Coal fly ash samples from different power plants of India have been collected and studied for their rare earth content and recovery. These samples were dissolved in nitric acid by (1) acid-digestion method and (2) by fusion with NaOH + NaNO3 mixture at 600 °C followed by successive hydrothermal treatment of the fused mass. The analysis of major and trace elements was done by ICP-AES.All the samples have similar element distribution with total rare earth content found in the range of 300 to 500 mg/kg and major elements as silicon, aluminum, iron, calcium and magnesium. Separation of bulk of the rare earth from matrix elements were carried out by using TEHDGA (N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis-2-ethylhexyldiglycolamide) impregnated XAD-7 resin. Quantitative separation of rare earth was obtained with no uptake of major elements. Simulated solution containing La, Nd, Y and Er, representing lighter and heavier rare earth, was prepared and studied for their adsorption behavior. The adsorption isotherm fitted well with Langmuir modelindicating monolayer adsorption of rare earth elements. Desorption of loaded rare earth elements was achieved by elution with 0.01 M nitric acid solution. The resin was recycled for 10 times and found to retain its extraction and elution properties.In India, the annual production of coal approximately touches 250 million tons ( Recently, DOE (USA) and Raw Materials Supply Group of the European Commission had declared the status of rare earth elements as ‘critical’ ( In the present work coal fly ash samples from different power plants of India have been collected and dissolved in nitric acid by hydrothermal processes, TEHDGA, a known commercial extractant for trivalent actinide/lanthanides separation from acidic nuclear waste solution ( Coal fly ash (CFA) samples from five different coal-fired power plants situated at Bhusawal, Kaperkheda, Durgapur, Panipat and Kota were obtained. These samples are agglomerate of spheres of 1 to 500 μm in diameter. The dissolution method adopted was by acid digestion at elevated temperature as reported by scientists (S. To 1 g of sample added 10 mL each of hydrochloric acid (35 wt%), nitric acid (65 wt%) and hydrofluoric acid (48 wt%) and mixed thoroughly in a Teflon coated steel beaker. It was then heated at 200 °C for 6 h in an oven. After cooling the paste obtained was dissolved in 4 M nitric acid and 100 mL solution was prepared for elemental analysis by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Horiba Jobin-Yvon make). The detection limit of all the elements were <0.1 mg/L and the error in analyses was ±5%. This mix acid dissolution method is an analytical method suitable to estimate the content of rare earth elements in coal fly ash. A mixture of 5 g of sample, 20 g each of sodium hydroxide and sodium nitrate was milled thoroughly and heated in an alumina crucible at 600 °C for 5 h. The resultant fused mass was then cooled to 80–90 °C and agitated with 500 mL water at 100–105 °C for 6 h. The precipitate was filtered and agitated again with 500 mL of 5% NaOH solution at 100–105 °C for 6 h. The precipitate was filtered, washed with hot water and dried overnight at 100 °C. The dried mass, weighing 1.5 g was then dissolved in 4 M nitric acid solution, filtered and made to 100 mL for analysis by ICP-AES. TEHDGA(98%) [ The extraction of metal ions present in dissolved solution of CFA was measured by equilibrating a known volume of solution (5 mL) with a known weight of resin (0.1 g) for 30 min in a vortex mixer. After equilibration, the aqueous phase was separated and centrifuged to remove any suspended particle and analyzed for metal ions using ICP-AES. The amount of metal ion extracted is expressed in term of weight distribution ratio ( Column operations were carried out in glass column of internal diameter 1.5 cm and length of 30 cm. The resin was packed into the column and the resin volume was measured as 20 mL. The feed solution of REEs having nitric acid concentration of 3.8 M was passed from the top of the column with the help of a peristaltic pump and a steady rate of 0.5 mL/min to maintain the resident time of 40 min. For every interval of 1 h samples were collected till breakthrough of rare earth elements were achieved. Samples were analyzed using ICP-AES. For elution, 0.01 M HNO CFA samples of acid digest were completely soluble in 4 M nitric acid, they were filtered for any suspended matter and analyzed for major and trace elements. The chemical composition of CFA largely depends on the mineralogy of the source coal and combustion temperature of the boiler. As ash is the non-volatile, incombustible mineral matter of the coal, therefore, the principal component of most fly ashes is dominant mineral phases of coal such as mullite (3Al REEs are present in much lesser extent, the total content found in the samples ranged between 300 and 500 mg/kg ( Alkali fusion with a mixture of NaOH and NaNO The TEHDGA loaded XAD-7 resin beads were characterized using FTIR spectra and SEM measurements. FTIR spectrum was measured for virgin XAD-7, original TEHDGA and TEHDGA impregnated XAD-7 beads and the plot is shown in The morphology of the TEHDGA modified XAD 7 was carried out using SEM measurements and corresponding micrograph is shown in The extraction of La, Ce, Nd and Y, representing the lighter and heavier REEs, with TEHDGA resin at varying nitric acid concentrations is shown in  Among the CFA samples, Kota power plant sample which was having maximum rare earth content of about 469 mg/kg was taken for of extraction and elution studies. Loading up to 4 bed volume has not seen any REE in the effluent, the column was then rinsed with 4 bed volume of 4.0 M nitric acid to scrub any co-extracted matrix elements. Elution of loaded REE was done with 0.01 M nitric acid. The eluted solution was pure rare earth nitrate without presence of any matrix elements. Adsorption and elution behavior of all the REEs are not same, depending on the charge density they have different loading capacity in the TEHDGA column, higher the charge density more is the loading capacity. In order to study the column behavior of REEs, a simulated solution containing La, Nd, Y and Er, in 4.0 M nitric acid was made and passed through the TEHDGA column. The amount of RE adsorbed on the resin at a given time was calculated by the difference between original feed concentration and the concentration at that particular time in the effluent. The breakthrough curves ( The Thomas model is the one frequently applied to estimate the adsorptive capacity of adsorbent and predict breakthrough curves, assuming the second order reversible adsorption kinetics and Langmuir isotherm. Theoretically, it is suitable to estimate the adsorption process where external and internal diffusion resistances are small. The linearized form of Thomas model is given as, The results obtained by fitting the experimental results using the Thomas model are shown in graphical form in The loading capacity obtained from Thomas model ( The parameters of equilibrium isotherms provide an insight into the sorption mechanism of the sorbent. Langmuir and Freundlich models are two widely accepted models used to explain the adsorption processes of such systems. Langmuir model This model relates the adsorption capacity of adsorbed species on a solid phase to the concentration of the species in the aqueous phase at constant temperature. The isotherm is based on the assumptions that sorption is limited to the monolayer adsorption phenomena, where the sites possess equal affinity for the sorbent (resin). The Langmuir isotherm is expressed as: (C Where,q Freundlich model This model gives the relationship between the amount of rare earth metals by the resin and equilibrium concentration of rare earth metals (mg/mL) in the solution, is best suited to describe heterogeneous and multilayer adsorption on resin surface and the model has the mathematical form as, is not heterogeneous and no significant multilayer adsorption even at the wide concentration range was observed. The economic feasibility of sorbent depends on its ability for regeneration and its stability for multiple sorption and desorption cycles. The rare earths (La, Nd, Y and Er) loaded column was subjected to desorption employing 0.01 M HNO The results obtained for elution were tabulated in An effort was made to map REE content in coal fly ash of different power plants of India. All the samples found to have similar elemental distribution with total rare earth content in the range of 300 to 500 mg/kg and major elements as silicon, aluminum, iron, calcium and magnesium. TEHDGA-XAD-7 resin showed excellent performance in selective separation and recovery of REEs from dissolved solution of coal fly ash. It has shown no extraction of matrix elements such as Si, Al, Fe, Mg, and Ca. A simulated solution containing lanthanum, neodymium, yttrium and erbium was used to study adsorption behavior of REEs. The loading capacity found from the experimental data was comparable to the loading capacity obtained from the Thomas model. The adsorption of rare earth metal ions followed Langmuir adsorption isotherm suggesting mono-layer type of adsorption and indicated uniform distribution of the active sites all over the resin substrate. Elution of loaded rare earths was achieved with 0.01 M nitric acid and all the rare earth metal showed similar elution behavior. The most noteworthy property of the resin is its high stability and recyclability. With this successful attempt in separating bulk of the REEs from coal fly ash, this resin can be projected as one of the potential candidates for large scale recovery of REEs. Also, separation of REEs from macro amount of matrix elements will ease the intragroup separation of REEs.