Fast neutron reactors have been mainly studied with a plutonium-breeding objective (creation of fissile atoms, mainly A FBR core comprises nuclear fuel subassemblies, boron carbide control rods, and a uranium blanket (to enable the reactor to “breed” plutonium). The cooling is usually by liquid sodium. Fuel pins and subassemblies must be designed to meet the economic objectives of future commercial reactors and ensure load-following without shutdowns owing to fuel-related problems. This has to be done in accordance with the requirements of different steps in the whole fuel cycle: fabrication, in-pile performance, out-of-pile handling, and reprocessing. Safety requirements corresponding to potential incidents are also taken into account at the design stage. The fuel in commercial fast reactors is generally a uranium/plutonium dioxide mix with a plutonium content of about 15–20%. However, other ceramic (such as nitride or carbide) or metallic (such as UPuZr alloy) materials have also been tested. A fuel pin consists of a stack of cylindrical fissile pellets placed in a sealed cladding tube; there has been some limited experience with pins directly filled with vibro-compacted powders (see Pins are grouped in bundles placed inside a hexagonal wrapper tube. Fuel pins are separated from one to another to ensure adequate coolant flow by a helical spacer wire or by spacer grids similar to the ones found in pressurized water reactors (PWRs). Steels (austenitic or ferritic) and nickel alloys are considered as materials for structural components (cladding, wrapper tube, wire or grids, etc.). As an example, The main specific characteristics are the following:  high neutron flux (∼6×10 high specific power rating and high heat flux (∼400–450 high cladding temperature (from ∼400 °C at the bottom to ∼600–650 °C at the top of the fissile column). When subjected to fast neutron flux, metallic structures tend to swell and become brittle. As the neutron energy exceeds the atom displacement threshold, each initial impact under irradiation results in a chain reaction of interatomic shocks, the importance of which depends on the neutron flux and energy spectrum. As a consequence of these shocks many atoms are displaced from their equilibrium positions. The resulting defects (vacancies and interstitials) have a tendency to move to restore a more stable state. They either diffuse towards existing defects and disappear, or collect to form more extensive defects. The motion of irradiation-induced defects, their annealing, coalescence, or trapping, are the fundamental mechanisms explaining the major phenomena encountered in metallic structures and fuels, namely embrittlement, swelling, and irradiation creep (see The main characteristic is the burn-up (τ, expressed in at.%), which corresponds to the percentage of heavy atoms (uranium and plutonium) undergoing fission during the period considered. The energy released during this period per unit mass of fuel is often expressed in MWd Steel damage can be expressed by the neutron flux integrated during irradiation (expressed in n A burn-up value of ∼20 The discussion will first be focused on mixed oxide pins. The pellet “smear density” is about 85% covering annular pellets with high oxide density (∼95% of theoretical density) or solid pellets with a lower oxide density (∼92% of theoretical density). The filling of cladding by fuel can be quantified by smear density. Smear density value is given by smear density (fuel/cladding section) plus measured/theoretical oxide densities. Pellet fabrication is based on powder metallurgy processes; basically UO Cold-worked austenitic steels (type AISI 316 or 15 Cr/15 Ni with possible addition of titanium) are the alloys mostly used as cladding material. Ferritic steel or nickel-based alloys have also been tested. Each pin is filled with helium gas. Based on many years of intensive multinational development, a large amount of experience on highly irradiated mixed oxide fuel pins has been gained (several tens of thousands of pins with τ>15 Owing to poor fuel–cladding heat transfer and oxide conductivity values, high temperatures and high radial thermal gradients are observed at the very beginning of life: typically 2000–2200 °C is the temperature reached at the center of the pellet. Then fuel microstructure and geometry evolve significantly (migration of the porosity towards the center of the pellet, radial redistribution of plutonium by an evaporation–condensation mechanism, closure of the fabrication gap, creation of a central hole for the initially solid pellet, etc.) and explains the important fuel temperature decrease shown at the beginning of life in The fuel–cladding gap is nearly closed at about 3–4 at.%. The residual gap of a few micrometers fills gradually with a mixture of gases that come from plutonium fission (xenon, krypton, etc.), which pollute the initial helium decreasing its thermal conductivity and leads to the central temperature re-increase. When irradiation reaches 7–8 The presence of an ever-growing quantity of fission products plays an important role in fuel pin behavior. At 12 Towards 12 Cladding geometry evolves under the influence of two mechanisms: swelling and irradiation creep.  Swelling of steels induces, at least initially, an isotropic strain. The increase in diameter is equal to the increase of length. The main parameters that control swelling are the temperature and the dose. Irradiation creep strain mainly depends on dose and stress. This mechanism is practically independent of temperature and does not participate in the damage of the material even at high strain values (a few percent). As irradiation continues, these two phenomena can induce significant cladding deformation with consequences on cladding embrittlement (owing to swelling) and reduction of coolant flow (owing to diametrical deformation). Cladding deformation is the phenomenon limiting fuel pin performance, and many studies aiming to improve swelling resistance have been performed.  Optimization (composition, thermomechanical treatments) of austenitic steels has been performed and a dose of about 160–180 Ferritic or ferritic–martensitic steels (9Cr type) present an excellent resistance to swelling, but their poor thermal creep resistance towards 600–650 °C does not allow their use unless at lower peak cladding temperature. A new class of ferritic steels strengthened by oxide dispersion (ODS steels) combining good swelling and thermal creep resistance seems very promising; irradiation of such pins is in progress (see Nickel alloys also combine good resistance to swelling and thermal creep but the significant irradiation embrittlement observed (low ductility above 500 °C) makes them unattractive as cladding material. The austenitic steels show good compatibility with sodium. External cladding corrosion does not affect more than 20–30 Mechanisms explaining these forms of corrosion are based on the role of caesium telluride (Cs Cladding deformation plays an unfavorable role in FCCI (explained by the increase of surface oxide temperature). So, the swelling-resistant materials (nickel alloys or ferritic steels) show a better behavior towards FCCI than austenitic steels. Studies of remedies are mainly focused on the incorporation of metallic getters (titanium, vanadium, etc.) inside the pin to trap oxygen required for the decomposition of Cs Fuel swelling under irradiation is roughly 0.62% per at.%. The resultant increase in the outside diameter of the pellet can be greater than that of cladding on all or part of the fissile column. Owing to stress relief by irradiation creep, the stress induced in cladding by this mechanical interaction is relatively low during stable operating conditions. During operating transients, additional high stress can be induced by differential fuel–cladding expansion because high strain rates prevent stress relief. The fundamental point is the incompatibility of (U,Pu)O Severe irradiation conditions can result from hypothetical accidents such as sudden control rod withdrawal, partial or total loss of coolant flow, earthquake, etc. These transient conditions will induce a degradation of the pin and subassembly behavior that could be significant: for example, increase of the thermal regime of the oxide and additional stresses on the cladding. Each situation of this type must be carefully investigated both from the point of view of the straightforward consequences (cladding failure, fuel melting, etc.) and of transmitted events that could result (e.g., dry-out of coolant channels). Although the key parameters differ from one event to another, two points have to be emphasized:  The importance of the state of the pin or subassembly at the time of the accident (“T0” state). The pin characteristics evolve significantly during irradiation, so it is important to deal with all the T0 states and to be able to characterize each of them completely (stresses in the cladding, oxide temperature, fission gas behavior, etc.). The transient kinetics. From a fraction of a second to several minutes (and more rarely several hours), this kinetics is much faster than that of power variations during normal operating conditions. In order to describe the pin and subassembly behavior under these off-normal conditions, specific codes have been developed as also have specific tests aimed at precise determination of the influence of evolution rate on mechanisms and data. Moreover, large experimental programs aiming to test pins or bundles under off-normal irradiation conditions have been conducted in experimental reactors. Compared to oxide, nitride or carbide fuel exhibits attractive properties such as good thermal conductivity, excellent compatibility with sodium, and high heavy metal atom density. With a design very similar to oxide fuel pins, carbide, carbonitride, and nitride fuel pins have been fabricated and irradiated. The main observations are:  swelling kinetics of these ceramics under irradiation is higher than that of the oxide, thus requiring a limited smear density in the cladding; assuming a swelling rate of roughly 1.1–1.6% per at.%, it is necessary to limit the smear density to 75–78% (instead of 85% for oxide) in order to reach a burn-up of about 20 a low gas release from these fuels; and a lack of cladding chemical interaction with nitride fuels; conversely, cladding carburization is often observed with carbide fuels. While carbide fuels are no longer studied (because of cladding carburization and poor chemical compatibility with oxygen and moisture leading to difficulties during the fuel cycle), the irradiation results provide favorable expectations for the performance of nitride fuels. The performance of nitride fuels has to be confirmed at high burn-up levels with results on a larger statistical scale. In addition, several other issues have to be considered, including fabrication of UPu alloy cannot be used because of the existence of a eutectic with the iron (from the cladding) appearing at temperatures close to operating conditions. UPuZr alloy (with a zirconium content of roughly 10%) pushes back this eutectic to 750 °C and allows for the design of metallic fuel pins. In parallel, a specific fuel cycle has been developed associating reprocessing by pyrometallurgy and fuel fabrication in the same unit. The fuel pin design must take into account different factors, the most important ones being:  fast swelling kinetics of the fuel (at least at the beginning of life); a large fuel–cladding gap is required in order to limit fuel smear density; and excellent fuel thermal conductivity, but a relatively low melting temperature; a significant safety margin with regard to melting is obtained by the presence of sodium (allowing improved heat transfer) between fuel and cladding. Irradiations under normal or incidental (cladding rupture, overpower, etc.) conditions have shown the reliable performance of metallic fuel and its potential to achieve high burn-up in prototypical elements. Qualification on a larger scale of the in-pile behavior and of the associated cycle is again necessary. Like the cladding, under the effect of neutron flux the hexagonal wrapper tube undergoes change. Geometrical changes, induced by swelling and irradiation creep (under the effect of dynamic sodium pressure), concern length, across-flat dimension, and, for subassemblies placed in the periphery of the core, bowing (differential swelling induced by differential flux and temperature between opposite faces of the wrapper tube). Moreover, embrittlement owing to irradiation or temperature has to be mastered in order to avoid rupture in the reactor or during the back-end of the cycle (handling, washing, etc.). Cold-worked austenitic steels (with composition closed to that of the cladding) were used first but are now frequently replaced by more swelling-resistant ferritic–martensitic steels (9Cr type), in so far as the peak wrapper temperature, lower than that of cladding, allows avoidance of thermal creep problems. Differential swelling between cladding, wrapper tube, and spacing system (spacer wire or grids) can induce additional stresses and deformations on these components and/or generate coolant flow perturbations in the bundle. These phenomena have been studied and have particularly shown that wires or grid materials have to be chosen and specified in order to minimize differential swelling. Supported by a large experimental base (irradiation tests, fabrication, and reprocessing), mixed oxide can be considered as the reference solution for fast breeder fuel. Alternative solutions based on nitride (with a similar fuel cycle) or metallic (with a specific fuel cycle) fuels have also been tested and have given favorable results. These, however, have to be confirmed on a large scale. Conversely to the objective of plutonium breeding, fast reactors can also be considered as plutonium burners. For this objective, the pin design has to be modified. The first stage consists of the suppression of the fertile parts (uranium blankets) and the second stage of the modification of the fuel composition by increasing the plutonium/uranium ratio. In this way, plutonium fuel without uranium (plutonium dispersed in a ceramic or metallic inert matrix) can be studied. 