Ionic exchange membranes (IEMs) are a potential alternative to traditional soil extraction and incubation methods for estimating soil inorganic N availability. However, there have been few comparisons of IEMs with more widely used N availability measurements. Here we found a strong relationship between soil inorganic N availability obtained using IEMs, and traditional soil inorganic N extractions and mineralization rates over a wide range of soil types. We also found lower variability in soil inorganic N availability obtained with IEMs than with traditional measurements. We conclude that IEMs are a reliable method to estimate inorganic N production in soils, and may become a useful alternative or complement to more destructive and time consuming traditional soil extraction and incubation methods for estimating soil inorganic N availability.Traditionally, soil inorganic N availability has been successfully estimated by soil extractions and mineralization rates ( These disadvantages can be overcome with the use of two-dimensional ion exchange membranes (IEMs). Since the entire surface area of an IEM can be brought into contact with the soil with minimal disturbance, IEMs are becoming a promising alternative for measuring soil nutrient availability for plants and microbes ( This study was carried out in 20 sites in Spain, chosen to represent a wide variety of soil characteristics (texture, pH, % of C and N; We first used univariate linear regression [ordinary least-squares (OLS)] analyses to examine the relationship between mineral-N, NH As hypothesized, we found a strong relationship between soil N availability obtained using IEMs and the traditional inorganic N availability indices. Ammonium in IEMs was positively related to soil NH The multimodel inference approach was useful for confirming our second hypothesis that abiotic variables will predict IEM results more poorly than traditional N availability indices. All the best (smallest AIC Finally, SDL indices showed significant lower variability in the results of soil NH We conclude that IEMs are a reliable method to estimate inorganic N production in soils due to their strong relationship with N mineralization processes, and that they may become a useful alternative or complement to the more destructive and time consuming traditional soil extractions and mineralization rates. We thank Peter M. Groffman, Neil D. Bettez, and Jonathan E. Hickman for reviewing the manuscript. J.D. and A.R. were supported by Fulbright fellowships of the Spanish Ministry of Education. M.D. was supported by an FPU fellowship of the Spanish Ministry of Education. This research was supported by the  Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at