This chapter reviews the use of naturally occurring biomaterials for tissue repair and regeneration and the effects of tissue source and processing methods for these materials upon the host response. The pros and cons of naturally biologic scaffolds are discussed. Methods for the preparation of biologic scaffolds are shown to have a critical effect upon functionality of the device. The mechanisms by which biologic scaffolds composed of extracellular matrix can alter the default wound healing response from the well-described pro-inflammatory and scarring events toward a more constructive remodeling response, i.e., the site appropriate formation of functional tissue, are discussed in detail.Introduction Naturally Occurring Biomaterials Synthetic Biomaterials Utilizing Nature’s Engineered Scaffold Material ECM Composition and Tissue-Specific Ultrastructure Production of Naturally Occurring Biomaterials from Decellularized Tissues Techniques Used to Decellularize Tissue Criteria for Decellularization Chemical Crosslinking and Sterilization Source Material of ECM Mechanisms by Which Biomaterials Support Constructive Remodeling Cryptic Peptides and Bioactive Molecules Recruitment of Progenitor Cells to the Site of Injury Modulation of the Host Immune Response—Push Towards an M2 Constructive Remodeling Macrophage Phenotype References  New generations of synthetic biomaterials which attempt to mimic the native ECM are being developed at a rapid pace for use as 3D scaffolds. Poly(glycolic acid) (PGA), Generally, the presence of an absorbable component as part or the entirety of a synthetic device or a natural device results in a less severe foreign body response than a nondegradable device. The effective ability of the host to effectively degrade and remodel an implanted biomaterial facilitates the integration of the implanted device with surrounding tissue and minimizes the formation of dense capsule formation. Individual ECM components or combinations of specific ECM components have been used as substrates for In summary, there is an increasing body of evidence that tissue-specific signals are present within the ECM from each tissue and organ. This property may be important in selected regenerative medicine strategies. The ECM provides a physical substratum for the attachment and spatial organization of cells Studies have suggested that tissue- and organ-specific ECM can promote site-appropriate differentiation of progenitor cells Zeisberg et al. isolated liver-derived basement membrane matrix from human or bovine liver, and used the substrate for culture of human hepatocytes Biologic scaffolds composed of ECM provide a more physiologically relevant culture substrate compared to reconstituted ECM proteins and have unique biochemical profiles that are dependent upon the tissue from which an ECM scaffold is derived. Minimally processed ECM scaffolds and gels like PLECM provide a combination of ECM proteins derived from the liver that are in physiologically relevant amounts (e.g., Types I, IV, VI, III, XI, XIX, heparin sulfate proteoglycan, ECM-bound growth factors, laminin, biglycan, tenascin, fibronectin) Decellularization of anatomically distinct tissues to produce an ECM bioscaffold has been reported for hollow organs, such as small intestinal, urinary bladder While the specific methods used to decellularize the tissue can vary greatly, the physical form of the resulting ECM can vary greatly. Hollow organs, such as the urinary bladder or small intestine, are typically incised and split open, thus forming a sheet-like structure. The sheet form can be air dried or lyophilized and further processed into a comminuted powdered form. The sheet form is typically very thin; therefore, multiple sheets can be laminated together by vacuum pressing to increase strength of the resulting multilayer construct. Lamination can also be used to create more complex 3D shapes like tubes by molding the sheets around a mandrel. Lamination, however, is limited by the nature of the starting sheets and by casting requirements of particular shapes. The sheet form of ECM has many advantages, not least of which is that it is usually rapidly produced, often requiring only a couple of processing steps and easily scaled for mass production. The sheet or laminate sheet form lends itself well to patch, bridging, or soft tissue reinforcement applications for which robust strength is usually required. The comminuted form in contrast is well suited for filling of volumetric injuries and can be applied by minimally invasive methods like injection. The maintenance of 3D organ morphology has recently emerged as a method for organ engineering The most effective agents for decellularization of each tissue and organ will depend upon many factors, including the tissue cellularity (e.g., liver versus tendon), density (e.g., dermis versus adipose tissue), lipid content (e.g., brain versus urinary bladder), and thickness (e.g., dermis versus pericardium). It should be understood that all cell removal agents and methods will disrupt ECM composition and ultrastructure. Minimization of these undesirable effects rather than complete avoidance is the objective of optimal decellularization. The optimal recipe of decellularization agents is dependent upon tissue characteristics, such as thickness and density, the agents being used, and the intended clinical application of the decellularized tissue. Prior to applying decellularization agents, undesirable excess tissue may be removed to simplify the cell removal process. Cell removal may focus on the retention of key ECM components like the basement membrane. Mechanical or physical methods may be used to facilitate decellularization. For thin tissue structures, such as urinary bladder, intestine, pericardium, and amnion, the most commonly used decellularization techniques include freezing and thawing, mechanical removal of undesirable layers such as muscle or submucosa, and relatively brief exposure to easily removed detergents or acids followed by rinsing. Thicker tissue structures like dermis may require more extensive biochemical exposure and longer rinse times. Fatty, amorphous organs and tissues such as adipose tissue, brain, and pancreas often require the addition of lipid solvents like alcohols. The complexity and length of the decellularization protocol is usually proportional to the degree of geometric and biologic conservation desired for the postprocessed tissue (e.g., macrostructure, ultrastructure, matrix and basement membrane proteins, growth factors, etc.), especially for composite tissues and whole organs. Regardless of the decellularization method chosen, minimizing the disruption of matrix molecules is of paramount importance. The method used to decellularize the tissue can be broadly divided into physical, enzymatic, or While there are many potential enzymatic methods of disrupting cells, trypsin is one of the most commonly used and effective enzymes. Trypsin cleaves peptide chains mainly at the carboxyl side of the amino acids lysine or arginine, except when either is followed by proline. This results in cellular detachment from the matrix and cell lysis. One of the disadvantages of using enzymes is the destruction of matrix proteins, especially with prolonged exposure which can also disrupt the native matrix architecture. Following enzymatic treatment, the tissue must be thoroughly rinsed to remove or inactivate any remnant enzyme and to remove cellular material. Enzymes are often used in conjunction with other methods in a stepwise process to facilitate dislodgement of the cells while follow-up methods target the remaining, often damaged, cells. Chemical methods of decellularization are varied in nature and mechanism of action. Detergents, changes of pH, and solvents or chelators can all be effectively used to decellularize tissue. Detergents comprise some of the most commonly used chemicals for decellularization, including sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), deoxycholate, and Triton X-100. SDS and deoxycholate are ionic detergents that not only solubilize cellular membranes but also disrupt protein–protein interactions that may damage the ECM ulstrastructure and protein integrity. Triton X-100 is a nonionic detergent that disrupts lipid interactions while leaving protein interactions intact. Zwitterionic detergents like CHAPS mix properties of both ionic and nonionic detergents but are less commonly used. Placing tissues in acidic or alkaline solutions can not only effectively disrupt cells but can also irreversibly damage ECM proteins. Peracetic acid (PAA) is a relatively weak acid that has been widely used as a decellularizing agent and a disinfectant, especially with ECMs, such as SIS and UBM, which have a thin cross-sectional area ( Following cell lysis, the membranes and cytoplasmic debris must be removed from the matrix, which is usually accomplished by aggressive rinsing in sterile water. This washing procedure also serves to remove any remnant detergents or enzymes from the decellularization process. The use of iso-, hyper- or hypotonic washing solutions can facilitate additional cell lysis as a physical method of decellularization as described above. Following decellularization, the tissue usually assumes a pale or translucent quality. However, macroscopic appearance alone is insufficient to determine the extent of decellularization. While there is no universal consensus for criteria Failure to completely decellularize a tissue leads to negative outcomes upon Following decellularization, further processing of the ECM can include dehydration, lyophilization, and/or comminution. Once comminuted, the powder can be enzymatically solubilized (e.g., pepsin) to produce a liquid form that can be subsequently induced to gel Terminal sterilization of an ECM bioscaffold is required prior to Surgical mesh materials composed of ECM are harvested from a variety of allogeneic or xenogeneic tissue sources, including dermis, urinary bladder, small intestine, mesothelium, pericardium, and heart valves, and from several different species. Although there have been no reported differences in the host remodeling response as a function of species source, there are clear differences with respect to age ECM scaffolds can change the default wound healing response from the well-described pro-inflammatory and scarring events toward a more constructive remodeling response The host response to an ECM that is not chemically crosslinked is distinctly different from the response to synthetic scaffold materials and from the response to either purified components of ECM, such as collagen I or chemically crosslinked forms of ECM. The purified components elicit a specific response to the particular molecule, for example, angiogenesis in response to Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) or bone formation in response to Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP). The specific response may be desirable for particular medical/surgical needs but typically lacks the complex constructive wound healing response observed when the intact ECM is used as a reparative scaffold. It has been shown that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) can cause release of matricryptic peptides from ECM, such as endostatin ECM scaffolds in preclinical studies have been shown to result in constructive tissue remodeling, promote angiogenesis, and to resist deliberate bacterial infection The concept of functional matricryptic peptides is not new. During ECM degradation, many large insoluble molecules present within the matrix are reduced to fragments which possess biological activities that are not possessed by the parent molecules. In addition to proteolysis-generated bioactive fragments, functional sites of the parent molecules that are hidden and inactive within the ECM can also become active due to conformational changes The second mechanism of site-specific ECM scaffold remodeling involves the recruitment of multipotent or lineage-directed progenitor cells by scaffold degradation products. Both the age and species of the tissue from which the ECM is harvested have an effect upon this chemoattractant potential. Transitional ECM instructs cell behavior in both the blastema and mammalian skeletal muscle regeneration, especially tenascin-C, hyaluronic acid, and fibronectin Studies have shown degradation products of human fetal skin-derived ECM possess stronger chemoattractant activity for skin-specific lineage-directed stem and progenitor cells than do degradation products of human adult skin-derived ECM. In addition, degradation products of porcine adult skin-derived ECM showed stronger chemoattractant activity than degradation products of human adult skin-derived ECM. These results suggest that ECM degradation products from younger tissue sources may have more potent chemoattractant activity for local tissue stem or progenitor cells than older tissue sources, and that the species of the tissue source also has an effect on chemoattractant activity. The early gestation human fetus (<24 weeks gestation), unlike the later-gestation fetus or adult, is able to heal incisional skin wounds without scarring The results of a previous study show that degradation products of ECM possess chemoattractant activity for local tissue progenitor and stem cells, and that this chemoattractant activity may decline as a function of the age of the tissue from which the ECM is harvested The exact mechanisms by which certain biologic mesh materials are capable of modulating the host macrophage Macrophages are a heterogeneous subset of the mononuclear cell population involved in the host response to implanted materials. Macrophages are activated in response to tissue damage or infection, causing an increase in the production of cytokines, chemokines, and other inflammatory molecules to which they are exposed. Recently, macrophage phenotype has been characterized based on distinct functional properties, surface markers, and the cytokine profile of the microenvironment. Polarized macrophages are referred to as either M1 or M2 cells, mimicking the Th1/Th2 nomenclature. Macrophages are a plastic cell population capable of sequentially changing their polarization in response to local stimuli during the process of wound healing. The macrophages participating in the host response to an implanted material are exposed to multiple stimuli including cytokines and effector molecules secreted by cells including other macrophages that are participating in the host response, microbial agents, epitopes associated with the implanted biomaterial, and the degradation products of the biomaterial, among others. Therefore, it is logical to assume that the host macrophage response after implantation of a biomaterial is modulated via “cross-talk” between macrophages and the other cells involved in the host response as well as factors within the local microenvironment. Considerable variability has been seen in the host immune response to xenogeneic biologic scaffolds depending upon the source of the ECM, method of decellularization, and the presence of any modifications like chemical crosslinking. Crosslinking of ECM with carbodiimide has been correlated with delayed degradation, a chronic mononuclear cell accumulation around the device and a foreign body reaction. Pro-inflammatory responses toward biomaterials are typically associated with encapsulation and a foreign body reaction. However, the bioactive and bioinductive molecules within the ECM that induce polarization are unclear, although it is likely that cellular remnants like DAMPs retained within the scaffold may play a role in the investigation of the immunomodulatory effects of common ECM scaffolds. Results showed that tissue source, decellularization method, and chemical crosslinking modifications affect the presence of the well-characterized DAMP—HMGB1 (High-mobility group box-1). In addition, these factors were correlated with differences in cell proliferation, death, secretion of the chemokines CCL2 and CCL4, and upregulation of the pro-inflammatory signaling receptor TLR4 (toll-like receptor 4). Inhibition of HMGB1 with glycyrrhizin increased the pro-inflammatory response, increasing cell death and upregulating chemokine and TLR4 mRNA expression. This suggests the importance of HMGB1 and other DAMPs as bioinductive molecules within the ECM scaffold. Identification and evaluation of other ECM bioactive molecules will be an area of future interest for new biomaterial development.