The conversion of lignocellulose to valuable products requires I: a fractionation of the major components hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin, II: an efficient method to process these components to higher valued products. The present work compares liquid hot water (LHW) pretreatment to the soda pulping process and to the ethanol organosolv pretreatment using rye straw as a single lignocellulosic material. The organosolv pretreated rye straw was shown to require the lowest enzyme loading in order to achieve a complete saccharification of cellulose to glucose. At biomass loadings of up to 15% (w/w) cellulose conversion of LHW and organosolv pretreated lignocellulose was found to be almost equal. The soda pulping process shows lower carbohydrate and lignin recoveries compared to the other two processes. In combination with a detailed analysis of the different lignins obtained from the three pretreatment methods, this work gives an overview of the potential products from different pretreatment processes.According to An effective conversion of lignocellulosic materials to valuable products first requires a fractionation of the three major components: cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, and second, an efficient method to process these components to higher valued products. In general, carbohydrates are hydrolysed to their monomers, whereas the lignin fraction could be utilized as a source for phenolic polymers ( An overview of various fractionation and pretreatment processes is given by The combination of a LHW treatment (  The separation efficiency of the fractionation at 473 In this work, the three major fractions of lignocellulosic biomass: cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin of the Aquasolve process, the soda pulping process and the ethanol organosolv process were compared. In contrast to previous works ( Rye straw was purchased from Cordes-Grasberg (Grasberg, Germany). The average length of the straw was 3–4 The flow-through experiments were performed in a fixed-bed reactor (50 Lignin precipitated from the cool liquid fraction after LHW treatment at 473 and 533 Conditions for the organosolv pretreatment were selected following the publication from The conditions for the soda pulping process were taken from In order to obtain the total number of sugars (sum of monomers and oligomers) in the pretreated samples, the solid residues as well as the liquid hydrolysates of selected experiments were treated with H The quantitative determination of the produced sugars and their degradation products including glucose, xylose, arabinose, furfural, and hydroxymethylfurfural were performed by means of HPLC. Pure water served as the eluent and was delivered at a flow rate of 0.6 Celluclast 1.5L and Novozyme 188 were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and produced by Novozymes Denmark. The activities and protein contents are summarized in In cooperation with the Lausitz University of Applied Sciences (Senftenberg, Germany), a mutagenized strain of Enzymatic hydrolysis was performed in triplicates in 5 The biomass loading is defined as follows: The enzyme loading of Celluclast 1.5L and of For all experiments performed, a volumetric ratio of Celluclast 1.5L to Novozyme 188 of 5:1 was used ( In order to compare the efficiency and the selectivity of the different pretreatment processes (  In addition to the solid residues (2), the hydrolysates (1) of the different processes were analyzed according to their carbohydrate concentrations ( An essential criterion for the comparison of the different pretreatments is the recovery of glucose after the enzymatic hydrolysis of the cellulose rich fraction. In order to analyze the effectiveness of the enzymatic saccharification, the biomass loading must be reduced to a minimum (  For both enzyme mixtures, the effectiveness of the enzymatic conversion of pretreated lignocellulose clearly depends on the pretreatment it was subjected to. Organosolv pretreatment provides by far the most suitable substrate for both enzyme mixtures. The residual hemicellulose and lignin content in soda and LHW pretreated rye straw might function as a barrier and reduce the cellulase activity ( According to The limit was set to a biomass loading equal to 15% (w/w) LHW treated biomass as recommended by Increasing biomass/cellulose loadings of organosolv and LHW pretreated rye straw lead to increasing glucose concentrations after 48 The conversion of organosolv pretreated rye straw (compare For LHW pretreated rye straw, the final sugar concentration is around 90 If LHW pretreated rye straw is enzymatically hydrolysed for 72 The maximum glucose concentration of soda pretreated rye straw (compare In contrast to LHW and organosolv pretreated rye straw, the enzyme complex from Despite incomplete adsorption of cellulases on the biomass and product inhibition at high biomass loadings (  Therefore the hydrothermal treatment at 533 High glucose recoveries with low enzyme consumption are major criteria for an appropriate pretreatment ( The recovery of xylose is well studied for the LHW pretreatment; high pentose recoveries have frequently been reported in literature ( The Aquasolve process yields two different lignin products: AL lignin (4), from the liquid fraction and AS lignin (6), which is the solid residue after the enzymatic conversion of the cellulose-rich fraction ( Summarizing the results, the soda pulping process applied shows lower carbohydrate and lignin recoveries compared to the other processes. Depending on the quality of the lignin product and its potential revenues, the organosolv process is a suitable pretreatment to achieve high lignin recoveries and high glucose concentrations. Both the concentration of pentoses in the liquid fraction and the overall pentose recovery are higher in the Aquasolve process than in the organosolv process. Concerning the consumption of additional chemicals, both the soda pulping and the organosolv process need a higher amount of additives, than the Aquasolve process, which uses only water as reaction medium. A major concern of the Aquasolve process remains the quality and quantity of lignin from this process. Unlike glucose or xylose, lignin is not a defined product. In fact every pretreatment process yields a different lignin product. Hence, investigations concerning scalability and comparative economics need, in addition to a fundamental comparison of the recovery of the major products from lignocelluosic materials, an evaluation of the quality of the different lignin products and their potential applications. This issue is addressed in our second publication by Different pretreatments were compared based on the recovery of the three major products (glucose, xylose, and lignin) from a lignocelluosic material like rye straw, as well as on the enzymatic efficiency at relevant biomass loadings. The soda pulping process shows lower xylose recoveries and moderate lignin recoveries relatively to the organosolv and the Aquasolve process. Both latter processes yield high cellulose to glucose conversions at relevant biomass loadings. High lignin recoveries from the organosolv process are achieved at the expense of additional chemicals and elaborate pentose recoveries, while high xylose recoveries can be realized with the Aquasolve process. However, unlike the organosolv process, the potential of the lignins from the Aquasolve process has not yet been demonstrated. The authors are grateful to the “Deutsche Bundesstiftung Umwelt (DBU)” for the financial support (AZ 13226-32). Support and valuable comments of Prof. Dr. Scheibner (Lausitz University of Applied Sciences, Germany) and Priv. Doz. Dr. habil. Bodo Saake (vTI – Institute of Wood Technology and Wood Biology, Germany) are acknowledged. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 