The stability of the thin films found in the froth phase of flotation plays an important role in the overall efficiency of the separation process. In turn, the physical behaviour of the particles attached to the films has a direct impact on the lamella stability. This effect is not fully understood. The film solids loading, or attached mass to area ratio, is an indicator of froth stability and has been measured by touch sampling of surface bubbles. Multiple samples can also be assayed as an indicator of maximum possible grade. Here the touch sample technique is used to show the particle packing arrangement on the film. This work presents images of touch samples from the top of the froth viewed under a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Froth samples were obtained during batch flotation of glass beads with a size fraction of 90–150μm. The packing arrangement of the particles attached to the surface lamellae were clearly resolved, making it possible to obtain a measure of film packing density using image analysis. These results can be used to validate and expand physical models that predict film stability.Sampling the surface lamellae of a flotation froth is done using the touch sample method, devised by As an indicator of the froth stability, solids loading data has also improved froth models: two models in particular are a mass balance model relating overflowing froth properties to froth structure ( The stability of a thin froth film is affected by the properties of the particles attached to it, including not only their size, shape and hydrophobicity, but also their arrangement in the film. Flotation froths are highly dynamic systems with large numbers of bubbles coalescing within the froth and bursting at the surface which makes detailed observation of the interaction of particles in the films difficult. A 2D analytical model of spherical particles in thin films was used by  However, simulations of the equilibrium positions of particles randomly placed in a thin film show that densely packed particles do not adopt an ordered regular pattern in the film as shown in  The results from these models show that the particle properties, such as contact angle and packing arrangement, have a large effect on the film stability. Therefore it is necessary to understand how particles will physically pack on a film. The relationship between surface packing, structural strength and contact angle for spherical particles at a liquid vapour interface was investigated by These theoretical and experimental approaches have highlighted the effects of several key particle properties on the resulting packing arrangement found at an interface, thin film or bubble. However, the particles found in a flotation froth are neither spherical, mono-sized nor regularly spaced and their behaviour will be determined by many dynamic processes within the froth. In order to validate and improve the accuracy of the computer models that predict particle effects on film stability, it is necessary to observe particle behaviour directly in froth films. This paper presents an additional application for the touch sample technique of A particle laden froth was generated in a laboratory Denver batch flotation cell with 10% solids in the pulp. The particles used were glass ballotini, purchased from Jenkins at VWR with a size fraction 90–150 It should be noted that when the particles are transferred from the film to the stub, they move from a curved to a flat surface which distorts their arrangement. In order to minimise this effect, large bubbles were selected for sampling which have a lower radius of curvature. The samples were dried in a low temperature oven (50 The contact angle of a sample of particles obtained from the froth was measured from the photographs shown in Samples 1 and 3 did not adhere to the stub surface and were therefore not used for further analysis. Sample 4 showed multiple features which are described in more detail below. It can be seen in  By thresholding the images obtained from the SEM ( As film stability is linked to the particle packing density, a film containing particles with a large number of sizes will achieve a higher packing density and be more stable than one in which all the particles are monodisperse. Therefore a flotation froth which contains particles of a large number of sizes will have films with a higher packing density and greater stability.  It should also be noted that the multiple layers may have developed defects during drying, as only the surface particle layer of the lamellae would be fixed by the adhesive layer on the sample holder. During drying, any liquid remaining in the film on the sample evaporates and changes the forces incident on the particles in the liquid. This could cause motion of the particles not attached to the adhesive layer and may change the particle packing arrangement of the multiple layers. Particles from the surface layer of the lamellae sampled (on the bottom of any multiple layers captured during sampling) were fixed by the adhesive layer on the SEM stub with a corresponding high level of certainty in any observations and measurements. The close presence of these fixed layers may minimise the ways and the degree to which the multiple layers above can rearrange. The multiple layers of particles have a lower degree of certainty in the patterns observed due to the possible defects developed during drying. However, without measurement of the multiple layer particle packing prior to drying, the extent of these effects cannot be determined. It was also possible to collect an entire bubble from the froth which remained stable on the sample holder. However, these were still extremely fragile and only one survived to be viewed with the SEM. The froth surface touch sampling technique combined with SEM can yield information on the particle arrangement on films. One sample showed particles forming irregular patterns on the film, which have a higher packing density than the theoretically predicted ones for close packed monodisperse particles. This is due to the varying size and shape of the particles used which have shown a tendency to group according to size and shape within the films, allowing the higher density packing. These results suggest that films containing particles with a range of sizes will have a higher packing density and are therefore likely to be more stable. The number of successful samples obtained during this study was too low to provide any firm findings, however has opened the way for further, in depth investigation. Multiple layers of particles were also observed on the samples. When a film is fully coated by multiple layers, its stability is increased. However, when multiple layers occur in localised areas on the film, it shows there is insufficient space to accommodate all the particles on the film surface. This indicates heavy loading and a higher density packing, leading to greater film stability. These areas of single and double layers occurring concomitantly on the film form a complicated system requiring further investigation to fully comprehend. It has also been shown that individual particle laden bubbles can be captured and imaged, allowing the structure and packing arrangement of the particles on the bubble to be seen. All of these results build upon previous work on particle packing to help build a more detailed understanding of the role particles play in the stability of flotation froth films. This method can also be used to compare the particle packing arrangements found in flotation froth films with those simulated by computer models, helping to validate and improve them. Future work will also focus on using this technique on an industrial flotation froth. Coupling the results from SEM microscopy with those obtained from energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) or TOF-SIMS means the chemical composition of the particles as well as their distribution in the film can be found. This study was performed in the Rio Tinto Centre for Advanced Mineral Recovery at Imperial College London. The authors gratefully acknowledge the EPSRC and CIKTN with Anglo Platinum for their financial support of this project.