The main goal of this work is to investigate the physical and chemical properties of fluticasone propionate (FP), mometasone furoate (MF) and salmeterol xinafoate (SX) after being size-reduced by jet-milling (JM) and wet-polishing (WP) technologies. FP, MF and SX crystals were size-reduced by JM and WP until a volumetric median particle size (Dv50) of 2μm. Additionally, FP particles were also produced by WP to target a Dv50 of 3μm. The micronized APIs were analyzed by laser diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, modulated differential scanning calorimetry, X-ray powder diffraction, Karl-Fischer, dynamic vapour sorption, mercury intrusion, Brunauer-Emmet-Teller adsorption method and by gas chromatography. The FP and MF powders size-reduced by JM presented a higher specific surface area (SSA), rugosity, porosity and water content and lower skeletal density, bulk density and solvents content when compared to the WP powders. On the other hand, SX by JM powders presented lower SSA, rugosity and porosity and higher densities compared to the WP powders. FP size-reduced by WP to a Dv50 of 2 and 3μm showed identical physicochemical properties. The JM and WP technologies produced FP, MF and SX powders with a similar PSD suitable for inhalation delivery but with distinct physicochemical properties that were technology dependent. These singular attributes may impact the interfacial properties and therefore the final drug product behavior, indicating that additional characterization of micronized API might be recommended for establishing meaningful and performance-oriented specifications.Pulmonary drug delivery for the local treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD) is advantageous and highly desirable due to the reduced amount of drug required for an efficient treatment, the higher amount of drug delivered at the site of action, the reduced adverse side effects and the quicker onset of drug action Asthma and COPD are two complex pulmonary diseases with similar effects on the patients' health such as airflow limitation and airway inflammation Inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting β2-agonists represent the first-line treatment for these respiratory diseases An efficient therapy requires the drug substance to reach the target area in the respiratory tract, which may be located in the small airways or throughout the lungs However, although there is a general consensus on the recommended drug substance PS or aPS, other properties such as the particle size distribution or span, surface area, rugosity, or residual water content, amongst other factors, might not be included on the micronized API specification while still potentially impacting the powder interfacial properties. Aspects that can contribute for this gap in micronized API specification recommendations include the insufficient understanding of the impact of the API processing history on the powder properties; the reduced process reproducibility observed in some size-reduction technologies (batch-to-batch variability) and the lack of knowledge in regards to the main API particle properties that will impact the final inhalation drug product performance, as it will also depend on the subsequent formulation methodology. Additionally, for a single treatment, there is a wide patient population with varying levels of disease severity and differences in inspiratory capacity and lung morphology, which add additional complexity in defining particle physicochemical properties that are meaningful for inhalation product performance. In the pharmaceutical industry, the API particles are conventionally manufactured to target the desired PS in two processing steps: firstly, a crystallization process (primary processing), where the API crystals are formed by the addition of an appropriate anti-solvent which will induce nucleation and crystal formation In order to overcome some of the previous constraints and to assure a better stability and control over the particles physicochemical and interfacial properties, WP technology has been developed. This technology consists in a size reduction step in wet media (e.g. microfluidization) followed by an isolation step by spray drying (SD). WP has been gaining momentum as a particle engineering technology for the pharmaceutical industry Although it is known that the primary processing (e.g. crystallization) may affect the secondary processing (PS reduction technique) and both can dictate the final API physicochemical properties, there is still a limited understanding of these relationships and how they will affect the final dry powder or pressurized metered dose inhaler drug product performance, after formulation The objective of the present study is to systematically investigate the impact of two different top-down technologies, jet milling and wet polishing, on the physicochemical properties of three inhalation APIs, fluticasone propionate, mometasone furoate and salmeterol xinafoate, when size-reduced to a similar particle size from the same starting raw material. For this purpose, a comprehensive evaluation of the physical and chemical properties using several analytical techniques was performed for all micronized APIs. Additionally, the effect of size-reducing to different particle sizes on the remaining physicochemical properties was also assessed for the FP produced by WP. Crystalline fluticasone propionate (FP) (C The raw materials of FP, MF and SX were size reduced under technology-optimized conditions to target a Dv50 of 2 In the JM process, nitrogen was used as the grinding gas; while in the WP process, the raw materials were first suspended in an appropriate anti-solvent, milled, and finally isolated using a SD apparatus. The particle size distribution of micronized FP, MF and SX powders was measured as a wet dispersion by laser diffraction (LD) using a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK) equipped with the Hydro 2000S sample dispersion unit. The LD methods were developed for each grade of micronized API. Each sample was suspended in the appropriate anti-solvent (e.g. water, heptane) containing a surfactant or stabilizer (e.g. Tween 80 and Span 85) at a low concentration. The sample in suspension was then vortex-mixed and carefully added to the wet sample dispersion unit until the established obscuration limit was reached and stable. The suspension was then subjected to continuous stirring and ultrasounds (US) for adequate dispersion into primary particles. All samples were measured in triplicate and the average was determined. The particle size distribution data was presented as Dv10, Dv50 and Dv90 (particle size below which 10%, 50% and 90% of the volume of particles exist); as well as the percentage of particles below 5 The particle shape and surface morphology of the micronized FP, MF and SX powders was determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The samples of micronized API were attached to adhesive carbon tapes (Ted Pella Inc., CA, USA), where the powder in excess was then removed by a jet of pressurized air. The samples were left in vacuum for 2 The thermograms to assess the thermal behavior of the micronized APIs were assessed using modulated differential scanning calorimetry (mDSC) performed in a Model Q200 from TA Instruments (Focus Scientific, Ireland), equipped with a Refrigerated Cooling System (RCS). The equipment was daily calibrated with indium. Approximately 3–6 The crystallinity and polymorphism of the micronized FP, MF and SX powders was assessed by X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) (X'Pert PRO X-ray diffraction system, PANalytical). The measurements were performed using CuKα1 radiation (λ The water content of the micronized FP, MF and SX powders was determined using Karl-Fischer titration. For the micronized FP and SX samples, 1 The dynamic vapour sorption (DVS) was used to evaluate the behavior of the micronized API samples towards the relative moisture using a SGA-100 Symmetric Vapour Sorption Analyzer (VTI, Hialeah, FL). The DVS equipment was calibrated daily with a 20 The mercury intrusion porosimetry for the micronized FP, MF and SX powders was performed using the Micromeritics AutoPore IV 9500 (Norcross, GA, USA). The pressure ranged from 3.4     The specific surface area of micronized FP, MF and SX powders was determined using a Micromeritics ASAP 2000 equipment (Norcross, GA, USA). A six-point Brunauer-Emmet-Teller (BET) method from the nitrogen adsorption analysis was performed after degassing with helium (purity > The residual solvents content was analyzed by gas chromatography (GC). The total solvents content data was provided by Hovione SA (Loures, Portugal). Different particle engineering technologies may yield micronized APIs with similar PSD but with distinct physicochemical properties. A thorough physicochemical particle and powder characterization was performed on the FP, MF and SX powders after being size-reduced by JM and WP technologies until a Dv50 of 2 The PSD analysis of all micronized APIs is summarized as Dv10, Dv50, Dv90, and span values in The particle shape and surface morphology of all micronized APIs was investigated using SEM as presented in Finally, the surface of the FP by WP material with a Dv50 of 2 and 3 The XRPD analysis was performed to determine the identity and the polymorphic form of the micronized APIs. The XRPD diffractograms of FP, MF and SX powders size-reduced by JM and WP are shown in The sharp and distinct peaks observed in the XRPD spectra suggest that all micronized APIs were predominantly crystalline. According to the XRPD diffractograms found in the literature, form I was identified in the three FP samples ( Regarding the MF powders, according to the XRPD spectra presented in According to the literature, the polymorphic form I was identified for both SX samples. This polymorphic form is characterized by sharp peaks at 2θ Overall, it could be observed that all powders produced by WP seem to present a higher crystallinity level, presenting more intense and sharper peaks than the JM powders. The only exception occurs in the MF powders where there seems to be no difference in the sharpness of the peaks. The thermal analysis was performed by mDSC to determine the identity and the crystallinity of the micronized APIs, and also to assess if the technology used influenced the thermal behavior. The heat flow thermograms of the micronized powders are presented in The thermogram of the three micronized FP samples presented an endothermic response at ~ The micronized MF thermograms were similar to the FP, presenting one endothermic peak at ~ The SX thermograms, as detailed in literature for micronized SX samples, presented two endothermic peaks at ~ Although both thermograms exhibit two endothermic peaks, the JM contrarily to the WP thermograms, presents a higher enthalpy of fusion on the second melting, which corresponds to the melting of form II. This was probably due to the milling conditions that formed a higher level of defects on the crystal surface (amorphous domains), that has been pointed as the reason for the conversion of form I to form II The specific surface area (SSA) of the micronized APIs was assessed by BET adsorption method – Although the SSA determined by BET and the SEM micrographs can give an idea of the particle topography/rugosity, they are not directly correlated. For that, the particles rugosity was calculated as the ratio between the SSA values determined by BET and the SSA determined by LD when the PSD was measured ( Regarding the SX powders, as expected by the SSA and SEM data, the WP presented higher rugosity. To obtain more data regarding the particles and bulk properties and to support the previous SSA and the rugosity factor data, the skeletal density (SkD), bulk density (BD) and porosity were also determined by Mercury intrusion ( In addition, according to the pore size distribution obtained at high pressure, a higher number of nanopores was observed for FP and MF powders produced by JM, comparing to the WP powders (data not shown). This supports the hypothesis that during the WP process, the residual solubility of the API in the anti-solvent may lead to the sealing of the smaller pores. Additionally, and as expected, contrarily to what was observed for FP and MF powders, the SX powder produced by WP presented a higher number of nanopores in comparison with SX by JM. The moisture content was assessed by KF to evaluate if different technologies would have an impact on the micronized APIs water content. According to the literature, the powders with amorphous domains are more prone to moisture sorption. A trend was observed for all samples. All the JM powders presented higher water content than the WP samples. This may be an indicative of the higher amorphous domains in the JM powders, probably due to the high mechanical stress induced at the particle surface during the milling process. Regarding the FP(WP) particles with different PS, no difference was observed. The sorption and desorption cycles were performed for all micronized API samples. All powders presented a similar water sorption and desorption profiles. In addition, similarly to what was observed in the moisture content analysis, the JM powders absorbed more water than the WP powders (data not shown). Regarding the FP samples produced by WP with PS of 2 and 3 The residual solvents content of all micronized particles was always higher for the WP powders, although below the International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) limits (according to information from the supplier). This was observed because the residual solvent content present in the WP micronized APIs resulted from the crystallization and WP process (wet micronization method followed by spray drying) where an anti-solvent was used during micronization. This led to the presence of a residual solvent content in the final product. On the other hand, the JM powders present low residual solvents because it is a dry size-reduction method where a constant feed of nitrogen is supplied during the process, decreasing the residual solvent content of the final product. The low solvents level of the JM samples may lead to a higher generation of electrostatic charges, which may potentially complicate the handling of the product. The examination of the analytical data shows that both JM and WP technologies successfully generated crystalline API particles with a similar PSD suitable for pulmonary delivery but with distinct physicochemical properties. The specific attributes found in each particle engineered API may enable the production of tailor-made crystalline particles for optimal pulmonary drug delivered of single or binary drug combination. Due to the high energy input during the comminution process, JM technology created FP and MF particles with a higher SSA and rugosity factor, which was supported by the topography observed in the particles surface by SEM and confirmed by the lower SkD, lower BD and higher porosity. The WP technology, on the other hand, produced smoother particles, which is already an indication of the lower SSA, lower rugosity factor, higher SkD and BD and lower porosity observed. These particle properties were most likely obtained during the WP milling step where the presence of an anti-solvent dissipated the mechanical stress of the particle surface and was responsible for sealing some internal pores and imperfections due to the API residual solubility (supported by the BET and pore size distribution data). Additionally, it could be observed that the FP powders intentionally produced by WP with a PS of 2 and 3 The only exception to this trend was the SX powders due to the particle singular shape and to the higher PS of the JM sample. This small difference in the PS, conditioned the further analysis. For this reason, it is harder to draw a significant comparison between JM and WP technologies for the micronized SX powders. According to the XRPD and mDSC data, all the polymorphic forms were identified and were stable. All WP powders presented higher intensity and slightly sharper peaks, with exception of the MF powders where the peaks sharpness was identical. This indicated a higher crystallinity level for the WP powders that might be related with the smoother milling conditions comparing to the JM technology. In the SX powder, the higher enthalpy value of the melting of form II (more instable) for the JM powder was also an indicative of harder milling conditions. The higher level of crystallinity for the WP particles is also supported by the KF and DVS data, in which the higher water uptake from all JM powders suggests the presence of amorphous domains in the particle surface, regardless of the particle SSA. The higher residual solvents content value observed in all WP technologies in comparison to JM was due to the exposure of the API particles to solvents during the micronization process and/or to the crystallization process conditions, while the JM approach consists in a dry milling method with a constant nitrogen feed; the residual solvents content in JM powders are related to the primary crystallization process. Both JM and WP technologies enabled the generation of crystalline API particles with a well-defined and comparable PSD suitable for use in inhalable drug products, but with distinct physicochemical properties. In regards to the particle and powder properties, the JM technology yielded particles with a higher surface area, higher rugosity factor and consequently lower density and higher porosity, than the WP technology, all supported by SEM micrographs. Additionally, all JM powders presented lower intensity peaks in the XRPD as well as higher water content and water sorption, regardless of the powder SSA, suggesting that the JM technology may be more aggressive to the particles surface during the particle comminution process than the WP technology. Conversely, the WP technology yielded particles with smoother surfaces, obtaining lower surface area, rugosity factor, higher density and lower porosity, also supported by the SEM micrographs. In addition, these WP particles have higher residual solvents content (below the ICH limit) due to the size reduction step in wet media. However, they may present a higher stability due to the slightly higher crystallinity level observed in the XRPD. All the previous trends were observed for the engineered FP and MF powders. Due to the differences in the SX powders particle size, it is harder to draw conclusions. Regarding the particle size effect evaluation performed for the FP particles with a PS of 2 and 3 This thorough particle characterization was important to understand the impact of the JM and WP technologies on the powder interfacial properties which can determine the formulation development and affect the final product in-vitro performance either for DPI or MDIs use. The relationships observed between the micronization technologies and the final physicochemical drug substance properties may support the establishment of meaningful and realistic specifications related with drug performance and enable future tailoring of a drug or combination of drugs with optimized performances. The authors would like to thank The authors would like to kindly thank Susana Campos from Hovione for her scientific input and support in proof reading the article.