The present work investigates the production of aluminium AA6061 matrix composite materials reinforced with Ti3Al particles by powder metallurgy techniques and hot extrusion. The milling process has a big influence on the characteristics of powder materials, changing the spherical morphology of as-received powder during milling process to flattened one due to particle deformation followed by welding and fracturing particles of deformed and hardened enough which allows to receive equiaxial particles morphology again. The investigation shows that so called brittle intermetallic particles yields to plastic deformation as good as ductile aluminium alloy particles. That indicates that in contrary to ceramics particle, the Ti3Al intermetallic powder cannot play a role of the accelerator during mechanical milling. The mechanically milled and extruded composites show finer and better distribution of reinforcement particles what leads to better mechanical properties of obtained products. The hardness increases twice in case of mechanically milled and only 20–25 HV1 for low energy mixed and hot extruded composites. The finer microstructure increase mechanical properties of composites materials. The higher reinforcement content results in higher particles dispersion hardening. Composites reinforced with 15% of Ti3Al reach about 400MPa UTS.Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are currently being investigated because of their superior properties as compared to those of most conventional materials. Two types of reinforcement (alumina and silicon carbide) have been extensively investigated by the scientific community. The introduction of new reinforcements such as intermetallics to aluminium alloys continues to be investigated in order to improve final behaviour of AMCs as well as to avoid some drawbacks of using ceramics as aluminium alloys reinforcements. At the present, the two major obstacles to the application of such materials are high cost and chemical reaction at reinforcement/matrix interfaces during materials processing and service at elevated temperatures John Benjamin et al. The process of mechanical alloying consists in repeated welding–fracture–welding of a mixture of powder particles in a high-energy ball mill The mechanical alloying process changes dramatically the powder characteristics, the more refined microstructure improved dispersion of the reinforcement particles and improved mechanical properties can be achieved with this process route compared with the same composite produced by conventional PM process and hot extrusions. The present work investigates the production of aluminium AA6061 matrix composite materials reinforced with Ti Aluminium matrix composites were produced employing the atomised aluminium alloy AA6061 as metal matrix when Ti To evaluate the effect of mechanical milling two types of ball mills were used: a low energy (horizontal ball mill) and a high energy one (planetary ball mill). The composite powders were produced by high-energy ball milling. The planetary (eccentric) ball mill was used with the following parameters: To characterise the obtained composite powders measurements of the apparent density according to MPIF Standard 28 Three sets of samples with 5, 10 and 15 In the contrary to conventional casting processes the PM route of composite materials production makes possible to obtain wide range of reinforcement particles percentage addition without typical for them segregation. Observation of morphology of powder mixture after low energy mixing process and after high energy mechanical milling process respectively allows to state that the low energy mixing process do not change morphology of the initial particles, allows for better distribution of reinforcement particles but cannot completely liquidate their agglomerates. Mechanical milling process has improved the reinforcement distributions throughout the whole particle. However, Whenever the reinforcement particles are situated between the aluminium particles during the ball collision, they are integrated in the resulting welded particle, forming a composite particle. With the work hardening due to the deformation and welding process that the particles undergo, fractures increase and reach the equilibrium with welding. At this moment, the equiaxial particles are formed. It can be seen that the longer milling time has improved the reinforcement distributions throughout the whole particle, and has produced equiaxial morphology. Intermetallic particles has undergone plastic deformation as well as the fragmentation what is not possible in case of low energy mixing processes. Another characteristic, which indicates that the process has reached its steady-state, is the recuperation of apparent density In the final products of composites materials, depending on the reinforcement size and shape, the density difference, type of matrix material, agglomeration can occur. Although the extrusion processes tends to minimise this problem reinforcement particles agglomeration is the most appointed cause of low performance of this class of materials. To avoid this problem mechanical milling can be used to improve the distribution of the reinforcement particles through the matrix. The big difference between particle size and their distribution through the aluminium matrix can be observed. In the mechanically milled composites one can see very fine distribution of small reinforcement particles and absence of agglomerates, however, there is fraction of particles with elliptical or flattened shape. Mechanical milling through the high degree of deformation, high density of dislocation, oxide and reinforcement particle dispersion in the matrix increase the hardness when the finer microstructure increase the mechanical properties of composites materials. One can see increase of the mechanical properties due to the mechanical milling process. Material designed as AA refers to aluminium matrix AA6061 alloy, L.E. refers to low energy mixing process, H. E. refers to high energy mechanical milling and for both of processes different concentration of reinforcement particles were used. As it can be see hardness of composite materials is only slightly higher after mixing process and small increase of hardness value is observed when reinforcement contents increase. In case of composites after mechanical milling hardness is more than twice of aluminium alloy. The same tendency can be observed for tensile properties however mixing process do not influence UTS value. Again mechanical milling change almost twice ultimate tensile strength of investigated composites. Moreover until 15% of reinforcement particles contents UTS is growing indicating to good interfacial bonding of matrix and reinforcement particles. The mechanical milling can produce the composites powders with homogenous distribution of reinforcement particles. The mechanically milled and extruded composites show finer and better distribution of reinforcement particles what leads to better mechanical properties of obtained products. The hardness increases twice in case of mechanically milled and only 20–25 HV1 for low energy mixed and hot extruded composites. The finer microstructure increase mechanical properties of composites materials. The higher reinforcement content results in higher particles dispersion hardening. Composites reinforced with 15% of Ti The addition of intermetallic reinforcement particles to the low energy mixed and extruded composites do not influence their tensile properties.