Lawnmower injuries to the digits are becoming increasingly common and are often complex in nature with multiple levels of injury. The management of these injuries as with that of other hand injuries is often tailored to the individual patient considering factors such as occupation and hobbies with the ultimate goal of restoration of function and a sensate fingertip.
                  The concept of using amputated, mangled or non-salvageable parts in a form of fillet flap has become more common in the recent years. We report a complex case of a multi-level injury to the dominant index finger of a professional typist from a lawnmower where finger length was maximised using a pedicled distal phalanx fillet flap which ultimately allowed the patient to return to work.Multi-level injuries to the digits pose unique challenges, are often difficult to salvage and frequently end in terminalisation. Finger length is important for performing certain tasks such as typing and a number of techniques have been reported to facilitate preservation of digit length such as the use of homodigital or heterodigital flaps or vascularised bone grafts. A 55 year-old female, right-handed typist sustained a multi-level isolated injury to the right index finger (RIF) whilst cleaning a lawnmower with the blade running. She presented with multiple lacerations to the middle (MP) and distal (DP) phalanges with loss of the pulp ( Given the severity of the injuries the patient was offered terminalisation through the proximal phalanx. However, she was very concerned that terminalisation at this level would make it impossible for her to return to work again as a typist and requested that everything possible could be done to preserve the length of her index finger. A significant skin defect on the radial side of the RIF was present after a thorough debridement. The RNVB was not salvageable due to the multi-level injury. Fragments of the distal part of the MP were completely excised due to the significant comminution and contamination. The MP base and remaining DP were preserved. The DP bone was filleted from its soft tissue components but left pedicled on the UNVB ( The resulting shorter RIF eased the tension on the UNVB. Turning the DP with its base pointing distally allowed the UNVB to be brought distally providing sensate coverage to the stump. A portion of the remaining volar skin was deepithelialised and used to provide extra padding for the ‘neo pulp’. A complete fusion was evident after removal of wires 6 weeks later. A custom-made finger prosthesis was successfully fitted allowing her to carry out her job without any issues. The concept of utilising remaining parts of a mangled finger using the principle of fillet flaps has gained popularity over recent years. Data from lower limb trauma demonstrated the importance of length preservation in reducing energy expenditure, which is proportionate to the level of amputation. There are no studies that report the use of digital fillet flaps for the purpose of length preservation and subsequently for prosthesis application. This case demonstrates a good example of the versatility of fillet flaps, but most importantly their role in the restoration of function, length and sensation. It also demonstrates a useful innovation of a well-known principle. None declared. None declared. None declared. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at