 Jack Howard passed away on July 7, 2008, under hospice care at the MIT Infirmary, close by the buildings and laboratories where he had spent most of his academic life. The accomplishments of his life belie a remarkable transit from his beginnings on a poor tobacco farm and in a one-room schoolhouse. Throughout it, he proceeded with grace, dignity, and generous aid to his colleagues as he contributed to and was honored at the highest levels of the Combustion Institute. Born in Tompkinsville, Kentucky, Jack was taught the dual importance of achievement and humility by his parents, Opal and the late Hugh Howard. “He felt that everything that had happened to him his whole life was a gift, a gift from God,” said Carolyn Howard, his wife. His beliefs were a touchstone of his life, yet he never pressed religion on others, instead living his beliefs. Jack graduated from the University of Kentucky in mining engineering (B.S. 1960, M.S. 1961). He then chose to study at Penn State for his doctorate, working with new faculty member Robert H. Essenhigh who was just arrived from Sheffield. With Essenhigh, he was steeped in the British tradition of blending technology with high standards of scholarship. Scientifically, carbon was his recurring theme, from coal and soot to fullerenes. At Penn State and then at MIT, where he arrived as a Ford post-doctoral fellow in 1965 and eventually became the first Hoyt C. Hottel Professor of Chemical Engineering, these substances were the bases for persistent inquiries into their physical and chemical natures and their health and economic impacts. Coal was the starting point. It was the subject of Jack's dissertation and of his first publication, “The Mechanisms of Ignition of Pulverized Coal,” in Advances in soot physics and chemistry are his other signature contributions to the combustion community. Notice of this work began with his papers on carbon formation and on electrostatics in bulk soot morphology ( Although the next student, Jim Bittner, began his research with this technique, he changed course and worked with Jack to adapt the apparatus for flame-sampling molecular-beam mass spectrometry. With their concentration measurements of small molecules, radicals, and groups of species up to 2000 daltons in a fuel-rich benzene flame, soot chemistry entered a new, increasingly mechanistic phase. For their paper “Mechanisms of hydrocarbon decay in fuel-rich secondary reaction zones” ( Jack's greatest technological impact may ultimately come from his development of combustion synthesis for C Jack's leadership contributions to the Combustion Institute were many, including service as program chair of the 19th Combustion Symposium in Haifa in 1982 and service as a member of the Board of Directors from 1994 to 2006. Jack was presented the Bernard Lewis Gold Medal in 1992 at the 24th Symposium, University of Sydney, “for the kinetics of soot formation and coal pyrolysis.” On top of these achievements and recognitions, his work and interests continued to grow. In 1996 he became director of MIT's Center for Airborne Organics, but he also began examining the science of soil clean-up and of supercritical-water oxidation. He explored new sampling and analysis techniques, and probed chemical issues of tar formation. At the same time, he mentored students and faculty and staff alike. In 1979–81, this was a formal role as Executive Officer of the Chemical Engineering Department at MIT, but he also carried out this role as an educator and collaborator and through other conscientious service roles in the Combustion Institute, the American Chemical Society, and at MIT. Many of the individuals with whom he worked have remarked that they all felt treated by Jack as colleagues, no matter how junior, and his care and judgment repeatedly gave cause for their highest respect. In the summer of 2007, Jack began to suffer health problems that were soon diagnosed as due to a brain cancer. Despite suffering through the disease and the treatment, Jack was able to recover sufficiently last spring to converse and even to visit the Nano-C laboratories. Up to the end, he retained his inquiring mind, his grace, and his concern for his personal and professional family. Jack is survived by his wife of 39 years, Carolyn Butler Howard; two children, Courtenay Howard, Winchester, MA, and Jonathan Howard with his wife Megan, Los Angeles, CA; his mother, Opal Howard; two sisters and a brother; and nearly one hundred M.S., Ph.D., Sc.D. advisees and post-docs who praise his work and his life.