The use of a single controlled bead milling step of the microalga Tetraselmis suecica resulted in a soluble fraction, rich in functional proteins. This was achieved by fine-tuning the processing time, thereby exploiting the difference in rates of protein and carbohydrate release during milling. Soluble proteins were extracted under mild conditions -room temperature, no addition of chemicals, pH 6.5-, with a yield of 22.5% and a specific energy consumption of 0.6 kWh kgDW
                     −1, which is within the recommended minimum energy for an extraction step in a biorefinery process. The resulting protein extract contained 50.4% (DW) of proteins and 26.4% carbohydrates, showed light green color and displayed superior surface activity and gelation behavior compared to whey protein isolate. The proposed process is simple (only one bead milling step), scalable, and allows the mild extraction of functional proteins, making it interesting for industrial applications in the food industry.Microalgae have been considered a promising feedstock for the feed and food industries due to their rich composition (broad range of biomolecules of diverse chemical nature), superior areal productivities compared to traditional crops and no dependence on fresh water and arable land ( The fractionation and purification of biomolecules –in particular proteins- from algae is not trivial. The first step, for most algae strains, involves cell disruption in order to release intracellular components into the bulk medium. For this, several technologies have been successfully employed, including bead milling, ultrasonication, enzymatic hydrolysis among others ( As indicated by The aim of this study was to demonstrate that with a simple process strategy (one unit operation, low energy consumption) it is possible to selectively concentrate proteins from green microalgae in a crude extract. Furthermore, the techno-functional properties (foaming, emulsification, gelation) of the resulting crude extract were determined and compared to the commercial standard whey protein isolate.  A fresh algal suspension (biomass) is fed to a bead milling where both cell disintegration and aqueous extraction are taking place. The bead milled suspension is centrifuged (14000 rpm, 30 min, 20 °C) and the resulting fractions regarded as soluble crude extract and insoluble fraction. Algae suspensions containing about 100 g Samples from the feed chamber were collected at different time intervals and used for the estimation of the disintegration rates and for the quantification of component release. For the latter, the samples were centrifuged and the supernatants and pellets analyzed separately. Cell disintegration was quantified in a flow cytometer (BD Accuri C6®). In this technique, forward scattering data was used to estimate the number of intact cells remaining at every time step compared to the initial amount of intact cells ( Dry weight and total ash were estimated gravimetrically after drying in an oven at 100 °C for 24 h and burning in a furnace at 575 °C respectively. Proteins were measured with the method of Lowry ( The release of pigments was determined by measuring the UV-spectra of supernatants at several times using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer DR 6000 (Hatch Lange, The Netherlands). The wavelengths 430 nm, 450 nm and 660 nm were selected as representative for total pigments (Chlorophyll Mass yields per component ( Protein samples were diluted with native buffer (Biorad) at a ratio 1:0.8 v/v. 25 μL of the resulting solution was loaded per lane in a 4–20% Criterion TGX gel (Biorad). Electrophoresis was run at 125 V for 75 min using Tris-Glycine (Biorad) as running buffer. Gels were stained overnight with Bio-Safe Coomassie blue (Biorad). Prior to the evaluation of the techno-functional properties, samples were freeze-dried during 24 h in a Sublimator 2 × 3 × 3, Zirbus Technology® GmbH, and stored at 4 °C in sealed bags. Unless otherwise noticed, all experiments were conducted at room temperature (∼23 °C); all runs were performed in duplicate. Whey protein isolate (BiPRO, Davisco Foods international) with a purity of 97.6% was used as commercial reference protein. Surface activity of samples containing alga proteins was determined via static drop experiments in an Automated Drop Tensiometer (ADT Tracker®, Teclis Scientific, France). With this technique, the surface tension of individual drops created automatically is monitored over time. Two distinct setups were used to assess foaming and emulsification activity. To investigate foaming activity, algae samples were dissolved in MilliQ® water to obtain solutions containing 0.1% (w/v) protein at pH 7. A single drop containing 11 μL of protein solution is formed and held hanging, while subjected to a stream of saturated air flowing vertically in a 5 ml cuvette. Emulsification studies were conducted on a 20 μL drop of hexadecane (Anhydrous, >99%, Sigma Aldrich) submerged in 5 ml of a 0.1% (w/v) protein solution. Gelation tests were conducted according to The kinetics of cell disintegration and component release during bead milling of microalgae was investigated by The rates of carbohydrate release (i.e., total sugars in the soluble phase) and the fraction of starch loss (i.e., total starch in the insoluble phase) were also quantified ( In As displayed in The kinetics of protein and carbohydrate release for The corresponding mass yields in the supernatant fraction are 22.5% for proteins, 27.7% for carbohydrates, 8.1% for lipids and 45.5% for ash. The bead milling process can be considered as an aqueous extraction process and thus, the largest fraction of lipids remains in the pellet phase due to their hydrophobic nature and density. The small amount of total lipids in the soluble phase corresponds to phospholipids, prosthetic groups (e.g., porphyrins) ( Regarding proteins, previous studies have found yields in the soluble phase of 21–24% for Several extraction methods have been proposed in the literature for the extraction of soluble proteins from microalgae. Those methods can be divided into physical and chemical. Physical methods involve mechanical shear (bead milling, high-pressure homogenization, ultrasonication, explosive decompression, microfluidization), electric fields and thermal treatments (thermal shock, microwaves). Chemical methods include solvents, ionic liquids, pH shifts and enzymatic hydrolysis ( In general, the application of electric fields leads to low yields even at high energy consumptions. This is due to the presence of a cell wall, which remains practically unaffected by electric fields ( Despite its importance, the techno-functionality of algae proteins is often overlooked. Most studies focus on presenting yields or extraction efficiencies, without addressing potential applications beyond a mere amino acid profile analysis. The issue of purity is also frequently neglected. In general, for a given separation process, purity and yield are inversely related. In other words, higher yields can be achieved at expenses of low purities. The functional activity of the crude protein extracted after short-term bead milling was further investigated in terms of surface activity and gelation behavior. Samples were compared with whey protein isolate. Dynamic surface activity for air-water interfaces (foaming) and oil-water interfaces (emulsification) showed the expected tendencies ( The gelation behavior was studied by measuring the storage modulus (G’ [Pa]) during a defined heating-cooling profile ( In this study it was shown that the soluble extract from green microalgae can be significantly enriched with proteins by performing cell disintegration –via a single bead milling step- for short times. This also ensures low specific energy consumptions, well below other disintegration methods like ultrasonication and electric fields. The resulting crude protein extract displayed excellent surface activity and gelation behavior, superior to whey protein isolate. The proposed process is easily scalable, does not require the addition of chemicals or expensive unit operations and lead to a product with potential application as functional ingredients in foods. This project is financed by the Dutch Technology Foundation STW under the project AlgaePro4You, nr. 12635. From January 2017, STW continued its activities as Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: