In this paper, the stress intensity factors (SIFs) around a 3D semi-elliptical squat on a rail surface are investigated. Elastic foundation and water trapped inside the crack are considered as key factors in crack propagation. It is found that the opening mode and shear modes show different behavior compared with former models. Also the lateral load can change the SIF pattern significantly. The superposition traction ratio and lateral load can increase the equivalent SIF up to 200%. This study confirms the pressurized water in a crack changes crack propagation direction making a squat.stress intensity factors in modes I, II, III and equivalent. semi-major axis of the crack semi-major axis of the contact patch semi-minor axis of the crack semi-minor axis of the contact patch friction coefficient between the crack faces elastic modulus lumped force rail height second moment of inertia stiffness per length of the foundation distance between two sleepers lateral load lateral load ratio ( bending moment maximum Hertzian contact pressure general degree of freedom traction force the distance between nodes and the crack tip crack mouth thickness traction ratio ( displacement in displacement in displacement in distance between the crack mouth and max. contact pressure crack angle with respect to the rail surface crack’s major axis angle with respect the direction of travel crack kinking angle crack twisting angle Poisson ratio In rolling contact fatigue (RCF) problems, due to a combination of both contact mechanics and fracture mechanics, calculating stress intensity factors (SIFs) is not easy, because they are so sensitive to both geometry and loading conditions. A squat is a crack that usually appears to be formed from a surface flaw (i.e. gauge corner checking cracks (GCCCs) or white etching layer (WEL), etc.) and grows to 5 To find a reasonable estimation of SIFs around a squat tip, one needs to model the rail geometry and boundary conditions accordingly. As the fracture of a part or structure is associated with SIFs and they govern crack propagation rate and trajectory Ringsberg The effect of the residual stress on SIFs is investigated by Kapoor and Fletcher A remarkable model is created by Bogdanski and Lewicki Crack propagation direction prediction is studied by Richard et al. In this paper, SIFs at a crack tip on a rail surface considering elastic foundation effects as well as different lateral traction ratios are estimated. The main contribution of this research is that, sensitivity of SIFs to rail and 3D crack geometry is shown. Water entrapment is modeled by pressurizing crack faces and it is shown how the crack growth direction angle can change due to water entrapment. As well, the growth angle at each point of the crack front is estimated when a wheel passes the crack. To estimate the stress intensity factors at a crack tip, both contact stress and bending stress due to the elastic foundation should be considered. Analytical models of SIF calculations at a crack tip and bending stress in a beam laid on an elastic foundation (i.e. Winkler model Secondly a crack on a block laid on fixed boundary conditions is modeled and compared with Bogdanski’s results. This model is used as a benchmark problem. Finally a 3D model of a slice of 60 The Winkler’s model of a rail laid on an elastic foundation and the displacement method in SIFs calculation are described as the following. Representing a rail as an infinite beam resting on an elastic foundation; the wheel-rail contact load not only applies Hertzian contact pressure but also causes a bending moment as well. The foundation has a stiffness per length of SIFs at a crack tip can be calculated using displacements in the FE models. In this method, SIFs are related to displacements of the associated nodes next to the crack tip as: Crack propagation angle highly depends on the proportion of SIFs. In lack of any shear mode (i.e. Two finite element (FE) models are created to investigate SIFs around a crack front. The first one is associated with Bogdanski’s model The second model is created to compare two different semi-elliptical cracks on a rail surface having different angles with respect to the traffic direction ( To model crack closure when a wheel passes the crack, contact elements are used between both faces of the crack. Therefore, a friction coefficient (FC) can be defined between both faces of the crack. The FC value of 0.1 considered in both models is that used by Bogdanski. A different FC changes shear mode SIFs, and the results cannot be compared with the benchmark problem. These models are used to investigate SIFs at a 3D crack tip. A Hertzian contact pressure with The models described in Section  Comparing with Bogdanski’s results which are plotted in In the second model a crack is located on a curved surface and on an elastic foundation, both of which affect the stress pattern. When a wheel passes the crack, the amplitude of It should be noted those nodes next to the left and right edges are affected by discontinuity of the stress field. Although they are plotted, the SIFs obtained at those nodes cannot be trusted. Field observations show that, most squats appear on rails with 350 and 850  The results obtained from a crack with Although the lateral load is able to increase the equivalent stress intensity factor at the crack tip, the wheel traction force should be considered as well. The crack’s direction (  Therefore the entrapped water has a significant effect on crack propagation direction compared with traction ratio. To investigate further, a piece of a rail with squat is cut off and observed. The aim of this observation is to find whether the finite element model can be validated or not according to the real field situations. Microscopic observations were carried out in order to observe the crack initiation mechanism in this particular case, where the crack propagates in an orderly manner in concentric circles. Transverse sections at side A and side B as shown in The maximum depth of crack propagation in this rail is more than 4 A transverse section of a rail having a squat is shown in To observe crack propagation behavior, the rail piece was frozen in liquid nitrogen in such a way that a ductile to brittle transition occurs. When the rail became brittle the rail was tapped with a small hammer and the cracked surface was exposed. The surfaces of the crack are shown in Further at higher magnification, the bottom surface shows the marks of crack propagation in concentric circles ( To find the evidences of crack initiation behavior in a moderate squat, a transverse section of cut was molded and polished to observe the microstructure. As shown in Several cracks were observed below the surface ( These two FE models show the transverse rail curvature along with the crack’s direction not only changes the contact stress pattern but also affects SIF plots. Although the first model (a block) with fixed boundary conditions can be used for a rough estimation of crack growth, the SIF pattern at the crack front is associated with crack geometry and its location on the rail surface. The slice model shows Applying a lateral load ratio with When the traction force is superposed with lateral load and bending stress, the maximum In an oblique crack with The sliced rail model has just a crack with a simple geometry. In a more complex case when the crack has both an angle with respect to the transverse direction and has eccentricity, modeling and finding the loading cycle will be more complicated. Further analysis and modeling are needed to investigate how a crack might propagate if any changes in geometry or loading take place. It should be noted that variation of elastic foundation can change SIFs and particularly The model shows an oblique crack develops parallel with the surface if some water entrapped inside the crack and pressurizes the crack. This confirms former studies that assumed entrapped water is one of the main causes of squat formation process  The authors are grateful to the CRC for Rail Innovation (established and supported under the Australian Government’s Cooperative Research Centres program) for the funding of this research (Project No. R3.105: Rail squats).  