The economic drivers behind the differences in design of plants treating coal destined for thermal and metallurgical coal markets worldwide are considered. Differences between plant designs in Australia, South Africa and the United States for both coal types will be discussed. Environmental constraints on plant design will be reviewed, in particular the means of dealing with ‘dry rejects disposal’ and water scarcity. Dealing with the ever-deteriorating quality of plant feed material, with the inevitable increase in near density material, will also be considered.This chapter begins with a consideration of the economic drivers behind the differences in design of plants treating coal destined for thermal and metallurgical coal markets worldwide. Further, the differences between plant designs in Australia, South Africa, and the United States for both coal types will be discussed. Environmental constraints on plant design will be reviewed, in particular the means of dealing with ‘dry rejects disposal’ and water scarcity. Dealing with the ever-deteriorating quality of plant feed material, with the inevitable increase in near density material, will also be considered. Most thermal coal sales contracts are driven by the desired calorific value (CV) of the coal delivered to the customer. Typically, minimum CV levels Fines dewatering can be the controlling factor in the acceptability of the final product. Conventional dewatering technology for − Effectively, over 55% of inert material (ash This phenomenon has driven thermal coal treatment circuit design in Australia, the USA, and South Africa, which commonly all discard nominal − US coals tend to be more readily liberated than Australian coals. By maintaining a coarse plant feed top size of 150–200 In Australia, it has been found that crushing plant feed to minus 50 Historically, South Africa has had a circuit design similar to that of the USA, although equipment selection was different (DM drums vs DM baths). Also, the South Africans tend to produce two products: a high quality export thermal product, and a high-ash domestic steam coal. However, recent circuits designs (  Testing of the flotation characteristics of the Lone Mountain plant feed coals showed excellent coal recovery at low ash. Frothing the − However, flotation release analysis testing on a simulated deslimed feed also showed excellent recovery at low ash. Past experience in handling this type of material (0.15 The column unit has consistently produced 20  The incremental inerts on this nominal 0.15  Plant design therefore targets achieving desired as-received (AR) moisture content and dry ash, phosphorus, sulfur, and other contaminant levels commensurate with acceptable coking characteristics. For several coking and producing regions only certain size fractions possess acceptable coking characteristics and, consequently, part of the plant product (typically the coarsest fractions) is sold as steam coal, for example the Rangal coal measures in Australia. Major circuit design differences are once again seen between US and Australian metallurgical coal plant design. Australian coking plants historically have had two circuits: DM cyclones on 50 Traditionally conventional froth flotation equipment was utilized. However, after the successful installation of column flotation at Middlefork in the USA in 1990, most subsequent Australian plants have used column flotation, mainly the Microcell or the Jameson types. Column flotation provides superior selectivity compared to conventional flotation, particularly for coals rich in clays. Conventional cells carry entrained slimes into the product, which are minimized by the deep froth depth and wash water used in column flotation. In the two-circuit met. Plants (DMC /froth flotation), inevitably some misplaced oversized material enters the flotation circuits due to worn deslime screen panels, particle shape effects, etc. Unfortunately, flotation kinetics are poor on + The hindered-bed devices, which are capable of lower cut points than the spirals, allow for more efficient recovery of the 1 Filtration, either by vacuum disk, drum, or horizontal belt filtration is practiced on the froth concentrate to maximize fines recovery. Customers of Australian metallurgical coals are more tolerant in their moisture specifications into their export-dominated markets than USA domestic or export contracts. The higher shipped moisture content tolerance for Australian coals enables superior fines recovery to occur. US metallurgical coal plants traditionally employed a combination of conventional froth flotation on the − US metallurgical coal plants have evolved to either DM bath with DM cyclone or DM cyclone alone for + Due to their high-moisture product content, filtration is not widely practiced, unless thermal drying is available, in newer US coking coal plants. The fine coal fraction tends to be dewatered in screen-bowl centrifuges being fed with combined spiral and froth concentrate (  Alternatively, the deslime column circuit mentioned in the thermal coal section is used. These deslime circuits have some losses of coal in the ultrafines, but moisture specs are met and + In both the USA and Australia the trend is to use fewer units of larger equipment, in both thermal and metallurgical coal facilities. Single unit operation circuits are favored for their simplicity, low capital, operation and maintenance costs. Major processing advantages are also seen with elimination of the distribution problems associated with multi-unit circuits. Case studies were conducted to evaluate the impacts of the different deslime and flotation circuit configurations on overall economic performance. Two series of studies were performed, one for the thermal market and one for the metallurgical (coking) market ( To illustrate the impacts of desliming on plant performance, a case study was performed in which different circuit configurations were evaluated for a plant producing metallurgical coal with contractual limits of 5.7% ash (dry basis) and 7% moisture. As shown in For conventional flotation and vacuum filters (Case A1), an acceptable ash could be made only by dropping the coarse circuit cut points to 1.50 RD. The total moisture content produced by this combination was 8.4%, which greatly exceeded the contract moisture limit of 7%. As such, filtration is a viable option for this configuration only when thermal drying is used downstream, or where moisture specs are lower (Australia). Conventional cells with screen-bowls (Case A2) lowered the total moisture to 7.4% and allowed the coarse circuit cut point to be raised to 1.60 RD before the ash The circuits incorporating the column flotation technology are shown in the bottom half of Unlike metallurgical coal contracts, as mentioned earlier steam coals are most often valued on the basis of delivered heat content. Although maximum   The results obtained for the case studies discussed above are fairly typical. Field data suggest that conventional flotation cells typically generate products having − It should also be noted that the capital costs will be much higher for non-deslime fines circuits. For a typical plant, capital costs for a by-zero (non-deslimed) circuit can be expected to be at least double the costs of the deslime circuit. The by-zero flotation cells have to handle approximately four times the volume that the deslime circuit would process. Also, carrying capacity, normally the major driver for circuit size and number of required column cells, is a function of particle surface area. The carrying capacity will often be half the value for by-zero applications in comparison to deslime scenarios, thus requiring twice the column capacity to get the same clean coal yield. Where the coal seam does not contain significant amounts of ultrafine clay, conventional flotation may be competitive and the benefits of column flotation minimized. Also, the presence of existing thermal drying capacity makes a by-zero circuit much more attractive, since thermal drying overcomes the very high incremental moisture associated with ultrafine solids. If the coals are relatively free of clay, and the plant RD cut points are already set to maximum practical values, conventional flotation may also be economically justified as well. Throughout the coal-producing regions of the world, the best, most liberated coals have already been mined. This leaves coal preparation with major challenges in dealing with coal having more near-gravity material. Many of these coals, in India, Mozambique and South Africa, will require substantial crushing to provide material liberated enough to generate a marketable product at economical yields. Crushing down to a top size of about 12 Faced with a very finely sized plant feed, major challenges will be encountered in the areas of efficient fine coal cleaning and dewatering. Conventional DM cyclone circuits will almost certainly be used to treat the coarser material, although bottom size feeding these DMC units may revert to the traditional 0.5 As far as the − Screen scroll dryers will most likely be used on the DMC product and screen-bowl centrifuges on the spiral/Reflux/fine DMC product. Either vacuum filtration or pressure filtration (depending on product moisture content and market moisture constraints) will be used to dewater the froth concentrates. Examples of vacuum and pressure filtration are shown in  The use of online nuclear analyzers will become ever more important as the quality of coals mined deteriorates and exacting quality specifications must be met from inferior coals run at low operating RDs. Similarly, plant control circuits will need to be maintained at a very high level in dealing with coals possessing high percentages of near-gravity material. Some form of briquetting or agglomeration may be necessary in view of the large percentage of fines in the finished product.  Several alternative strategies are available to deal with dearth of water. These include closed water circuits for conventional plant circuit design, ‘coarse wash only plants,’ and dry cleaning circuitry. Also, desalination plants are being introduced, significantly pushing up treatment costs. Whenever possible, current processing plants dispose of fine waste material in slurry form. This is done by pumping the plant tailings, predominantly thickener underflow, to dams, impoundments, slurry cells, underground, etc. With scarcity of water supply and environmental constraints in many regions of the world, this is no longer possible. Alternatives include the use of belt presses, and plate and frame filters, which allow fine refuse to be disposed of ‘dry,’ providing good husbanding of the scarce water resources. Many plants in the USA, Australia, China, and South Africa have already moved into this mode of fine refuse disposal. A further alternative to minimize water consumption and provide a more handleable product is the ‘deep cone thickener.’ This device is widely used in the diamond industry to thicken tailings into a ‘stackable paste’ for disposal. This technology has been applied in the coal industry at Lone Mountain plant in the USA (  In these cases, and in similar circumstances in some South African mines, washing of the coarse coal only will provide sufficient beneficiation to render an unsaleable ROM coal saleable. Typically in these plants ROM coal is screened at between 6 and 9 Conventional screening techniques will not provide efficient separation dry at fine sizes. Consequently, innovative screen technology such as roller screens and ‘flip flop’ screens have been utilized to achieve high levels of screening efficiency. Recent plants incorporating this circuit design concept include Phoenix in South Africa and the Castle Valley (Roxon Roller Screen) and West Elk (Bivitec screen) plants of Arch Coal in the USA. In both of the latter plants, dry screening is achieved on the novel screen technology with the oversize (± Wet fines generation and fine refuse disposal needs are minimized, and therefore water requirements are also minimized, which is essential in the dry, environmentally constrained Western USA. The economic benefits of the coarse ‘wash only’ plants vs conventional washing on the ‘marginal direct ship’ coals are enormous, both in terms of reduced plant capital cost and increased plant yield. However, it has to be borne in mind that this particular plant design has limited application. For the Western USA coals treated in ‘coarse wash only’ plants, an advantageous feature has proved to be the much higher ash level in the coarse material than in the fines. This, coupled with typically extremely well-liberated coarse material, has enabled these plants to produce a very saleable combined product of washed coarse coal and by-passed fines.  Air Jigs and Air Tables, many resurrected from old designs, have been developed to fulfill this need. Although the levels of processing efficiency reached by these dry cleaning devices are considerably less than for DM processes, the ability to clean coal with no water requirements has major The FGX device ( From the foregoing, it is apparent that coal processing engineers in the future will be facing major challenges. They will need to produce a high quality product from inferior, middlings-rich coals, constrained by even scarcer water sources and stricter environmental regulations. The need to continue to improve fine wet-cleaning techniques, such as spiraling and hindered-bed separation, as well as successfully driving down the bottom size treated by DMCs, will be paramount. Continual improvement in techniques to effectively dewater the fines coal products from the new plants will be required. Depending on handleability and dustiness, the briquetting process may well be required to produce a similar product. Improvements in dry screening efficiency and processing will be extremely helpful in arid areas. The area of ultrafine wet coal cleaning currently reserved for flotation (column and conventional) will need to be expanded to include efficient Through innovation and fortitude the coal processing engineers of the future will rise to the challenges facing them, as this group has always done in the past. This will be driven by a ‘coal hungry’ global market.