A fundamental study on the kinetics of uranium mineral bioleahing using Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans has been carried out in stirred reactor (SR) and column reactor (CR). The four factors affecting uranium dissolution kinetic including aeration rate, pH, initial Fe2+ concentration and temperature were selected to be optimized in SR. The aeration rate of 100 l/h pH of 1.8, initial Fe2+ concentration of 4g/l and temperature of 35°C were determined as optimal conditions. To understand ferric and ferrous ions changes by biooxidation, chemical leaching at constant potential were conducted. Results showed that the electrochemical reaction controlled the overall uranium dissolution. By the progress of bioleaching, three stages of bioleaching were observed. The rate controlling is anodic uranium mineral decomposition in the first and second stages while in the third stage cathodic ferric reduction is rate controlling. By using SEM, EDX, XRD and BET analysis, the formation of K-jarosite layer over the residue particles confirmed and the increasing of porosity in the particles surface proved that diffusion of ions from layer was not limiting in uranium bioleaching. The modified kinetic model during bioleaching in SR was presented and developed in CR. Comparing the results, the semi-empirical model data are in good agreement with the experimental data for both uranium leaching and bioleaching in SR and CR.Low grade ores are treated under very mild conditions to minimize costs. Extraction of uranium from ores by bacterial leaching processes arise from the need to develop economically viable processes for processing low grade ores ( Enhancement of low grade resource processing needs to better understand of the kinetics of bioleaching of uranium minerals. A comparison of previous studies about uranium bioleaching in stirred bioreactor is summarized in In this study the effective parameters on the kinetics of uranium bioleaching such as aeration rate, pH, initial ferrous concentration and temperature was investigated and optimized. The uranium bioleaching and characterization of residues were evaluated at optimum conditions in stirred and column reactors. In order to quantify the parameters independently, controlled redox potential experiments were conducted. Finally, a kinetic modified model was presented for uranium mineral bioleaching in stirred reactor and developed in column reactor. A bulk of low grade uranium ore was obtained from the Saghand uranium mine in the center of Iran. The bulk sample was initially crushed by a jaw crusher from 150 A pure strain of Samples of leaching solutions were regularly withdrawn for concentration measurement of uranium and iron. Uranium concentration was determined by ICP-OES (Perkin Elmer Optima 2000 DV). 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) testing was used for ferric ion and total iron measurement to evaluate the bacterial activity in ferrous ion oxidation to ferric ion and subsequently precipitated using a standard diagram of absorbance ( The stirred reactor (SR) leaching experiments were performed in a double-wall, six-litter glass bioreactor (4.5 The SR chemical leaching tests were conducted in order to simulate bioleaching conditions at constant potential by adding 0.2 The column reactor (CR) bioleaching experiments were performed in column which was fabricated from 5  The effect of pH was examined at values of 1.6, 1.8, 2.0 and 2.2 with initial Fe Initial [Fe The effect of temperature was studied at 25, 30, 35 and 40 According to the results obtained, optimum conditions for uranium bioleaching in SR was achieved at pH 1.8, [Fe Furthermore,  For the control test (cell free), as shown on The kinetics of leaching can generally be described by a rate expression of the following form ( K(T) is a rate constant which is a function of temperature and initial mineral grain size, Assuming that temperature and particle size are all fixed, K(T) will be constant. K(T) is given by Arrhenius law: F(C) is a function of solution composition such as [Fe The half reaction for oxidation of UO The reduction of oxidant in the solution, written as The rate of an electrochemical reaction is dependent on the potential difference across the electrode-solution interface, E, the concentration of the reacting species and the temperature, T. If the anodic half-reaction is considered irreversible, then the rate of the anodic half-reaction is given by, For cathodic half-reaction is, The general requirement for dissolution is that the sum of the rate of anodic half-reactions, By assuming The rate of dissolution is achieved by substitution of Eq.  If the  If the In bioleaching process because of bacterial activity, the concentration of ferric as an oxidant varies during the bioleaching process. To take account the variation of [Fe W(1 The parameter  Effect of four stirring speed, 400 RPM, 500 RPM, 600 RPM and 700 RPM on the rate of uraninite dissolution investigated. The results obtained in In order to analysis of F(C) in Eq. Analysis of the data obtained from dissolution tests showed that uraninite dissolution rate increased by increasing of The fractional order of reaction was obtained by plotting the logarithm of rate against that of At ORP The Based on the preceding investigation in stirred reactor, the kinetics equation of uranium bioleaching (Eq.  The kinetics equation for uranium bioleaching (Eq.   The kinetics of uranium mineral bioleaching by taking account of ferrous and ferric ions changes during biooxidation was investigated. The optimum conditions for stirred reactor bioleaching were aeration rate 100 l/h, pH 1.8, initial Fe The authors thank the