In this work, the impact of water type on borate ore flotation was investigated, while various physical parameters during flotation were considered in order to compare the results. Two different colemanite samples from Emet deposits of Turkey, named as Emet-A and Emet-B contained 44% B2O3 and 40% B2O3, respectively. The flotation tests were performed at feed particle size range of −210 +20μm. Optimal consumption values for the reagents were determined as 2000gt−1 for AeroPromoter R825 from Cytec Company, a sulphonate type collector, 1500gt−1 for Procol CA927 from Allied Colloids Company, a sulphosuccinamate type collector and 100gt−1 for AeroFrother 70 from Cytec Company, an alcohol-type frother. In the tests, the impeller speed of the Denver-type flotation machine was set to 1200rpm and the samples were fed into a litre cell at 25% solid/liquid ratio and at natural pH value of the slurry at room temperature. The flotation results obtained from the tests with use of tap water, demineralised water and the artificial water prepared with Ca2+ and Mg2+ cations deliberately added into demineralised water were compared to each other in optimal flotation conditions.Water is not only a necessary medium for almost all mineral processing methods, but also one of the most important components for flotation, therefore water type is one of the main factors affecting flotation results. For some routine flotation tests the tap water in most areas is satisfactory, but for delicate flotation separations the composition of the water is extremely important. Many flotation scientists prefer to use distilled, de-ionised or de-mineralised water and then, after having established the effect of the major variables, to vary the composition of the water. In this way, it is possible to assure that a process will operate effectively over the probable range of water supply composition. Soft water is often used in flotation circuits where the collector is a soap because of the detrimental chemical reactions between soap and the calcium and magnesium cations in hard water. Water hardness results in loss of selectivity during flotation and in increased reagent consumption. Under conditions of extreme water hardness, softening of the water is usually preferred. When the water is moderately hard, flotation test will usually indicate whether the use of softened water is advisable. It is very important to conduct final testing in water from the source representative of local water to be used. Any change of water source during operations should be checked before general use to determine its effect on selectivity and reagent consumption. There are a few examples that water quality affects recovery and grade values during the flotation process. Especially, the effects of calcium and magnesium cations on the flotation of non-sulphide minerals are profound, such as separations of quartz and fluorspar Taggart It has also been found that mill water may depress or activate the constituents if over-charged with various ions. The most liable ions to build up are Cl Wills Water quality also plays an important role in oxide flotation. The effects on selective flotation of fine (1–16 Water effects were different for each mineral and reagent combination. In general, plant recycle water decreased selectivity and increased reagent consumption. Interpretation of results is given in terms of electrokinetic effects, hydrolysis of cations, and mineral-collector interactions. Two techniques of treatment for plant recycle water, cation precipitation and zeolite adsorption, were assessed. The former was found to be more effective under the tested conditions but recycle water continued to give poorer selectivity than the potable A marked deterioration in the selectivity of the flotation method used for the complex copper–lead–zinc ore from Aggeneys was noticed during a pilot-plant run in Australia shortly after it was decided to run on a closed water circuit. This was found to be caused by an accumulation of the breakdown products of the copper collector Z-200 (a xanthate). Due to the importance of the water quality as one of the flotation parameters, a literature survey was carried out to gauge the extent of research by the mining industry in this field and to determine what methods were available to cope with residual reagents in the recycle water. It was found that there was a general tendency by industry (except the mining industry), to employ biological activated sludge processes for the removal of organic and inorganic nutrient substances from their recycle waters. Due to the low cost and efficiency of the activated sludge systems, as experienced by industry and water purification works, it was decided to carry out some laboratory experiments to establish the amenability of flotation plant effluents in being treated by this method. A small capacity (2.5 It was earlier reported that colemanite flotation can be positively influenced by the presence of multivalent ions in the medium, such as Ba Borate ore samples containing large amount of colemanite were supplied from Emet-A and Emet-B sections of the Emet deposits of Turkey by Eti Holding authorities (formerly, known as Etibank), due to their different quality. These samples were separately prepared to obtain final particle size of −210 +20 Before the batch flotation experiments were carried out, a report giving a complete chemical and physical analysis of Birmingham tap water was supplied from the Severn Trent Water Authority in England and is given in From The reagent, AeroPromoter R825 has an anionic-type structure, specifically a sodium alkyl sulphonate and may be classified on the basis of alkyl and alkyl aryl sulphonic acid and salts. These reagents could have following structural formula: R825, commercially produced by Cyanamid is known to be very efficient as a collector for colemanite, as well as some other non-metallic minerals, i.e. barite, celestite and kyanite according to the literature. It is a very viscous, mahogany-brown colour liquid having a specific gravity of 1.1 The reagent, Procol CA927 produced by Allied Colloids Company is a sulphosuccinamate. This type of reagent has been recently introduced for use in oxide mineral flotation, especially for cassiterite. These compounds are used as wetting agents, collectors, auxiliary collectors and fatty acid emulsifier for a variety of flotation processes and they have a similar use area to sulphosuccinates. Their typical formula is R–N–H–C–O–CH According to the supplier, Procol CA927 is a white emulsion having a low viscosity and miscibility with water. Its pH is about 9 and specific gravity is 1.07 It is clear that flotation results were influenced by the use of de-mineralised water instead of Birmingham tap water when R825, sodium alkyl sulphonate, was employed as collector. It is interesting to note that when CA927, sodium sulphosuccinamate, was used as collector, the results were not influenced by a change of water type. In the light of above information, batch flotation tests were conducted with previously defined optimal flotation conditions in order to compare the results in terms of distilled water and Birmingham tap water usage. From After determination of significant differences in flotation results in terms of tailing grade values due to usage of distilled water and tap water when R825 was employed as collector, attention was directed towards the effect of specific ions in tap water on flotation. Calcium and magnesium cations are commonly present in most tap waters. In order to observe the effect of these ions, known amounts of calcium and magnesium ions were added to a slurry made up of de-mineralised water and colemanite particles from Emet-A and Emet-B ore samples and then their effect on flotation recoveries and grades were determined. The same experimental procedure was followed during the present tests as in the preliminary flotation tests, i.e. optimal flotation conditions with 2000 From It is obvious that when the quantities of added Ca and Mg ions were increased, flotation results for both types of samples were negatively influenced. The individual effect of these ions was determined as they gave similar results to each other. Much lower final concentrate recovery and grade values were obtained when these ions were employed together. The examination of water quality and its effect on batch flotation results should be considered when optimal conditions for colemanite flotation are determined. Birmingham tap water does not contain impurities at high concentrations for public use and it is also an adequate medium for laboratory flotation experiments, although use of de-mineralised water seems to be more effective than the tap water, when R825 which is known as conventional for this type of borates, is considered as a collector for colemanite flotation. The flotation test results for comparison of tap water and de-mineralised water are shown in After determination of the difference between the tap water and distilled water in terms of flotation results for colemanite samples, it was decided to add some alkali ions, i.e. Ca When calcium and magnesium ions were added to the slurry either separately or jointly at known concentrations, i.e. varying from 50 to 300 As a result of these primary tests, it can be seen that colemanite flotation is not effectively influenced by use of Birmingham tap water. However, if the water quality changes from soft to hard, the flotation process is more likely to be affected. Finally, above results directed the attention of this study towards the determination of the interaction mechanisms of the selected reagents with Ca