In order to assess the feasibility for long lived radioactive wastes storage facilities in deep geological formation, solute transport processes must be investigated in the vicinity of the host formation. In France, the Oxfordian and Dogger limestone layers surrounding the Callovo-Oxfordian (CO
                        x
                     ) argillite in the east of the Paris Basin are investigated for this purpose. More than 60 samples of Oxfordian and Dogger formation groundwater and one sample of Triassic formation groundwater, located at the bottom section of the investigated sedimentary cover, were collected over a 250km2 area, and were analysed for major ions, δ18O and δ2H of water, 87Sr/86Sr, and δ34S and δ18O of dissolved sulphate. Oxfordian and Dogger formation water is from meteoric origin, and no direct water flow between Oxfordian, Dogger, nor Triassic formations was evidenced. Mineralization processes of the Dogger limestone groundwater were fully investigated. These processes correspond to a series of geochemical reactions including: calcite dissolution, incongruent dissolution of dolomite, ion addition from upward vertical diffusion through the sedimentary pile inducing cation exchange and further dissolution due to the increased ionic strength of the solutions. A PHREEQC model was developed to simulate inferred chemical processes. The model output is consistent with observed data.In France, the Bataille Law in 1991 initiated the investigation of the feasibility for radioactive waste storage in deep geological formations. For this purpose, the French national radioactive waste management agency (Andra) built the Meuse/Haute-Marne underground research laboratory (URL) in the east of the Paris Basin. The targeted layer for radioactive waste disposal is the Callovo-Oxfordian argillite formation (CO The aim of this study is to extend current knowledge of the system laterally to a 250 Samples from 22 boreholes distributed over the study area were collected between 2003 and 2008. A first sampling campaign was conducted in 2003 and 2004 ( During the second sampling campaign, boreholes were drilled in five locations, namely the A, B, C, E and F platforms ( Sampling at the URL (URL-P) shaft boreholes (PPA00XX) was performed with a Rylsan® tube introduced at a depth of 50–100 During the 2008 campaign, up to three samples for each groundwater-producing levels were collected sequentially during and after drilling in three stages: a first sampling during drilling of the borehole when inflow was sufficient, a second one following the end of the drilling after one or two days of pumping to purge the borehole, and a third one after a longer pumping period (pumping of 7–52 well volume) ( Three different techniques were used to collect samples. The first technique consisted in pumping the overall water column using a submersible pump lowered at a depth of 150 The third technique used a submersible pump, with low pumping rate, lowered at the depth of the productive horizon and designed to perform discrete sampling. This Diapo® system was developed by Andra (DP) ( For anions and bromide concentration determination, raw water was sampled in 60 They were measured at IDES laboratory (CNRS – Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, France) using a Finnigan Delta The results are reported in δ-notation, permil deviation of the measured isotopic ratio relative to the V-SMOW international standard. The uncertainty is better than ±0.2‰ for δ For Sr analysis, samples were filtered at 0.1 The isotopic composition of dissolved sulphate was analysed at IDES laboratory (CNRS – Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, France). The dissolved sulphate in groundwater samples was precipitated as BaSO The barium sulphide produced through the reduction step was converted into Ag Total CO Cl The Cl The Cl Dogger borehole in A platform was also logged with NaBr-rich fluid. If residual traces were still present, Cl/Br ratios should be significantly lower than those of other samples, which are not observed here. The samples collected from this borehole were then considered as reliable and kept in the data set. The Triassic layer groundwater Cl δ Triassic groundwater is very rich in heavy isotopes, with values of −2.11‰ and −17.8‰ for δ Oxfordian groundwater isotope compositions range from −9.46‰ to −7.07‰ and from −63.2‰ to −48.1‰ vs. V-SMOW for δ In The isotopic composition of dissolved Sr may be used as a tracer of groundwater flow paths or as a tracer of mixing between water masses ( The groundwater samples from Oxfordian and Dogger layers plot on distincts domains, which does not evidence any direct connection between water masses. The Dogger groundwater samples seem to plot on a mixing line, for which the Sr-richest end-member displays the Regarding the least concentrated end-member, two hypotheses are possible: The first hypothesis relies on the fact that the Sr isotope ratio of that second end-member is similar to that of CO The second hypothesis is that the more radiogenic signature of the second end-member is due to interaction with fracture filling minerals. Those minerals mainly consist of secondary calcite that was precipitated from circulating fluids within the fractures, leading to more radiogenic Regarding the Oxfordian groundwater samples, a linear trend also seems to appear, but the scattering of data prevent any firm conclusion. Nevertheless, it is noticeable that the whole data set plot between the mean values of The Triassic groundwater sample present a Sr The isotopic composition of dissolved sulphate is presented in If the typical δ Anyway, a clear difference is observed between the typical isotopic signature of Dogger aqueous sulphate and that of Oxfordian aqueous sulphate. The results of major element analyses are presented in Major ion trends are presented in    For one occurrence of the first reaction, two occurrences of the second reaction happen. In water saturated with respect to calcite, incongruent dissolution results in consumption of Ca A strong correlation is observed between Cl When entering Dogger groundwater, the large amount of diffusive chloride significantly raises the ionic strength of the solution. The activities of each dissolved species are consequently lowered, and solution, which had previously reached saturation with respect to calcite and dolomite, becomes under saturated. As a consequence, water is then able to further dissolve those minerals until saturation. Mg The last major ion to consider is sulphate. Three origins of this compound may be considered: diffusion of sulphate from the Triassic formation, oxidation of pyrite or dissolution of gypsum. The first hypothesis is unlikely, because of the low concentration gradient between groundwater from the Triassic and Dogger formations (1.1–2.73 times more For all samples, water is under saturated with respect to gypsum, and dissolution may occur. Exponential shape of the trend in In conclusion, constraints on the origin of sulphate are not very strong, however modelling, considering all the processes involved, may contribute to confirm the proposed series of reactions. In order to confirm the processes inferred in the previous section (addition of Cl the average amount of clay mineral in EST422 Dogger sample is 8.82% in mass of the total rock (Andra, personal communication), a 2/3:1/3 proportion mix of illite and smectite with respective CEC of 22 a rock density of 2.4 lead to a mass of clay minerals equal to 211 The initial composition of bounded cations was assumed to be at equilibrium with EST01448 formation water. A side model was run where exchange sites are brought to equilibrium with EST01448 water. In order to account for mineral equilibria, equilibrium phases with calcite, dolomite and gypsum was introduced in the model. All saturation indexes were fixed with respect to those observed for EST02842 sample. They are close to 0 for calcite (0.03), over saturated for dolomite (0.38), and clearly under saturated with respect to gypsum (−0.7). Good agreement is observed for alkalinity, sodium, calcium and magnesium ( Due to the fact that CEC is the only input parameter of the model which is a theoretical assumption, a sensibility test of the output data needs to be made. A 25% error on CEC definition induce an output error on Mg Geochemical processes are synthesised in A large set of samples was analysed to characterize groundwater from the Oxfordian, Dogger and Triassic layers of the Paris Basin. Water is of meteoric origin except for that collected in the Triassic layer, which probably shows a major contribution of evolved seawater, as evidenced by water isotopes and Cl Geochemical processes leading to the mineralization of Dogger formation water have been defined as follow: early dissolution of minerals such as calcite, dolomite and gypsum, followed by incongruent dissolution of dolomite in the recharge area. Thereafter, diffusion of chloride and sodium induced Mg The entire tracer span indicates a geographical repartition of the geochemical characteristics of groundwater, which is consistent with estimates of residence time. The first group of samples, which is located at the south, the west, and the centre of the study area, shows most depleted δ Authors would like to thank GNR Forpro, Andra and TAPSS 2000 research program «Present and past transfers in a sedimentary aquifer – aquitard system: a 2000