Re/Mo separation is studied by a new solvent extraction technique which is based on extraction mechanisms of the constituent metals. Based on McCabe–Thiele plots, a flow diagram has been proposed for separation and purification of Re over Mo. Re-recovery section of the diagram shows that Re is extracted when major amount of Mo is removed. For removal of the remained Mo, a two-stage extraction is required at pH=2 and V
                     a/V
                     o
                     =1. In order to obtain Re, the resulted aqueous phase is stripped by adding sulfuric acid. According to the results, while more Re is extracted at less pH, optimum extraction of Mo happens at pH=1.2. Re selectivity over Mo maximizes by approaching of the pH to zero.Re and Mo are strategic metals with special properties and important applications Re can be obtained via roasting/solvent extraction or direct reduction of the molybdenite concentrate Current industrial practices for extraction of Re from Re/Mo bearing solutions are ion exchange (resin) and solvent extraction processes Liquid–liquid extraction using organic solvents has proved an efficient technique for separation and purification of metal ions. Ease of use, low cost and recyclability of components are advantages of this technique Compared to other extractants, TBP is relatively inexpensive with low solubility in water and good extraction performance Karagiozov In Karmania Co. of Kerman, I.R. Iran, a large amount of rhenium is annually wasted as outgoing dust of molybdenite roasting furnaces. This definitive source of rhenium/molybdenum can be leached for the effective separation of Re over Mo via solvent extraction method. Additionally, recovery of Re and Mo from the furnace out-gas is both environmentally and economically advantageous. The aim of this work is separation and purification of Re over Mo from molybdenum oxide leaching liquor by using TBP as the extractant. Flowchart of the separation and purification process was devised based on the theoretical and experimental analysis of the system. The outgoing dust of the roasting furnace was obtained from the Karmania Co. (Kerman, Iran). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns showed that the main constituents of the dust are molybdenum oxide (MoO Experiments were carried out in a 4 Tributyl phosphate (TBP) was used as extractant at the ambient temperature. Mixtures of leaching solution and organic solvent with different volume ratios were agitated for 30 The concentrations of Re and Mo in all aqueous solutions were determined by an Inductively-Coupled Plasma (ICP) instrument. Contents of Fe and Cu were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). The concentrations of Re could be analyzed based on a spectrophotometery method The leach liquors produced contained large amounts of ferric ion which usually cause main problems to the solvent extraction process. This is because of the easy extraction of ferric ion by all cationic extractants and its hard stripping from the organic phase. In order to prevent poisoning of the organic phase by ferric ion, the pH of the solution must be raised. This is due to precipitation of ferric ion at higher pHs. Although this is a pragmatic method for solutions containing too much target metals, it is not feasible to Re of very low concentration. Our experiments showed this method unfavorable due to wasting of substantial part of Re which co-precipitated with iron. Ferric ion was thus left inside the leach liquor; while Re was extracted by a previously reported method  In the case of Mo, anionic to cationic conversions can be due to the different effects of pH on the extraction curves. Depending on pH and Mo concentration, both MoO In order to show the effect of pH on selectivity of Re over Mo, the factor The effect of pH on quantities of It should be noted that the concentration of Mo in leach liquor is much higher than that of Re (see Section McCabe–Thiele plot was constructed using 40 McCabe–Thiele plot was also constructed applying 40 The stripping isotherm for Mo loaded is plotted in Based on the results obtained from  In order to assure of the results obtained from McCabe–Thiele, a simulation counter-current stripping was carried out for two stages at An overall flow sheet for separation and purification of Re over Mo is presented in Different mechanisms of Re and Mo extraction by TBP provides the feasibility of separation of Re over Mo. The extraction percent of Re decreases by increasing of the pH; while the extraction percent of Mo forms a bell diagram versus pH which shows a peak at pH