Evaluation of ground behavior due to tunneling is a key factor in designing and construction of tunnels, especially in soft grounds. In this study, a physical model setup has been designed and constructed to simulate the excavation procedure of a full-face circular tunnel. Silica sand was used with four different densities and three different cover to tunnel diameter ratios. Full-face excavation was simulated with variation of the tunneling-induced volume loss. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) technique was employed to monitor the ground deformation throughout the excavation process. A new empirical equation is introduced to predict the maximum ground settlement as a function of ground relative density.Tunneling efficiency is considered by both excavation rate and induced ground settlement. Normally, the engineers deploy various empirical, analytical and numerical techniques for prediction of the tunneling-induced ground movement. Ground movements are controlled by a number of factors including geological, hydro-geological and geotechnical conditions, tunnel geometry and depth, excavation methods and the quality of workmanship and management (  As uttered by Some empirical equations were introduced by considering some other parameters such as the surface load, applied face pressure, internal friction angle and Poisson’s ratio (   Among the various parameters influencing the tunneling-induced ground behavior, the ground density has rarely been taken into account. Although Due to the gaps left in the previous works, this study was set to investigate the ground movement in loose materials subjected to tunneling and to evaluate the influence of soil porosity on the ground settlement. This investigation contains a series of 1-g physical model tests. The modeling was conducted under different cover to depth ratios as well as tunnel volume loss. Stainless steel beams were used for construction of a stiff model frame with inner dimensions of 30 cm in width, 120 cm in length and 145 cm in height ( The Firuzkuh silica sand with a mean particle size of 300 μm and a uniformity coefficient of 2.3 is very common as a standard modeling soil in Iran. According to In order to measure the strength properties of this sand under modeling load conditions, a series of triaxial compressive tests were conducted, the result of which is presented in The model material was prepared with sand pluviation method. Automatic soil spreader was designed with a sweep rate of 1.8 m/min and flow rate of 26 kg/min (35 mm soil layer in each cycle). In order to find the resultant sand density as a function of the falling height, the sand density was measured by means of measuring caps placed inside the model for different falling heights. A linear relationship was obtained between these two parameters as shown in The investigations in this study was limited to very loose and loose sandy grounds (Dr < 40%). The maximum accessible falling height in the developed apparatus was 90 cm, corresponding to a relative density of 27%. Therefore, tests were conducted for minimum and maximum possible falling heights of zero and 90 cm, corresponding to relative densities of 2% and 27%, respectively. Moreover, two other relative densities of 9% and 33% were tested, where soil compaction method was used to reach the relative density of 33%. According to Using Eq. The values of maximum surface settlement versus tunnel volume loss are plotted in Physical modeling was conducted under four above mentioned relative densities and different cover to tunnel diameter ratios of 2, 3 and 4. A uniform convergence of the ground surrounding the tunnel is expected during a full-face tunneling process by tunnel boring machines in sandy soils. Full-face tunnel excavation was simulated by means of a pack of conic wedges, illustrated in The initial model tunnel diameter was 188 mm, which decreased to 174 mm under a constant convergence speed of 1.3 mm/min. It is noticeable that the length scale for the physical modeling in this study was 50, therefore the model tunnel of 188 mm in diameter was representative of a prototype tunnel with 9.4 m in diameter. This dimension is quite common for subway tunnels. The model deformation was measured by Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) technique. This technique, as a non-destructive method, is popular worldwide and is employed for deformation measurement during physical modeling under both centrifugal ( A PIV camera was set perpendicular to the model screen at a distance of 1.5 m, as shown in Due to the interface friction between the soil and the sidewall acrylic plates, the soil movements on the sidewalls were resisted to some extent, compared to the soil movements in the middle section of the model. In order to measure the extent of soil movement reduction on the sidewalls, the vertical surface settlement in the middle section of the model was measured by means of strain gauges (SG) and compared with the settlement data on the sidewalls obtained through PIV technique. The maximum vertical surface settlements measured by SG and PIV results are compared in It is obvious from this figure that the PIV data mostly are less than SG data. As the tunnel volume loss increased, the difference between these data increased due to mobilization of side friction. The soil movement reduction on the sidewalls reached to about 25% at a tunnel volume loss of 12%. These results are in agreement with the results of centrifugal tunnel modeling reported by The gap parameter or tunnel volume loss, the sand density and the cover to depth ratio were considered as governing parameters in this research. To study the influence of these parameters on the ground deformation, a total number of 10 model tests were conducted, as listed in As mentioned before, the PIV technique was employed to monitor the model deformation during the tunnel convergence process. The tunnel volume loss was taken up to 16 percent in each test to obtain a completely failed ground behavior. The ground deformation under different C/D for the model tests with The ground deformations for model tests with C/D = 3 and different soil densities are shown in The most common developed functions for prediction of the ground surface settlement are listed in The most important input parameter in the above mentioned equations is  As mentioned by By substitution of It is obvious in In general, the proposed equation shows a good agreement with experimental data. However, as the soil get denser; especially at higher values of tunnel volume loss, the proposed equation overestimates the surface settlement. This can be explained by the findings of To compare the proposed theory with some pre-existing theories, the variation of maximum surface settlement with tunnel volume loss are plotted in As can be expected, the pre-existing theories predict the surface settlement independent of ground density. The equations developed by Among the various equations developed for prediction of settlement troughs, the modified Gaussian function developed by The predicted settlement troughs show good agreements with the experimental data, especially for the values of tunnel volume loss less than 8%, which are more common in practice. It is seen in this figure that the error of the proposed equation for the common values of tunnel volume loss is mostly less than 0.05%. However, even for the values of volume loss as high as 16%, the proposed equation predicted the surface settlement with an error of less than 0.2%. A physical modeling setup was designed and constructed for simulation of full-face circular tunneling in sandy soils. A series of physical model tests was conducted using Silica sand. The effect of the soil relative density, the cover to tunnel depth ratio and the tunnel volume loss on the surface settlement and ground deformation was studied. The ground deformation was monitored through particle image velocimetry as a non-destructive image processing technique. Using the data produced from 1-g physical model tests and some centrifugal model test results from literature, a new equation for prediction of the maximum surface settlement above the tunnel was developed. The proposed equation defines the maximum surface settlement as a function of tunnel volume loss, diameter, depth, and soil relative density. Finally, the estimated maximum surface settlement was used in the modified Gaussian function for prediction of settlement trough profile. It is concluded that the values and profile of the ground settlement is strongly related to the sand relative density. As the relative density of the sand increases, the magnitudes of surface settlement decreases while the width of the settlement trough increases. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Not applicable. Not applicable. The authors acknowledge the experimental assistance of Mr. Behnam Nouri, Mr. Farid Alerasul and Mr. Ali Ghanbari.