Dorsal fracture-dislocations of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint of the long fingers are in most cases unstable. They require surgery, whose primary aim is to restore and maintain articular congruency. While numerous techniques exist to treat these injuries, none have been shown to be superior to any of the others in terms of outcomes and complications. The least invasive techniques should be used as much as possible. We report here a rare case of incarceration of the flexor tendons in the PIP fracture which required open surgery.In most cases, dorsal fracture–dislocations of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint of the long fingers result from axial trauma on an extended finger. These fractures are generally unstable, particularly when a large proportion of the joint is affected and when the comminution is severe. They require surgical treatment A 17-year-old, right-handed man, a smoker with no particular medical history, presented at the emergency room following direct trauma to the fourth finger at his workplace. The examination revealed ulnar clinodactyly of the finger. X-rays done on the day of the injury showed a complex fracture of the base of the second phalanx with dorsal dislocation of P2 relative to P1 ( In the operating room on day 2, the fracture was reduced and fixation was achieved under regional anesthesia with a pneumatic tourniquet placed around the upper arm and inflated to 250 We used a volar Bruner-type incision The recovery required prolonged rehabilitation. At 4 months after the surgery, the patient no longer felt any pain; however, he had an active and passive flexion deficit of 25° despite the physical therapy and active flexion of 100° of the PIP ( There are many surgical techniques to manage dorsal fracture–dislocations of the PIP. Various percutaneous methods have been proposed, such as placing a dynamic external fixator The principal and widely-accepted criterion to limit complications of dorsal fracture–dislocations of the PIP is to obtain and maintain articular congruency between the head of the first phalanx and the base of the second phalanx. Fracture reduction using external manipulation followed by pinning is entirely percutaneous and minimally invasive, which limits the risk of damaging soft tissues, joint necrosis and surgical site infection. Initially, we preferred this technique in our patient given his young age and his desire to return to work and resume sports activities as quickly as possible. However, since it was impossible to obtain satisfactory anatomical reduction using external manipulation, we were forced to resort to open surgery to examine the injury more closely to find out what was hampering the reduction. In this patient, the fracture reduction was difficult due to incarceration of the flexor tendons at the fracture site. This complication of dorsal fracture–dislocation of the PIP joint had never been described in the literature. The approach we used to the PIP allowed us to see this incarceration and to restore the anatomy of the base of the second phalanx. Factors influencing the evolution of such lesions are not well known. Had we not seen the incarceration of the flexor tendons in our patient, the result would likely have been nonunion with persistence of the dislocation. Open reduction of the fracture is a more invasive technique, exposing patients to a greater risk of postoperative infection, surgical soft tissue trauma (flexor and extensor tendons, volar plate, collateral ligaments), joint necrosis and tendon adhesions. However, open reduction allows anatomical reduction of the fracture and active mobilization of the joint, thus, accelerating rehabilitation and the recovery of joint ROM. There is no consensus regarding the management of dorsal fracture–dislocations of the PIP joint This clinical case demonstrates the importance of adopting a pragmatic instead of a dogmatic attitude in these complex fracture–dislocations. The difficult or impossible reduction of an articular fracture by external or percutaneous maneuvers must bring up the possibility of incarceration and lead to the surgeon opening the joint. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. We thank Philip Bastable for the translation and the team at the SOS mains.