The effect of statistical variance associated with concrete material properties for different concrete mixes, curing conditions and ages are reported in this paper. The concrete mixes that were analysed are the commonly used Australian N32 and N40 mixes. Samples of concrete were extracted from concrete trucks on site to ensure that the concrete had been exposed to batching and transport processes associated with typical concrete supply. Curing times for test samples ranged from 7 to 28 days. The test frequency was significantly increased for testing samples at 7 and 28 days due to their importance as commonly referenced values in design. Variations of recorded material properties with respect to time and curing conditions are established via a statistical analysis. A Monte Carlo simulation, incorporating the statistical parameters of material properties as input, was applied to serviceability deflection predictions. A statistical prediction of member deflection was established and analysed depending on the variability of material properties. This paper presents an alternative approach to predicting deflections based on the variability that occurs with concrete material properties.Mean value Standard deviation Coefficient of variation Modulus of elasticity of concrete at 28 days Modulus of elasticity of concrete at 7 days Characteristic compressive strength of concrete at 28 days Characteristic tensile strength of concrete at 28 days Compressive strength of concrete Mean compressive strength of concrete Splitting tensile strength of concrete Flexural tensile strength of concrete Moment of inertia Moment of inertia of cracked section Effective moment of inertia Gross moment of inertia Length Span of member, to centre of each support Span of member, to face of each support or drop panel Applied moment Applied moment to cause cracking Number of tested specimens Target value, threshold. Concrete is a structural material that exhibits a large variability in performance due to the environmental factors as well as the natural variability of its constituents. This variation in performance on site is due to factors such as placement, mix constituents, temperature and humidity Reinforced concrete structural design commonly incorporates empirical equations to predict material properties such as the modulus of elasticity An experimental program was designed to examine the effects that concrete mix and curing conditions have on the statistical distribution of material properties. The material properties monitored in this research included compressive strength, modulus of elasticity and splitting tensile strength. The concrete samples for this research were obtained from a construction site in Adelaide, Australia, to ensure that the concrete had been exposed to batching and transport processes associated with typical concrete supply. Statistical relationships between these material properties were established and analysed. The experimental program incorporated test samples collected from the onsite concrete trucks, and hence two factors have been investigated as the main variables of this research: variability arising from batching and transporting concrete. Variability arising in situ due to placement and compaction, temperature history and curing conditions were not studied as part of this research. A data base of material properties was produced, from which statistical mean and standard deviation values can be determined. These statistical values allowed a Monte Carlo simulation to be implemented for predicting member deflection, a process similar to that used in other studies In short, this paper initially examines the magnitude of variability of concrete material properties ( The experimental data for analysis in this section has been obtained from concrete test samples cast from a construction site located in Adelaide’s Central Business District (CBD) and laboratory tested at The University of Adelaide. The concrete is typical N32 or N40 concrete, which represents a ‘normal’ mix of concrete with an Due to the non-destructive nature of laboratory testing for For clarification of data acquisition, it is worth mentioning that the classification of 7-day data and 28-day data contains an allowable variability in testing time of plus or minus 12 h, as per AS1012.9 In design of concrete members, the two main commonly referenced material property ages are 7 days and 28 days     The number of cylinders tested for each material property varies significantly. The variation of supplied concrete type and quantity was controlled by the construction plan of the building. This situation led to some material properties having a very low number of specimens tested. It should be noted that in the situations where fewer than approximately five specimens were tested, the sample populations are considered too small to obtain meaningful statistical data. This has been accounted for by accumulating laboratory cured and site cured data. The error of the mean has been stated for each of the developed relationships.  The results presented in this section have provided this research with statistical parameters for representing material properties as normally distributed. This concrete has been exposed to typical batching and transport processes with a range of curing times and conditions. Accordingly the data is typical of concrete manufactured in Adelaide, South Australia. The next section deals with estimating the statistical parameters of The models presented in Examination of the concrete material property data obtained in Section  The statistical analysis performed has allowed distributions of Although it is theoretically possible to evaluate the correlation between each of the experimentally tested concrete variables, this relationship was not considered in this research. Such an evaluation would require a substantially large number of concrete samples from each batch, and each individual sample would have to be tested for  Three different concrete members were considered to form an example application of the aforementioned statistical approach to member deflection prediction. The members selected included two reinforced concrete (RC) beams and a one-way prestressed flat slab. The two RC beams had identical dimensions and reinforcement arrangements; however, the applied uniformly distributed loading (UDL) was altered to create an uncracked example in one beam and a cracked example in the other. This was achieved by adjusting the applied moment A Monte Carlo simulation with a sampling number of 1000 was used to predict deflections which incorporated the statistical distributions presented in It can be seen from the predicted deflection results in An examination of the spread of the probabilistic deflection predictions reveals that changes in the magnitude of material properties, due to changes in ambient conditions, for example, have the ability to alter member deflections significantly. The coefficient of variation (COV) is as high as 31% for the site cured N40 mix and 22.4% for the laboratory cured N40 mix, as shown in Probabilistic output of member deflection allowed this research to examine the application of confidence limits for member deflections. Assuming that the distributions of member deflections are normally distributed, it was possible to calculate confidence limits which relate to a particular mix and set of curing conditions. The application of confidence limits was performed with the use of Eq. The probability of exceedance has been determined for each value produced by AS 3600  The statistical distribution of A probabilistic model for determining The insight provided by this research has the potential to be developed into a simple software package that determines the confidence limits and distributions of member deflection based on the concrete mix and in situ curing conditions. Providing clients with a probabilistic answer to deflection prediction is considered to be an improved method of providing confidence in the outcome of member performance.