This paper shows how static failure loads can be used to predict impact failure of granules. A theoretical model is presented that gives the maximum force experienced during impact and equates this to experimentally measured static failure load to define a critical impact velocity for impact failure. A granule will fail if the predicted theoretical maximum force during impact due to the impact velocity is greater than the real force required to produce failure in that particular granule.
                  The random nature of granules produces a spread of velocities at which granules of a given size will fail; this spread is the failure distribution. In this paper it is shown that the failure distribution of a series of impact experiments can be represented by a 2-parameter Weibull equation. The important c-parameter is related to the impact angle and the critical normal impact velocity that is found from static compression tests. Thus the number of granules failing by impact at each velocity can be found by performing static failure tests.Granulation has been an important powder production process in industry for the past few decades. There are many advantages to using granulated material, for example improved flow-ability and improved dissolution characteristics. As granules are so important to so many industries it is desirable to know as much as possible about efficient processing and transportation of granular material. Granules can impact upon each other and process equipment, potentially leading to granule breakage. It would be of useful if we could predict whether granule breakage will occur and, if so, the rate of granule breakage. Granule breakage on impact with a rigid surface depends upon material properties of the granule and the surface as well as the velocity and angle of impact. Despite the long history of research into granulation, it has been difficult to predict granule breakage during processing without using a statistical approach involving extensive impact experiments. This is largely due to the random nature of the number and position of flaws/pores within granules. This leads to a spread of impact velocities required to induce failure within a given sample of granules. This random spread of failure velocity is indirectly apparent when particles of identical size and material are fired at a rigid surface and the number of undamaged granules is counted as shown by It is sensible that for any given granule there is a specific force required to cause the granule to fail by impact loading and a different specific force required to cause the granule to fail under static compression. Further, if a granule's properties are changed such that it becomes stronger and is more resistant to dynamic failure it is intuitive that it should become more resistant to static failure. It is well known that many granules fail by rupture of their interparticle bonds,  The majority of work on brittle elastic failure assumes spherical particles and deals with elastic failure based on the original Hertzian theory, trying to relate induced stress fields to conventionally measured yield stresses in order to predict failure. This paper takes a slightly different approach and uses the predictions by  A 2-parameter Weibull distribution is used to relate the number of undamaged granules, The Weibull distribution can be fitted to existing experimental impact data to find the values of The parameter, More usefully, the Weibull equation can be used to predict failure distributions of dense granules from static failure tests by finding the critical normal impact velocity, The critical normal impact velocity,      The critical normal impact velocity can then be used to find the To get the theoretical distributions of impact failure: Measure the critical static load. Calculate the critical normal impact velocity, Use the critical normal impact velocity and impact angle to find the Use the Weibull equation (Eq. The static compression tests in step 1 need to be performed on real granules of the same material that will be used in the processes of interest. To find the critical normal impact velocity in step 2 requires knowledge of the material properties of the granules as well as the impact surface. The basic idea is that the failure distributions of granules impacting on a surface at various velocities can be represented by a 2-parameter Weibull distribution, with the important As the granules are dense (porosity < This acceleration expression is then manipulated and non-dimensionalised to give a dimensionless set of equations of motion for the impacting sphere. The numerical solution of which, for a non-failing sphere, yields real values for; total time of impact, maximum contact radius and maximum contact force. A failure criterion is then applied that “a granule will fail if the theoretical maximum force is greater than the real force required to produce failure in that particular granule”. The real force required to induce failure cannot be calculated and is difficult to measure exactly by impact experiments, thus it is suggested that the static critical load, Consider a sphere of radius, When the sphere impacts on the platen there is a force, Assume the force acting on the sphere is given by (based on Denoting the height of the centre of mass of the sphere above the platen surface as, The motion of the sphere must satisfy Newton's laws of motion where: Using Eqs. Differentiation of Eq. If we introduce an area, Boundary conditions, with time, for Eq. For small deformation, differentiation of Eq. Non-dimensionalising the area, A convenient choice for Solving Eqs. Eqs. Eq. Integration of Eq. At We can now define a dimensionless force, From the definition of Substitution for The force reaches its maximum value when The maximum force is an especially important parameter as we can define the failure criterion as “a granule will fail if the theoretical maximum force is greater than the real force required to produce failure in that particular granule”. The maximum force can be found by substituting the dimensionless maximum force, Eq. The radius of maximum contact area can be found by: The total collision time without failure can be obtained by numerical integration of Eq. We now have an equation relating the maximum force, felt by a granule on impact, to:     A particular granule will fail if this maximum force is greater than the static critical load, For any granule impacting on a given surface the only variable that affects the failure force of that specific granule is the velocity of impact. It can clearly be seen from Eq. Eq. This is the important result that allows the prediction of the critical impact velocity (parameter  The single particle impact experiments were carried out using a continuous flow gas gun as shown in For all angles used the curve fit parameters obtained are shown in Parameter, The In which case we should find that c should be directly proportional to 1/sin As the It has already been shown that the Weibull equation accurately describes the failure distribution of impacting fertilizer granules and the theoretical model suggests it is possible to predict the critical normal impact velocity from material properties and static compression failure tests. The theory was verified using similar granules to those used in the original impact experiments and conducting static compression experiments on them. The measured static critical loads were then used to find the critical normal impact velocity and subsequently a theoretical failure distribution using the Weibull equation. The granules were placed between 2 rigid hard platens and a compressive load applied. The static failure loads were measured and Eq. The critical normal impact velocities calculated from the static compression tests were used to find the As can be seen the predicted failure distribution based on the average value from the static compression tests fits fairly closely to the experimental impact data. It has been demonstrated that real experimental impact failure distributions for dense granules can be suitably represented by the 2-parameter Weibull equation. It was further demonstrated that the important parameter, the  Area (m d d Dimensionless area Dimensionless area constant (m Parameter in Weibull distribution—critical impact velocity Diameter of granule (m) Young's modulus of granule (N m Young's modulus of platen (N m Force (N) Dimensionless force Static critical load (N) Constant—Laugier equation Dimension of Length (m)  Parameter in Weibull distribution Number of undamaged granules per 100 fired Radius of circle of contact (m) Radius of granule (m) Dimensionless time constant (s Dimension of time (s) Dimensionless time Normal velocity (m s Critical normal failure velocity (m s Elevation of the centroid of a granule above the platen (m) Velocity of granule (m s Angle of impact with platen (90° being perpendicular) Density (kg m Normal stress (N m Poisson's ratio of granule Poisson's ratio of platen