Paramagnetic manganese can be employed as a calcium surrogate to sensitize the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technique to the processing of calcium during the bone formation process. At low doses, after just 48h of exposure, osteoblasts take up sufficient quantities of manganese to cause marked reductions in the water proton T1 values compared with untreated cells. After just 24h of exposure, 25μM MnCl2 had no significant effect on cell viability. However, for mineralization studies 100μM MnCl2 was used to avoid issues of manganese depletion in calvarial organ cultures and a post-treatment delay of 48h was implemented to ensure that manganese ions taken up by osteoblasts is deposited as mineral. All specimens were identified by their days in vitro (DIV). Using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES), we confirmed that Mn-treated calvariae continued to deposit mineral in culture and that the mineral composition was similar to that of age-matched controls. Notably there was a significant decrease in the manganese content of DIV18 compared with DIV11 specimens, possibly relating to less manganese sequestration as a result of mineral maturation. More importantly, quantitative T1 maps of Mn-treated calvariae showed localized reductions in T1 values over the calvarial surface, indicative of local variations in the surface manganese content. This result was verified with laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). We also found that ΔR1 values, calculated by subtracting the relaxation rate of Mn-treated specimens from the relaxation rate of age-matched controls, were proportional to the surface manganese content and thus mineralizing activity. From this analysis, we established that mineralization of DIV4 and DIV11 specimens occurred in all tissue zones, but was reduced for DIV18 specimens because of mineral maturation with less manganese sequestration. In DIV25 specimens, active mineralization was observed for the expanding superficial surface and ΔR1 values were increased due to the mineralization of small, previously unmineralized areas. Our findings support the use of manganese-enhanced MRI (MEMRI) to study well-orchestrated mineralizing events that occur during embryonic development. In conclusion, MEMRI is more sensitive to the study of mineralization than traditional imaging approaches.At present, detailed analyses of bone apposition rates Manganese (Mn Fertilized White Leghorn chicken eggs were purchased from CBT Farms (Chestertown, MD) and maintained in a humidified commercial egg incubator. Calvariae were harvested with the approval and strict adherence to the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the AFIP. Chick embryos were removed from the egg, decapitated, and the calvarial bones that comprise the vault of the skull were aseptically dissected free of periosteal membranes. Primary osteoblasts were obtained from the third population of cells released by serial collagenase digestion of the calvarial bones of 16-day-old chick embryos To study the uptake of manganese by primary osteoblasts, cells were plated at a density 1.5 For MRI studies, Eppendorf tubes with manganese-free and manganese-treated cells pellets were imaged directly in a 10-mm radio-frequency (RF) probe. Quantitative maps of water proton T1 relaxation times were extracted from MRI images of the cell pellets. Two-dimensional cell pellet images had a slice thickness of 1 Primary osteoblasts were isolated from embryonic chick calvarial bones as described above. Cells were grown to confluence in T-75 flasks and first-passage cells were plated onto an opaque solid bottom 96-well plate with 25,000 cells per well. The cells were allowed to attach overnight, then the culture medium was removed and replaced with 100 Calvariae, harvested from 16-day-old chick embryos, were washed with sterile PBS and cultured in 6-well dishes for up to 25 In preparation for the MRI experiments, specimens were washed with a large excess of PBS and the frontal bone was removed and the remaining bone was flattened between two glass slides (width 12 All MRI experiments were performed at 37 Cell pellets and ethanol-fixed calvarial specimens were digested in a mixture of concentrated nitric acid and 30% hydrogen peroxide (all chemicals were purchased from Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) using an accelerated microwave digestion system (Anton Paar, Ashland, VA). The resulting digest was diluted with ultra pure water to 5 For LA-ICP-MS studies, calvariae fixed with 100% ethanol were air-dried between two pieces of glass to ensure a flat geometry. Dry specimens were attached to a glass slide using double sided tape in order to eliminate sample motion during the ablation process. Spatial elemental maps were acquired using a laser ablation (NewWave UPMacro, NewWave, Fremont, CA) inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry system (PerkinElmer Elan 6000, PerkinElmer, Shelton, CT). The laser ablation and ICP-MS parameters are summarized in The mean and standard deviation of each data point was estimated from a minimum of 4 repeat experiments. A one-way analysis of variance using a post To establish whether MRI can distinguish between untreated and Mn-treated cell pellets, cells were exposed to the following doses of MnCl The effect of different doses of manganese on osteoblast cell viability was measured after 24 and 48 According to our ICP-OES results, presented in To test our hypothesis that organ cultured calvariae treated with a low dose of manganese can sequester sufficient manganese to alter measured MRI parameters, we cultured a series of calvariae from 16-day-old chick embryos. Typically Mn-treated specimens were exposed to 100 Representative T1-weighted images of DIV4, DIV11, DIV18, and DIV25 calvariae are shown in To test our hypothesis that MEMRI can be used to estimate the level of mineralizing activity in organ cultured calvariae, we analyzed the local variation in T1 values of water protons situated over the 4 tissue zones shown in After our MRI studies, we subjected DIV4 and DIV25 specimens to LA-ICP-MS, in which a laser ablation unit is coupled to the ICP-MS system to allow the generation of spatially dependent trace element maps In an earlier publication, we established that manganese added to culture medium is taken up by primary osteoblasts and is deposited in the mineral phase found on the surface of organ culture calvariae Cell pellet studies were performed using low manganese doses (25 to 500 Cell viability studies confirmed that cells were marginally impacted by the 25 The manganese content of control specimens did not exceed 15 Manganese sequestration in mineral deposits at the calvarial surface had a marked effect on water proton T1 values compared with age-matched controls. We found that by subtracting R1 values of age-matched controls from those of Mn-treated specimens, the mineralization activity for each zone can be assessed in terms of its surface [Mn] content. This basic linear relationship between ΔR1 and [Mn] assumes that the relaxivity of the manganese-containing mineral is constant. If manganese replaces a fixed number of calcium ions in the hydroxyapatite crystal structure, it is safe to assume that the relaxivity of hydroxyapatite mineral with trace amounts of manganese is a constant. However, the manganese concentration used in the relaxivity equation can be assumed to be proportional to its surface concentration if we can assume a constant volume of water above the tissue zones being compared. Given this assumption, our MEMRI results have yielded valuable insights into the spatial and temporal mineralization sequence of calvarial bones and confirmed that this highly regulated process proceeds in culture without the added mechanical stimulus of an expanding brain. However, a small change in the surface [Mn] content in the orbital zone with the thickest bone, overlaid with the lowest volume of water, may have a larger effect than a large change in [Mn] in the S3 zone with the thinnest bone and overlaid with the largest volume of water. Thus, our comparisons of mineralizing activity must occur within tissue zones of comparable thickness. In those zones with similar surface [Mn] contents, small increases in tissue thickness can manifest as augmented surface [Mn] content. Consequently, this amplification strategy may prove useful when trying to measure sub-voxel differences in bone appositional rates in response to various treatment paradigms. Our T1 maps of mineralizing activity were verified using LA-ICP-MS to extract manganese surface concentration maps of samples previously submitted for MRI. A limitation of the LA-ICP-MS technique is that only elements located on the ablated surface are detected and their quantity is a function of the laser ablation efficiency. With MRI, manganese deposited on both the intra- and extracranial surfaces influence water proton T1 values. MRI images closely resemble the manganese elemental maps because the extracranial surface with its calvarial ridge was in contact with nearly all of the water located between the slides used to hold the specimen; while the relatively flat intracranial surface was in contact with mostly glass. Despite the high overall mineral density of the calvarial ridge, only a very thin line of manganese was found at this location possibly due to low levels of active mineralization or reduced laser efficiency in this highly calcified zone. We suspect that in very thin tissue zones, the overall [Mn] content on LA-ICP-MS maps was lower because there was less material to ablate. Therefore, a better measure of the surface [Mn] content was calculated by normalizing [Mn] to the phosphorus content of the ablated bone. Various ROIs drawn on T1 and LA-ICP-MS maps were used to extract the T1 and new percent [Mn] for the different tissue zones in the Mn-treated DIV4 specimen. We found that R1 was linearly correlated with [Mn] with a slope of 0.37 (% s) With this insight, we revisited the ΔR1 data present in In conclusion, we found that T1 maps of mineralizing calvariae exposed to 100 The authors thank Simina Lal (Department of Environmental and Infectious Disease Sciences, AFIP) for her assistance with the ICP-OES analysis. This work was supported in part by