Introduction: The most common damage caused by snowboarding is wrist injury. However, Elbow injuries are relatively rare. In general, elbow dislocation with ipsilateral distal radius fracture is also very rare.
                  Presentation of case: We present an 18-year-old right hand dominant male with distal radius extra-articular fracture and elbow fracture dislocation. Computed tomographic scan and Magnetic resonance image of elbow joint showed retained intra-articular fragment, trochlear fracture, and the humeral attachment site of lateral collateral ligament (LCL) with rupture. The ruptured LCL was repaired, and then, the distal radius fracture was fixed with a volar distal radius locking plate. At one year after surgery, the patient did not complain of any subjective symptoms or functional deficit.
                  Discussion: The injury mechanism would fall into the outstretched arm state, leading first to hyperextension of the wrist, resulting in fracture of the distal radius. The remaining force is then applied to the elbow joint by an external rotation and valgus moment arm, resulting in the rupture of the LCL of the elbow joint. In this state, the remaining force is transmitted through the olecranon to the trochlea as a shear force, resulting in osteochondral fracture and subsequent dislocation of the elbow joint.
                  Conclusion: Combined injury of extremity from snowboarding is relatively rare, but we experienced a case of elbow dislocation combined with distal radius fracture caused by fall on outstretched hand on the snow surface during snowboarding in a young adult.Most injuries in snowboarding occurred as a result of jumping and losing control and most injuries occurred by fall on the snow surface [ An 18-year-old right hand dominant male visited the emergency room with left elbow pain and ipsilateral wrist pain caused by falling during snowboarding. The patient did not wear protective gear for upper extremity at the time of the injury. He complained of painful swelling in the left elbow and wrist with limited motion. On physical examination, there were not any neurovascular deficit and any wound in his left elbow and wrist. There was posterior dislocation of left elbow joint without definite fracture and extraarticular fracture of distal radius with volar angulation on simple radiographs ( At five days after injury for control of swelling, surgical treatment was performed. Under the general anesthesia with patient in supine position, the elbow joint was approached through Kocher approach. We found completely avulsed LCL from its humeral attachment site and partial rupture of common extensor origin and the annular ligament during dissection ( Elbow dislocation is most commonly associated with damage to soft tissue, such as the ligament around the elbow joint, and fracture of the bony structures such as the radial head, coronoid process, and olecranon [ The most common variety of elbow dislocation is posterior [ Elbow dislocation often is associated with a fracture of the distal aspect of the capitellum, or radial head, which appear as intraarticular osseous bodies [ In elbow dislocation, non-surgical treatment can produce good results in most cases. In general, surgery is indicated for acute elbow dislocations in two situations. The first occurs when the elbow requires flexion beyond approximately 50–60° to remain reduced. The second occurs when elbow dislocation is associated with unstable fractures around the joint; fracture-dislocation [ Combined injury of extremity from snowboarding is relatively rare, but we experienced a case of elbow dislocation combined with distal radius fracture caused by fall on outstretched hand on the snow surface during snowboarding in a young adult. Therefore, careful clinical and radiological examinations are necessary. All of the Authors declare that they have no conflict of interest either personally or with any of their relatives. All authors declare that they did not receive any source of funding by any mean to run this case report. They wrote this paper and they edit it on their own fund. The retrospective case report is exempt from ethical approval in our institution. Informed consent was taken from the patient in order to publish this case report. Dr. Jin Sung Park: is the corresponding author. He contributed in study design, data collection and analysis, writing paper, and reviewing literature Dr. Dong Kyu Moon: Study design, data analysis, writing the paper, and reviewing literature. Dr. Sun Chul Hwang: Study design, data analysis Dr. Jun Il Yoo: Study design and data analysis All authors read and approved the final manuscript. N/A. Dr. Jin Sung Park. Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed