Abundant resources of magnesium silicates make an interesting prospect for long-term storage of CO2 by mineral carbonation. Several carbonation processes proposed in literature for CO2 storage employ extraction of silicate minerals using a liquid solvent. In this study, the dissolution of natural serpentinite in respective solutions of acids, bases and ammonium salts has been investigated. Experiments performed at room temperature showed that H2SO4 was most efficient at extracting magnesium from serpentinite, followed by HCl, HNO3, HCOOH and CH3COOH. Experiments for determining the dissolution kinetics was performed at temperatures of 30, 50 and 70 °C in 2 M solutions of H2SO4, HCl, and HNO3. At 70 °C temperatures all magnesium was extracted from serpentinite in each of the three acid solutions tested during 1–2 h. Also a large part of iron in serpentinite was extracted, while very little silicon dissolved (<4%). The dissolution rate seemed to be limited by product layer diffusion for serpentinite particles with a size distribution of 74–125 μm. The apparent activation energies were 68 kJ mol−1 for dissolution in H2SO4, 70 kJ mol−1 for dissolution in HCl, and 74 kJ mol−1 for dissolution in HNO3.Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) is considered as one of the main options for reducing atmospheric emissions of CO Alkaline-earth oxides, such as magnesium oxide (MgO) and calcium oxide (CaO), are present in large amounts and high concentrations in naturally occurring silicate minerals such as serpentine and olivine ( Since carbonation securely traps CO In Finland, the most common rocks rich in magnesium are ultramafic rocks, of which serpentinites are the most interesting for CCS purposes, consisting mainly of serpentine. The known and accessible resources of serpentinite in Eastern Finland alone could theoretically be sufficient for 200–300 years of CCS processing, if 10 Mt CO The most efficient processes suggested for carbonation involve leaching or dissolution of silicates in liquid media and precipitation of magnesium or calcium as carbonates or hydroxides for subsequent carbonation ( The present study was aimed at finding a suitable solvent for extracting magnesium from Finnish serpentinite tailings for subsequent fixation of CO Serpentinite from the stockpile of the Hitura nickel mine of Outokumpu Mining Oy, central Finland, was selected for experimental study. A batch of 7 kg serpentinite rocks was ground and sieved, from which a particle size fraction of 74–125 μm was selected for the experiments. Samples of the both the sieved 74–125 μm fraction and the unsieved fraction were analyzed using X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) and X-Ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy (XRF). For a more accurate measurement of the contents of elements in the serpentinite, five samples of the sieved fraction were completely dissolved using a solution of HCl, H In order to find a suitable solvent for leaching magnesium from serpentine, common acids used in mineral processing (HCl, H Experiments for determining the dissolution rate of serpentinite in selected solvents were carried out in an open spherical glass batch reactor (500 ml) heated by a temperature-controlled water bath ( The results from the ICP-AES analyses showed the concentrations ( In order to design a carbonation process, which recovers magnesium ions needed for fixation of CO In order to determine the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step in dissolution of serpentinite in selected mineral acids, the experimental data was analyzed according to the integral analysis method ( A summary of the results from the serpentinite dissolution analyses (ICP-AES) and XRF-analysis of the sieved sample is shown in The effect of solvent concentration on dissolution of serpentinite in respective solvents is shown in The ammonium salt solutions tested (NH Another interesting result is that no measurable amount of magnesium or iron (< Based on the results from the experiments described above, HNO The effect of the particle size was tested in 2 M HCl at 70 °C solution temperature, using sieved serpentinite fractions of 74–125 μm, 125–250 μm, 250–350 μm, and 350–500 μm ( Kinetic analysis was performed based on experimental data for dissolution of magnesium from serpentinite ( The apparent rate constants were determined from the slope of the lines in By plotting the apparent rate constants for each experiment in an Arrhenius plot ( The results ( For a pure diffusion controlled process, the activation energy should be rather low. However, the results show that the process is very temperature sensitive and the activation energy is of the order of 70 kJ mol According to Eq. To further enhance the dissolution rate a grinding media (e.g. fluidization using glass beads) could be used simultaneously to remove the silica layer from the particles ( All acids tested were able to extract a significant amount (3–26%) of magnesium and (2–16% of) iron from serpentinite in 1 h using acid concentrations of 1 M–4 M at room temperature. Sulfuric acid yielded the highest magnesium and iron concentrations, followed by hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, formic acid and acetic acid. Higher acid concentrations yielded more dissolved magnesium and iron in all acids tested, except for acetic acid. Ammonium salt solutions were the only solvents tested that extracted magnesium selectively, but the extraction ratio was much lower than the extraction achieved using acids. Neither of the alkaline solutions tested (sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide nor ammonia) managed to dissolve any measurable amount of magnesium or iron. Reaction temperature was found to have a large effect on the dissolution of serpentinite in all three mineral acids evaluated: the extraction of magnesium and iron increases with increasing reaction temperature and residence time. However, very little silicon was dissolved (< The activation energies determined for magnesium extraction with mineral acids were approximately the same thus suggesting that the same mechanism was at work. The dissolution kinetics were found to follow rather well a shrinking core model for constant particle size with product diffusion as the rate-controlling step for all three mineral acids tested. The low concentration of dissolved silicon indicates that silicon stays on the particle while magnesium and iron is extracted. The high activation energy indicates that the chemical reaction initially controls the rate, with product layer diffusion gradually becoming rate limiting as it builds up. While product layer diffusion explains the dissolution mechanism for a particle size distribution of 74–125 μm, another mechanism seems to be rate limiting for particles of 125–500 μm. Although the experiments show that common mineral acids can extract magnesium from serpentinite in time frames relevant for industrial processes, a successful carbonation process must also manage to precipitate magnesium carbonate and recycle most of the additional chemicals used. Therefore, more research on process development is needed before serpentinites can be used for long-term storage of CO Explanation of symbols We thank Esko Pöyliö and Rita Kallio at Ruukki for generously providing us with XRF and XRD services, and the Laboratory of Energy Engineering and Environmental Protection for facilitating this work. We thank Mika Järvinen for helpful comments and proof-reading, and Jaakko Savolahti for assisting us with the experiments. We acknowledge the Nordic Energy Research, the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (TEKES) and the Finnish Recovery Boiler Committee for financial support. Ron Zevenhoven acknowledges the Academy of Finland for an Academy Researcher position (2004–2005).