Resonant-mode cantilevers have been investigated widely for detection of target analyte mass. We examine its application for measuring mechanical property of an organic film. A cantilever resonant frequency depends both on its mass and its spring constant. A change in either one of them causes resonant frequency shifts. Piezoelectric excited millimeter sized cantilever (PEMC) sensors exhibit high mass-change sensitivity (2fg/Hz) at high-order resonant modes present in the frequency range of 800–1000kHz. The response of this high-order mode to the formation of a sugar film membrane provides experimental data for characterizing the mechanical properties of the sugar film. Sugar film formation, surprisingly, caused a significant resonant frequency increase of greater than 20kHz. The high-order mode was highly sensitive to spring constant changes caused by the sugar film and was characterized by varying thickness and temperature of the sugar films.In recent years, resonant-mode cantilever sensors have attracted a great deal of attention for sensing target analytes. They have been largely reported for detecting mass-changes that occur as a consequence of analyte binding or attaching to the sensor surface Several reports have been published on increase in resonant frequency caused by adsorption-induced surface stress on fundamental resonant frequency of cantilevers PEMC sensor is a resonant-mode sensor that comprises of an anchored piezoelectric layer (typically, lead zirconate titanate; PZT) bonded to a non-piezoelectric material (typically glass) The resonant frequency of a cantilever, in a lumped mass model is typically given as If change in resonant frequency is only due to mass changes, such as in the case when a droplet of water is added to the sensor, the change in frequency is due to the added mass and can be obtained from Eq. PEMC sensors were fabricated as reported in earlier publications From the experimentally observed resonant frequency shifts the added mass of water was calculated (Eq. Similar to the experiment described above, a 0.4 Since the resonant frequency in air was 966.077 In order to test the approach of residual film property analysis, glucose solution was diluted 10-fold, and was successively dispensed on the sensor to examine film thickness effects on change in effective spring constant. One notes that spring constant depends on moment of inertia of the adherent film and is thus dependent on film thickness. The moment of inertia has a cubic dependence on thickness; however for small film thickness variations (5–50 Addition of the first droplet results in a frequency shift of −352 A thickness dependence of spring constant change indicated that change in elastic properties of the membrane film on the sensor surface caused the observed high-order resonant mode responses. To confirm the hypothesis that film elastic property changes is the cause for increase in resonant frequency, we measured response of a sensor with a sugar film for small temperature changes. The sugar film at a higher temperature becomes softer and thus is expected to reduce effective spring constant change. The resonant frequency of a PEMC sensor is also affected by temperature as PZT properties are temperature-dependent. In Although we were able to measure changes in sensor's resonance property to changes in sugar film thickness, and show that the changes in spring constant are attributable to the sugar film, reducing the data in terms of sugar film's elastic property is nontrivial. Such a calculation required confirmation of the particular resonant mode of the multilayer PEMC, and then determination of its resonant behavior numerically with deposited sugar films. If one models the sugar film as a solid with a constant elastic modulus, then the change in resonant frequency observed experimentally can then be obtained numerically by iterating on the elastic modulus value. High-order resonant mode of a PEMC sensor has high sensitivity for measuring change in spring constant caused by micron-sized sugar film. The net frequency response is a resultant of the two opposing effects, where film mass decreases resonant frequency while film's spring constant increases resonant frequency. Even though the mass effect is large, the glucose films increased effective spring constant resulting in a significant net increase in resonant frequency. When a mass of the order of micrograms was added which resulted in films of 6–60 The authors are grateful for the generous support of