A simple and effective approach was introduced to functionalize multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) by in situ deposition of hydroxyapatite (HA) to improve their hydrophilicity and biocompatibility. Firstly, we prepared two types of pre-functionalized MWNTs: acid-oxidated MWNTs and covalently modified MWNTs by poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG). The influences of the acid-oxidated time, pre-phosphorylation, and PEGylation of MWNTs on in situ growth of HA were further investigated in simulated body fluid (SBF) with ionic concentration: 2, 5 and 10 times, respectively, at 37°C for 24h. The results exhibited that all these factors have positive effects on the HA crystals growth, especially the PEGylation of MWNTs plays a key role during the deposition. Finally, the methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay was performed to evaluate their cytotoxicity, which showed that the PEGylated MWNTs wrapped by HA crystals have the best biocompatibility.Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are arousing more and more interests from researchers due to their exceptional combination of mechanical, thermal, chemical, and optical properties To date, raw CNTs are super-hydrophobic and can easily aggregate in aqueous media as well as in organic solvents. Therefore they must be functionalized or modified to improve the hydrophilic and dispersion ability for biological applications. Currently, several strategies based on non-covalent adsorptions or covalent linkages have been developed to functionalize CNTs. For the non-covalent method, agents including anionic, cationic or non-ionic surfactants Herein, we will report the third approach to functionalize MWNTs by In this paper, we firstly prepared two kinds of MWNTs which named acid-oxidated MWNTs (AO-M); poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) functionalized MWNTs (PEG-M), respectively. Later, the biomineralization method was used to deposit the HA on the surface of PEG-M and AO-M (HA-PEG-M and HA-AO-M), respectively. Moreover, we investigated the effects of acid-oxidated time, pre-phosphorylation and the ionic concentration of SBF during the MWNTs with 10–20 Pre-weighed raw MWNTs (Raw-M) were initially added into 70 The synthetic routes for the preparation of PEG-M were shown as Scheme (1) in The pre-phosphorylation and biomineralization process are displayed in scheme (2) of Nicolet 5700 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR, Thermo Electron, USA) was performed to identify the attachment of the functional groups on the surface of MWNTs. All specimens were made into powder and mixed with pure KBr at a weight ratio of 0.5–1%. Each sample was recorded from 4000 to 400 The water contact angle (CA) was measured using a sessile drop method at room temperature with the contact angle equipment (DSA 100, KRUSS, Germany). CA values of the right side and the left side of the distilled water droplet were both measured, and an average value was used. The CA was determined at 25 The dispersion ability in aqueous system was observed and taken photos after theses samples were added into water and stored for 3 days. The decrease in UV–vis absorption of the solution was used to calculate the average absorption of carbon nanotubes and determine the dispersion ability with UV–visible spectrophotometer (UV-2550, Shimadzu, Japan). The spectra were collected within a range of 200–800 The surface morphology of MWNTs with different treatments was observed using a Quanta200 scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI, Philips, Netherlands). The specimens were firstly dispersed in water with ultra-sonication for 1 The crystalline phases of MWNTs before and after soaked in SBF were identified and compared by XL-30 X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips X’ Pert Pro, Netherlands). The diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observation was performed with a HITACHI H-700H at the electron acceleration voltage of 150 Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA, Netzsch STA 449C, Bavaria, Germany) was employed to determine the actual yield of HA on the surface of MWNTs. Approximately 10 The cytotoxicity of different types of MWNTs was evaluated based on the methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay. The osteoblasts were grown in RPMI medium 1640 (Gibcos) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The cells with a density of 1.0 Raw MWNTs (Raw-M) are often modified by chemical treatments, among of which, treatment in HNO Biomineralization is a quit complicated but powerful approach for the synthesis of advanced materials Therefore, if we expect to get favourable biomineralization results, the –H In order to estimate the accurate crystal type of calcium phosphate, XRD test was employed. The acid-oxidated time is also a very important factor which could lead us to an optimal deposition result. Firstly, the hydrophilic property should be investigated because so many hydrophilic groups have generated during the acid-oxidated process. The SEM micrographs provide direct assist to identify the appropriate oxidated time ( As mentioned above, the ionic concentrations of SBF is another important factor during the biomineralization process. Through the above comparison and analysis of the MWNTs, we have determined the optimal experimental conditions. However, we can still find that HA growth on MWNTs’ surface does not meet the requirement in biomedical field. As it is well known, in nature, organisms could create the proper organic matrix to provide effective help for the nucleation and growth of inorganic crystals. Based on this natural phenomenon, PEGylation to AO-M-4 was conducted in our research. The formation of calcium phosphate crystals on PEG-AO-M was characterized by FT-IR, XRD, SEM, TEM, and TGA analysis, respectively (  As seen from the SEM and TEM images of HA-PEG-M in TGA analysis displayed that there were about 80% of HA for PEGylated MWNTs ( The cytotoxicity of MWNTs with different treatments (Raw-M, AO-M-4, PEG-M, HA-AO-M-4 and HA-PEG-M) was assessed by a MTT assay, respectively. Our study focuses on the cytotoxicity of HA functionalized MWNTs as the substrates for osteoblasts growth and for bone regeneration. From Therefore, the HA functionalized MWNTs had excellent biocompatibility and dispersion ability in aqueous system, especially after the MWNTs are covalent by PEG. The expected advantages (e.g. excellent biocompatibility and osteoconductivity of HA and the outstanding mechanical property, flexibility and elasticity of MWNTs) could be combined. They may have great potential applications in the field of bone tissue engineering as good scaffold materials for the growth and proliferation of osteoblasts and bone formation. This study may promote and widen the biomedical applications of MWNTs. The HA functionalized carbon nanotubes will play an important role in the research and development of various nanomaterials. Simultaneously, the functionalization strategy could put nanotubes into other biological or biomedical systems. In this study, we mainly investigated the effects of the acid-oxidated time, pre-phosphorylation, PEGylation to MWNTs, and ions concentration of SBF on the crystal growth of HA. The results indicated that all these factors had positive influences on the deposition rate of HA. In particular, covalent PEGylation to MWNTs played a crucial role in the growth of HA crystals. The binding affinity between the HA crystals and the PEG-M surface is strong enough by the ionic and hydrogen bond interactions, which was very helpful to improve the dispersion ability and biocompatibility of nanotubes. Most importantly, the covalently PEGylated carbon nanotubes with HA deposition showed excellent biocompatibility according to the results from the evaluation of MTT assays. Therefore, a simple approach was provided to functionalize carbon nanotubes. It may be of great potential to widen their applications in biomedical field, especially in bone tissue engineering. This work was partially supported by Figures with essential colour discrimination. Certain figures in this article, particularly