Much controversy surrounds the treatment of unstable thoracolumbar burst fractures with treatment options consisting of anterior, posterior, or combined anterior and posterior surgery. Traditionally, anterior column reconstruction has been performed through an anterior approach with vertebrectomy and reconstruction with a cage or structural graft. This is typically supplemented with posterior pedicle screw fixation. There has been increased interest in pursuing minimally invasive options to decrease patient morbidity. The article discusses the use of vertebroplasty to support the anterior column and discusses the risks, benefits, biomechanics, and outcomes of such a procedure in the treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures.Most burst fractures are stable and best treated non-operatively. Historically, these were treated with prolonged bed rest and postural reduction. Unstable burst fractures are defined as those with >50% canal compromise, >50% loss of vertebral height, >30° of segmental kyphosis, neurological deficit, or a combined type B/A3 or C/A3 injury by the AO classification. A consensus on the ideal surgical approach for such injuries still has not been reached. This is in part due to the various treatment options and training experiences of the surgeons treating these fractures, as well as the clinical presentation of the patients. Whether the patient is neurologically intact, has a nerve root lesion, or has a complete or incomplete injury weighs in the decision-making process as well. Options include vertebrectomy with anterior column reconstruction with anterior instrumentation alone or in combination with a posterior segmental pedicle screw construct, short-segment pedicle screw instrumented fusion alone, One of the fundamental debates in the treatment of these fractures is whether the fracture can be treated with short-segment pedicle screw instrumentation (screws placed only in the adjacent vertebrae) versus long-segment instrumentation (screws placed in at least two vertebrae above and below the fracture). Proponents of the use of short constructs point to the decreased soft tissue dissection, decreased costs, and preservation of motion segments in a generally young, active population. However, others point to the high failure rate and development of segmental kyphosis when short-segment instrumentation is used, presumably due to the inability of the instrumentation to provide enough stability for the healing of the fractured vertebra without settling and loss of reduction. McCormack et al. The question remains regarding the best way to reconstruct the anterior column in patients with a high load-sharing score. Traditionally, this has been done through a thoracotomy or thoracoabdominal approach, and more recent data shows that it can be done through a minimally invasive direct lateral approach with the use of special retractors and instrumentation. Each of these allows improved reduction of the segmental kyphosis and direct decompression of the bony impingement of the spinal canal, which is especially desirable in patients with a neurological deficit. However, bleeding can be extensive and the anatomy distorted when treating fractures. These also carry the risk of decreased pulmonary function either when a thoracotomy is employed or if the diaphragm needs to be taken down. When treating fractures, through a thoracoabdominal approach, there is a risk of visceral or solid organ injury as well as a need for extensive dissection of the psoas muscle to access the fracture, causing potentially long-term hip flexion weakness and, even worse, lumbar plexus damage. Furthermore, some would argue that in the process of performing a corpectomy, the surgeon is removing vascularized bone fragments that have great healing potential, depriving them of their blood supply, and then reimplanting them as bone graft. Although the bone graft is autogenous, the likelihood of fusion decreases once devascularized. Other surgeons prefer a structural graft. If taken from the patient, it has a high healing potential but carries with it the complications of the bone graft harvest, including donor-site pain, increased blood loss and operative time, and increased infection. If using a structural allograft, these risks are negated, but the healing potential is decreased. The graft also carries the risk of disease transmission, however small this may be. In addition, most surgeons prefer to supplement anterior column reconstruction with posterior segmental instrumentation. This can be done under the same anesthesia in most cases but can also be staged, requiring a second trip to the operating room. It also contributes to the morbidity of the surgery. As Wood et al. Recent literature has presented an alternative to this practice. Kyphoplasty has become increasingly familiar to the spine surgeon in the treatment of osteoporotic compression fractures, and it has been adapted to be used in the treatment of burst fractures. A detailed description of this technique has been previously published. The goal of cement injection is to supplement anterior column stability in order to take stress off of the posterior instrumentation. Several biomechanical studies have been performed testing the stability of kyphoplasty. Rotter et al. There is some hesitation in adopting the use of Norian or other calcium phosphate cements due to the reports of three deaths during its use during kyphoplasty/vertebroplasty. Each patient experienced an intraoperative period of hypotension that temporally corresponded with the injection of the cement, similar to what has been reported in the hip arthroplasty literature. Theories as to the cause of this are fat or monomer embolism. Another concern regarding kyphoplasty in burst fractures is the risk of cement extravasation and neurological complications related to this. This has been extensively studied. Verlaan et al. One theoretical risk of kyphoplasty is that the inflation of the balloon will cause retropulsion of bone fragments into the spinal canal, causing neurological injury. This has not been shown to be the case. Korovessis et al. In line with reports of other minimally invasive surgery, kyphoplasty in the treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures has decreased operative times, decreased blood loss, and decreased hospital stay. Marco and Kushwaha This data should be compared with other accepted treatments for thoracolumbar burst fractures in order to give it context. Danisa et al. In light of these numbers, it seems that kyphoplasty combined with short-segment posterior instrumentation is a valid option in the treatment of thoracolumbar trauma and compares quite favorably to both anterior surgery alone and 360° operations. The goals of surgery for the treatment of unstable burst fractures are to restore stability, decompress the spinal canal, and achieve a solid fusion. These can all be achieved with either kyphoplasty or anterior column reconstruction. However, the morbidity of a thoracoabdominal approach or thoracotomy cannot be overlooked. Decreased pulmonary function is expected after a thoracotomy. During the thoracoabdominal approach, a large amount of muscle dissection just to get to the spine is necessary. The external oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis muscles must all be incised to enter the retroperitoneal space. The psoas muscle must then be dissected posteriorly to protect the lumbar plexus and to gain access to the vertebral body. The segmental artery at the injured level will be sacrificed and if anterior instrumentation is to be used, multiple segmental vessels must be ligated, risking an ischemic injury to the spinal cord. The vascular supply to the fragments of the fractured vertebral body is then removed, devascularizing them and decreasing their healing potential. Direct decompression of the spinal canal also risks injury to the dura or spinal cord. Finally, the anterior column must be reconstructed. Commonly used expandable cages are attractive options but have been known to cause adjacent vertebral body fractures and carry a higher risk of pseudarthrosis than titanium mesh cages if not used properly. When compared to anterior column reconstruction through an anterior approach, short-segment posterior pedicle screw instrumentation supplemented with kyphoplasty, which can be done through a posterior only approach, without the morbidities of an anterior approach, and with clinical success, seems like a viable option when used in appropriate situations.