The high temperature properties of Rb2SeO4 have been studied by calorimetry, impedance spectroscopy and X-ray powder diffraction. As synthesized, Rb2SeO4 includes a second phase of Rb2SeO3, which can be eliminated upon heating the compound. As expected, no conductivity is observed in dry (pH2O<0.001bar) air. By changing to humidified (pH2O=0.1bar) air at 176°C, the conductivity increases sharply from 8.6·10−8 to 1.7·10−6
                     Scm−1. Under humidified (pH2O=0.1bar) reducing atmosphere (9%H2 in N2), the conductivity increases to 2.0·10−4
                     Scm−1 at 317°C. Degradation of Rb2SeO3 and Rb2SeO4 to form RbOH, which is known as a proton conductor, are thought to be responsible for the observed conductivity in humidified atmospheres. Our observations may explain the conductivity rise in other solid acid electrolytes, including sulfate and selenate groups, around their decomposition temperatures, in humidified atmospheres.Rubidium selenate, Rb Some data related to the thermal decomposition of rubidium selenate in air have already been reported. Gattow 26.6 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) analysis were done using a Zeiss Evo 60. EDS data were analyzed using the NSS 2.2 X-ray MicroAnalysis program. Phase identification was carried out by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis on a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu K Thermal analysis, termogravimetry (TG), differential thermal analysis (DTA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), were carried out using TG–DTA system (Netzsch STA 409 CD) and Netzsch DSC 200 F3 with a heating rate of 5 Conductivity measurements were performed using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Two pellets were produced by pressing Rb The reaction for synthesis of Rb Synthesis with slow evaporation resulted in Rb In literature, it has been reported that a very small amount of Rb  Above 400 As given with In order to determine the phase transitions more accurately, DSC analysis of Rb XRD patterns were obtained at both ambient and elevated temperatures. HT-Xray diffraction was performed on the compound in flowing dry air up to 600  Both pellets were tested in the temperature range of 113–317 Conversion of Rb  Rb It can be concluded that the formation of RbOH by decompositions of Rb The authors would like to thank colleagues at Department of Energy Conversion and Storage in Technical University of Denmark for assistance and discussions, especially Peter Holtappels and Jens F.S. Borchsenius and Yıldız Technical University for the support of this study. The Catalysis for Sustainable Energy initiative is funded by the Danish Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.