Vitamin K (as phylloquinone and menaquinones) is an essential cofactor for the conversion of peptide-bound glutamate to γ-carboxy glutamic acid (Gla) residues in a number of specialized Gla-containing proteins. The only unequivocal deficiency outcome is a bleeding syndrome caused by an inability to synthesize active coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X, although there is growing evidence for roles for vitamin K in bone and vascular health. An adult daily intake of about 100 μg of phylloquinone is recommended for the maintenance of hemostasis. Traditional coagulation tests for assessing vitamin K status are nonspecific and insensitive. Better tests include measurements of circulating vitamin K and inactive proteins such as undercarboxylated forms of factor II and osteocalcin to assess tissue and functional status, respectively. Common risk factors for vitamin K deficiency in the hospitalized patient include inadequate dietary intakes, malabsorption syndromes (especially owing to cholestatic liver disease), antibiotic therapy, and renal insufficiency. Pregnant women and their newborns present a special risk category because of poor placental transport and low concentrations of vitamin K in breast milk. Since 2000, the Food and Drug Administration has mandated that adult parenteral preparations should provide a supplemental amount of 150 μg phylloquinone per day in addition to that present naturally, in variable amounts, in the lipid emulsion. Although this supplemental daily amount is probably beneficial in preventing vitamin K deficiency, it may be excessive for patients taking vitamin K antagonists, such as warfarin, and jeopardize their anticoagulant control. Natural forms of vitamin K have no proven toxicity.Blood coagulation (anticoagulant). Activated protein C inhibits inflammation, apoptosis, and endothelial barrier breakdown (protective effect in sepsis). Liver (then blood plasma) Extrahepatic tissues (brain, spleen, bone, endothelial cells, etc.) Cofactor for protein C (anticoagulant). Ligand and activator of TAM (Tyro3, Axl, Mer) tyrosine kinase receptors. Regulatory role in immune response and phagocytosis. Bone remodelling and mineralization. New role proposed as hormone that regulates glucose metabolism and fat mass. Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Insufficient data Not set Compounds with vitamin K activity all have a common 2-methyl-1, 4-naphthoquinone ring structure (trivial name menadione) with those found in nature having a variable alkyl substituent at the 3 position. Naturally occurring forms are classified according to whether they are synthesized by plants or bacteria. Plants, almost invariably, synthesize only 1 chemical form called phylloquinone (vitamin K Until the mid 1970s, the only known role of vitamin K was as an essential antihemorrhagic factor, which was known to promote synthesis of the active forms of prothrombin (factor II), and factors VII, IX, and X. The subsequent discovery of several other Gla proteins that are expressed in virtually every tissue of the body has led to a reevaluation of the health role of vitamin K. The possible requirement of vitamin K to promote optimal bone health remains a subject of ongoing study, and originally stemmed from the discovery that osteocalcin was an important noncollagenous protein in skeletal extracellular matrix. Osteocalcin has 3 Gla residues that have been highly conserved throughout vertebrate evolution. This is probably because their location and spatial orientation are exquisitely suited to high-affinity binding to bone hydroxyapatite, In addition to their well-known function as cofactors for γ-glutamyl carboxylase, there is a growing body of evidence, recently reviewed, Traditional screening tests for vitamin K deficiency are based on global coagulation assays that include the prothrombin time (PT) and the activated partial thromboplastin time. These tests are simple to perform, but a prolonged PT is not specific to vitamin K deficiency. The most useful confirmatory test is restoration of a normal PT (and individual factors) by vitamin K administration. Inherent to the PT is its insensitivity to vitamin K deficiency; it can predict an imminent bleeding tendency, but is not useful for the diagnosis of subclinical deficiency. The major dietary and circulating form of vitamin K is phylloquinone, and measurement of this form in serum is a useful indicator of vitamin K. The majority of circulating phylloquinone is carried by triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, There are several studies that describe a high prevalence of low phylloquinone concentrations in hospitalized patients When the supply of vitamin K is either insufficient or abnormal, functionally defective vitamin K-dependent protein molecules are produced at their site of synthesis and in some species, including humans, are released into the bloodstream. These abnormal molecules comprise a heterogeneous spectrum of undercarboxylated or partially carboxylated molecules. The historical collective term for these undercarboxylated species is Assays for undercarboxylated factor II (PIVKA-II) have proved an extremely useful biomarker of subclinical vitamin K deficiency for at-risk patient groups, The measurement of undercarboxylated osteocalcin (GluOC) is also widely used as a surrogate marker of the vitamin K reserves of bone. Other biomarkers that have been used to assess vitamin K status include urinary measurements of free Gla and vitamin K metabolites, which reflect whole body turnover of Gla proteins and vitamin K, respectively. Urinary Gla represents the final catabolic product of all Gla-containing proteins and is diminished in states of vitamin K insufficiency. In our hospital, we find the most practical way to assess vitamin K status in most patient groups is to measure both serum phylloquinone and PIVKA-II, combining the marker of tissue reserves with the functional marker of coagulation, respectively. We use a sensitive immunoassay for PIVKA-II that has a lower threshold of detection of ∼200 μg/L, and that represents only 0.2% of total circulating native factor II. The major form of vitamin K in most diets is phylloquinone from plant sources. Food frequency questionnaire–derived estimates of relative intakes of phylloquinone and menaquinones in The Netherlands suggest that about 90% of total vitamin K intakes are provided by phylloquinone, 7.5% by MK-5–10, and 2.5% by MK-4. National surveys reveal considerable variations in phylloquinone intakes within the same population. Conventional dogma is that the liver, the site of Gla coagulation factor synthesis, is also the major storage site of vitamin K, but it is now known that other organs have some storage capacity, that for phylloquinone and MK-4 probably exceed the size of their hepatic pools. Older recommendations of the daily requirements for vitamin K were based on limited metabolic studies in a few individuals in whom a coagulopathy had been deliberately induced by dietary depletion, usually accompanied by antibiotic therapy in an attempt to reduce intestinal synthesis of menaquinones. In 2001, a reevaluation of the US recommendations led to abandonment of the previous recommended daily allowance of 1 μg/kg per day in favor of the setting of an Adequate Intake (AI) based on median intakes for men and women reported by the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. It is important to emphasize that the current AI values for healthy populations refer only to the coagulation function of vitamin K rather than to the requirements for the putative roles in bone and vascular health. Whereas the US committee noted the interest in new indicators sensitive to vitamin K intake, such as GluOC, they considered that the uncertain physiologic significance of such biomarkers precluded their use for the establishment of a recommended daily allowance. There are several lines of evidence that relate low intakes or impaired status of vitamin K to indices of poor bone health, including fracture rates. Population studies in different healthy groups have found low dietary consumption of vitamin K is associated with increased fracture risk Epidemiologic studies have found that high circulating GluOC concentrations constitute an independent risk factor for bone fracture Most bone health intervention trials with vitamin K have been carried out in Japan using MK-4 at high doses (45 mg/d) and, although a meta-analysis revealed an apparently striking reduction of hip and vertebral fractures, this conclusion needs to be regarded cautiously. Historically, the extent of vitamin K deficiency in hospitalized patients has been difficult to evaluate because of reliance on global coagulation tests, which lack both sensitivity (factor II concentrations need to fall to <50% of normal before there is any change in the PT) and specificity. A Japanese study directly addressed the question of how sudden and severe dietary vitamin K depletion affects both circulating and liver concentrations in patients before and after undergoing gastrointestinal surgery. It is well recognized that the intestinal uptake of vitamin K is dependent on its solubilization by bile salts and that diseases resulting in bile salt deficiency pose a high risk for the rapid development of severe vitamin K deficiency and resultant coagulopathy. Patients with severe acute liver failure (ALF) commonly present with a complex, multifactorial coagulopathy that includes a reduction in circulating concentrations of both vitamin K-dependent and -independent coagulation proteins. The possible contribution of vitamin K deficiency to this picture was examined in a series of 49 adults admitted to the hospital with ALF. At present, the only generally accepted clinical risk of providing too little vitamin K to patients receiving parenteral nutrition (PN) is the risk of bleeding due to reduced synthesis of factors II, VII, IX, and X. Other putative risks of PN-associated vitamin K insufficiency with other clinical outcomes, such as increased fracture rates and cardiovascular calcification, are presently unquantifiable. The natural source of vitamin K in parenteral feeds is phylloquinone contained in the lipid emulsion. As highlighted by Singh and Duerksen In 2000, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) revised their guidelines and mandated that adult parenteral multivitamin preparations should provide 150 μg phylloquinone per day. Certain patient groups have enhanced risk of developing vitamin K deficiency that may be due to malabsorption resulting from physical (eg, short bowel syndrome) or pathophysiologic factors (eg, cholestasis), or owing to associated treatment (eg, antibiotics). In addition certain metabolic states (eg, fever) may be associated with an increased requirement owing to the increased turnover of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation proteins or the vitamin itself. As discussed, the most severe malabsorption of vitamin K is seen in cholestatic liver disease. There are few studies that have carried out quantitative assessments of vitamin K requirements in such high-risk groups, but if given parenterally rather than orally, the current FDA recommendation of 150 μg phylloquinone per day is more than sufficient to protect against vitamin K deficiency. The colon contains a large reservoir of bacterial menaquinones; limited quantitative data suggest the average pool size is ∼2 mg (range, 0.5–5.0 mg). Although antibiotics are a well-known contributory risk factor to vitamin K deficiency, evidence that the mechanism is due to decreased MK synthesis remains unproven and, in fact, some antibiotics have been shown to be weak inhibitors of vitamin K metabolism. In conclusion, patients who lack an intact colon should not require extra supplementation beyond what is already recommended for enteral or parenteral preparations. Patients at greatest risk remain those on enteral nutrition with short bowel syndrome who cannot absorb vitamin K from the small intestine owing to disorders of bile acid secretion or metabolism. Pregnant women who require PN should be considered a high-risk group with respect to the vitamin K requirements of their fetus because of several case reports that have documented maternal PN without supplemental vitamin K as a causative factor for either fetal intracranial hemorrhage In most countries, all newborns receive vitamin K prophylaxis (usually at a dose of 1 mg intramuscularly) to prevent the rare but potentially fatal VKDB of early infancy. Several authors have expressed reservations of the potential impact of the 150 μg level of fortification of multivitamin preparations on those patients who are also taking vitamin K antagonists, such as warfarin. For conventional anticoagulation therapy, a major concern is that the combination of phylloquinone intakes from the multivitamin preparation and the lipid formulation may be excessive and jeopardize anticoagulant control. As discussed, depending on the lipid source, the total daily intake from both sources may range from a minimum of 150 μg to >400 μg phylloquinone. The impact of different levels of phylloquinone intakes on the control and stability of conventional anticoagulation therapy has recently been reviewed. The applicability of data from the above studies to patients on PN suggests that, whereas patients would benefit from a constant daily intake of phylloquinone, serious consideration needs to be given to the level of supplementation, particularly when the total intake exceeds 150 μg/d. Apart from causing nutritional resistance, 1 particular danger is to patients who have been started on oral anticoagulant therapy while taking PN and who subsequently are taken off PN and resume their normal diet. High vitamin K intakes are also contraindicated for patients on low-dose anticoagulation therapy. Reports of toxicity for phylloquinone, the form of vitamin K almost universally used in injectable and parenteral formulations, are rare and generally attributed to the vehicle of solubilization or other component rather than to vitamin K itself. The most serious reaction to vitamin K is anaphylactoid reactions after parenteral administration. A large, worldwide surveillance of adverse effects of 2 commercial (Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Nutley, NJ) phylloquinone formulations (Konakion Cremophor versus Konakion MM) showed that 96% of the rare adverse events were associated with the older formulation containing Cremophor EL (BASF Corp, Ludwigshafen, Germany), an emulsifier previously implicated as the cause of anaphylactoid reactions for other drugs. In the early 1990s, there was considerable worldwide alarm arising from the publication of 2 epidemiologic studies in the United Kingdom that reported an unexpected association between the intramuscular injection of phylloquinone given to newborns with later childhood cancer (for reviews see Shearer Menaquinones are not used for parenteral administration, but large pharmacologic doses (45 mg/d) of MK-4 are given orally in Japan as an anti-osteoporotic agent without evidence of adverse effects.  Although a weekly intravenous supply of 250–500 μg phylloquinone is sufficient to maintain effective coagulation in most patients on PN, a daily injection of 150 μg phylloquinone should cover the requirements of all patients and will be also more effective in maintaining the γ-carboxylation status of noncoagulation Gla proteins. Lipid emulsions provide a variable amount of phylloquinone according to the type of oil, and this source of vitamin K needs to be factored into requirement calculations. Pregnant women present a special risk category because of the poor placental transport of vitamin K and consequent danger that even subclinical maternal vitamin K deficiency can result in severe bleeding or skeletal defects in the fetus. The phylloquinone content of present PN formulations may cause vitamin K overload in premature infants. Consideration needs to be given to administer lower amounts of phylloquinone to preterm infants, especially in the first 2 weeks of life. Although anticoagulant control in patients taking vitamin K antagonists such as warfarin may be improved by a regular vitamin K intake, the current FDA recommendations for multivitamin preparation (150 μg/d) and variable amount from lipid emulsions (up to 400 μg/d) may cause warfarin resistance. Such high phylloquinone intakes are likely to completely negate any antithrombotic effects of low-dose (minidose) warfarin therapy.  Are there any long-term pathologic consequences of suboptimal vitamin K status mediated by nonfunctional extrahepatic Gla proteins (eg, osteocalcin in fracture risk and MGP in vascular calcification)? How do varying vitamin K intakes affect the control and stability of conventional anticoagulant therapy in patients on PN? More in-depth studies (using sensitive methodologies of haemostatic capacity and vitamin K status) are needed to confirm or refute the proposed antithrombotic mechanism of low-dose anticoagulant therapy for patients with central venous catheters.                      