Introduction
                  Calcaneal fractures are rare in children. These fractures are often misdiagnosed as a consequence of their subtle clinical and radiographic presentation. The purpose of this paper was to identify prognostic factors on the basis of type of fracture, age and treatment. This would enable suggestions to be made with regards to treatment for these fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A full literature search was performed to find studies that were clinically orientated, in the English language and involved children (under the age of 16). Studies with no outcome data were excluded.
               
                  Results
                  There were a total of 284 patients reviewed in 26 peer-review publications. Two hundred and eight patients had intra-articular fractures. The non-operatively managed joint depression type fractures had poor outcomes in 21% of patients. In those who underwent surgical fixation for these fractures, 3 patients had reduced subtalar motion, and three had pain, one of whom required a subtalar arthrodesis at 7 months. In the tongue type fracture group, the outcomes were similar in those treated operatively and non-operatively. Extra-articular fractures were found to be much less common than the intra-articular fractures. They also became less common in older children. Generally, the outcomes were good, irrespective of treatment. Only 2 patients with type 1B fractures had poorer outcomes.
               
                  Discussion
                  This is a rare injury and outcomes may be poorer in those who do not have adequate anatomical reduction. Displaced intra-articular fractures in all age groups should be considered for anatomical reduction of the articular surface, to guarantee good outcomes and prevent future pain and arthritis. Extra-articular fractures in children are less severe, do well with conservative treatment, and rarely require operative intervention.Calcaneal fractures account for nearly 2% of adult fractures but are rare in children These injuries usually occur as a result of falls from height. A fall of over 1 metre was initially thought to be the cause, although lower distances have caused fractures [ The basic fracture patterns seen in intra-articular fractures involving the subtalar joint were first described by Essex-Lopresti Posteroanterior, lateral, and axial radiographs of the calcaneus should be obtained routinely. Rasmussen and Schantz recommended an oblique view routinely as certain injuries like fractures of the anterior process are better visualized The purpose of this paper was to systematically review the literature regarding the treatment of calcaneal fractures in children. Most case series and literature reviews of calcaneal fractures haven't commented on the treatment of specific types of calcaneal fractures. Our objectives were to perform a full literature review, and identify prognostic factors on the basis of type of fracture, age and treatment. This would enable suggestions to be made with regards to treatment for these fractures. The following headings were used in a Medline literature search: The following data was independently extracted the following data from each study by two reviewing authors (A.N and A.N): first author, year of publication, study population demographics, type of fracture, method of treatment, and outcome measures. In order to enter the review, studies had to be clinically orientated. Studies not in the English language and those involving adults (over the age of 16) were excluded. In studies where children aged 17 were included, these were excluded from the data set. Studies with no outcome data were also excluded. Studies where age wasn't clearly linked to the individual patient data were excluded from any age-related assessment [ Twenty eight case series or case reports were identified [ There were a total of 284 patients reviewed in 26 peer-review publications ( In all the papers, 3 main scoring systems were used; the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) hindfoot score, the Clinical Rating System for the Ankle-Hindfoot developed by AOFAS (MAS score) These fractures were divided into those with joint-depression type, those with tongue type fractures, and those which were in neither category or were Schmidt and Weiner type 4 Sixty There Surgical intervention included closed reduction and internal fixation (CRIF) with screws or wires, or open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with a plate or screws. One patient with bilateral open fractures required external fixation on both sides, prior to definitive fixation Fifty A number of papers have described fractures as displaced and intra-articular. A total of 36 patients have been described in 7 publications [ A Occult fractures of the calcaneus have been reported in toddlers younger than three years resulting from low energy injuries. Initial radiographs may be normal. Isotope bone scans are useful but are not required if the child is otherwise systemically well. Repeat radiographs in 2–3 weeks do show an arc of sclerosis The majority of cases occurred between the ages of 11 and 13. Paediatric calcaneal fractures are difficult to diagnose in children because the fracture may be undisplaced and it is not always possible to obtain an accurate history. Fractures are also rarer in children as a result of the large cartilage component in the feet and the relative strength of the bones of the foot in relation to the body weight. There is also a tendency for fractures to be missed in children, especially occult fractures and undisplaced extra-articular calcaneal fractures [ Intra-articular fractures can account for as many as 75% of all calcaneal fractures in adults The calcaneum is the largest of the tarsal bones and the earliest to ossify. The primary ossification centre appears during third month of intrauterine life. The secondary ossification centre appears around 6 to 8 years and forms the epiphysis on the posterior surface. It fuses with the body around 14 to 16 years In our series, the non-operatively managed joint depression type fractures had poor outcomes in 21% of patients. In patients with more than 10 years follow up [ In the tongue type fracture group, the outcomes were similar in those treated operatively and non-operatively. Four patients out of 38 (10%) had poor outcomes after surgical fixation; compared with 2 out of 17 (12%) who underwent non-surgical management. These fractures are also much more common in the older children compared with younger children. Seventy-nine percent of all tongue type fractures reported have occurred in children over the age of 11. In our institution, we followed up a 9 year old boy who had an undisplaced intra-articular tongue-type fracture at the age of 6. He was managed non-operatively ( In the patients with uncategorized intraarticular fractures, only 2 patients had poor outcomes (7%). These patients had 17–21 year follow up and had pain and arthritis of the subtalar joint There are many limitations to this review. Firstly, a large number of studies had very limited follow up (less than 2 years) [ This is a rare injury and outcomes may be poorer in those who do not have adequate anatomical reduction. Displaced intra-articular fractures in all age groups should be considered for anatomical reduction of the articular surface, to guarantee good outcomes and prevent future pain and arthritis. The outcomes of non-operative treatment in intra-articular JD-type and tongue type fractures seems to be less effective, although the majority of these patients still have good outcomes. Operative fixation may be the treatment of choice for the more severe types of intra-articular fracture. Extra-articular fractures have good outcomes irrespective of treatment or age. However, one must be cautious with non-operative treatment of type 1B and 2B fractures. None to declare. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.  None to declare