In this work, carbon dots conjugated carboxymethyl cellulose-hydroxyapatite nanocomposite has been synthesized by one-pot synthesis method and used for multiple applications like metal ion sensing, osteogenic activity, bio-imaging and drug carrier. The structure and morphology of the nanocomposite were systematically characterized by FTIR, XRD, TGA, FESEM, TEM and DLS. Results clearly demonstrated the formation of fluorescent enabled carbon dots conjugated nanocomposite from carboxymethyl cellulose-hydroxyapatite nanocomposite by a simple thermal treatment. The synthesized nanocomposite is smaller than 100 nm and exhibits fluorescence emission band around 440 nm upon excitation with 340 nm wavelength. In the meantime, the nanocomposite was loaded with a chemotherapeutic drug, doxorubicin to evaluate the drug loading potential of synthesized nanocomposite. Moreover, the as-synthesized nanocomposite showed good osteogenic properties for bone tissue engineering and also exhibited excellent selectivity and sensitivity towards Fe3+ ions.Cellulose is the most abundant renewable polymer available in nature. Materials based on cellulose and its derivatives particularly carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) have been widely used in a variety of applications for their fascinating properties such as hydrophilicity, biodegradability, biocompatibility and ease of processibility ( Currently, researchers have designed HA based nanocomposite and applied in multiple applications. For example, Azzaouia and co-authors synthesized a tri-functional CMC-HA composite and employed as (i) toxic material absorbent; (ii) antimicrobial and antifungal composite; and (iii) a candidate for bone tissue engineering ( Carbon dots (CDs), a luminescent nanomaterial has been extensively studied due to its low cost, facile synthesis, hydrophilicity, high photostability and excellent biocompatibility. In recent years, there is a growing interest in developing surface functionalized nanomaterials with CDs for drug delivery; so that it can be accurately traced in cells and tissues. In our previous work, we have demonstrated the CDs embedded nanoscale metal organic frameworks for potential drug delivery ( It is well known that the excessive amount of Fe Sodium salt of carboxymethyl cellulose (degree of substitution 0.9), calcium nitrate tetra hydrate ( For the synthesis of CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite, calcium nitrate [Ca(NO For study purpose, HA and CMC-HA were also synthesized. HA nanoparticles were synthesized by previously reported methods with slight modification ( The functional groups of CMC, HA, and synthesized nanocomposites were determined by Fourier transform infrared [FTIR (Agilent Cary 660)] spectrometer using KBr pellet method. The crystalline phase of samples was recognized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern recorded on Phillips PW 1710 X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of HA and synthesized nanocomposites was carried out in STA PT 1600, LINSEIS, Germany instrument under N An anticancer drug, doxorubicin (DOX) was used to evaluate the drug loading and release ability of CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite. For drug loading, 2.5 To examine the release rate of DOX from CDs-CMC-HA, 2.5 Human triple negative breast cancers cells (MDA-MB-468) and osteoblast-like MG63 cells were procured from NCCS Pune, India. Cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 Prior to treatment with CDs-CMC-HA, MDA-MB-468 cells were grown on cover slip of about 70–80% confluence. On the day of study, the media was replaced with CDs-CMC-HA extract (5 Anticancer activity of CDs-CMC-HA and DOX loaded CDs-CMC-HA on MDA-MB-468 cells was studied. In this assay, MDA-MB-468 cells at a density of 1 MTT assay was employed to quantitatively determine the cell viability and proliferation of MG63 cells, after exposure of CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite. Initially, MG63 cells were seeded in 6-well plate at a density of 6 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity of MG63 cells (6 Extracellular mineralization ability of CDs-CMC-HA was examined by alizarin red staining (ARS) and von kossa staining (VKS). Before adding sample extract (100 Fluorescent sensing of Fe Measured data were expressed as mean and standard deviation with n In this study, carboxymethyl cellulose has been established as an active functional material due to its recognizable contribution in in-situ mineralization of HA and the formation of high fluorescent CDs through carbonization. The schematic presentation of the starting CMC-HA formation step followed by CDs-CMC-HA formation to drug loading and release behavior of CDs-CMC-HA are shown in The in-situ formation of HA in CMC matrix and the weakening of intermolecular interactions after thermal treatment were depicted from FTIR spectra ( The XRD patterns of nanocomposites were given in The thermal stability of synthesized nanocomposites was analyzed by TGA, shown in The microstructure and size of the HA nanoparticles in the synthesized nanocomposites were examined by FESEM and HRTEM; presented in The hydrodynamic particle size of the synthesized nanocomposites was determined by DLS study. Results ( The photoluminescence (PL) study of HA, CMC-HA and CDs-CMC-HA were carried out and presented in The intercellular uptake of CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite by MDA-MB-468 cells was examined under fluorescence microscope (350 DOX is a cationic anticancer drug. It can be efficiently loaded in anionic molecules/particles by electrostatic interactions and shows high drug loading efficiency ( In order to evaluate the anticancer activity of DOX loaded CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite; in-vitro cytotoxicity of CDs-CMC-HA and DOX loaded CDs-CMC-HA against MDA-MB-468 cells was studied by using MTT assay. The viability of MDA-MB-468 cells after treatment with different concentrations (5 In-vitro cell viability and proliferation of osteoblast like MG63 cells cultured with CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite were evaluated by MTT assay at 1, 4 and 7 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an ectoenzyme express osteogenic cell differentiation in the early stage ( The deposition of calcium phosphate in the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a late stage marker for osteogenic cell differentiation. ARS is commonly used for detecting calcium in the deposited mineral ( The fluorescence response of CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite to different metal ions was investigated and presented in In The present work demonstrated the successful fabrication of fluorescent enabling carbon dots conjugated CMC-HA nanocomposite through a simple one pot method. The synthesized CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite exhibited an intense blue emission at 440 The authors declare no conflict of interest The authors would like to acknowledge In house project support group (iPSG) (OLP-0231), CSIR- National Metallurgical Laboratory for financial support and research facilities. The authors also like to acknowledge the Indian Institute of Technology (Indian School of Mines) [IIT-ISM], Dhanbad for providing characterization facilities. Author (Chandrani Sarkar) acknowledges University Grants Commission, India for granting Fellowship. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: Photostability test of CDs conjugated CMC-HA nanocomposite; PL decay curve of CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite; Zeta potential measurement of CDs-CMC-HA in aqueous medium at pH∼7; Digital images of (a) HA nanoparticles, (b) CMC-HA, (c) CDs-CMC-HA and (d) DOX loaded CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite; Digital images of (a) free DOX solution and (b) DOX after loading in CDs-CMC-HA nanocomposite.