Coal permeability changes during the course of gas drainage process due to the change in pore pressure, porosity, and desorption. Understanding of coal permeability behaviour enables a better assessment of gas drainage performance. Despite the research carried out to investigate the factors affecting coal permeability, limited study has been conducted on the impact of creep on coal permeability evolution. As coal is generally soft and gas drainage is a lengthy process, the impact of creep on permeability variation can be quite significant.
                  In this study, an improved permeability model was developed by incorporating the viscoelastic creep term of Nishihara model into the constitutive stress-strain equation for anisotropic poroelastic media. The model was then implemented in a fully coupled Finite Element numerical model. Two scenarios under various stress and uniaxial strain conditions were simulated to investigate the impact of creep on coal permeability and gas drainage. A comparison between the results of the simulation of the improved permeability model and the original permeability model were performed.
                  The results show that creep can have a significant impact (up to 25% or more) on coal permeability and gas drainage. This impact is function of coal properties such as directional elastic and viscoelastic moduli and reduction of pore pressure due to continuous desorption of gas. Comparison of improved and original models show that the impact of compaction creep on coal permeability becomes more pronounced owing to further pressure depletion toward the end of gas drainage process. It is also evident that the viscoelastic compaction creep as a result of gas pressure reduction from 6 MPa to 4 MPa induces a 5% decrease in permeability. A reduction of 13% in permeability was also achieved for pressure reduction of 4 MPa (from 6 MPa to 2 MPa). This indicates that coal permeability could be significantly overestimated if the impact of creep was not considered. The time and viscosity coefficient associated with creep were found to have negligible impact on coal permeability. This study proved that creep in coal is an important phenomenon that should be considered when conducting gas drainage performance analysis, particularly for soft coals. The improved permeability model and the fully coupled numerical model can be used to better predict gas drainage performance, and to improve the layout design of gas drainage boreholes.Biot coefficient, dimensionless thermal coefficient, °C parameter of Langmuir curve, Pa pore compressibility, Pa grain compressibility, Pa matrix compressibility, Pa cleat volume compressibility, Pa gas diffusion coefficient, m change in pore pressure, Pa change in temperature, °C incremental total volumetric strain, dimensionless component of the incremental total strain tensor, dimensionless parameter of Langmuir curve, dimensionless incremental bulk swelling strain, dimensionless bulk swelling strain in i direction, dimensionless Young’s modulus of elasticity, Pa Young’s modulus of viscoelasticity, Pa viscosity coefficient, Pa.s a fraction between 0 and 1 natural fracture porosity, dimensionless initial natural fracture porosity, dimensionless shear modulus, Pa geometric term, dimensionless grain compressibility, Pa bulk modulus, Pa permeability, mD initial permeability, mD Kronecker’s delta, dimensionless Lame coefficient, Pa constrained axial modulus, Pa molar mass of gas, kg/mol component of the Poisson’s ratio tensor, dimensionless domain boundary reservoir pressure, Pa atmospheric pressure, Pa initial reservoir pressure, Pa Langmuir pressure constant, Pa Darcy velocity, m/s gas mass exchange term, kg/(m universal gas constant, J/(mol K) gas density, kg/m coal density, kg/m linear strain at infinite pore pressure on an unconstrained sample, dimensionless component of the total stress tensor, Pa yield stress, Pa horizontal effective stress, Pa incremental temperature, °C total overburden stress Langmuir volume constant, m Coal and gas outburst is a major hazard that coal miners encounter from time to time. When mining progresses further deeper, coal permeability is expected to decrease gradually and thus the likelihood of gas outbursts increases. Determination of coal permeability is crucial to assess the performance of drainage boreholes. However, coal permeability varies during gas drainage due to the change in the effective stress and desorption-induced coal shrinkage. As gas desorption occurs, coal keeps experiencing compressive deformation by overlying rocks. As the drainage process takes a significantly long time, coal internal structure is expected to rearrange due to the constant compaction from adjacent rocks, and as a result, coal porosity and permeability vary. This phenomenon is called creep or time-dependent deformation ( Cataclastic creep: defined as delayed weakening of microstructure ( Granular creep: the rearrangement of grains induced by frictional sliding ( Pressure solution creep: dissolution-precipitation induced by stress, and Adsorption-diffusion creep: the deformation exerted by the adsorption followed by desorption and diffusion ( The latter two mechanisms applicable for fluid saturated coals may have more impact on coal permeability than the other mechanisms during gas drainage. As coal is generally softer than most of rocks, the impact of creep on coal permeability is expected to be more significant. Coal permeability is sensitive to the effective stress and alters when geomechanical behaviour and in-situ conditions such as reservoir pressure, gas desorption, and reservoir temperature change during gas drainage ( The study of impact of creep and viscoelastic behaviour on coal is critical for successful employment of gas extraction techniques. During drawdown, time-dependent shrinkage of coal that is controlled by diffusion rate happens when fluid is removed. This leads to a phenomenon called compaction creep ( Different types of gases have diverse adsorption capacity and consequently show dissimilar viscoelastic and visco-plastic creep behaviour. The more the adsorption capacity of the gas is, the softer the coal becomes and its cushioning effect increases. Some research has been conducted to study creep phenomenon in coal containing gas through uniaxial ( In this paper, a new permeability model has been developed by incorporating viscoelastic compaction creep term of Nishihara rheological model in a constitutive stress-strain equation for anisotropic poroelastic media suggested by Coal permeabilitiy models are generally based on the assumptions that it is homogeneous and has dual porosity, which means gas is predominantly stored in the coal matrix and flows through cleats via Darcy’s law. The complexity of modelling coal permeability, compared to that of in conventional gas reservoirs, arises from the swelling/shrinkage resulted from adsorption/desorption ( Permeability models are proposed by linkage of either porosity or stress to permeability, most of which have been developed based on the assumption that strain is uniaxial ( For uniaxial strain condition that is deemed to be valid for a relatively large basin scale ( In addition, the stress-permeability relationship is defined by Eq. Eq. The sorption induced volumetric strain Coal permeability models generally fall into two categories. In the first category, the relationship between porosity and permeability is considered. After the review of some existing permeability models ( In this section, a series of governing equations used for development of a new permeability model and a fully coupled numerical simulation incorporating geomechanical deformation and Darcy flow is presented. In order to model strain behaviour of rocks and porous media, some exponential ( It should be noted that the three-dimensional Nishihara model used in some studies ( A constitutive equation obeying linear elasticity is suggested by  In this study, the following equation has been suggested for viscoelastic porous media by adding the viscoelastic term of Eq. Eq. The flux of free phase gas in macropores (cleats) occurs through Darcy flow. The transport of gas in micropores (matrix) obeys Fick’s law in adsorbed and dissolved states ( Based on the ideal gas law, the gas density can be obtained from the following equation: In Eq. By substituting Eqs. Eq. A permeability model that considers stress-time deformation of coal will be developed in this section. The new model is based on the stress-strain equation for anisotropic poroelastic media ( The coal is a homogeneous, anisotropic, and an elastic medium; Average permeability of coal is considered rather than directional permeability; The whole system is isothermal and the pore gas is ideal. Swelling and shrinkage of matrix is analogous to thermal expansion and contraction; Gas flow in coal is viscous and governed by Darcy’s law; Coal is laterally constrained, uniaxial strain ( Swelling/shrinkage strain due to sorption is isotropic; Water content and capillary effects on coal permeability are negligible; and Change in coal permeability is due to the effect of prevailing effective horizontal stresses acting on the normal cleat.  According to the series connection of the elements of Nishihara model, the total strain can be written as: The creep constitutive equation of Nishihara model under two conditions is presented as: In Eq.  Considering uniaxial strain assumption (  The following equations can be obtained by adding the viscoelastic term of Eq. Considering constant total overburden stress ( The first term of Eq. It yields: Since according to simulation results presented later in this study, time (t), viscoelasticity in z direction, and viscosity coefficient in The new permeability model (Eq. The numerical simulation has been conducted by employment of gas flow through poroelasticity and sub-surface flow (Darcy’s law) module. A 2-D square homogeneous simulation model of 10 m × 10 m coal ( The initial gas pressure in reservoir was set to 6 MPa and desorption of methane gas triggers through the pressure difference between reservoir and the borehole. The pressure in drainage borehole was atmospheric (101.325 kPa) and flux occurred from the reservoir into the borehole. The bottom, right and left boundaries were constrained (no lateral strain). The right and top boundaries were under constant stresses. There was no-flow condition on all boundaries except for drainage boundary (borehole wall). The summary of the stress, strain, and pressure conditions in the domain (Ω) and on the boundary (∂Ω) under uniaxial strain condition is as follows: A simulation example has been presented to compare the results of the new permeability model and PC model ( The results indicate that sorption has a dominant effect on coal permeability for both models. As shown in A sensitivity analysis has been carried out to investigate the effect of parameters of the new model on permeability change with respect to PC model, as summarised in The comparison of difference of permeability values between the new and PC models is listed in  In this section, a series of scenario-based numerical simulations have been carried out to investigate the impact of creep on coal permeability evolution and gas drainage performance under in-situ stresses and uniaxial strain condition. For this purpose, two scenarios of: Vertical stress greater than confining stress, and Vertical stress less than confining stress have been considered.  Comparing the results obtained from both models show a decrease of between 23.7% and 25% in permeability exerted by viscoelastic compaction creep considered in the new model under the mentioned geomechanical stresses ( As discussed before, since soft coals are more prone to compaction creep than hard coals, it is critical to consider the impact of compaction creep on coal permeability and gas drainage. The new permeability model suggested for anisotropic poroelastic media and the simulation results presented in this study show that compaction creep can have significant impact on coal permeability. In this study, creep as a crucial factor that may have substantial impact on coal permeability and gas drainage has been studied and a new permeability model that incorporates creep has been suggested. To do this, the stress-strain relationship suggested by A comparison between the new permeability model and PC model has been made and a significant impact of creep on permeability has been observed. In addition, the impact of compaction creep and viscoelastic behaviour on coal permeability, and the pertinent parameters involved such as elastic and viscoelastic Young’s moduli, viscosity coefficient and time on coal permeability have been studied. A series of scenario-based numerical simulations have been implemented by COMSOL Multiphysics and employment of Finite Element Method (FEM) to study the impact of creep on coal permeability. The following conclusions have been drawn: Elasticity of coal in x direction shows a very high influence on coal permeability when creep is considered. However, elasticity of coal in z direction has negligible impact on permeability. For example, the new permeability model shows further reduction in permeability from 25% to 44% for an increase in Young’s modulus in x direction from 2 GPa to 3 GPa compared to PC model. Both new permeability model and PC model show an increase in permeability with elastic moduli in x direction. The new model shows an increase in permeability with viscoelastic moduli. However, compared to PC model it shows a considerable reduction in permeability due to viscoelastic compaction creep. The Poisson’s ratio on xy plate shows the largest impact on coal permeability compared to the Poisson’s ratios on other plates. The new model depicts that an increase of 0.05 in Poisson’s ratio on xy plate results in further reduction in permeability by 2%. However, an increase of 0.1 and 0.08 in Poisson’s ratios in zx and zy plates, respectively, leads to no change in permeability. Alteration of viscosity coefficient and the time associated with viscoelastic behaviour have negligible impact on coal permeability for a significantly wide range of values during gas desorption. Compaction creep is more critical for softer coals as they experience further compaction compared to stronger coals. Compaction of coal structure leads to loss of porosity and permeability. Similar to viscoelastic compaction creep, visco-plastic compaction creep may exert additional impact to alteration of coal permeability. However, its impact was not considered in this study. The findings of this study may contribute to a better understanding of the impact of compaction creep on coal permeability as a critical factor influencing gas drainage. Also, the assessment of interaction of drainage borehole and coal reservoir could be improved. The authors would like to acknowledge the School of Mechanical and Mining Engineering of the