A new model for calculating the adsorption equilibrium constant of water vapor in the micropores of activated carbon was established, the mechanism of which is based on the penetration of water clusters into micropores. Two kinds of carbon materials with significantly different pore and surface structures were prepared for water vapor adsorption, and the adsorption experiments were conducted in different conditions to test the accuracy of the new model. The new model was also applicable to water adsorption on bituminous-based activated carbon. Furthermore, being able to calculate the values for enthalpy of activation and entropy of activation, the new model can provide universal thermodynamic criteria for the water adsorption on activated carbon.Activated carbon mainly suffers from water vapor adsorption in gas separation and purification, such as hydrogen gas from steam methane reforming and volatile organic compound (VOC) removal from air In the beginning, water vapor adsorption was analyzed by theoretical methods. Dubinin and Serpinsky (DS) Do et al. Although the DD model can describe the different shapes of water adsorption isotherm in activated carbon, many physical parameters, such as the equilibrium constant of micropore adsorption and the size of water clusters, cannot be directly measured. Thus, it is necessary to develop a new theory or to establish a novel model to calculate these factors with measureable macroscopic parameters. Thereby motivated, a new model was proposed herein to calculate the equilibrium constant of micropore adsorption in this paper. In addition, water vapor adsorption experiments were carried out and the adsorption data for two different kinds of activated carbon were determined. The applicability of the new model was also tested against those of other scholars’ research. A commercial granular activated carbon, purchased from Shanxi Xinhua Activated Carbon Co., Ltd. (KZ15-2), was used as the raw activated carbon (RAC). Prior to use, it was washed in deionized water to remove impurities and was kept in a drying vacuum oven at 573 Porous texture of RAC and MAC were determined by N Configuration of the experimental apparatus used in the fixed-bed adsorption experiments is shown in The original model was proposed by Do et al. with assumptions of the DD model During adsorption, a portion of water molecules have sufficient potential energy to enter a micropore and then to be adsorbed inside. On the other hand, some water molecules adsorbed on activated carbon surfaces leave the micropore because of heat activation. Having described a mechanism for water adsorption–desorption in the micropores of activated carbon, a mathematical model can now be established to calculate the equilibrium constant of micropore adsorption (i.e. Water molecules are initially hydrogen-bonded to the functional groups and chemisorbed water molecules, resulting in the formation of water clusters on the activated carbon surface. Then, when the cluster grows to a critical size, water molecules begin to fill in micropore of activated carbon. Water molecules are linked by hydrogen intermolecular bonds between each other in micropore of actiavted carbon. During desorption, the hydrogen intermolecular bonds are ruptured because of heat activation, and then the water molecules leave from the micropore. The adsorbate residing in micropore of activated carbon is distributed uniformly. According to the assumptions of water vapor adsorption in the micropore of activated carbon, that water molecules are initially chemisorbed with the surface fucntional groups, and then fill in micropore of actiavted carbon, the rate of adsorption in micropores can be expressed as follows: During adsorption, the rate constant of water vapor adsorption on functional groups and chemisorbed water molecules ( During desorption, water molecules leave from the micropore of activated carbon because of heat activation. The rate of water vapor desorption in micropores is described as follows: where When adsorption equilibrium is achieved, the number of molecules adsorbed on a unit of surface per unit of time is equal to the number of molecules desorbed through a unit of surface per unit of time, and the rate of adsorption is equal to that of desorption. Thus, the equilibrium constant of micropore adsorption, In Eq. Eq. Detailed pore structural parameters of RAC and MAC are listed in The experimental and numerical simulation results of adsorption isotherms for water vapor on RAC and MAC are presented in Accuracy of the new model was tested using the On the basis of the new equation parameters for RAC and MAC, the values for enthalpy of activation (Δ Experimental data of water adsorption on bituminous-based (BPL) activated carbon samples were used to test the applicability of the new model at 293, 313, 333, and 353 A new model was developed for calculating the adsorption equilibrium constant of water vapor in the micropores of activated carbon. By using the equation, the equilibrium constant of micropore adsorption at different temperatures can be calculated with a few number of parameters. Particularly, the new model is applicable to water adsorption on RAC, MAC, and BPL activated carbons with evidently different pore and surface structures. Furthermore, values for enthalpy of activation and entropy of activation can be calculated by the new model that provides universal thermodynamic criteria for the water adsorption on activated carbon. The authors thanks Prof. Duong Do for his instructive advice. The financial support from