Hypothesis
                  This study addresses the outcome after osteosynthesis or hemiarthroplasty, using a cohort of patients that was enrolled in a previous prospective study on humeral head perfusion and was consequently treated using a common conceptual approach.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Between 1998 and 2001, 98 patients with 100 fractures of the proximal humerus were treated surgically by a single surgeon with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) (51/100, group A, median age 54 years; range, 21-88) or with hemiarthroplasty (49/100, group B, median age 66 years; range, 38-87). Seventy-six of 98 patients were available for re-evaluation at a mean follow-up of five years (3.3-7.3) using the Constant-Murley score (CMS), the Subjective Shoulder Value (SSV), and conventional radiographs.
               
                  Results
                  The median total CMS was 77 (range, 37-98) for group A and 70 (range, 39-84) for group B. The median SSV was 92 (range, 40-100) for group A and 90 (range, 40-100) for group B. Avascular necrosis occured in 6/40 fractures treated with ORIF.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Osteosynthesis and hemiarthroplasty yield similar functional results and comparable patient satisfaction following the applied decision making process in this selected patient cohort. Osteosynthesis with preservation of the humeral head is worth considering when adequate reduction and stable conditions for revascularization can be obtained. In patients with osteopenic bone and/or comminuted fractures, hemiarthroplasty is a viable alternative.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level 2; Prospective non-randomized comparison study.Treatment of complex fractures of the proximal humerus remains challenging and controversial. Treatment concepts are heterogeneous. There is little evidence and poor consensus concerning the optimal treatment modality This study addresses the outcome after osteosynthesis or hemiarthroplasty using a cohort of patients that was enrolled in a previous prospective study on humeral head perfusion, and, consequently, was treated using a common conceptual approach. To analyze the decision making process and its consequences, the functional outcome and subjective satisfaction of patients treated with osteosynthesis or with hemiarthroplasty was evaluated. Between February 1998 and December 2001, 100 shoulders (98 patients/60y (21-88) / 55 women/ 57 right shoulders) with fractures of the proximal humerus were included in a prospective, surgical evaluation protocol. Fractures with at least 1 component proximal to the surgical neck were termed intracapsular. Patients with these fractures were treated by a single surgeon. Patients in poor medical condition or expected to be unable to comply with the postoperative rehabilitation program were treated conservatively and not included in this report. The choice of the treatment was based on the Codman-LEGO description system, Surgery was performed in the beach chair position using a delto-pectoral approach without detachment of the deltoid. For osteosynthesis, a thin, flexible plate ( Rehabilitation instructions were the same for both groups. For the first 6 weeks, patients were immobilized in a simple sling at day and in a gilet (a removable Desault bandage) at night. They were allowed to perform simple pendulum exercises several times a day. Additionally, the following exercises were allowed: assisted external rotation up to 10° less than the opposite side, assisted internal rotation up to the abdomen, and assisted elevation of the hand to the forehead. Patient re-evaluation was performed following a standardized protocol. We measured the Constant-Murley score (CMS). Twenty-two of 98 patients (23/100 shoulders) were lost to follow-up: 15 of 22 patients had died of unrelated causes, 5 could not be traced, 1 had moved overseas, and 1 refused consultation. Thus 76/98 patients (77/100 shoulders) were available for long-term evaluation at a mean follow-up of 5 years (range, 3.3-7.3). The SSV was assessed in 44/51 in group A and in 33/49 in group B. Six of 51 in group A and 5/49 in group B were available for telephone interview only. The CMS was assessed clinically in 38/51 in group A and in 28/49 in group B. Sixty-eight of 100 x-rays were available at the longterm for evaluation. In group A, there were 4 fractures with 2 fragments (both anatomic neck fractures), 19 with 3 fragments, and 15 with 4 fragments. In group B, there were 7 fractures with 3 fragments and 21 with 4 fragments. The median age at follow-up was 50 years (range, 21-88) in group A and 66 years (range, 38-87) in group B. Statistical analysis was performed using In Stat This sudy did not undergo Institutional Review Board approval. The median total CMS was 77 (range, 37-98) in group A and 70 (range, 39-84) in group B. The median SSV was 92 (range, 40-100) in group A and 90 (range, 40-100) in group B. The difference for the total CMS ( The radiologic assessment of avascular necrosis in the group treated with osteosynthesis (group A) revealed no structural alterations in the humeral head in 20/40, structural alterations in 14/40, and collapsed heads in 6/40. The probability of head collapse was 13% in group A1 (initially perfused) and 20% in group A2 (initially ischemic). Documented complications in the postoperative period were: (1) arthrolysis for the treatment of postoperative stiffness in 10 shoulders in group A (in these cases osteosynthesis implants were also removed) and in 6 shoulders in group B; (2) revision surgery for the treatment of postoperative hematoma in 1 case in each group; and (3) revision of the tuberosities performed in 1 shoulder in group A and 3 in group B. Furthermore, 6 loosened and migrated screws were removed under local anesthesia in 5 cases, and in 1 case in group A, a fatigue fracture of the plate occurred. There was no infection. The CMS was slightly lower for arthroplasty than for osteosythesis. The main difference between them was a reduced value of force for arthroplasty. This might be due differences in age and gender: The median age at follow-up of the patients in the arthroplasty group was 16 years higher than in the osteosynthesis group; 18 of 38 evaluated patients in the osteosynthesis group and 19 of 28 in the arthroplasty group were female. After normalization of the Constant score, The reported incidence of posttraumatic avascular necrosis varies between 1% and 34%. A limitation of the study is the loss of follow-up (23 of 100 fractures were lost). Seven fractures in group A and 16 in group B were not available for evaluation. As losses in both groups were comparable, they should not significantly influence the results of the study. Revision surgery was neccessary in a small number of patients. The indications for and the amount of revision surgery was comparable in both groups; therefore, complications did not significantly influence the results. An inherent weakness of the study is the lack of randomization. The choice of the treatment modality was based on the assessment of perfusion of the humeral head and the feasibility of adequate osteosynthesis, as well as on patient related factors such as the expected ability to cooperate; therefore, randomization was not feasible. As a result, patients within the arthroplasty group were significantly older than those treated with osteosynthesis, which would negatively biase this group. The strengths of the study are the relatively large patient cohort with initially assessed humal head perfusion, the prospective data collection, and a relatively long follow-up period. In summary, the functional outcome (CMS) for pain, activities of daily living, range of motion, and the subjective outcome (SSV) in the arthroplasty group was the same as the osteosynthesis group. Furthermore, initial ischemia of the head did not predict development of humeral head necrosis. In conclusion, both ostesynthesis and arthroplasty yield satisfying results for selected patients, that adequate treatment selection was probably the reason for the similarity of the results and that initially ischemic heads did not necessarily develop avascular necrosis, thus indicating that revascularization can indeed occur. We believe that osteosynthesis with preservation of the humeral head is worth considering when adequate reduction and stable conditions for revascularization can be obtained. If osteosynthesis is not feasible, especially in older, uncompliant patients with osteopenic bone and/or comminuted fractures, hemiarthroplasty seems to be a viable alternative to osteosynthesis, offering comparable functional outcomes to osteosynthesis.