Selective leaching of high iron cobalt matte in sulfuric acid at atmospheric pressure is being reported. The matte assaying 4.55%Co, 13.58%Ni, 3.72%Cu and 53.6%Fe was produced by carbothermal reduction and pyrite sulfuration of nickel converter slag containing 1.36%Co, 3.39%Ni and 1.01%Cu from the Jinlong nickel smelter (Yunnan, China). The process is made up of three-step countercurrent leaching. In the first step most Fe of the matte is leached as the fresh matte is mixed with some sulfuric acid solution containing low concentrations of Co and Ni ions from the third step. The leach residue of the first step is contacted with the rest leachate of the third step leachate, and Co and Ni partially dissolve. The leach residue from the second leaching step is leached with 5.5M sulfuric acid, the leachate is diluted and divided into two parts as the leachants to the first and second leaching step. In the first step, 71.6%Fe, 0.6%Co and 0.2%Ni dissolve and 99.0%Co and 99.5%Ni are extracted by injecting H2S; in contrast, 67.5%Fe, 3.5%Co and 0.4%Ni dissolve in the first step, and 96.1%Co and 99.2%Ni are extracted without H2S input.Valuable metals, such as Co, Ni and Cu are present in the smelter and converter slags either in chemically dissolved forms or as physically entrapped metal or metal sulphide droplets during smelting non-ferrous metal sulphides. There are two kinds of methods to recover these valuable metals, i.e. pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical methods. The hydrometallurgical method is to directly treat these slags, such as sulfuric and ammonia leaching; aqueous sulphur dioxide leaching; roasting with ferric sulfate, pyrite, ammonium sulfate, and sulfuric acid followed by leaching; pressure leaching Hydrometallurgical methods for the treatment of these high-grade mattes include atmospheric pressure leaching or high pressure leaching. High pressure acid leaching has been conducted by many researchers for extracting valuable metals from high-grade mattes. Plasket and Romanchuk recovered nickel and copper from a high-grade matte at Impala platinum by the Sherritt Process Previously the hydrometallurgical methods were mainly used to treat high-grade mattes with a concentration of Fe below 15%. High-iron mattes prepared by carbothermal reduction in an electric furnace are generally required to reduce iron from 50 to 15% by blowing and refining in a converter. The reactivity of the low-iron mattes becomes lower after the pyrometallurgical pre-treatment, and is little soluble in acids at atmospheric temperature and pressure. Therefore, previous focus has been put on the high-pressure and high-temperature leaching of the low-iron mattes or a combination of atmospheric leaching and high-pressure and high-temperature leaching. The objective of this paper is to conduct a feasibility study of selective recovery of Co, Ni and Cu from a low grade matte with a high-iron content using sulfuric acid leaching at atmospheric pressure. An innovative process is proposed to directly leach the high-iron cobalt matte at atmospheric temperature and pressure. Iron is selectively removed during the leaching process and nickel and cobalt are recovered from the leachate with copper remaining in the leach residue. The matte sample used in this investigation was produced by carbothermal reduction and pyrite sulfuration of a nickel converter slag containing 1.36%Co, 3.39%Ni and 1.01%Cu from the Jinlong nickel smelter (Yunnan, China). The chemical composition of the matte is given in Samples were first crushed and ground to a particle size of 80% passing 0.1 The aim of the first step atmospheric pressure leaching tests was to optimize the operation parameters, such as concentration of sulfuric acid and concentrations of nickel and cobalt ions in the dilute leachate of the third step, leaching time, and leaching temperature. According to experience of tests the concentration ratio of Ni to Co in the leachate of the third step is approximately 8, for the sake of simplicity, the initial concentration ratio of Ni to Co in the acid from the dilute leachate of the third step was set at 8. A sample of 20 The continuous three-step countercurrent leaching was carried out with optimised parameters obtained from the step-wise batch experiments. Artificial acid solutions containing ions of nickel and cobalt were used in the first cycle. The objective of the first leaching step is to remove iron from the feed, and to precipitate cobalt and nickel from the third step leachate. Fe is removed in solution and Co and Ni are enriched in residue in the first step leaching. The reactions are shown in the following equations:  In general, the Co and Ni precipitation decrease with an increase of the initial concentrations of Co and Ni, but the dissolution of Fe increases. Clearly, the Co and Ni precipitation are higher with H  The precipitation of Co and Ni and the dissolution of Fe at a temperature between 30 and 95  After the first leaching step, about 50% of the Fe in the matte dissolves and Co and Ni in the solution precipitate as sulphides. The leach residue of the first step is about 66.8% (w/w) of the matte. This residue as the feed to the second leaching step consists mainly of Fe, Co and Ni metals and Ni, Co and Cu sulphides. The part of Fe in the alloy is hard to leach with a low concentration acid. The residue is contacted with the part of the third step leachate to leach Ni and Co. Dissolution of the Co and Ni alloy is expressed by the following reaction: The effects of the concentration of sulfuric acid and leaching time on the dissolution of Co, Ni and Fe in the second step are shown in The matte weight is decreased to 50% after the first and second step low acid leaching. There are sulphides of Co, Ni, Cu and alloys of Fe, Co and Ni in the residue that cannot dissolve in acid at a low concentration. However sulphides of Co, Ni and alloys of Fe, Co and Ni can dissolve in acid at a high concentration at 95 The effects of the concentration of sulfuric acid and leaching time on the dissolution of Co, Ni and Fe were investigated in the third step batch experiments. The third step leach residue is mainly copper products in the leaching process. According to the step-wise batch experiments, the optimised conditions assumed for the three-step countercurrent leaching are outlined in The initial matte to the first step was 20 The proposed three-step countercurrent leaching can selectively remove most Fe from the high iron cobalt matte with sulfuric acid at atmospheric pressure. In three-step countercurrent leaching, 71.6%Fe is removed at a respective recovery of 99.0%Co and 99.5%Ni with H