Stratified rock masses, formed by preexisting original materials on the earth crust, are distributed broadly over land area. During the forming process of this kind of rock mass, differences in material composition, particle size, color and fabric result in rock stratification. Consequently, one set of dominant structure plane, called a bedding plane, is generated. In addition, it is common to encounter interstratified joints, caused by geotectonic movement, cutting through rock layers. The intersections of the two types of discontinuities form the so-called stratified rock masses. Today, many underground constructions, such as tunnels for civil engineering projects and mining excavations, have to be constructed in stratified rock masses. The rock mass structure of a stratified rock mass plays a vital role on failure of an underground opening during excavation and in operation. In particular, it is known that discontinuities will affect the behavior of stratified rock masses and special considerations, e.g. rock bolting and/or heavy lining, have to be made when the stratified rock masses are not stable The most important feature of stratified rock masses is the anisotropic rock mass mechanical behavior resulting from occurrence of highly persistent bedding planes, covering a large area, and interstratified joints. In performing physical model tests and numerical analysis to simulate stratified rock mass mechanical behavior, one should consider the specific structure of the stratified rock mass and the excavation process to capture the effect of the orientation and mechanical properties of discontinuities on stability of the rock mass. To obtain realistic results for a stratified rock mass during underground excavations, rock blocks of different sizes representing the variable discontinuity structure of the rock mass should be tested at significant stress levels under different excavation conditions. With in situ tests, such an experimental program would be difficult, time-consuming and expensive This paper presents an approach, which incorporates the “virtual block” concept for stratified rock masses with the UDEC results, to improve the interpretation of stability around underground openings. This potentially represents a significant advance over earlier stratified rock engineering approaches, which did not consider the virtual block concept. To demonstrate the sensitivity of stratified rock mass structure on model test and numerical modeling results, the influence of the dip angle of discontinuities and mechanical properties of weak seams on stratified rock mass stability is explored in this research. Moreover, displacement distribution and stress arching are studied as well. Ideally, the model material should have mechanical properties that could reproduce. In order to simulate the behavior of a stratified rock mass, aluminum blocks and rods of different dimensions are used in a wax door test as shown in The model framework, made of stainless steel with enough rigidity, is 1000 In this test, in order to simulate the full-face excavation, the wax door is made into a hollow rectangular parallelepiped of length 300 In this study, two series of model tests are conducted. Series-1 contains seven samples without weak seams, and with different dip angles of the stratified rock mass set at As a traditional technique, strain gauges and displacement sensors are used to measure deformations resulting from excavations in physical model tests. Because the physical model dealt with in this research is composed of discrete blocks, experimental difficulties exist in using them in measuring local as well as global deformations. Therefore, a photogrammetric technique is used in this study to obtain deformations and strains. During the past ten years, this methodology has been applied to a number of geotechnical engineering problems The photogrammetric system called PhotoInfor was developed at The University of Tokushima by Yuan-hai et al. The displacements of the stratified rock mass in Series-1 and Series-2 tests were measured by the aforementioned digital photogrammetric system ( To provide an insight into the failure mode and mechanism of underground openings in stratified rock masses, UDEC Based on the model test, the total dimension of the numerical model is 1000  According to Murayama's research With respect to Series-1 (without weak seams) tests, after excavation, the failure mode is predominantly controlled by the structure of the stratified rock mass. The rotation, falling and sliding initiate at the roof and shoulders of the excavations. With excavation advancing, failure occurs at two shoulders and then extends along a certain route until one or more ‘virtual blocks’ are formed. Furthermore, the results also show that the displacement of a ‘virtual block’ at the roof tends to increase as the block dimension decreases. It is clear that the dip angle has a prominent effect on the failure mode of stratified rock masses, and the shape as well as extent of the failure zone is also strongly dependent on the dip angle.    Besides, it is observable in Displacement profiles of rock masses above the tunnel roof are given in The failure modes of the stratified rock mass are significantly affected by the seam planes and are quite different to that of the stratified rock mass without the seams. In PhotoInfor, the final image of the physical model test after excavation is compared with the control image—photograph of the physical model test before excavation to obtain the displacement and deformation distributions of the surrounding rock mass. Displacement distributions of the physical model tests conducted for Series-1 and Series-2 are shown in If a portion of an otherwise rigid support of a granular mass yields, the adjoining particles move with respect to the remainder of the granular mass. This movement is resisted by shearing stresses which reduce the pressure on the yielding portion of the support while increasing the pressure on the adjacent rigid zones. This phenomenon is called the “arching effect”. In 1943, Terzaghi  The characteristics of stress arching bunch formed in a stratified rock mass after excavation indicate its difference from a stress arch found in continuous materials and it can be described as follows: The stress arching formed in a stratified rock mass after excavation is a layered system containing several independent stress paths in an arch shape overlying one above another within the disturbed zone. Stress arches formed in a stratified rock mass are asymmetric except when the dip angle is 0, while most stress paths in an arch shape reported in continuous material are symmetric around the center line. The number of stress arches formed differs with the dip angle. As illustrated in As marked in The paper presented laboratory physical model tests and UDEC numerical simulations conducted for evaluating the effects of the structure of a stratified rock mass on its failure mode and mechanism around underground openings. The numerical results on failure modes were found to be agreeable to physical model test results. The paper showed how “PhotoInfor” technique can be used to monitor deformations around underground excavations of physical models. The physical model test results and numerical analysis indicate that the dip angle of the stratified rock mass and weak seams between the blocks have significant influence on the underground excavation stability and the failure modes. In general, as the dip angle of a stratified rock mass increases, the failure zone and the deformations around the underground excavation increase, and the distribution of these two variables in the stratified rock mass become more asymmetric. The weak seams significantly affect the failure mode and the failure zones of stratified rock masses. For the first time in the literature, this paper introduced the ‘virtual block’ concept for the analysis of failure zone, and also to show a possible relation between the failure zone and the structure of the stratified rock mass. For a nearly horizontal stratified rock mass, the failure mode is similar to failure of a “rock beam”. For a bedding plane dip angle around the friction angle of the bedding plane, the failure occurs through falling of a ‘virtual block’. For a bedding plane dip angle much larger than the friction angle of the bedding plane, the failure primarily occurs through sliding of the stratified rock mass along the seam of joints and also like a ‘virtual block’, especially for the joints with weak seam. It is suggested to consider the dimension and failure modes of the ‘virtual blocks’ in designing rock support systems for stratified rock masses. The stress arching bunch, the peculiar phenomenon in a stratified rock mass due to its layered structure, is discussed in this paper. ((π/4)+( It is suggested that future work on this topic should consider the influence of the lateral pressure coefficient, the mechanism of stress arching bunch and the dimension of openings on the stability around underground openings in stratified rock masses. The study was sponsored by the