Osteochondral fracture of the patella is a common concomitant injury of the knee, especially in lateral patellar instability, and the importance of early stable fixation with minimal complication and early mobilization should be emphasized. Screws and Kirschner wires both absorbable and nonabsorbable have been the common mode of fixation of these fractures. Nevertheless, these fixation techniques require larger osteochondral fragments and are associated with cartilage abrasion, hardware prominence, synovitis, and foreign body reaction. In contrast, suture fixation can adequately stabilize smaller osteochondral fragments without comminution and prevent some of the possible complications of other techniques of fixation. We created 4 holes in a rectangular pattern on the patella oriented perpendicular to its anteroposterior surface. We used readily available, and affordable, no. 2 Ultrabraid sutures inserted into the holes and looped around the osteochondral fragment, compressing it to the patella. The technique is very simple and is relatively easy to learn. It provides secure fixation and allows early mobilization. And it spares the knee from subsequent surgical procedure for removal of metallic implants.Patella fractures comprise around 1% of all bony injuries. More often, these fractures are either avulsion fractures or complete fractures extending to the anterior cortex of the patella. Standard lateral, sunrise, and merchant view and sometimes oblique radiographs are needed to visualize these fragments and fractures. Osteochondral fragments can be difficult to diagnose radiographically because they may only contain small ossified portions. These injuries can lead to progressive chondral damage and early-onset arthritis. Small fragments (<5 mm) deemed unsalvageable is removed and the donor site treated with cartilage-resurfacing techniques. Arthroscopic assessment is initially done prior to appropriate exposure for rigid fixation. The patient is positioned supine with a tourniquet applied. After skin preparation and draping, diagnostic arthroscopy is usually done to assess the magnitude of intra-articular damage. A midline skin incision is made from 5 cm above the superior pole of the patella extended down to the level of tibial tubercle as needed for exposure. Subcutaneous tissue is then superficially dissected to expose the vastus medialis and quadriceps tendon. Medial skin flap is then developed to expose the quadriceps tendon, medial border of the patella, and medial border of the patellar tendon. A medial parapatellar arthrotomy is then performed. The patella is flipped laterally to expose the articular surface to the front. Subsequently, osteochondral fragments are retrieved ( After the surgery, a functional brace at 0° to 30° flexion is applied for the first 2 weeks. Partial weight-bearing ambulation assisted by 2 crutches is immediately started. Two weeks postoperatively, the skin sutures are removed. The functional knee brace is adjusted gradually to achieve 90° flexion by 6 weeks and then discontinued. There are several techniques to fix osteochondral fractures of the patella, and the choice of fixation is based largely on surgeon's preference. Some use screws like Acutrak headless screws (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR) designed to fix osteochondral fractures. However, they usually require larger osteochondral fragments and are removed after a few weeks postoperatively to assess healing and to avoid the consequences of fragment collapse, which can lead to prominent hardware. Bioabsorbable screws have been recommended to avoid future implant removal, but the degree of compression they provide and the fact that they remain in situ for a long time before enzymatic breakdown occurs is in question. There are several advantages of this technique. It is relatively simple and easy to learn. The technique can use high-strength sutures. In this technique, we used Ultrabraid (Smith & Nephew), which is an ultrahigh-molecular-weight polyethylene polymer coated with silicone, which has a low abrasive property. Suture fixation of osteochondral fractures of the patella is relatively safe, simple, and easy to perform. It avoids potential complications such as chondral abrasions, synovitis, irritation, and osteochondral comminution associated with other techniques of fixation. It may be the only choice of fixation for smaller osteochondral fragments that cannot be fixed by other fixation techniques. High-strength sutures for fixation are readily available and are relatively more affordable than other fixation devices. In addition, the technique enables adequate compression and fixation, ensuring early mobilization. 