Combining polyester scaffolds with synthetic nanohydroxyapatite (nHAp), which is bioactive and osteoconductive, is a plausible strategy to improve bone regeneration. Here, we propose the combination of PBAT [poly(butylene-adipate-co-terephthalate)] and synthetic nHAp (at 3 and 5wt%). PBAT is a relatively a new polymer with low crystallinity and attractive biodegradability and mechanical properties for orthopedic applications, however, with a still underexplored potential for in vivo applications. Then, we performed a careful biological in vitro and in vivo set of experiments to evaluate the influence of PBAT containing two different nHAp loads. For in vitro assays, osteoblast-like MG63 cells were used and the bioactivity and gene expression related to osteogenesis were evaluated by qRT-PCR. For in vivo experiments, twenty-four male rats were used and a tibial defect model was applied to insert the scaffolds. Micro-computed tomography (Micro-CT) and histological analysis were used to assess e bone neoformation after 6 weeks of implantation. Three point flexural tests measured the mechanical properties of the neoformed bone. All scaffolds showed promising in vitro properties, since they were not cytotoxic against MG-63 cells and promoted high cell proliferation and formation of mineralized nodules. From a mechanistic point-of-view, nHAp loading increased hydrophilicity, which in turn allowed for a better adsorption of proteins and consequent changes in the phenotypic expression of osteoblasts. nHAp induced better cellular responses on/in the scaffolds, which was mainly attributed to its osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties. Micro-CT images showed that nHAp at 3% and 5wt% led to more effective bone formation, presenting the highest bone volume after 6 weeks of implantation. Considering the three point flexural tests, 5wt% of nHAp positively influenced the flexural mode of the neoformed bone, but the stiffiness was similar between the 3% and 5wt% groups. In summary, this investigation demonstrated great potential for the application of these novel scaffolds towards bone regeneration and, thus, should be further studied.In recent decades, the development of natural and synthetic biomaterials has aroused the interest of researchers around the world in order to induce and guide fast and controlled tissue regeneration seeking to improve the quality of life. The reconstruction of bone defects, such as local filling of lost bone tissue due to trauma, infectious processes or congenital malformations, is an ordinary procedure in maxilo-facial and orthopedic surgeries, however, it represents a major challenge to medical and dental clinics due to a lack of prolonged bone growth, infection, and other reasons Several techniques have been investigated for the preparation of improved orthopedic biomaterials, many focused on developing biologicially-inspired nanometer surfaces. Particulatly, electrospinning has been studied as an alternative to produce 3D fibrous scaffolds due to an ability to mimic the architecture of the bone extracellular matrix (ECM) Such electrospun ultrathin and nanometer fibers can be obtained using a great variety of natural or synthetic polymers as matrices. In order to produce novel scaffolds, biodegradable polymers have been extensively investigated The synthesized nanohydroxyapatite (nHAp) is similar to that found in bone in terms of chemical structure and spatial organization It is known that the fine control of surface wettability is key to obtaining a deep understanding of the processes of biological cell integration and the further development of new potential biomaterials for the tissue engineering community Several papers have been published using polyesters with different loads of nHAp for bone regeneration purporses Nevertheless, an association between All the materials and methods are described in the supplementary data. We observed that melting temperature increased with nHAp loading and as its concentration increased, whilst no clear influence was observed on glass transition. On the other hand, the nHAp loading decreased the degree of cristallinity, which may be attributed to a certain loss of mobility of the polymer chains, therefore preventing an ideal aligment of their segments in the crystal lattices (Fig. 1 and Table 2 described in the supplementary data). Then, we can evaluate whether nHAp acted as a nucleating agent or not. After polymer melting, a nucleating agent could reduce the barrier of free-energy for a primary nucleation, therefore decreasing the critical nucleus size. As a consequence of lowering the free enthalpy of nucleation, the crystallization induction time would also decrease and result in an increase in the nucleation rates The electrospinning process is largely used to produce scaffolds that can act as support for cell adhesion and proliferation. For this purpose, the formation of fibers with proper morphology and distribution is required. The electrospun fibers were ultrathin (100 In the biomedical field, the knowledge of material wettability can be a prerequisite to obtain a better understading of its potential applications. A material with high hydrophilicity is always desirable for tissue engineering applications. We identified that the nHAp changed the wettability properties of the electrospun PBAT scaffolds. From the contact angle curves, the advanced contact angle (ACA) values were 115°, 101° and 80° for PBAT, PBAT/3% nHAp and PBAT/5% nHAp, respectively. Snapshots of the contact angles are shown at the top of the micrographs, before cell cultivation ( These results show the possibility of tuning the wettability of the PBAT matrix by nHAp loading, further generating materials with enhanced hydrophilicity, as shown in The best cell adhesion provides the greatest cell density which increases cell to cell contacts which positively affects osteoblast proliferation. As these cells are anchorage-dependent (meaning that they need to adhere to live), a good fixation on the scaffold surface is essential for adhesion and subsequent cell proliferation and bone formation The formation of mineralized nodules was observed by optical microscopy, which indicated the presence of calcium (Fig. 3 For the analysis of gene expression in this study, genes involved in osteogenesis were selected to provide perspective of this material as a scaffold for bone regeneration. All groups were subjected to quantitative PCR assay in real-time (qRT-PCR) for 3 reference genes, β-actin, GAPDH and 18s. β-actin was chosen to be the reference gene because it presents greater stability during the experimental conditions and it was used to normalize all the results ( Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) is a marker of osteogenic differentiation. The increase of its expression occurs in mature osteoblasts, as we can observe at 7 The expression of Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) is associated with osteoblastic differentiation, and was decreased at 7 The expression of Collagen type 1 (Col I), an abundant organic component of the extracellular matrix, was similar at 7 and 14 The genes osteopontin (OPN) and osteocalcin (OC) are bone mineralization markers OC expression at 7 and 14 The high OPN expression at 14 Briefly, the Microstructural parameters of bone repair are shown in The histological analyses showed the presence of bone defect in all groups (without neoformation) ( Then, the previous results corroborate the results of BV (analyzed by microCT), since higher BV values were found for the scaffolds compared to control group. We can assume that the PBAT/5%nHAp group presented better biomechanical results compared to allbecause the predominance of lamellar bone promoted an increase of tension force at this area. Different concentrations of nHAp associated to PBAT facilated bone neoformation. Clearly, the flexural tests for PBAT/5%nHAp group showed better bone formation in the defective area ((p Although HAp is a main skeleton constituent, the mechanism involved in creating a mineralized matrix is still not fully understood, and can be more explored and explained Herein, for the first time we performed a systematic biological Herein, we performed a full Combining polyester scaffolds with synthetic nanohydroxyapatite (nHAp) is a plausible strategy to improve bone regeneration. PBAT [poly (butylene adipate-co-terephthalate)] is a very novel and interesting polyester due to its high flexibility and elongation-at-break besides low crystallinity. Electrospinning has been applied to produce 3D fibrous scaffolds with the ability of mimicking the architecture of the bone extracellular matrix. Nevertheless, an association between The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: