The painful knee is one of the most common musculoskeletal presentations to primary and secondary care. It is important to distinguish between acute and chronic causes of knee pain, since the urgency of diagnosis and management can be vastly different. This short review covers the common diagnoses that are frequently encountered, with a systematic approach to confirming the diagnosis, and a management strategy.Infection – septic arthritis/osteomyelitis Fracture or tendon rupture Meniscal tear/bucket handle tear Cruciate ligament injury Patella instability Referred pain (spine/hip/ankle) Inflammatory arthropathy Crystal arthropathy Osteoarthritis Rheumatoid arthritis TKA failure Painful knee is one of the most common presentations to both the primary and secondary care setting. In the chronic setting osteoarthritis (OA) is common, with one-third of adults aged over 45 years seeking treatment for OA. Assessment of the patient with an adequate history is key in the management of knee pain. It is important to ascertain the site and nature of the pain, the onset duration, exacerbating and relieving factors, associated symptoms such as paraesthesia or systemic symptoms, and whether there was a history of trauma. With trauma, it is key to distinguish the mechanism of injury, and whether there was a history of dislocation which required attention. It is also important to ascertain the presence of a knee effusion and the timing, over which this occurred, as well as establishing instability symptoms or locking. It is important to ascertain details of any previous surgery to the knee and if there is an implant in situ. If infection is suspected history must include questioning on systemic upset and possible sources of infections elsewhere in the body (i.e. urinary tract infection) that could have caused a bacteraemia with inoculation into the knee. Examination of the knee should be targeted to the suspected pathology elicited from the history. The protocol follows the same principle as to other joints in the musculoskeletal system, which employs ‘look, feel, move and special tests’. Inspect the knee in the coronal and sagittal plane and observe for swelling or deformity and previous scars. Then to assess for inflammation by temperature, erythema and effusion. Here it is useful to compare both knees together. Examine the active and passive range of movement and patella tracking, then assess the joint line for tenderness. Specific to the knee is to test the ligaments systematically; this includes the ACL using Lachman's test and anterior drawer. The PCL, using posterior sag sign and posterior draw test. The collateral ligaments should be tested in extension and 20 degrees of flexion. If the history is indicative of instability, then performing the dial test is useful to assess for a posterolateral corner injury. This is performed in the prone position. With both acute and chronic knee pain the examination should be completed by examination of the joint above and below, which involves hip and ankle examination to rule out referred pain. The knee is the joint most commonly affected by septic arthritis. It is important to treat this in a timely manner, therefore suspicion and identification is vital. Irreversible cartilage damage can occur by 8 h due to the release of proteolytic enzymes from inflammatory cells.  It is important in the history to ascertain whether there has been any recent surgery to the knee, or whether the patient has had an arthroplasty on the affected side.  Generally plain radiographs would be normal, but can sometimes indicate contiguous spread from adjacent osteomyelitis, or if performed after an interval could indicate joint destruction. Joint fluid aspiration is most useful and can direct antibiotic treatment if required. This must be done under aseptic conditions as demonstrated in Identification of crystals is important, as crystal arthropathy is the commonest differential to rule out, though it may coexist with infection.  The patient would need to be monitored for response with sequential blood inflammatory markers and will often require repeated debridement. The presentation after trauma depends on the mechanism of injury. Knee pain can be caused by fracture to the tibia, femur or patella, ligament injury, meniscal injury, tendon rupture (quadriceps/patella), or dislocation of the patella or the knee joint itself.    Injuries with a congruent joint can be managed non-operatively and it is recommended to allow ROM through a hinged knee brace and protected weight bearing for 6 weeks. Interval radiographs will be required to monitor healing progress. Meniscal injury is the most common indication for knee surgery. Medial meniscal tears are more common than lateral tears and both are more prevalent in ACL deficient knees.    The mainstay for treatment for a degenerative meniscal tear is non-operative, and most symptoms settle down without further intervention. Persistent symptoms of a mechanical nature can be treated by a partial menisectomy if not amenable to repair. Whether to repair a meniscus or simply debride, it is determined by the location of the tear and its relation to the blood supply (  Examination can be difficult in the acute period due to effusion and pain. Specific tests include Lachman's, which is graded by the amount of anterior tibial translation on the femur (grade 1–3), anterior draw test, and pivot shift test.  An MRI scan can be obtained on an acute outpatient basis, which will demonstrate the tear along with bone bruising (oedema) classically in the middle of the lateral femoral condyle and posterior one-third of the lateral tibial plateau  Focused rehabilitation should be commenced for all patients in the initial period. Those who cannot achieve dynamic stability can be considered for surgery. Meniscal surgery is usually carried out at the same sitting. Outcome and return to sport is largely dependent on motivation and compliance to the rehabilitation protocol, and is in the order of 9 months. Osteoarthritis is secondary to progressive loss of articular cartilage and can be related to previous trauma, increased age, high BMI, and occupation that requires repetitive loading and bending although the most common relationship is probably genetic but little is known.  Examination findings include an effusion, with reduced range of movement with crepitus, joint tenderness and an antalgic gait. It is important to look for overall limb alignment and previous scars indicating surgery in the past.  Occasionally an MRI scan is utilized to assess the cartilage surface in the three compartments when an isolated compartment is involved, in order to plan treatment.  Involvement of the multidisciplinary team is vital to offer the patient the correct treatment based on their expectations in a systematic approach. Non-operative treatment consists of counselling the patient and educating them about the condition and activity modification, a supervised exercise programme, weight loss (if BMI >25), and regular analgesia escalation based on the WHO analgesic ladder. If the patient fails non-operative treatment, surgery would be offered. The type of surgery is dependent on patient factors and the arthritis pattern on imaging and assessment. In younger patients with single compartment disease, and deformity on alignment, an osteotomy can be offered to realign the mechanical axis and offload the affected compartment. Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is the mainstay of surgical treatment for knee arthritis. This can be either with cruciate retaining or sacrificing implants, with largely similar outcomes. The patella is either routinely or selectively resurfaced, again with no recommendation ( For isolated unicompartmental disease (usually the medial knee compartment), a unicompartmental knee arthroplasty is a desirable treatment option as it is associated with a faster recovery time in comparison to TKA (  Specific consideration around surgery is to address their medication peri-operatively, ensuring the patient understands the higher risk of wound related complications, and infection. Following TKA, some patients continue to have pain or develop a new pain, which may be accompanied by other symptoms such as instability, swelling or stiffness. Important causes are infection, instability, patellofemoral problems, osteolysis and prosthetic loosening.  On examination, check for pattern of gait, identifying any thrust from instability. Note surgical scars, erythema, increased temperature, effusion or sinuses, as well as tenderness along the joint line. Tenderness along the lateral patella border can indicate lateral facet syndrome due to an undersized patellar component. Tenderness on the medial or lateral aspect of the joint can be due to tibial component overhang or collateral ligament irritation, and posterolateral pain could be secondary to the popliteus tendon. Active and passive range of movement should be assessed and stability of the knee should be checked, along with patella tracking. Stability should be assessed in the coronal and sagittal planes in extension, 30 degrees flexion and 90 degrees of flexion.  Serological investigations can be useful in identifying prosthetic joint infection. An ESR >30 has a sensitivity and specificity of 82% and 85%, respectively. C-reactive protein (CRP) value >10 has a sensitivity and specificity of 96% and 92%, respectively. A SPECT CT scan can be useful to assess the prosthesis fixation and other causes of pain and can detect subtle stress fractures. A bone scan represents radionuclide uptake, which is influenced by blood flow and osteoclast activity. It has high sensitivity but low specificity. In a triple-phase scan (most commonly technetium  The painful knee is a common presentation with a multitude of causes; therefore a systematic approach with a detailed history, good examination and appropriate investigations will aid in providing a diagnosis. Only then can a management plan be implemented. We have given an overview of some of the common painful knee conditions that present both acutely and on a chronic basis - there are less common conditions that are beyond the scope of this article.