In the mid-1990s, several pilot plants were constructed at Wairakei to either improve the operational and economic performance of the power station or to mitigate the environmental effects of discharges to the Waikato River. The results of the following investigations are discussed: (1) fluid flow dynamic effects on silica scaling; (2) production of silica sols of predetermined particle size to evaluate the potential for generating commercial grade silica products; (3) use of “sulfur oxidising bacteria” for the abatement of dissolved hydrogen sulphide in cooling water; (4) removal of arsenic from separated geothermal water; (5) steam line condensate corrosion; and (6) measurement and modelling of steam scrubbing in Wairakei's long steamlines.Wairakei was the first liquid-dominated geothermal field that was developed for power production, and in its early days had to pioneer a number of techniques to solve problems that arose during the normal running of the station and borefield. In the mid-1990s, a number of pilot plants were constructed to investigate ways of improving the operational and economic performance of the power station or mitigating the environmental effects of discharges to the Waikato River. As such, part of the work undertaken was not directed at science but at outcomes. Some of the pilot plants have an on-going intellectual property component and are only briefly discussed. A plant was also established to investigate if a high-value, commercially acceptable, silica product could be produced which could offset the cost of extraction and provide a commercial return. This paper includes material taken from In fluids supersaturated with respect to amorphous silica the mechanism responsible for the majority of silica deposition is the preliminary formation of colloids, and their subsequent precipitation on to equipment surfaces as a voluminous, sometimes hard, but often porous scale. These deposits reduce heat transfer in heat exchangers, increase pressure drop in pipes and, in severe cases, can cause complete blockages in sections of the system (e.g. Previous work (e.g. It had been empirically observed that fluid flow structure can influence silica scaling with unusual deposition being observed near bends, valves and other items which disturb or disrupt the flow. Some years previous to the experiments described here, a simple study to determine the hydrodynamic influence on silica scaling was conducted in the wastewater drains at Wairakei ( In another study ( The pilot plant therefore attempted to identify the effects of flow characteristics on scaling by controlling both silica colloidal particle size and fluid flow conditions simultaneously in order to gain a fundamental understanding of the forces involved in an individual colloid particle moving from the bulk solution phase and becoming attached to the wall. The hydrodynamically well-examined and prescribed geometry of a flat plate in a parallel laminar flow was the first flow situation to be investigated, followed by a vertical cylinder. To provide a well-characterised hydrodynamic flow, a water tunnel was constructed which was large enough that the test samples placed within it would not seriously impede the flow. This restriction necessitated a tunnel diameter of 200 A uniform velocity is desired across the test section, to provide constant conditions across the entire width of the test piece. This was achieved by allowing the fluid to settle in a 500-mm diameter pipe (at low velocity) and then accelerating the fluid quickly into the test section. Provision was made to insert and secure models and test plates in the test section through four large (50-mm diameter) access ports at 90° spacing around the perimeter. Ten smaller access ports (12-mm diameter) were included in two planes along the axis of the test section to provide access for a pitot-static probe. All of the access port plugs were smoothed to conform to the inner wall of the test section to prevent disruption of the flow. Silica particle size control was obtained by manipulating the nucleation temperature. The particle size distribution was monodisperse, typically with a standard deviation of about 6 The whole pilot plant was fully instrumented for flow control, data collection, temperature, etc. Use of programmable logic controller instrumentation allowed a constant fluid velocity to be maintained within the test section even if silica scale were to significantly alter the pressure drop in the recirculating loop during the experiment. Local dynamic pressures and temperatures within the test section were also measured; pressure data were obtained using a transducer connected to a 4-mm diameter pitot-static tube which could be inserted through any of the access ports in the side or top of the test section. Initial tests confirmed that the velocity profile in the test section was sufficiently uniform and that additional flow-straighteners were unnecessary. The first test specimen was a 100-mm long stainless steel plate, sharpened to a knife edge at the upstream end. This plate was exposed to a flow velocity of 1.2 After the first test the plate design was modified. Subsequent plates were 250 Results obtained with the new plates were encouraging, but also somewhat surprising. Those of Test 2, the first test with the trip wire and the mild steel plate, were unexpected. Little scaling was seen over the first 40 Despite changes to the velocity and particle size in subsequent tests there was no observable influence of hydrodynamics in the scaling process. Although it is difficult to quantify with the experiments having variable length of exposure, there appears to be a correlation of scaling rate with particle size. Smaller particles cause less scaling than larger ones. A series of vertical cylinder tests followed the flat plate experiments. In these tests the mild steel cylinders were 25 The results obtained in the cylinder experiments were different from those of the plate tests. The scales deposited were much harder than those deposited on the flat plates, and a hydrodynamic influence was immediately obvious. Most striking was that no visible scaling occurred along the whole length of the stagnation line ( There was also a very marked effect due to particle size: the larger the size the greater the degree of scaling. Silica deposition at the smaller particles sizes was almost non-existent ( We were not able to discern any difference in silica scaling between either ends of the cylinders, which indicates that there is a negligible gravity effect in these experiments. Where the flow was disturbed close to the test tunnel walls, the silica scale was aligned in a pattern that indicated it was forming perpendicular to the flow stream. The experiments indicated that there was a definite colloid particle size effect, as well as an unmistakable hydrodynamic effect in the cylinder tests. Silica scaling occurs at an individual colloid level only when a colloid is transported from the bulk fluid to a scaling surface. This will require transport of the colloid through the boundary layer adjacent to the surface. We considered a number of possible mechanisms for this transport process: electrostatic, diffusion, inertial and/or gravitational forces. We conclude that inertial forces were probably responsible for the colloid transport through the boundary layer. Individual colloid particles will have a velocity distribution in the fluid due to Brownian motion. If the momentum is sufficient, the particles can penetrate the boundary layer to attach to a surface. The effect will be proportional to the mass and velocity of the particles. The mass of a colloid particle is proportional to its radius cubed, and so there should be a very large particle size effect, which we do observe. This would also explain the smaller silica-free stagnation line at higher velocities. The lack of scaling on the downstream side of the vertical cylinders can be explained by a reduction in the inertia of the particles when the flow separates on the sides of the cylinder. In this area, the fluid velocity is greatly reduced. The deposition of silica in borefield and power station installations tends to limit the efficient use of geothermal energy. One possible solution to this problem is to remove the silica from the geothermal brine, which would then allow further utilisation of heat not normally available. Our aim was to produce a high-value commercially acceptable silica product that would not only offset the cost of extraction, but also provide a commercial return. A further requirement was that any process did not constrain normal power station operation. Silica sols are concentrated solutions of colloidal silica in which the colloid particles are constrained within narrow size limits (i.e. monodisperse), and where impurity levels are appropriate for the final application. A further requirement is the necessity to produce monodisperse sols with different average particle diameters. Typical uses of such sols are in refractory cements, polishes for silicon wafers, photographic coatings and as binders for catalytic materials. Initial bench top experiments were conducted to determine how to measure particle size, control particle size distribution, stabilise the particles to halt agglomeration, concentrate the colloidal solution, remove contaminants, and determine typical scale-up parameters for a larger pilot plant. These parameters were then used to design a small pilot plant that would provide enough sample material for commercial evaluation and provide sufficient operational data. The conceptual design of this pilot plant was based on initial temperature control to regulate the particle size followed by ultrafiltration (UF) to concentrate the sol, incorporating diafiltration The essential elements of the pilot plant consisted of: a supply of separated geothermal water which was under-saturated with respect to amorphous silica, taken from the injection pipeline; a heat exchanger to reduce the temperature of the separated geothermal water from approximately 125 a series of temperature controlled ageing tanks to enable control of ageing temperatures during colloid growth; a 100-μm filter to remove suspended solids; a three-stage continuous UF system to concentrate the pre-formed colloidal silica to a concentration of >30% silica by weight; dosing pumps to enable pH adjustment and the addition of stabilising agents; a fresh water supply to enable the removal of geothermal salts; and ancillary equipment to enable mixing and circulation of chemicals for sterilising and cleaning the UF filters and pipe-work. A schematic of the pilot plant is shown in As in the hydrodynamic experiments (see Section Commercial silica sols are normally produced at concentrations ranging from 30% to 50% silica by weight. The challenge for producing similar products from geothermal water involves not only the ability to control particle size but also to be able to concentrate sols from a very dilute 300 At Wairakei the initial pH of the separated geothermal water is approximately 8.5 and hence sufficiently alkaline to achieve stability of low concentration colloids during the ageing process. The organic stabiliser used was injected into the flow after ageing and prior to ultrafiltration. This was found to be sufficient to inhibit agglomeration during the process and provide ongoing stability over several years. The diafiltration or washing of unwanted salts from the concentrated geothermal silica sols was carried out using local potable water. The process could be used at any stage during the UF process though less fresh water, and hence less time, is required at higher sol concentrations. The inclusion of salts in the colloid matrix during particle growth was an inevitable consequence of using geothermal brine. This was ameliorated to some extent at Wairakei where low dissolved solids concentrations exist. Particle size was measured by dynamic light scattering (or photon correlation spectroscopy; A typical analysis, measured by ICP-MS and ICP-AES, is presented in In general the designed pilot plant performed as anticipated and operated successfully on an intermittent basis for 11 months. However, it was found necessary to add two large ageing tanks to ensure complete polymerisation prior to UF. In common with observations at Wairakei and other NZ geothermal fields, the silica scaling rate is maximised when both polymeric silica and available monomeric silica is present simultaneously at elevated temperatures. Initial cleaning frequency was typically ∼6 During the entire operation of the pilot plant, there was very little silica scaling observed in any of the ageing tanks or on the permeate side of the ultrafilters. This is consistent with field observations in the general power plant indicating that scaling rates are small at low temperatures when the silica is fully polymerised. The experiments proved that it is possible to produce silica sols that compare favourably with commercial products. One of the prime requirements of a commercial process is the ability to produce sols of predetermined particle size, which we were able to accomplish. The purity of the sols is satisfactory, but probably better results could be achieved with greater time for the diafiltration. The economics of a full-scale process were not easy to ascertain; however, the principal factors were recognised. Probably the largest operational cost is the replacement of the ultrafilters. These need replacing when they block, and cannot be satisfactorily cleaned. This is a gradual process, and we never reached this stage in our experiments. Consequently, we can only estimate the likely lifetime of the filters. Added chemicals are not expensive. The UF units are expensive, and a plant with any reasonable throughput would require large areas of land for the ageing tanks. The remainder of the equipment is not excessively expensive. The removal of silica from the brine allows a large range of downstream processes. Other mineral extraction processes become much easier when the silica is removed and heat exchangers can also be much more readily utilised without the threat of silica deposition. The Wairakei Power Station was commissioned in 1958 using steam at a pressure of 1.5 Steamline condensate corrosion ( The Wairakei plant has been fortunate with respect to steam quality, with no significant turbine deposition or chloride stress corrosion cracking. Because it was the first plant in the world to use steam from a liquid-dominated geothermal system there was a gradual and progressive increase in generation over a long period with the installation of steamlines of different diameters feeding a range of turbines varying in pressure and generation capacity. By 1975 there were 10 installed pipelines, up to about 3 The result of these investigations was a numerical scrubbing model, which assumed a homogenous two-phase mixture of steam and water droplets at the separator outlet, and calculated steam and condensate contaminant chemistry (i.e. silica or chloride) at any point downstream. A “scrubbing efficiency” was determined for a 760-mm pipeline using measured drainpot silica concentrations and calculated pipeline condensation rates. The scrubbing efficiency of the pipeline was defined as the percentage of contaminant removed from the steam phase into the condensate phase, and this was made on a per unit length basis to allow for varying pipeline lengths. To extend the model to other pipeline sizes and other conditions it was necessary to decide what factors influence the scrubbing efficiency—volume flow seemed intuitively to be the most likely. Scrubbing efficiencies between 0.079% and 2.717% per metre were determined for the pipeline sizes mentioned earlier. Later development of the model added thermodynamic data to provide for the prospect of higher steam flows, drier pipelines and superheat generation. The latter was a new issue for Wairakei which arose, firstly from the installation of large diameter pipelines with increasingly efficient insulation, and secondly from the use of high-flow wells that produced dry steam or (in some cases) superheated steam.  The Wairakei Power Station is the only geothermal plant in the world with once through cooling. It uses approximately 17 Investigations, required for re-permitting the plant under the Resource Management Act of 1991 ( Although the treatment of 17 Separated geothermal water from the Wairakei geothermal field containing about 4 An arsenic removal pilot plant was set up at Wairakei, using the process shown in The experimental data indicated that: (a) At optimum gas and water flows the gas absorption tower was only able to dissolve H Finally, it was concluded that the proposed arsenic removal process, despite its simplicity, would not be economic due to the high cost of flocculants. The results of the pilot plant tests showed that: The effects of flow on silica scaling could be investigated and characterized by simultaneously controlling the size of the colloidal silica particles and fluid flow conditions, and observing the silica deposition on flat plates and vertical cylinders. By-product silica sols could be prepared by using temperature control to regulate sol particle size, followed by ultrafiltration to concentrate the sol and diafiltration to remove contaminants. Sulfur oxidising bacteria efficiently remove dissolved hydrogen sulphide from water discharges using pipelines as biofilm support structures. Arsenic solids can be successfully separated using dissolved air flotation following the addition of H Galvanic corrosion is the primary driver in “patch type” erosion–corrosion in steam transmission lines, with flowing condensate removing iron from the upstream edge of each patch and magnetite deposition at the downstream edge. Steam scrubbing performance decreased as steam-line diameter increased. We thank Ian Thain, who, as station manager of Wairakei Power Station, actively supported these pilot plant trials. Dr. Mike Dunstall and Wayne Christie co-operated in some of the trials.