Structural failures caused by a strong earthquake may induce a large number of casualties and huge socioeconomic losses. To design a structure that can withstand such earthquake events, it is essential to accurately estimate the nonlinear structural responses caused by strong ground motions. As a replacement of an onerous and complex nonlinear time history analysis, simple regression-based equations have been widely adopted in routine engineering practices. It is, however, noted that the response prediction is deterministic, which cannot quantify the variabilities stemming from the nonlinear behavior of the structural system, i.e. varying seismic demands given the same earthquake intensity value. In addition, it is well known that the accuracy of prediction based on the regression-based equations is limited. In order to quantify such uncertainties and improve the prediction accuracy, this paper proposes a probabilistic deep neural network model based on a Bayesian deep learning method. By introducing a loss function which is proportional to the negative log likelihood of the Gaussian distribution function, the mean and variance of the structural responses can be obtained. This assessment is important especially for earthquake engineering applications because of large randomness in the input ground motion details and their significant impact on the structural responses. Moreover, using the proposed probabilistic deep neural network model, one can estimate seismic fragilities of the structural system efficiently. Thorough numerical investigations are carried out to demonstrate the proposed method. The supporting source code and data are available for download at http://ERD2.snu.ac.kr.With growing complexity of urban societies and increasing population, it is one of the most important challenges faced by structural engineers to establish an effective disaster risk management framework against seismic hazards. In particular, the enhancement of life safety and resilience hinges on abilities to design civil infrastructures that can resist earthquake loads. In such a seismic design, a proper estimation of the structural responses under a seismic excitation based on the understanding of both the structural system and the earthquake ground motions is one of the most essential tasks. However, it is challenging to accurately assess the seismic responses of a nonlinear structural system because of the uncertainties in the numerical model and the variabilities in the ground motions Although the NSPs employ several parameters that were calibrated based on the seismic responses calculated from time history analyses, the approach generally leads to a significant level of uncertain errors in the estimations of the structural responses. This is because most of the NSPs are developed based on simple regression functions whose parameters were estimated based on a limited amount of data regarding ground motions and hysteretic behaviors. To overcome such challenge, the authors recently developed a new framework to predict responses of nonlinear structural systems using To quantify such variabilities of structural responses given values of selected intensity measures (IMs), this paper proposes a new This paper first provides a brief overview of To obtain reasonable predictions without performing time-consuming nonlinear time history analysis, the authors recently proposed a deep learning-based response prediction method for single degree of freedom (SDOF) systems Artificial neural network (ANN) is one of the machine learning techniques designed to mimic a human brain’s structure and operation. Given the input data The deep learning-based seismic response prediction framework It was confirmed that the accuracy of the proposed method is superior to that of three existing simple methods which are widely used in practice: capacity spectrum method The Bayesian deep learning method In the Bayesian deep learning method, the impact of the latent uncertainties in the input data is quantified by obtaining the probability distribution of the output prediction from a DNN model. In other words, the output of the DNN model is given as a Gaussian random variable, characterized by the conditional mean and variance of the response given input values. The conditional variance can be modeled following one of the two assumptions: homoscedasticity and heteroscedasticity In order to take into account the fact that the prediction uncertainty is actually affected by the input values, we adopt the heteroscedasticity assumption. To this end, the following loss function When the discrepancy between the predicted mean value The architecture proposed in Kim et al. Since the probabilistic DNN model propagates the inherent randomness in the input to the output, the conditional variance of the structural responses, It should be also noted that the impact of the input randomness on the variance of the structural responses is affected by the behaviors of the structural system during the seismic excitation. With growing interest in properly describing the impact of a given earthquake shaking on structural response, the spectral acceleration at the first mode period is one of the most commonly used IMs in earthquake engineering because of its high correlation with the seismic responses of a linear structure. It is, however, widely known that there are no IMs that are fully correlated with the structural responses when the structure exhibits nonlinear behaviors The estimated variance of the structural responses also facilitates the reliable evaluation of the structural responses compared to the deterministic method. Since the conditional variance indicates the level of inherent randomness of the input dataset, the proposed method can be utilized to identify the best subset of IMs for structural responses ( The proposed probabilistic DNN model is trained using the nonlinear structural response database that was developed by Kim et al. The database constructed by Kim et al. The observed mean squared errors (MSEs) of predicted responses randomly drawn from the estimated Gaussian distributions are shown in Three error measures, i.e. the mean absolute error (MAE; The low values of MAE and MSE for both the train and the test datasets in In order to test and demonstrate the performance of the proposed method, its prediction accuracy is compared with the aforementioned three simplified methods as well as the deterministic DNN model To confirm the performance of the probabilistic DNN model in predicting the mean and the variance of the peak displacement, we plot the probabilistic predictions together with the structural responses obtained by the dynamic analysis. The predictions by the deterministic DNN model developed by Kim et al. The mean curves of the probabilistic model successfully capture the central tendencies of the structural responses under given ground motions, which implies that the developed probabilistic models achieve unbiased predictions without overfitting. It is also found that the majority of the structural responses from the time history analysis (blue circle) and those predicted by the deterministic DNN model (red x) fall within the mean In order to verify the predicted conditional variances, a simple numerical investigation is conducted by using the Bayesian linear regression Although the peak displacement is the most widely used measure of the structural response in earthquake engineering, the peak velocity and acceleration are also considered important because they show significant correlation with the damage of non-structural components and the base shear capacity, respectively. To utilize the knowledge gained during the aforementioned training, the parameters of the DNN model trained for the peak displacement is used in developing the DNN models for the peak velocity and acceleration. Since the proposed DNN model first extracts the features from the input, then merges those to predict the structural response, only final merged layers depicted in In order to further demonstrate the performance of the trained DNN model, the estimated peak velocity and acceleration of the hysteretic models are plotted for 1,499 ground motions as shown in Since the motivation of the research is to promote probabilistic prediction of the structural responses under earthquake excitation as a replacement of the existing simple regression method used in practice, it is important to encourage a wide array of engineers and researchers to use the proposed DNN model. However, in most cases, it is difficult to reproduce researchers’ contributions even if the source codes are provided. In order to address this issue, i.e. to facilitate the use of the proposed method in practice and research field, the authors developed a novel web-service providing an interactive visualization of the proposed DNN predictions at To investigate how individual features of earthquake ground motion (e.g., earthquake characteristics, peak values of ground motion time histories, and the response spectrum) affect the variabilities of the response prediction, various DNN models are trained using different subsets of the input parameters instead of using the complete feature set as done in The trends of MAE, MSE and MV in In order to further investigate the relationship between the input data and the structural response, the lognormal PDFs of the peak displacement estimated from the probabilistic DNN predictions are plotted in  Following the procedure described above, one can quantify the contributions of specific input data such as ground motion duration and fault mechanism to the response uncertainties, or find the best combination of the input data by checking the level of decrease of MSE and MV. However, it is worth noting that although a deep learning method can analyze the relationship between the input and the output variables using the raw data, a careful preprocessing of the input data is needed due to potential issues regarding convergence of the loss function. In earthquake engineering, seismic fragility curves are widely used to evaluate the conditional probability of exceeding a limit state given a ground motion intensity       The proposed DNN-based seismic fragility analysis is demonstrated by application to a frame structure by Kwon and Elnashai The quasi-static cyclic analysis of the structural system is performed with 1st mode force distribution. As shown in This numerical example confirms that it is convenient and intuitive to develop a fragility function using the proposed method. Moreover, since the deep learning-based fragility does not use an assumption about the relationship between IM and DM, its actual relationship can be properly incorporated into the fragility for each limit-state. This framework can be further extended to develop a ground motion selection algorithm for the purpose of assessing the structural system, because one can readily identify the ground motions that significantly affect the variability of the fragility. For example, In this study, a probabilistic deep neural network model is proposed to evaluate the seismic responses of structural systems and quantify the prediction uncertainties. Given input information regarding the structural system and the ground motion characteristics, the proposed method produces two outputs, the conditional mean and variance of the structural responses which are main components of the loss function of the Bayesian deep neural network. Therefore, the developed model can capture the effects of randomness inherent in the input data, i.e., the loss of information in the process of representing the earthquake ground information by selected features. The performance of the proposed method is tested through various numerical experiments. The numerical investigation confirms that the probabilistic deep neural network can successfully predict the relationship between the input and the output of the dataset. In particular, it produces a relatively small variance to the structural system behaving in the linear elastic range, while a relatively large variance is obtained for the nonlinear case. Such characteristics of the developed method facilitate various applications in earthquake engineering. In the first application example, the method is used to quantify relative contributions of the classes of the ground motion information into the prediction variability. This procedure is helpful in identifying the best subset of the input features which can predict the output with higher accuracy. The second application example demonstrates the possibility and the merits of using the probabilistic DNN model to compute the fragilities of the structural system. The results confirm that the proposed procedure can capture the relationship between the intensity measure (IM) and the damage measure (DM) more accurately compared to the conventional method which relies on the assumed regression function of the IM and the DM. Currently, a further study is underway to apply the developed method to sophisticated frame structures subjected to a large number of ground motions. The developed probabilistic deep learning method trained with the database facilitates the computationally efficient prediction of the nonlinear seismic responses and the fragilities. It is expected that training with additional types of hysteretic behaviors will promote the future application of the deep learning models to the seismic design and the assessment of a wide class of structural systems. Although this paper used the proposed DNN model to predict the seismic responses of structural systems, the proposed approach is generic and applicable to other types of systems subjected to different hazards, e.g. a building subjected to wind loads or a shape memory alloy used for vibration attenuation. The first author is supported by the International Research & Development Program of the