The influence of the shape of limestone particles on impact crushing parameters has been investigated by testing single particles in a high-resolution impact analyzer. The measurements conducted included the contact time and force, the transferred energy, the fragment size and shape distribution as well as the energy utilization. The particles tested were classified in seven different shape classes that ranged from spheres and cubes to plate-shaped and acicular bodies. The results show that the measured parameters are significantly influenced by the particle shape. These differences are caused by an additional orientation phase of an irregularly shaped particle prior to the main impact. Usually, the impact bar of the crusher hits one of the corners first, accelerates, rotates the particle and disintegrates a part of it occasionally.
                  For spherical and cubical particles the contact forces and transferred energy are the highest and the contact time is the lowest. These results suggest that the mechanical design of impact crushers could be made on the basis of testing spheres or cubes, which would provide a safety factor in the design. Regarding the size distribution of the fragments, both the upper diameter and size modulus of a truncated Rosin–Rammler–Sperling–Bennet distribution are the lowest for spherical particles while no clear trend was found in respect to the distribution modulus. The comparison of the fragment shape distributions shows, except for the coarser fragments, hardly an influence of the initial particle shape on the smaller fragments. The energy utilization is the lowest with spherical and cubical bodies and rises with increased elongation and flatness of the feed particles.Material Diameter Limestone (Bernburg) 60 Number Material Shape 1 (One contact) Hardened steel Flat Velocity Condition 40 Clean, dry Moisture Temperature Dry Ambient Relative position Plate overlapping particle body prior to impact length (mm) relative confidence interval (%) breadth (mm) thickness (mm) diameter (mm) feed diameter (m) upper diameter (mm) size modulus, characteristic diameter (mm) Young’s modulus (N/m mass specific kinetic energy (J/g) kinetic energy of rotor (J) transferred energy (J) mass specific transferred energy (J/g, J/kg) force (N) maximum force (N) coefficient of restitution (–) mass (kg) particle mass (kg) distribution modulus (–) size distribution function, cumulative mass percentage undersize curve (–) tensile strength (N/m confidence probability (%) surface difference (cm time (s) contact time (s) velocity (m/s) transformed diameter (mm) transformed size parameter (mm) share of used energy (–) energy utilization (cm shape factor (–) density (kg/m energy ratio (–) angular velocity of particle (s angular velocity of rotor (s The physical principle of impact is widely used in different designs of crushers, such as vertical shaft impact crushers (VSIC) or horizontal shaft impact crushers (HSIC). Especially for materials without higher amounts of abrasive minerals the installation of impact crushers is feasible due to the elevated size reduction ratios or the enhanced liberation of desired or undesired components. Another important reason to install impact crushers is their capability to ameliorate the particle shape. Therefore, there are different designs in operation in many industries, such as in the cement and lime, ore and coal processing, aggregate or recycling industry in order to fulfill the various purposes. The sizing and design of the impact crushers are based on the feed parameters, such as the material to be crushed, the mass flow, diameter and moisture of the feed particles as well as the desired product parameters, such as the product particle size and shape distribution. Additionally, some system parameters have to be considered, for example, the wear rate of certain machine parts or the specific energy consumption of the crusher. However, the sizing of impact crushers is still mainly based on experience. One reason is the difficulty to measure certain parameters, such as the contact forces or the transferred energy between the feed particles and the impact bars of the crusher. Therefore, a test apparatus and a test program are developed in order to determine the system and product parameters. Another reason is the lack of systematic investigations. Therefore, the influence of several parameters is hardly known, such as the particle shape of the feed. So far, only a few results are published (for example, The investigation of the crushing parameters needs to be based on an experimental set-up which represents the effects in a real impact crusher. Otherwise, it is difficult to transfer the results into the industrial practice. The advantage of the crushing process inside an impact crusher is the predominant occurrence of single particle comminution events. Therefore, single particle impact tests as single events on a movable flat plate are suitable. The investigation of the impact process is executed by a high-resolution impact analyzer HASA ( During the test one rock specimen is fed via a feed shaft to the rotor. On its way it activates a photorelay. This signal causes the clutch to separate the rotor from the motor and starts the measurement process. A sensor is scanning a slotted disk, which is form-locking connected with the rotor, and enables the measurement of the speed of the rotor prior to, during and after the impact. The high-speed camera detects the point of impact of the specimen against the bar. Since all the geometric and kinematic data as well as the moments of inertia are known it is possible to derive mathematically the contact force development ( The fragments of the comminuted particles are irregular in shape. The investigation of the product includes the fragment size and shape distribution. Since the shape of the fragments is different in the various size fractions test sieving is neither meaningful nor recommended. Therefore, an optical device (CPA) is selected which enables the determination and characterization of the fragment size and shape by equivalent diameters resp. shape factors. The fragments of each crushed specimen are collected at the bottom of the casing of the test apparatus and fed manually into a container of a CPA-device ( For the tests a typical rock which is frequently comminuted by impact crushers is chosen. The selected Triassic limestone (age, Muschelkalk) from Bernburg (Sachsen–Anhalt) is used as lumps in shaft kilns for the production of burnt lime and as raw meal in a rotary kiln for making cement clinker. It is a fine grained and dense limestone (Wellenkalk) ( The features of the microprocess “single particle impact-crushing” can be classified by influencing and crushing parameters. A circumferential velocity of 40 The crushing parameters characterize the product (product parameters) and the interaction of the particle with the impact plate (interaction parameters). Because of the variations in the shape, mass and strength of the specimens the determination of these crushing parameters has to be based on many experiments with particles of the same shape class in order to achieve a defined statistical certainty. A confidence probability of The results in the following figures are represented by columns which show the mean values as well as the standard deviations. The test results are classified according to the parameters presented in Sections It is difficult to identify clearly a fracture with irregularly shaped particles. Therefore, it is necessary to define a fracture. Fracture as the first step in comminution is here defined as a minimum 10% mass loss in the form of fragments broken off the original specimen mass ( With this definition an impact velocity is chosen to yield purposely a fracture probability of 100%. Experiments show that a velocity of 40 During the contact time the transfer of energy between the impact plate and the specimen happens. There is a strong dependence on the shape ( The force–time curve (see The energetic assessment of the impact process is based on different kinds of energy (see  With irregularly shaped particles there are several options to measure and define a diameter ( The different diameters The determination of the parameters of this function can be accomplished by two options. The first one minimizes only mathematically the deviations between a function and the measured data. The parameters of those functions can only be interpreted in relationship to each other. Usually, it is, for example, difficult to find an imaginable correlation between the mathematically found upper particle size and the real existing one. The second approach determines at first the real existing largest particle diameter and uses this size as the upper limit of the truncated curve. The other parameters of the function are then approximated by minimizing the deviations between the real existing measuring data and the function. Usually, the mathematical fit is better with the first approach. In the first case the standard deviation between the function and the data is here on average 2 till 3%, whereas the deviation is about 3 till 4% in the second case. Because of the enhanced physical interpretation the second option is chosen. A typical example of a truncated RRSB-distribution is shown in  The particle shape is derived from the shadow image of the free falling particle by using the largest chord of the specimen and the perpendicular longest one. The assessment of the particle shape is then based on the ratio There are no significant differences between the shape factors within the fractions except for the largest fractions with the plate-shaped and especially acicular particles. Furthermore, there is hardly any difference between the shape factors of the smaller fragments from the different shape classes. An important aspect of the impact process is the assessment of the energetic efficiency. The energy utilization By far, the lowest efficiency is with cubical specimens ( Many results of other investigations are not likely to be used to assess the findings. The following discussion compares the findings of the comminution of limestone rocks with different particle shapes with the results of other authors. Additionally, the discussion includes the assessment of theoretically and empirically derived equations, which are used frequently in industry. The adequate use of those equations and the knowledge of the limits of their applications are important to size properly an impact crusher. An impact velocity which for example does not result in a fracture probability of 100% reduces the capacity, in the worst case it causes the blockage of the crusher. In preliminary tests an impact velocity was determined in order to secure a fracture probability of 100% with all particle shapes. The shapes which are most difficult to crush are the spheres and the cubical but irregularly shaped particles. The tests confirm an empirically derived equation to determine the necessary impact velocity ( The found contact time Δ Theoretically derived equations to determine the contact time between bodies are based on the theory of Therefore, several empirically determined equations can be found in literature, such as ( The measured contact time is significantly shorter than the calculated ones. Since those equations do not consider important physical parameters, such as the Young’s modulus However, the shortest contact time is with spheres and the longest with very irregularly shaped bodies. The images of the high-speed camera give an explanation ( The maximum crushing forces are the highest with spheres. The measured force of 263 The analysis of the contact process between the particle and the bar gives an explanation of this effect. The initial contact between the bar and an edge or corner of the irregularly shaped particle accelerates and orientates the particle and reduces the relative velocity till the main impact between a plane of the body and the bar happens. Occasionally, it was observed that the edges started to disintegrate during the phase of orientation. The calculation of the contact forces can be done by different empirical equations, such as ( Previously executed tests ( It is very interesting to assess the transferred energy in respect to different kinds of offered energies and operation results. At first the transferred Furthermore, the transferred energy The energy ratio The comparison clearly shows that it is impossible to achieve the same comminution results with reverse effects. A movable rotor can transfer much more energy to a stationary particle than a flying particle with the same impact velocity to a stationary wall, if the inertia of the rotor is much bigger than the one of the particle. This is usually the case with real machines. Additionally, the transferred energy can be compared with the specific energy consumption of impact crushers in operation. The energy consumption is typically about 0.7–1.2 The fragment size distribution of crushed limestone rocks from Bernburg were determined by a previous investigation ( There are not many published results of fragment shapes from single particle impact tests available. The comminution of cubical diabase particles by impact shows a significant increase of elongated and plate-shaped fragments in the smaller fractions ( The measured energy utilization All other shapes show a higher energy utilization. In comparison to cubical particles acicular and plate-shaped bodies yield an elevated energy utilization although the mass specific transferred energy is significantly lower, i.e., the energetic aspect is not alone sufficient to assess the comminution process. It is possible to produce smaller fragments with the same energy if the feed particles are elongated or plate-shaped. The energetic aspect is superimposed by a stress effect. The assessment of the influencing and product parameters shows an influence of the particle shape. The differences between the values of the parameters with regularly and irregularly shaped specimens are not marginal, but significant. The visual investigation of the impact process shows that it is necessary to distinguish several phases. With spherical bodies there are only central impacts possible. The normal axis passes through the mass center of the sphere and the point of contact with the bar. The comminution phase starts immediately after the elastic and plastic deformations finish. With irregularly shaped particles usually eccentric impacts happen causing an angular impulse. This impulse orientates the particle till one plane hits the bar and no turning is possible anymore. In this position the comminution process starts. Occasionally, it can be observed that the disintegration already occurs at the edges and corners of the particle which hit the bar first. Those phases prior to the main impact prolong the contact time, accelerate the particle, reduce the main contact force and absorb already some energy. These effects influence the mechanical and process design of the crushers. The mechanical design of impact crushers (for example, dimensioning of machine parts, assessment of dynamic behaviour of the machine, and motor sizing) is based on the contact time, the occurring maximum crushing forces and the energy consumption. Since the numbers are in favour for the mechanical design with acicular and plate-shaped particles, the results of experiments with cubical particles are a sound basis. The process design of those crushers (for example, product quality and specific power consumption) considers the fracture probability, the product size and shape distribution as well as the energy utilization. Since the fracture probability and the energy utilization is better with elongated and plate-shaped particles, the results of tests with cubical particles can be used as a basis as well. Detailed investigations are necessary in order to assess the fragment sizes and shapes. The initial particle shape influences especially the coarser fractions of the fragments. Additionally, the investigations show that theoretically or empirically derived equations cannot be used for sizing. It is still necessary to execute experiments. Especially, the energetic aspect of comminution, the relationship between energy consumption and product fineness, needs to be analyzed in more detail. The financial support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) is gratefully acknowledged.