Five different types of Ti-6Al-4V machining chips were recycled in their solid state using equal channel angular pressing (ECAP). The chips were produced by either turning or milling with or without the application of a coolant. All the as-recycled materials achieved full density but their microstructures, including the prior chip boundary spacing and grain size, are dependent on the starting chip morphologies and dimensions. The differences, however, were largely removed in the subsequent mill-annealing processing consisting of β homogenisation, hot deformation and final annealing, leading to near-identical mill-annealed microstructures for all different types of chips consisting of equiaxed α+β grains with lamellar α, typical following such a treatment. The recycled and mill-annealed materials possess high yield strengths of  >900MPa and satisfactory tensile ductility of  >11%, comparable or superior to the original commercial mill-annealed Ti-6Al-4V and independent of the initial chip conditions.Titanium (Ti) alloys, in particular Ti-6Al-4V, are widely used in biomedical and aerospace applications thanks to their attractive strength to weight ratio, toughness and corrosion resistance. Ti parts are mostly produced through machining operations and a large amount of machining chips is produced as a result. This inevitably adds to the already high cost of Ti manufacturing. Although there has been some progress in near-net-shape manufacturing of Ti-6Al-4V components using powder metallurgy (e.g. uniaxial die-pressing and sintering) and more recently additive manufacturing (e.g. selective laser melting and electron beam melting), the processes are far from mature and the high cost of the Ti-6Al-4V powder means that it is mostly used for niche applications. To add value to Ti manufacturing, the cost can be lowered by recycling. However, due to the high melting temperature and chemical reactivity of Ti alloys, traditional metal recycling methods such as vacuum arc remelting and electron beam cold hearth refining are not very cost effective. Recently, In these reported successes in solid-state recyling of Ti, however, the machining chips were specially prepared with dry milling to avoid complications. In reality, coolant is almost always used during milling and other machining operations and the shape and size of the chips produced vary with the machining parameters such as the speed, feed and axial depth of cutting. For industry applications of such solid-state recycling processes, therefore, it is important to know if significant variations would result from various sources of chips. The current investigation aims to examine the effects of the starting chip conditions on the microstructure and mechanical properties of Ti-6Al-4V after solid-state recyling by ECAP and mill-annealing processing. Five different types of Ti-6Al-4V chips were produced under a variety of conditions, and their appearances are shown in The analysed compositions of the chips and the commercial mill-annealed bar used to obtain MC1, MC2 and MC3 are shown in The chips were recycled using ECAP with back pressure, similar to the setup detailed by The recycled billets were subjected to mill-annealing to produce the desired final microstructure. The mill-annealing process consisted of three steps: (1) homogenising in the β phase field at 1050 Scanning electron microscopy (Quanta FEG 200 ESEM) was used to observe the microstructures on the longitudinal and cross sections of the as-recycled materials and those parallel to the forging direction of the mill-annealed materials. Specimens were prepared using standard metallographic techniques and final polishing was done using an OP-S and H The measured densities of the chips in the as-recycled, β homogenised (i.e. after step 1), hot deformed (after step 2) and mill-annealed (after step 3) states are shown in The compositions of the samples after solid-state recycling and at selected stages of thermomechanical processing are shown in The microstructure on the longitudinal section of the as-recycled MC1 (4 passes) is shown in The cross section microstructures of various chips after different numbers of ECAP passes are shown in After β-homogenisation, all five ECAP recycled materials developed a full Widmanstätten structure of fine lamellar α in a matrix of retained β, as shown in The measured prior β grain size and the α lamellar thickness for each material are shown in Following isothermal hot forging, most α lamellae were aligned perpendicularly to the forging direction, as shown in This can be attributed to the slower deformation rate in the forging process and the isothermal conditions used (not isothermal in the case of hot rolling), both facilitating the globularisation process of the α lamellar. Dynamic globularization is strain dependant and initiated by either shearing of the α lamellar or sub-boundary formation due to recovery, followed by the nucleation of an interface and subsequent penetration of the β phase leading to the separation of the α lamellar ( The final annealing led to the so-called mill-annealed microstructure, consisting of both equiaxed α and β grains as well as α lamellae, as shown in Most importantly, after mill-annealing the final microstructures are nearly identical for all the different chips recycled. It appears that while the machining chip dimensions may have some influence on ECAP consolidation and the as-recycled microstructure, the prior chip boundaries, micropores and other defects are easily removed after the mill-annealing processing. This shows that the ECAP recycled Ti-6Al-4V can undergo the same thermomechanical processing and be intergrated into the existing production lines with no special treatment required. The Vickers microhardness values of the five recycled materials at different stages of processing are listed in The corresponding tensile true stress versus true strain curves for various mill-annealed materials are shown in Several observations can be made. First, the recycled materials after standard mill-annealing treatment are as strong and often stronger than the original alloy. This could be attributed to a combination of the refined grain and phase structures due to severe plastic deformation (all) and higher oxygen contents (MC1–3). Second, the tensile ductility is somewhat lower in the recycled materials. Although the higher oxygen contents in MC1–3 might have played some role, the low oxygen MC4–5 also have less ductility. It is noted, however, that MC4–5 are only processed for 1 pass, and yet possess ductility comparable to MC2 and MC3 processed for 4 passes. Based on the tensile results on MC1 ( There has been limited research on ECAP of Ti-6Al-4V.  The solid-state recyling process using ECAP is robust and efficient in consolidating different types of Ti-6Al-4V machining chips, regardless of their starting conditions such as sizes, shapes and use of lubricants. The as-recycled materials were fully dense, consisting of a highly refined grain structure and discontinuous bands of titanium oxide at the prior chip boundaries. The increase in oxygen and other interstitial contents during recycling is insignificant thanks to the relatively low processing temperature. Although the microstructures in the as-recycled state are different for the various types of chips, the subsequent mill-annealing processing, standard for Ti-6Al-4V, readily dissolves the oxide into the titanium matrix and gives rise to a typical microstructure of equiaxed α The recycled plus mill-annealed materials generally have high yield stresses of  >900 Since the recycled materials can be treated using the standard processes, leading to tensile properties as good as those of the commercial Ti-6Al-4V, the recycled alloy can potentially be considered for the same applications, including bolts and nuts by forging, wires by drawing, and armour plates by rolling. However, more sophisticated tests such as fracture and fatigue are needed to fully characterise the performance of the recycled materials.