The influence of long term milling in an attritor of a mixture of BaCO3 and TiO2 powders on the reaction synthesis of BaTiO3 was studied. Thermal analysis (TG and DTA) of the unmilled and milled powders and X-ray diffraction of powders calcined at different temperatures were undertaken. Milling does not change the reaction sequence between BaCO3 and TiO2. BaTiO3 and Ba2TiO4 are produced in both kinds of powders. However, milling reduces the formation temperature and accelerates the formation rate of these two phases. The production of final BaTiO3 is incomplete in the milled powder, probably because of the formation of big crystals of Ba2TiO4. As a consequence, the milled powder contains large amounts of Ba2TiO4 after calcination at 1200°C. Milling produces allotropic transformations in TiO2 from anatase phase, to α-PbO2-like phase and finally to rutile structure.BaTiO In continuing these efforts, the purposes of the present work are to analyze the effect of long-term milling on the structure and chemical behavior of the BaCO A mixture of 55.7 g of BaCO The unmilled and milled powders were examined by wet chemical analysis methods to identify any possible contamination from the mill, X-ray Diffraction (XRD) (Shimadzu XD-3A, Cu- Chemical analysis indicated 0.012% wt of Fe in the unmilled mixture and 0.096% wt in the powders milled for 72 h. No chromium was detected. Therefore, the contamination by the milling media and the mill was marginal. The XRD patterns of the BaCO A sample of TiO The morphology of the unmilled particles can be observed in The TG patterns for the unmilled and milled BaCO The DTA patterns of the milled and unmilled samples are presented in Comparison between In the milled powders, the TG events A, B and C correspond to the DTA events 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The allotropic transition of BaCO In order to identify the origin of the thermal events observed in the TG/DTA experiments, several calcinations, followed by quenching, were performed. The XRD patterns of the unmilled powders calcined at different temperatures are shown in Since the XRD patterns of the powders milled for 5, 20 and 72 h and calcined at different temperatures are similar, only the XRD patterns relevant to the powders milled for 72 h are presented in Faint diffraction peaks around 2θ 26.7° are visible in the pattern of the milled powder calcined at 850°C. These peaks do not match with any of the JCPDS diffraction cards available for Ba–Ti–O compounds or barium and titanium oxides  When the unmilled and the milled samples are treated at 1200°C during 1 h, the XRD patterns of both samples are different ( The XRD patterns of the unmilled and milled powders calcined at different temperatures show that BaTiO These two reactions are associated with a weight loss owing to the evolution of gaseous CO In the unmilled powder, the Ba The DTA curve of the unmilled powder displays an endothermic peak (peak 5) that starts at 1280°C, with a maximum reaction rate at 1330°C. Reaction Reactions In the milled samples, the formation of BaTiO The milled powders do not display a DTA event which could account for reaction  Mechanical activation of the synthesis reaction of BaTiO Intensive milling in an attritor decreases the rate of reaction Milling provokes phase transformations in TiO This work was performed under a research project (DEPI-951196) granted by the Instituto Politécnico Nacional.