Binder is essential in the iron ore agglomeration. Fulvic acid (FA) is one of organic active fractions of the MHA binder. A further study of the interaction between FA and iron ore surface was conducted via elemental analysis, chemical group analysis, batch adsorption experiments, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) investigation, zeta potential measurements and scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging. It is found that the adsorption amount of FA onto iron ore surface obviously increases with increasing the solution pH. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis indicates that ligand exchange (coordination) as a special chemical adsorption occurs at the interface of iron ore and FA. Zeta potential results display that the adsorption of FA onto iron ore surface can be characterized by specific ligand exchange and electrostatic forces. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging shows that flocculation sedimentation is observed during the adsorption process. Ball-shaped FA–mineral colloidal complex with a diameter of 20–100μm is presented in the SEM micrograph of FA-coated mineral granules. Ligand exchange, hydrophobic interactions and electrostatic force are contributive to the adsorption, with ligand exchange and hydrophobic interactions predominant.Binder is essential in the iron ore agglomeration for the improvement of green pellet strength ( The obvious strengths promote the development of domestic organic or organic-based binders with the rapid development of iron and steel industry in China. One promising type of modified humic substance based binder, namely MHA binder, has been patented and proven by laboratory studies to be suitable for iron ore agglomeration. Humic substances (HS) are the major functional fraction of the MHA binder ( Humic substances in the MHA binder can be further separated into two fractions, according to their solubility, such as fulvic acid (FA) and humic acid (HA). FA is the fraction of humic substances that is soluble under all pH conditions and is referred to as moderate molecular weight substances ranging from several hundreds to several thousands ( In general, three mechanisms are reported in the adsorption of HS onto minerals, including (i) specific adsorption with ligand exchange (coordination) ( In this investigation, elemental analysis, chemical group analysis, batch adsorption experiments, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) investigation, zeta potential measurements and scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging were used to analyze the FA sample, the adsorption of FA onto iron ore and the surface properties of FA–mineral colloidal complex. The FA sample was isolated from a typical kind of brown coal in Hunan province of China. The experimental procedures for separation of FA from the brown coal were shown in The FA sample was characterized by elemental analysis, chemical group analysis, and visible spectrum (E4/E6) as described elsewhere ( The natural iron ore (magnetite) was obtained from Shanxi Province of China. Firstly, the magnetite samples were ground and passed through a 10 Main chemical compositions of magnetite granules were tested and presented in The magnetite granule suspension was first prepared by putting some magnetite into a known volume of distilled water. Test solutions at the dry mass ratio of FA to magnetite were gotten by diluting some FA powders in a proper amount of magnetite granules suspension. The solutions were quickly adjusted to needed pH (that is, within ± The adsorbed amount (Q Zeta potentials of samples were measured with a Coulter Delsa model 440sx by taking the average of four measurements. Magnetite granule suspension of 10 Samples were from the flocculation sedimentation of batch adsorption experiments. X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS) Model PHI-5400 (America PE Corporation) was used to test the surface composition of magnetite granules coated with FA fractions. The XPS measurements were made on a VG ESCALAB MkII spectrometer with an Al First, samples from the flocculation sedimentation of batch adsorption experiments were pipetted onto a glass slide surface and placed into a desiccator, where samples are dried at room temperature. The testing samples were sprayed with gold powder and pasted a conducting resin to improve the conductivity. Finally, the samples were analyzed by a SEM, Model Quanta 200 (FEI Corporation, Holand; EDAX, US). Short-term batch experiments on the adsorption kinetics of FA onto magnetite granule surfaces at different solution pH values were firstly studied. The adsorption amount and the fitting parameters for adsorption speed of FA onto magnetite against the adsorption time are plotted in The results in Under conditions of the same adsorption time, adsorption amount increases obviously with increasing the solution pH value. In the view of a much faster adsorption equilibrium and higher adsorption amount at higher pH value in this study, the interactions of FA fractions with magnetite must be stronger than electrostatic repulsion. It can be concluded that electrostatic interaction is not a chief interaction between the magnetite and FA. At different FA solution concentrations, results show no great differences with the results presented in The XPS spectrum provides information on the chemical changes of a given atom or ionic forms in the mineral ( As seen from  Although XPS provides qualitative analysis, it cannot explain clearly adsorption of FA onto mineral surface. To complement XPS, zeta potential measuring was used to analyze the interactions between FA and magnetite at acid and basic pH conditions. Zeta potential, often, can be used to estimate the likely effect of various adsorbate on the properties of minerals ( From Meantime, it is shown in The increase in zeta potential below the IEP and the decrease in zeta potential above the IEP with the pH value increasing can be explained by considering the ligand exchange and electrostatic interactions between the acidic moieties of FA and the magnetite surface. Under the condition of pH values smaller than the IEP of magnetite, magnetite is positive. With increasing of solution pH and ionization, fulvic acid carries more and more negative charges. The increase of zeta potential due to that ligand exchange is strengthened by electrostatic attraction occurring at the boundary of magnetite and FA. Under the condition of pH values larger than the IEP, magnetite is negative. The decrease of zeta potential lie in that ligand exchange is weakened by electrostatic repulsion occurring at the boundary. From the results mentioned above, it can be concluded that adsorption of FA onto magnetite particles can be characterized by specific ligand exchange and electrostatic interactions. Flocculation has been observed in the adsorption. SEM imaging, therefore, was conducted to provide insights into the nature of interactions between FA and magnetite granules and a true picture of magnetite–FA colloidal complex. The surface topographies of the magnetite before and after FA adsorption are shown in As shown in As listed in Formation of magnetite–FA colloidal complex can be mainly explained as two reasons. One is that ligand exchange takes place in the link of FA and magnetite particles. Ligand exchange increases with increasing of pH value, which makes the adsorption amount increase as pH increases, and flocculation are obvious at higher pH values. Also, the adsorbed FA can have influences on the chemical properties of the underlying mineral (for example, electrical property or charge density), which plays an important role in changing the interfacial behavior ( The other reason is that organic macromolecules formed by hydrophobic FA–FA interactions might promote small magnetite particles or small magnetite–FA colloidal complex to form larger magnetite–FA colloidal complex ( In brief, flocculation sedimentation is accompanied with the FA adsorption onto magnetite. Fine magnetite particles are aggregated by the adsorbed FA. When magnetite–FA colloidal complex grows to the suitable size, sedimentation forms as presented in This investigation is carried out to understand the interaction between FA and iron ore surface. Adsorption of FA onto magnetite surface is dependent on pH value and adsorption amount of FA is apparently increased with the solution pH value increasing. Ligand exchange makes charge of magnetite surface reverse even though the adsorbed FA carries negative charges. Flocculation sedimentation is accompanied with the FA adsorption onto magnetite. And the flocculation sedimentation may be influenced by adsorbed FA fractions. The adsorption shows that ligand exchange, hydrophobic interactions and electrostatic attraction are contributive to the adsorption, while ligand exchange and hydrophobic interactions dominate the mechanisms. This work is supported by the