The effect of Si content in Al–Si alloy powder with NaOH on H2 production was investigated. The total amount of H2 produced decreased as Si content increased, which is inconsistent with the results predicted by the chemical reaction. Si caused a delay in the rate of H2 production. Energy dispersive spectrometry showed that a large amount of unreacted Si remained in the matrix, and the unreacted fraction increased as the Si content increased. As the evolution reaction of Al and Al–Si alloys is exothermic, the temperature of all the specimens increased. Si addition reduced the hydroxide removal rate, which decreased the average H2 production rate. The initiation time for H2 evolution depends on the elimination rate of the oxide film formed during production of the powder. On increasing the Si content, SiO2 was formed, which is harder to eliminate than Al2O3; this delayed the initiation.H The specimens used in this study were manufactured using a centrifugal atomizer. Al–Si alloy powders were produced by melting commercial aluminum ingots with Al–30%Si mother alloy, and subsequent centrifugal atomization. Four different powders were manufactured by adding up to 25 wt% of Si. The powders were sieved and particles of the same size (250–300 μm) were selected in order to eliminate the effect of the powder size. In order to observe the effect of Si particle size on H Tests for H  The Al(OH) The reaction rate was determined by the Gibb’s free energy function. The addition of Si to Al delayed the reaction resulting in a decrease in the total amount of H Most of the Si remained in the eutectic phase in the specimen containing 12 wt% Si, as compared to the specimen with more than 18 wt% Si, whose Si was unreacted. As the etching time increased, more unreacted Si was found in the specimen containing more than 18 wt% Si, because the eutectic Si had a large surface area that reacted more easily. As seen in The formation of Al In order to compare the stability of products of the H The effect of Si contents on the characteristics of H EDS scan results showed that the concentration of Al decreased and Si content increased as the reaction progressed. The H This work was supported by the Hyundai-Kia Motors and NGV.