Enhancing the recovery of ultrafine magnetic particles in high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is a tough issue in industrial practice. Mathematic modeling has been adopted to describe particle capture in HGMS and many analytical models for regular shape (only circular and elliptic) matrices under ideal conditions (ideal potential flow) have been derived. Irregular shape matrices have better magnetic characteristics and can enhance particle recovery in HGMS. However, analytical models cannot be derived for irregular shape matrices and generally qualitative analyses were conducted, which can hardly be rigorous and convincing. It is essential to develop methods to conduct quantitative analyses for irregular shape matrices. In this paper, 3D numerical simulation was adopted to study particle capture by irregular matrices in axial HGMS. A simulation model consisting of a particle group and magnetic matrices (circular, elliptic, square and diamond cross-section) for axial HGMS was established. Evolution of particle group in the HGMS system employing the four kinds of matrices were detailly demonstrated. Particle motion trajectories were depicted and particle capture cross section area were calculated and compared quantitatively. Elliptic and diamond matrices present better particle capture performance than circular and square matrices under moderate induction range and can be applied to enhance recovery of ultrafine particles. The numerical simulation results are consistent with our previous theoretical studies using analytical models and experimental results on the matrices. The present study also indicates that there should exist optimal aspect ratio for diamond matrices and optimal tooth angle for grooved plates used in HGMS.High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is effective in removing or recovering weakly magnetic materials from slurry and has been applied in many industrial fields For the study of special shape matrices in HGMS, numerical simulation of magnetic and fluid field around matrices were usually adopted However, it should be noted that only analytic equations of particle capture by very regular shape (circular and elliptic cross-section) matrices under quite ideal fluid conditions (ideal potential flow) can be derived. For more general conditions (such as more generalized or complex shape matrices or under more generalized fluid conditions), particle capture motion equations cannot be analytically expressed. In our previous study, experiments were conducted to investigate performance of four kinds of cross-section (circular, elliptic, square and diamond) matrices in axial HGMS Numerical simulation has been widely used in the theoretical study of particulate systems The numerical simulation package COMSOL Multiphysics is widely used in coupled field simulation analyses Generally, magnetic field strength Scalar magnetic potential Thus Eq. For matrix domain, magnetization The flow is incompressible viscous liquids described by Navier-Stokes equation and continuity equation: A time-dependent study is applied for particle tracing. Particles were released with an initial velocity equal to the fluid. The particle motion is governed by Newton’s second law. As has been illustrated in our previous papers, for HGMS of particles in the size range of several to dozens of microns, the dominating forces are magnetic force and fluid drag force Magnetic force acting on a particle of radius In axial HGMS, particle capture performance of matrix is evaluated by particle capture cross section. Particle capture cross section is the area at inlet within which particles can all be captured by matrix. Particles with initial location along the boundary of capture cross section can just be captured at the end of matrix and those with initial location outside the boundary will escape. More detailed introduction of particle capture cross section can be consulted in previous publications Magnetic field strength To present an intuitive observation of magnetic force distribution around matrices, vector plot of normalized As shown in Contour plot of To conduct a deeper comparison of magnetic force generated by the four kinds of matrices, the areas surrounded by isolines of In our previously published papers  Although   Particle capture cross section area of matrices under different circumstances were calculated using MATLAB and then particle capture performance of the four kinds of matrices could be quantitatively compared. For all the circumstances considered, particle capture cross section area increases rapidly first and then slowly with increasing applied induction. This regularity is related to the variation of magnetization state (unsaturated or saturated) of matrices with increasing applied induction. The induction corresponding to the inflection point of the lines in Comparing particle capture cross section areas among the four kinds of matrices, within the whole induction range considered, particle capture cross section area of square matrix is quite equivalent to that of circular matrix while cross section area of diamond and elliptic matrices are quite similar. For all the particles considered, within applied induction range of approximately 0.1–1.1 T, particle capture cross section area of elliptic and diamond matrices are larger than those of circular and square matrices and the sequence is diamond > elliptic > square > circular. When applied induction is above 1.1 T, particle capture cross section area of circular and elliptic matrices are slightly larger than those of elliptic and diamond matrices. The results are quite consistent with the variation of surrounded area of The most widely applied field of HGMS is the processing of fine weakly magnetic minerals in mineral processing. To ensure a magnetic product with high recovery and grade of valuable metal, a medium applied induction (0.2 T–0.6 T) is usually adopted. In one of our previously published paper To present a comprehensive analyses of particle capture performance of the four kinds of matrices in axial HGMS, the effect of matrix length on particle capture is also investigated. It has been seen from the analyses above that particle capture performance of circular, elliptic, square and diamond matrices are studied and compared quantitatively. The theoretical analyses correspond well with previous theoretical and experimental results. A very interesting result that should be given adequate attention is that, for all the circumstances considered in this study, particle capture performance of diamond matrix is the best (largest particle capture cross section). For the processing of weakly magnetic minerals in mineral processing, two kinds of high gradient magnetic separators have been widely applied in industry: vertical ring pulsating high gradient magnetic separator and horizontal ring high gradient magnetic separator. Rod matrices are adopted in vertical ring pulsating high gradient magnetic separator while grooved plates are used in horizontal ring high gradient magnetic separator. In our previous study, it has been proved that, for elliptic matrix, there exists optimal aspect ratio for maximum particle capture under specific induction in axial HGMS Grooved plates are used in horizontal ring high gradient magnetic separator In this paper, 3D numerical simulation of particle capture of circular, elliptic, square and diamond cross-section matrices in axial HGMS was conducted. Particle capture cross section of the matrices differ greatly for low applied induction and small size particles while for relatively high applied induction and large size particles, particle capture cross sections are almost identical. Particle capture cross section area of the four kinds of matrices increase rapidly and then slowly with increasing applied induction and the inflection point is exactly the induction under which matrices just reach magnetization saturation. Particle capture performance of elliptic and diamond matrices are equivalent while that of circular and elliptic matrices are quite similar. Particle capture cross section area of elliptic and diamond matrices are larger than those of circular and square matrices when applied induction is below approximately 1.1 T and the absolute difference increases with the increase of matrix length. The results of numerical simulation are consistent with our previous theoretical studies with the analytical models (circular and elliptic matrices) and experimental results on the matrices. Adopting elliptic or diamond matrices can enhance capture of ultrafine magnetic particles in HGMS and improve separation performance. The numerical simulation results also indicate that there exists optimal aspect ratio for diamond matrices and optimal tooth angle for grooved plates in HGMS. This will be theoretically and experimentally investigated in our follow-up work.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:       