Here we report the fabrication of high surface area CuO nanoparticles (NPs) on micron-scale ZnO (CuO/ZnO) “flowers” with dimethyl methylphosphonate (DMMP) gas sensing capabilities. The formation of CuO NPs/ZnO heterojunction structures was confirmed by PXRD and TEM analyses. The gas sensing properties of the CuO NPs/ZnO structures showed a faster response time (26.2s) compared to the exclusively ZnO-based sensor (330s). The heterojunction sensors demonstrated the highest selectivity in 10ppm DMMP, reaching the high value of 626.21 at 350°C. This CuO NPs/ZnO heterojunction structure provides an extension of the depletion layer and an increase of the resistance (Ra) in air, leading to a reduction of the depletion layer and resistance (Rg) when exposed to reducing DMMP gas. The higher surface area (6.0m2/g) of the CuO/ZnO heterojunction structure with a 0.5h synthesis time of the ZnO flowers further promoted the adsorption kinetics for the reaction between C3H9O3P and O2− when exposed to DMMP, thus enhancing its sensing properties.The chemical warfare agents (CWAs) Sarin and Soman are some of the best-known chemical-based weapons of mass destruction. Sarin is a particularly dangerous gas since it causes severe effects on the human health system that can lead to neuromuscular paralysis or death while being both colorless and odorless Among the many SMO materials available In this work, we report the microstructural evolution and DMMP gas sensing properties of CuO nanoparticles on micron-scale ZnO (CuO/ZnO) “flower” structures synthesized via a hydrothermal method. Based on our previous report, Al-doped-ZnO-based sensors showed improved sensing capabilities for the DMMP gas detection, i.e., surface modification with Al metal doping could increase O The synthesis of ZnO flowers was carried out via a hydrothermal method Structural data were collected using powder X-ray diffraction with Cu Kα1 radiation (λ The electrical properties of the sensor mounted on a printed circuit board (PCB) were measured at 300–400  ZnO and CuO/ZnO samples with different ZnO synthesis times were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) as shown in   The possible mechanism behind DMMP gas detection by We demonstrated a hydrothermal method for fabricating CuO NPs on high surface area ZnO flowers, which have highly sensitive DMMP gas sensing capabilities. PXRD and TEM analyses confirm the formation of CuO/ZnO heterojunction structures. The BET surface areas of the This work was supported by the Agency for Defense Development (ADD) of the Republic of Korea and Korea Ministry of Environment as “Convergence Technology Program (2015001650001)” and Priority Research Centers Program (2009-0093823) through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF).