In this work, we present a phase field model to simulate the crystallization of Fe3O4 in FeO
                        x
                     –SiO2 melts under oxidizing conditions. The diffusion of FeO and Fe2O3 is considered, because the FeO/Fe2O3 ratio in the melt can be related to the local oxygen potential of the melt. A boundary condition is developed to ensure conservation of Fe while the ratio of FeO/Fe2O3 is in equilibrium with the oxygen fugacity of the atmosphere. Two-dimensional simulations are performed with different nucleation densities of Fe3O4 and varying oxygen fugacity in the atmosphere. The results show that, for the considered nucleation densities, the crystallization of the melt has a larger effect on the oxidation state than the oxygen fugacity of the atmosphere.
                  Furthermore, for the considered composition range, the growth velocities of the spinel crystals increase with decreasing oxygen fugacity.The local oxidation state of iron in a silicate melt is of great importance to slag practice in pyrometallurgy and to the behavior of magma or lava in geological systems. The ratio of ferrous (Fe Several experimental studies have been carried out to determine the mechanisms of the oxidation or reduction of iron-bearing silicate melts ( Currently, modeling of silicate melt crystallization is mainly performed on the macroscopic level, using thermodynamic equilibrium calculations to determine the fractions of all phases as a function of temperature. For pyrometallurgical applications, the FactSage thermodynamic package ( In this work, the complex relation between the crystallization and the redox state of FeO An introduction to the phase field simulation technique is given in  About twenty years ago, the phase field technique has emerged in the field of material science and engineering to simulate microstructure evolution at the mesoscale. Nowadays, multi-component and multi-phase system can be modeled. In contrast to macroscopic models, the crystallization kinetics, diffusion profiles and the morphology of individual crystals can be described. Whereas macroscopic models rely on thermodynamic equilibrium calculations, phase field models build upon the principles of irreversible thermodynamics to describe evolving microstructures. The total free energy of a system, which is minimized towards equilibrium, is defined as the integral of the local energy density, which traditionally includes interfacial energies and chemical energies of the bulk phases, but also elastic or magnetic energy contributions can be included. Nowadays phase field models are often coupled with thermodynamic databases to retrieve the Gibbs energies of phases and chemical potentials of components. Because of the inclusion of all energy contributions, a phase field model naturally incorporates phenomena that are notoriously difficult to model, such as the Gibbs–Thomson effect at curved interfaces that drives the growth of complex crystal shapes, e.g. dendrites. In classical sharp interface models for microstructure evolution, the model equations are defined within a homogeneous part of the microstructure, such as a single grain of a certain phase. At the interfaces, a discontinuous transition of properties occurs and specific kinetic and thermodynamic constraints are applied such as local thermodynamic equilibrium and heat or mass balances. Therefore, the interfaces need to be explicitly tracked and this makes sharp interface models quite cumbersome in terms of model formulation and numerical implementation. However, in a phase field model, explicit tracking of individual interfaces or phase boundaries is avoided by assuming diffuse interfaces between different phases or grains, in which a continuous transition of properties occurs. In a diffuse interface model, the model equations, for e.g. solute diffusion, are defined over the whole system without prior knowledge of the interface position. The mathematical formulation of a phase field model is still complex but its numerical implementation is more straightforward than sharp interface models, due to the lack of interface tracking. Realistic phase field simulations require large memory computer architectures because all variables are defined over the whole system. But since the computing power and available memory of nowadays super computers keep increasing, phase field models continue to proof their vigor to simulate different physical processes such as sintering, solidification and grain growth in a wide variety of systems, including metallic alloys, semi-conductors or oxide melts. The reader is referred to ( In this section, we briefly describe the phase field model that is used in this work. For a more detailed description and the implementation, we refer to ( According to the principles of linear non-equilibrium thermodynamics, the mineralogy is assumed to evolve in such a way, to allow the largest energy dissipation rate ( The first two terms in the integrand, Next to the phase field equations in Eq. As shown in Eq. The Gibbs energies of the different phases, in Eq. The Fe–Si–O system is thermodynamically a ternary system with two independent composition variables. We choose FeO, Fe Furthermore, the common reference state The diffusion is assumed to be much slower than the redox reaction kinetics, and the redox ratio of FeO/Fe Equivalently, this reaction can be written in terms of the fictive component FeO The equilibrium constant for the reaction above, is given by From this equation, it can be concluded that the At the interface between the melt and its atmosphere, it is assumed that the melt is in local equilibrium with the atmosphere. Therefore, at the interface, the fugacity of oxygen in the atmosphere, Spinel crystals, such as Fe The orientation of the interface is represented by It should be noted that Here, The phase field and diffusion equations are discretized on a two-dimensional equidistant numerical grid using finite differences in the FORTRAN programming language. Central finite differences are used in space and forward differences in time. For a detailed description of the numerical implementation, we refer to The components FeO and Fe The value of Furthermore, the conservation of Fe, at the open system boundary, implies the following relation between the mole fraction of both iron oxides on the ghost nodes ( Eqs. The thermodynamic data for the liquid, such as Gibbs energies and chemical potentials, are calculated from the FToxid database of FactSage ( The grid spacing in horizontal and vertical direction is 0.125 Except for the one-dimensional simulation in In this section, the simulation results are presented and discussed. Although using a simplified system, FeO–Fe In a first, one-dimensional simulation, the oxidation of a FeO In a second series of simulations, the number of nuclei of the spinel phase is varied to investigate its effect on the oxidation state of the melt. Simulations with respectively 1, 4 and 9 nuclei are performed, while the nuclei are spread out evenly over the simulation domain. These numbers of nuclei correspond to nucleation densities of 7.1 In a third series of simulations, the oxygen fugacity of the atmosphere is varied, while all simulations start with the same number of spinel nuclei, namely four. Simulations are performed for the following oxygen fugacities, The larger local driving force in the last equation, explains the faster crystal growth at lower oxygen fugacity. The complex relation between crystallization and redox equilibrium of silicate melts is modeled and investigated for a FeO In future work, the presented model can be used to simulate crystallization of higher order silicate melts, containing alkali cations, to create deeper insight into the oxidation or reduction of these melts. Several studies have shown that the diffusion of these cations is of great importance to the redox behavior of such a melt. JH holds a scholarship from the