A two-layer rechargeable oxide battery using a stack initially developed for solid oxide cells was operated for 2100 h with more than 1000 charging/discharging cycles. The operation temperature was 800 °C and the applied current density (on the solid oxide cell) was 150 mA cm−2. During operation, no electrochemical indications for degradation were measured. The voltages achieved during redox cycling were in good agreement with the equilibrium voltages of the envisaged corresponding phases. For the first time, a storage material based on the calcium–iron oxide with the richest iron content was used. Storage utilization was 86%, thereby reaching a capacity of 20.6 Ah per layer. Post-test analysis of the storage revealed mostly expected storage phases and sufficient remaining storage porosity.A unique selling point of a solid oxide cell (SOC) system is its fourfold usability as a) a fuel cell (SOFC), b) an electrolyzer cell (SOEC), c) a reversible cell (rSOC), and d) a rechargeable oxide battery (ROB). While in fuel cell mode it generates electricity, in electrolyzer mode electricity from renewable sources can be used to generate “green” hydrogen or a syngas composed of hydrogen and carbon monoxide. In reversible mode, the produced hydrogen is promptly stored in a flexible manner and re-electrified in the same system in fuel cell mode when more electricity is needed. Using almost the same stack as for SOFC, SOEC, and rSOC – but with a closed fuel side, which contains an oxidizable and reducible storage material – the SOC system can be similarly operated as battery in fuel cell and electrolyzer mode. However, by oxidizing the material (fuel cell mode; discharging) or reducing the material (electrolyzer mode; charging) a secondary battery is generated. Such a high-temperature battery was invented years ago by Siemens [ For the battery test, a slightly modified Jülich F-design SOC stack was used. In contrast to a normal SOC stack, additional channels were milled into the metallic interconnect on the fuel side (see Redox cycling was conducted at a constant furnace temperature of 800 °C with a small amount of air flux (4 slm – standard liter per minute). The first charging curve with a current density of −0.15 Acm The complete operating curve of the battery stack is shown in  Room-temperature X-ray diffraction reveals the following phases (according to the numbering in Samples II, III, IV: metallic iron, CaO, CaFeO Sample V: metallic iron, CaO, Fe Sample I: metallic iron, CaO, traces of Ca It should be noted that sample V and parts of area I represent a position that is outside the active cell area, as the cell itself has a size of 100 × 100 mm In From Samples I and II form a densified outer layer on the surface of the storage material; this is also visible to a lesser extent for sample IV. Even after prolonged operation and 1000 redox cycles, all samples have sufficient remaining porosity. In the higher magnifications ( The microstructure of all samples looks different; no general trend was identified. To better visualize the individual phases in In all the post-test analyzed samples, the light-grey phase corresponds to the metallic iron and the middle and dark grey phases correspond to Fe–Ca mixed oxides of various Ca to Fe ratios. Moreover, signals for Ca and Fe, Si (from the polishing media) and Pt (from the contact coating) are present in most point analyses. In some locations, Mn was also detected. We assume this originated from the evaporation of the native oxide scale on the metallic interconnect (top layer of Cr–Mn spinel), cf [ The voltages measured during charging/discharging of the iron–calcium oxide storage material are in good agreement with the theoretical stability levels of the related phases. We therefore assume roughly appropriate atmospheric conditions and reduction/oxidation behavior for the storage material. Storage utilization of 86%, which results in 20.6 Ah per layer, is quite good for the first automated long-term battery test. There were no indications of any degradation effects in storage capacity during the more than 1000 redox cycles. However, it needs to be kept in mind that the cycling was performed with less storage utilization, which might have an impact on the degradation behavior (e.g. formation of dense oxide layer on the surface of the storage). After reducing the original CaFe With respect to sample I, in addition to the metallic iron, calcium oxide, and low amounts of an iron-reduced calcium–iron mixed oxide, we also detected a boron-containing calcium oxide in X-ray diffraction. However, wet chemical analysis does not reveal the presence of any barium. Therefore, we assume that the measured X-ray reflexes correspond to a non-equilibrium Ca–Fe oxide with an unknown composition. The existing atmospheric conditions (oxygen, water vapor, and hydrogen partial pressure) likely lead to the formation of this untypical compound. Finally, the same statement can be derived for samples I and V: both storage materials are outside the active cell area for the battery reactions and thus exhibit untypical and unpredictable behavior and composition. In summary, the redox-cycling test with 1000 cycles was successful, with most of the storage material behaving as expected and described in model experiments during cycling; the degradation of the storage material is very low. A two layer stack, initially developed for use as a solid oxide cell or electrolysis cell stack was used as a rechargeable oxide battery. A Ca–Fe oxide was incorporated as storage material into the “fuel side” of the stack and redox-cycled more than 1000 times. This high-temperature battery was operated at 800 °C at moderate (cell) current density. The measured equilibrium voltages during the multiple charging/discharging steps at ca. 10% usage of the storage capacity correspond well with the related component stabilities. The monitored electrochemistry gave no indication of any degradation process. Storage utilization was approximately 86% over the entire period. Post-test analysis of the storage material reveals the expected metallic and oxidic compounds for the bulk of the storage material. In contrast, the storage material behaves different in areas that are not at a close distance to the active cell (outside their area), but with no negative influence on overall functionality. It can therefore be concluded that this type of battery might be used in applications where a high operation temperature is not critical or where multiple charging/discharging cycles are necessary.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the Jülich SOC group for their support with cell and stack manufacturing and stack testing. They would also like to thank Dr. D. Sebold for SEM investigations. The authors are also grateful for initial financial support from the German