Plastic represents a significant fraction of the total packaging waste, and its management is an important issue that should embrace recycling techniques for material recovery. Support decisions in the area of waste management can be made using the life cycle approach, which is commonly used to identify the environmental impacts of recycling and can give information to put environmental issues into a wide perspective.
                  This study evaluates how much an innovative recyclable package is environmentally preferable to an alternative package that is not recyclable considering that both are produced from recycling post-consumer PET bottles.
                  Two products were chosen to perform the study. The first product is a package produced with a multilayer film and whose end-of-life scenario includes land-filling and incineration. The second product is an innovative package produced employing a mono-material whose end-of-life scenario comprises recycling, land-filling and incineration.
                  This study explains that the utilisation of recycled materials represents the initial effort to reduce environmental burdens and shows that using recycled materials combined with specific additives that assure the recyclability of the final product leads to a better environmental performance. The package produced employing a recyclable mono-material film is more environmental advisable than the multilayer for all of the impact categories analysed. The results obtained are also tested using a sensitivity analysis and an uncertainty analysis and confirm the results of the life cycle impact assessment. The study demonstrates the pertinence of the life cycle approach to assess whether a prevention activity to reduce waste production is actually environmental sustainable and to provide decision-making support in the field of packaging waste management.Plastic production is a significant issue involving several industrial sectors. In 2011, the world plastic production rose to approximately 280 million tonnes, of which 58 million tonnes were produced in Europe ( Support decisions in the area of waste management can be made using the life cycle approach ( Several life cycle assessment (LCA) studies have investigated plastic waste treatments ( However, in the food sector, the quantification of the preference level in the case of two packages made with waste plastic, of which one is recyclable and the alternative one is not, is seldom investigated, in spite of the interest in recycling in general ( This study investigates the market segment of food packaging characterised by the employment of post-consumer PET bottles. Since the application of LCA can support the decision making process in the field of waste management ( The products considered suitable for this research present the same function, namely, the containment and protection of sliced meat and similar production processes. Both products are manufactured using post-consumer bottles, which undergo the same treatments, and in addition, both include the utilisation of virgin materials. Both products are manufactured by extrusion but have some differences in the way they use specific additives or a specific barrier. The final manufacturing stage is the application of the form-fill-seal technology for both products, and the different end-of-life scenarios allow the effect of the variation in the environmental impacts on the quantification to be investigated. The methodology chosen to quantitatively assess the environmental impacts associated with the products is a comparative LCA application, which is often used to compare alternative products from an environmental perspective ( In addition, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to investigate the main different elements in the data inventory (the materials used in the extrusion phase and the end-of-life scenario) and to understand the effect of the methodological choices, such as the application of the impact assessment methods and the analysis of the recycling processes. An uncertainty analysis using the Monte Carlo technique is also performed to improve the robustness of the results. According to the defined research design, the two products chosen for the study are a tray produced with a multilayer plastic film (hereafter, the multilayer plastic tray), whose end-of-life scenario includes land-filling and incineration, and an innovative tray produced employing a mono-material PET film (hereafter, the PET tray), designed with the intent to be recyclable. Both products are manufactured using post-consumer PET bottles. Since the method chosen to evaluate the environmental profile of the products is LCA, the study is carried out according to international standards ( The sensitivity analysis conducted to investigate the main different elements in the data inventory is performed using an alternative hypothetical end-of-life scenario compared to the baseline study, and the composition of the additive used in the baseline study is varied according to the composition of the alternative additives. The sensitivity analyses performed to investigate the methodological choices are conducted using a different impact assessment method (IMPACT 2002+) in comparison to the baseline scenario, in which ReCiPe 2008 is employed and the “system expansion” approach ( To avoid a lack of transparency, the study was also reviewed by a panel of external and independent LCA experts to verify whether the study was consistent with the principles and requirements of the international standard on LCA ( The study compares the environmental impacts associated with two plastic food packages, a multilayer plastic tray and a PET tray both weighing 30 The functional unit used as a basis for comparison is defined as one tray with a sealed lid for sliced meat and characterised by a capacity of 0.54 This study considers the whole system required to manufacture film reels for tray production, including transport, assembly and the product end-of-life ( In particular, with respect to the films, the system boundaries comprise the transport of post-consumer bottles, virgin PET and materials for the packaging of the films, the treatment of post-consumer bottles (first screening, prewashing, sorting, grinding, washing, flotation, centrifugation, drying, dust remover, and second screening), extrusion, packaging and transport to the client plant. For the production of both films, post-consumer bottles are processed and recovered in a plastic film for food packaging. The main difference in production of the two films is the material used during the extrusion phase, which is the phase where the recycled PET becomes food safe. For the production of the multilayer plastic film that will compose the tray, a specific multilayer high barrier co-extruded film is used. The main characteristic of the barrier is the permanent adhesion on plastic foil, making treatment in a recycling plant difficult; on the other hand, the recyclability of the PET tray is assured by using a mono-material film that can be processed in a recovery plant. The specific high barrier used for the multilayer film and the additives utilised for the PET film are safe and in accordance with European Union standards (Commission Regulation No. 2023/2006). With respect to the tray systems, the production of the trays by means of the form-fill-seal technology is included in the system boundary. The end-of-life is also included in the assessment. The main difference between the multilayer plastic tray and the PET tray is that the first is not recyclable, so the end-of-life scenarios only include incineration and landfill disposal; in comparison, the second is made with a mono-material, yielding end-of-life scenarios that include recycling, incineration and landfill disposal. The stages outside the system boundary are the transport of trays, distribution and use. These stages are neglected because the related impacts are assumed to be comparable for both systems. The recycling processes are analysed using the “cut off” approach in accordance with the Ecoinvent database ( The primary data about the multilayer plastic tray and the PET tray are directly collected by means of specific data sheets, which allow for the investigation of the energy consumption, the resources used, the pollutants emitted and the waste produced by both product systems. The data sheets are structured into two parts; the first addresses film production, while the second addresses tray production using the form-fill-seal technology. This structure allows for the investigation of the film system and the tray system and for the verification of the mass balance. Both the transport of raw and secondary materials for the production of the film reels and the transport of supplies are elaborated by means of the primary data (the distance and the mode of transportation). The main differences between the two systems analysed are the transport of the multilayer barrier film and of the additives used, whereas the transport of the post-consumer bottles and virgin PET are identical ( The consumption of raw materials for the production of the film reels is included in the evaluation and is obtained using the primary data ( The materials employed, the resources and energy consumed, the emissions and the waste produced are included in the evaluation. In particular, the materials and chemicals used to treat the post-consumer bottles are processed. All of the data are directly collected in the plant of the company involved in the study. The scraps obtained during post-consumer bottle treatment represent the average amounts used in the production of one film reel ( The energy consumed by the form-fill-seal technology and the information concerning the transport of scraps are directly collected in the sliced meat packaging plant involved in the study ( The end-of-life is also included in the assessment. The multilayer plastic tray is assumed to be incinerated or land-filled, while the PET tray is assumed to be incinerated, land-filled or recycled on the basis of the Italian scenario ( A life cycle impact assessment is performed using the ReCiPe 2008 methodology with the midpoint perspective ( The main assumptions are tested in a sensitivity study to examine their influence on the results. Four sensitivity analyses are performed concerning (1) the end-of-life scenario, (2) the additive composition, (3) the impact assessment method chosen to clarify the related influence on the results ( The end-of-life scenario of the baseline study is defined by the mean of an Italian report about waste production ( The additive composition is elaborated on the basis of the material safety data sheet and is considered an affective assumption that could influence the results. Thus, another sensitivity analysis is performed ( The robustness of the results is examined using the method IMPACT 2002+ ( The recycling processes of the baseline study are analysed by means of the “cut-off” approach. In this sensitivity analysis, the “system expansion” approach carrying out a consequential LCA is applied to test this alternative allocation procedure (  An uncertainty analysis was carried out using Monte Carlo statistical techniques (  The results confirm that the impacts of the PET tray are less significant than those of the multilayer plastic tray for all of the environmental categories studied. The level of statistical significance is higher than 96% for most categories, except for terrestrial ecotoxicity and natural land transformation, for which to the levels are 58% and 52%, respectively. These results show that the uncertainty due to the life cycle inventory analysis associated with the cumulative effects of model imprecision, input and data variability mainly affects the terrestrial ecotoxicity and natural land transformation, whereas the other categories present a lower level of uncertainty. An important field in the scientific literature is the need to support industry design and waste management, especially when waste can be seen as a raw material for new product development and packaging can be improved for recycling ( Some studies about PET recycling have focused on waste management ( The outcomes of this study are in line with the results in the literature, which explain that the utilisation of recycled materials represents the initial effort to reduce environmental burdens ( The results obtained through the sensitivity analysis also demonstrate that the choice of a different additive composition or of a different end-of-life scenario results in a consistent rank order across the products analysed. However, the sensitivity analysis with the application of the IMPACT 2002+ method revealed that the PET tray presents higher impacts than the multilayer tray with respect to carcinogens and the terrestrial ecotoxicity because of the additive composition and the aluminium consumption for the additive packaging. On the other hand, the sensitivity analysis concerning the investigation of the recycling processes, as implemented in other papers ( However, this study's main limitation is the assumptions concerning land-filling and recycling, where the modules used express average technologies, especially in the case of post-consumer trays treatments, and the advantages from end-of-life tray recycling mainly include less material consumption and average data, which are in line with the main assumption of other studies ( The growing production of plastic materials causes a significant waste flow for which the environmental implications are often debated. Because of this important issue, this study focused on the environmental advantages of two recycled plastic packages, one recyclable after use and one not, using the LCA approach. The results indicate that the choice of a comparative LCA application is an effective solution to investigate how much an innovative recyclable package is environmentally preferable than an alternative package that is not recyclable. The sensitivity analysis conducted helped to understand the effect of the methodological choices on the outcomes and confirmed that the assumptions made do not change the relative rank order, with nearly all categories preferring the recyclable product despite the additive composition, the end-of-life scenarios and the end-of-life recycling allocation. However, the employment of a different assessment method led to an opposite relative rank order with regard to specific categories such as carcinogens and terrestrial ecotoxicity. For each package analysed, the uncertainty analysis conducted led to the identification of the impact categories in which the environmental advantages of the PET tray over the multilayer tray is clear and of the other categories in which this benefit can be considered absent, namely, terrestrial ecotoxicity and natural land transformation. It should be noted that in this study, the main assumptions concern the end-of-life scenarios. These assumptions could be improved to verify whether, in other cases, the preference rank order between the two analysed packages changes and the investigation of a different electricity grid mix of other countries should be employed to highlight the impacts associated with both trays processed elsewhere in Europe.