Microcystins are produced by several species of cyanobacteria and can harm aquatic organisms and human beings. Sediments have the potential to contribute to the removal of dissolved microcystins from the water body through either adsorption to sediment particles or biodegradation by the sediment's bacterial community. However, the relative contribution of these two removal processes remains unclear and little is known about the significance of sediment's overall contribution. To study this, changes in the concentration of microcystin-LR (MCLR) in the presence of sediment, sediment with microbial inhibitor, and non-sterile lake water were quantified in a laboratory experiment. Our results show that, in the presence of sediment, MCLR concentration decreased significantly in an exponential way without a lag phase, with an average degradation rate of 9 μg d−1 in the first 24 h. This indicates that sediment can contribute to the removal of MCLR from the water immediately and effectively. Whilst both, the biodegradation and adsorption ability of the sediment contributed significantly to the removal of MCLR from the water body, biodegradation was shown to be the dominant removal process. Also, the sediment's ability to degrade MCLR from the water was shown to be faster than the biodegradation through the bacterial community in the water. The present study emphasizes the importance of sediments for the removal of microcystins from a water body. This will be especially relevant in shallow systems where the interaction between the water and the sediment is naturally high. Our results are also useful for the application of sediments to remove microcystins at water treatment facilities.Occurrences of cyanobacterial blooms in aquatic systems pose a threat to the ecosystem's organisms and public health, and can cause extreme aesthetic problems ( To assess the potential risk of human and animal exposure to microcystins, it is crucial to understand the fate of microcystins in aquatic systems. Microcystins are produced within the cyanobacterial cells and released into the surrounding water when cells lyse under unfavourable conditions ( Adsorption of microcystins to sediments occurs when microcystins bind to the surface of the sediment particles, usually at a specific site, and previous studies have reported on the presence of microcystins in natural sediment samples ( Biodegradation is the second major process that influences the fate of microcystins in aquatic systems ( Understanding the underlying mechanisms for the contribution of sediments to the removal of microcystins from the water is important; this includes a quantification of the relative contribution of biodegradation in and adsorption onto sediments. Firstly, this will help to understand the fate of microcystins in aquatic systems which may lead to better management strategies. Secondly, better treatment methods for microcystin-contaminated water may be established based on the understanding of the natural attenuation mechanisms of microcystins in the aquatic system. The decay of dissolved microcystin was quantified in the laboratory by incubating a commercially available variant, microcystin-LR (MCLR; Sapphire Bioscience, Australia), with different combinations of water and sediment from Lake Yangebup, Western Australia. MCLR was added at an initial concentration of 20 μg L Lake water and sediment for the laboratory experiment were collected from an urban shallow lake, Lake Yangebup (32°6′40″S, 115°50′00″E), Perth, Western Australia. Samples were collected in April during a toxic In the laboratory, sediment samples were thoroughly mixed and refrigerated overnight at 4 °C before the commencement of the experiment. All laboratory tools and glassware were autoclaved before use, and preparation of the set-up was done under sterile conditions in a fume hood. The lake water was filtered with a GF/F filter (0.7 μm, Whatman) prior to the experiment to remove suspended particles and cyanobacterial cells but to keep the natural bacterial community. When sterile water was used, the water was further filtered through a special capsule filter (0.8 μm/0.2 μm, AcroPak™ 500 Capsules with Supor A water sample of 5 ml was taken with a polyethylene syringe connected with a tube by opening the flasks every 12 h to quantify the concentration of MCLR. The first water samples were taken 1 h after the experiment commenced. Water samples were kept at −20 °C before quantification of MCLR with a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)-PDA system. The sediment was analysed for particle size and organic matter content. The method used for the analysis of particle size was adapted from Thawed water samples were centrifuged to remove any suspended particles before they were applied to Solid Phase Extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters Oasis HLB). SPE cartridges were used for cleaning and concentrating microcystins. After application of the samples, the SPE cartridges were rinsed with 10 ml of 10% (v/v) and 20% (v/v) methanol, respectively. MCLR was eluted with 5 ml of 100% methanol +0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v) from the SPE cartridges into 6 ml glass vials. The glass vials were placed in a water bath (40 °C), and the liquid samples were evaporated to dryness under a mild nitrogen stream. Dry samples were re-dissolved in 30% acetonitrile (v/v) for quantification of MCLR in a Waters HPLC system (Alliance 2695) which was equipped with a PDA (1.2 nm resolution) and an Atlantis T3 3 μm column (4.6 × 150 mm i.d). Mobile phases used for the HPLC were acetonitrile with 0.05% TFA (v/v) and Milli-Q water with 0.05% TFA (v/v). The gradient used to separate peaks was identical to One Way Repeated Measures ANOVA or Friedman Repeated Measures ANOVA on Ranks was performed to test for the difference in MCLR concentrations within each treatment. No MCLR was detected in treatment 2, which served as negative control and in which no MCLR was added. This indicated that the quantified MCLR in all the other treatments did not originate from the lake water or sediment but was due to the addition of MCLR. No significant removal of MCLR was detected in treatment 1 (Friedman Repeated Measures ANOVA, When MLCR was added in sterile lake water with sediment (treatment 3), MCLR concentration decreased significantly from the commencement of the experiment ( Aeration had a significant effect on the removal rate of MCLR added to sterile lake water with sediment ( The addition of the microbial inhibitor had a significant effect on the removal of MCLR added to sterile lake water with sediment ( Significant reduction of MCLR over time was observed in non-sterile lake water without sediment and sterile lake water with sediment ( This study aimed to quantify the significance of sediments' contribution to the removal of microcystins from water and to differentiate between the relative contributions of biodegradation ability and adsorption ability of sediments. Microcystin-LR concentration decreased exponentially in the presence of sediment with no observed lag phase. This is in contrast to earlier studies which documented lag periods ranging from a few days to several weeks before microcystins were degraded ( The addition of a microbial inhibitor to the sediment, leading to the quantification of the adsorption ability of the sediment only, had a significant effect on the removal rate of MCLR from the water. With a microbial inhibitor, MCLR concentration did not significantly decrease within the first 36 h, while MCLR concentration decreased to under detection level within the first 36 h in the absence of the inhibitor. As the latter treatment represents the sum of adsorption and biodegradation, the difference between the two curves indicated the contribution of the biodegradation ability of the sediment. This emphasizes that the exponential decay of MCLR in the presence of sediment was mainly caused by its biodegradation ability. However, although adsorption of MCLR was negligible compared to biodegradation at the start of the incubation, in the long term, a significant loss of MCLR was observed due to adsorption ( Our results indicated that biodegradation contributes more to the removal of MCLR from water than adsorption, which has also been shown earlier for microcystin elimination in sandy aquifer material ( Compared to the immediate and fast biodegradation of MCLR in the presence of sediment, the biodegradation of MCLR by bacterial activity in the water in the absence of sediment had a lower rate and a lag time of 60 h ( Our study indicated that the indigenous microcystin-degrading bacterial community from Lake Yangebup sediment preferred oxygen rich over low oxygen conditions. As many lake sediments are completely deprived of oxygen for a prolonged period of time, future research should evaluate the oxygen-need of microcystin-degrading bacteria communities as this would help to identify the optimum function conditions for these bacteria communities. We can conclude from this study that (1) sediments contribute significantly to the removal of microcystins from a water body; (2) whilst both the biodegradation and the adsorption ability of sediments can contribute significantly to the removal of microcystins from water, biodegradation was shown to be the dominant removal process. Our study indicates that the biodegradation ability of sediments is an important factor to be considered when sediments are used to remove microcystins in water treatment facilities; (3) sediment and water from Lake Yangebup, which experiences frequent toxic This work was supported by the The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.