In oil well drilling process, a perennial issue is formations detection particularly in passing through high and low pressure formations. However, automatic classification of keybeds in the Gachsaran and Asmari formations by applying drill cutting images can help in decision-making, especially in oil wells of Iran, about mud weight and casing design for oil well drilling process. First, this study focuses on color analysis and fuzzy c-mean clustering to extract relevant features from images of the drill cuttings. Furthermore, a support vector machine and different kernel functions are utilized to classify the samples into different keybeds. Second, due to changing color of drilling cutting in each well, this study proposes texture analysis for keybeds classification. In this method, a co-occurrence matrix and features of energy, homogeneity, entropy and brightness are applied as feature vectors and classification is done by using the support vector machine too. This study, moreover, introduces the accuracy and response speed of the above techniques. To sum up, the results show that this method can be used to detect different formations (particularly between Gachsaran and Asmari) by approximately 95% accuracy.Oil well drilling is a time consuming, complicated and costly process, so that Increasing the speed and safety of this process can benefit experts to find discrepancy in different formations easily ( Nowadays, intelligent processing techniques have been improved significantly to solve geologic problems. During the drilling process, various methods have been introduced to verify the type of formations and lithology ( To classify oil wells, one common method is to apply mud-logging data that The present study applies texture analysis and co-occurrence matrix calculations to extract of the features of energy, homogeneity, contrast and correlation. In addition, SVM multi-classes are employed to classify the keybeds of the Gachsaran and upper Asmari formations. The pixels of each image, furthermore, are divided into two clusters by color analysis and fuzzy There are plenty of methods for extricating texture from images, including wavelet analysis, Gabor filters, texture energy laws, and a gray level co-occurrence matrix. Admittedly, the gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) is one of the main efficient methods of texture analysis (  The present study extracts the feature vector from these 4 features in the 4 directions of At first, Fuzzy In this algorithm, data collections are divided into C clusters by Assigning a random value to the center of a cluster. Calculating the matrix of the membership rate of each piece of data is as (7): Updating the cluster center by: Defining criteria of Convergence and stoppage of the algorithm allow the calculation of the center of each class and the dependency rate of each sample to each class. To use this algorithm, the maximum dependency rate of each group is usually expressed the dependence of that member on the group. The SVM is designed to separate two classes, but can be extended for separation multiple classes ( The learning data To solve this problem, The problem is solved for   Under some special conditions, the kernel function can be defined as One-against-all method (OAA) One-against-one method (OAO) In the OAA method, a collection of two-class SVMs are considered and If the number of available classes defines In this research, Drill cuttings of the Gachsaran and Asmari formations were extracted from 3 oil wells where are located in an oil field in southwest of Iran. In this field, the Gachsaran formation made up of 7 members and the Asmari formation includes 3 members. Furthermore, Member 1 from Gachsaran, which is located on the top of the Asmari formation as lowest formation in Gachsaran, consists of four keybeds (A, B, C, D); successfully detection and classification of these keybeds are essential for geologist to make appropriate decision. In this research 5 groups, comprising keybeds A, B, C, D from Gachsaran formation and a group of upper Asrmari, are defined. Image samples are captured by a Nikon D-90 digital camera under standard conditions (a place where light and temperature are controlled). Randomly, the drilling cuttings are selected and prepared to take picture. Examples of the images are shown in In this research, we apply two algorithms, color and texture analysis, to divide the five formations. In both analyses, original image size is 900×900 then it is divided into a patch 300×300 in size with a 50% overlap. For each layer, original image is divided into 25 sub-images with size 300×300 consequently this study describes 125 images and we uses them for training data set. To generate 125 images for testing, algorithm repeats this method again on the other samples of layers that shown in First of all, each patch is captured in three primary colors of red, blue and green channels that pixels of each image are being scattered in this three dimension space. Second, According to plenty of experiments that have been conducted, we would predict two clusters to design FCM structure which includes Group 1 or 2, so each pixel belongs to each group according to their degree of similarity. Moreover, the center of each cluster is determined by using FCM and the covariance matrix is calculated for both clusters. For each patch of layers, this process is done that  In The results of the confusion matrix show that the SVM for different kernel functions works almost the same and successful for the A, B, and C keybeds that yields the maximum performance (100% correct) to recognize these keybeds whilst the performance which is evaluated for the classification of the keybeds D and upper Asmari has different attitude that the best accuracy is evaluated with the Polynomial kernel function approximately 70% (17/25) although Quadratic, Linear and RF stand at lower level 60%, 48% and 20%, respectively. To achieve high accuracy in distinguishing between the Gachsaran and upper Asmari formations, other test is taken just focusing on these two layers. For this purpose, new samples from other oil well are used. The accuracy and the response time of the algorithm for 40 training and 40 test data are shown in Unlike the multiple classes Linear SVM, the accuracy of the classification for just these two classes is different and the maximum of it can be seen in linier function roughly 87.5% and 177 In this section based on facts that mentioned above, the texture as efficient method is applied that can have useful information about features of drilling cutting in each layer. For texture analysis not only does each original color image convert to gray level, but also it splits into patches, same as color analysis, which includes 25 sub-images. Computation of the GLCM matrix for each layer introduces different features comprising Energy, homogeneity, contrast, and correlation in four directions (0°, 45°, 90°, 135°). It can be seen that First of all, all features of GLCM matrix in each direction are sorted in one feature vector that contribute to a feature vectors with 25 dimensions for each sample. In the next step, the SVM is trained and then tested by using125 training data sets. Finally, the result yields to compare different kernel functions. The results of   As it this approach can extract feature of mass of rock, it can be used in different application such as classification of rock in each field as well as in gas wells, so that it would be developed to each application which needs recognition and classification od rocks based on macroscopic images. To sum up, It is inescapable to select the most suitable patch size to create standard and constant window to divide the original image to sub-images; to resolve this issue, the accuracy of the algorithm is tested by using different window sizes to produce high performance. For this purpose, emphasizing the two classes (keybed D and Top Asmari) is mentioned. The dimension of the windows is ranging from 30×30 to 400×400 at10  This study applies color and texture analysis for multiple class classification of the Gachsaran and upper Asmari formations. The results from these two algorithms aknowledge that: Formation detection is considered a prediction method to decrease time and risk in make good decision to classify formations. FCM and Co-occurrence matrix have been applied to extract features as feature vector. Texture analysis performs better in distinguishing the boundary of the two formations and the accuracy of this term is around 95% whilst to detect all formations, color analysis has better performance than texture analysis. The speed of texture analysis is higher than color analysis that is around 30 Texture analysis is more reliable for expanding to other wells because of the likelihood of color changes in samples from well to well. The best size of window to split original image into sub-images is around 300×300. This algorithm can be developed for the classification other rocks.