As-cast samples of a cobalt base alloy (ASTM F-75) were heat treated in contact with different bioactive materials: (a) powder mixtures of β-tricalcium phosphate (TCP)–bioactive glass (BG) in different proportions (TCP–BG: 60–40, 70–30 and 80–20wt%) and (b) mineral and synthetic wollastonite. Samples were packed with each bioactive material and heat treated for 1h at 1220°C. To characterize the in vitro bioactivity, heat treated samples were immersed in a simulated body fluid. After immersion, a ceramic layer containing Ca and P was formed on all samples. The thicker and more homogeneous layers, identified as apatite, were formed more rapidly on the heat treated samples in contact with 80TCP–20BG and synthetic wollastonite. The more bioactive coatings were selected for MC3T3 cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation assays. Cell proliferation and alkaline phosphatase activity were not affected by the different coatings. Additionally, samples packed with 80TCP–20BG presented a higher cell adhesion than those packed with synthetic wollastonite. On the samples previously packed with synthetic wollastonite, a denser homogeneous Ca- and P-rich layer was formed 21 days after cell seeding and incubation in differentiative conditions.The Co–Cr–Mo alloy (ASTM F-75) As stated in the literature However, other still unanswered questions remain to be issued in order to obtain better results with surface coating of the ASTM F-75 alloy for the development of medical devices. Among those, it is possible to include the following: (i) how the choice of coating materials (TCP, wollastonite, HA, bioactive glasses and so forth) influence the bioactivity of this alloy after treatment with body fluids? and (ii) would the surface bioactivity for those different coatings directly correlate to their biocompatibilities? In order to issue those questions, we have characterized the A biocompatible cobalt base alloy (Biodur ASTM F75, Carpenter, USA) was used to obtain metallic discs of 1.27 The bioactive glass (BG) used in this study was prepared from a mixture of reagent grade chemicals of SiO The β-tricalcium phosphate (TCP) was obtained from a mixture of reagent grade chemicals of CaCO The wollastonite was synthesized using the sol–gel method (under acid conditions) from the reagent grade chemicals of Si(OCH Two discs with 5 The crucibles containing the sandwich samples were placed in an electric furnace (LINDBERG/BLUE, BF51433PC-1). The heat treatment was performed at 1220 After heat treatment each metallic sample was immersed in 150 Both the surface and the cross-section of the metallic samples were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Philips, XL 30 ESEM). The acceleration voltage was 20 For the evaluation of the specific biocompatibility, as defined by Kirkpatrick and Mittermayer MC3T3-E1 mouse preosteoblasts were cultured on Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) Alpha Medium (Gibco) at 37 In order to observe the overall morphology of adhered cells, the samples were processed for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) by a 2 The levels of cell adhesion were evaluated either 4 or 24 In order to study possible effects of the coatings over MC3T3 cells differentiation into a more mature osteoblastic stage, those cells were seeded over the different surfaces and incubated for 7, 14 or 21 days on Osteogenic Conditions (OC), induced by the supplementation of culture medium with 3 The results obtained from the biocompatibility assays (cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation, As we reported previously, after heat treatment, fine agglomerates were observed homogeneously distributed on the metallic surface, containing mainly Ca, P, O and Si. In the cases when the samples were packed using the mixture TCP–BG, Na was also detected    A completely different behavior was observed on the samples treated with the TCP80–BG20 mixture. After only 7 days of immersion in SBF, a peak at 31.7° 2   Based on the SEM, EDS and XRD results presented above, it was possible to select the most bioactive materials, namely the ASTM F75 discs treated with TCP80–BG20 or SW, for the   An initial cell attachment was also observed with TCP80–BG20 surfaces ( As it was not expected, levels of viable cells over the different material surfaces were again followed colorimetrically for up to 1 week ( Finally, the levels of cell differentiation over the studied surfaces were inferred by the alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP) of the MC3T3 cells. Previous works from literature describe a peak of ALP activity usually for 2 weeks, with confluent MC3T3-E1 cells seeded over polystirene, and in the absence of dexamethasone These results demonstrate the feasibility to promote a high