In this study solvent extraction process has been used for separation of cadmium and copper from sulphate solution. A phosphoric acid extractant (D2EHPA) and an oxime extractant (MEX) in kerosene diluent were used as cadmium and copper extractants, respectively. The results showed that 1g/L cadmium could be extracted by 30–35% (v/v) D2EHPA at the pH of 3.5–4. Cadmium separation factor over copper with D2EHPA was calculated 4.04 in best condition of pH (=2). On the other hand 3% MEX separated 1g/L copper over cadmium optimally at the pH of 3.5 and under this condition of pH, copper separation factor is calculated 4495.5. Loading capacity studies showed that copper existence in cadmium aqueous solution reduces cadmium extraction with D2EHPA up to 10% whilst copper extraction percentage with MEX does not vary considerably in the presence of cadmium.Elimination of heavy metals from industrial wastes at the point of environmental aspects was always important. Furthermore there is an attitude toward the recovery of precious metals from low-grade or complex ores, secondary resources and industrial wastes because of the reduction of world's high grade resources and metals high prices. Generally, hydrometallurgical route (leaching–solvent extraction–electro winning) is found suitable to process lower grade ores, wastes such as slag, tailings and recycled solutions In this study recovery and separation of cadmium and copper were considered. Cadmium and its compounds are toxic and poisoning occurs through inhalation and ingestion. In spite of its toxicity, it is used in different industries such as electroplating, pigments, synthetic chemicals, ceramics, metallurgical and photographic products, electronics and other industries Among the available processing alternatives, solvent extraction is a technique that not only meets the strict environmental regulations but also high purity value added products could be produced. Acidic extractants, including carboxylic acids, dialkyl phosphoric and dialkyl phosphinic acids, can be used to extract cadmium (II). The extraction of cadmium (II) is selective in the presence of Zn(II), Ni(II), Co(II), Mn(II), Fe(II), Ca(II) and Mg(II) with ΔpH Among phosphoric acids, (Di(2-ethylhexyl)) phosphoric acids (D2EHPA) which is successfully used as cadmium extractant in several industrial and experimental works, is used in this study and the extraction mechanism of the metal ion (in this case cadmium) with D2EHPA which is diluted in kerosene may be expressed as follows In addition of zinc processing residues cadmium and copper co-existence is seen in different metal processing plants. For instance the dense fumes, which come from smelters of metal bearing ores, are rich in metallic pollutants, such as Cd, Cu, Pb, and Zn The aqueous feed solution containing cadmium and copper was prepared by dissolving appropriate amount of their sulphate salt in distilled water. Sulphuric acid (H Experimental studies were carried in two steps. At first, optimum condition of pH and extractant concentration for extracting of cadmium with D2EHPA and copper with MEX from their pure sulphate solution of each metal were determined. In this stage we have investigated the extraction process in order to obtain optimum conditions of pH and extractants concentrations ([HA]), whereas optimum condition of each desired parameter (pH or [HA]) was determined by varying that parameter whilst all other parameters kept fixed. The condition at which highest extraction percentage happened, were chosen as optimum condition. After that, a solution of both metals was prepared and contacted with organic phases (extractant which diluted in kerosene). Metals concentrations in all aqueous phases were 1 After extraction process organic and aqueous phases were separated using separatory funnel. The solutes (Cd or Cu), which initially was dissolved in aqueous phase (with initial concentration of [A The distribution ratio of the solute can be calculated as following: For practical purposes, as in industrial applications, it is often more popular to use the percentage extraction % Acidic extractants include simple reagents such as carboxylic acids and organophosphorus acids, as well as chelating acids, extraction occurs by a change of the acidity in solution; thus, increasing the pH of solution increases extraction. Acidic extractants extract metals generally according to the following equilibrium reaction: The extent of extraction also depends on the magnitude of the metal–extractant formation constant and concentration of extractant. These factors can be combined with the distribution coefficient in the following equation derived from Eq. The effect of pH on cadmium extraction from synthetic sulphate solution was examined in the range 0.5–4.5 at different D2EPHA concentrations. It was observed from A plot of cadmium extraction using different concentrations of D2EHPA is presented in Initial experiments on the extraction of copper from synthetic sulphate solutions were conducted in the initial aqueous phase pH range 0.5–4.5 using different concentrations of MEX. As it is shown in Based on the previous results, the effect of the concentration of MEX on the extraction of copper was evaluated at distinct pH level (3.5), as shown in The selectivity of one metal over the other(s) is the ease of isolating that metal from the mixed electrolyte solution and is expressed in terms of the separation factor, An aqueous phase of both metals was contacted with D2EHPA (30%) in different pH conditions. It was considered that maximum separation factor occurs at more acidic condition (pH It is important to make a decision regarding the staging requirements, as it is directly related to the cost of operation and maintenance. The McCabe–Thiele diagram helps to set the number of extraction stages needed in a mixer-settler for the extraction of cadmium from the copper solution. Extraction isotherm was obtained by contacting the metals solution and 30% D2EHPA (v/v), at different A/O phase ratios from 1 to 5 and O/A from 1 to 5 at an initial aqueous phase pH of 3.5. Kinetic of cadmium and copper extraction also was studied in which the effect of contact time on metals extraction has been considered using 30% (v/v) D2EHPA and pH  Same solution with previous separation test was contacted with MEX in order to study its capability in copper separation over cadmium. The metals solution was subjected to copper extraction in single stage at different initial aqueous phase pH and A/O ratio of 1:1 using 3% (v/v) MEX. Results which are shown in Loading capacity of D2EHPA and MEX were studied in the optimum conditions of pH and extractant concentration which were determined previously. It was found that cadmium extraction percentage increases with raising of D2EHPA concentration ( D2EHPA's capacity for copper extraction was found approximately 10 times less than of its capacity toward cadmium extraction and as It was also found that copper extraction efficiency increases with rising of MEX concentration ( Optimal cadmium separation over copper with D2EHPA occurs at more acidic and restricted pH than cadmium optimum extraction pH, whilst MEX separated copper over cadmium with grater separation factor and extended domain of pH. Loading capacity studies revealed that 1