Cutting hard rocks has some problems such as low penetration rate and high wear rate of cutting tools. These problems can be solved by the microwave treatment of hard rocks during cutting. In this study, the effects of microwave treatment were investigated on the strength of nine different igneous rocks. First, the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) tests were carried out on the untreated samples. Then, the strength tests were performed on the microwave treated specimens. The results show that the rock strength decreases generally with increasing microwave power and treatment duration. The strength losses and the heating degrees are different for each tested rock type irradiated by microwave power due to the different the mineral content. When treating the specimens with microwave energy, crackings and/or meltings occur depending on the applied power, the exposure duration, and the mineral content. Even a small amount of metallic mineral can increase too much the temperature of a specimen. The UCS and the BTS values of granites decrease generally with increasing surface temperature after 200 °C and 100 °C, respectively. The significant losses in the UCS and the BTS values of syenite and gabbro specimens are generally observed below 100 °C due to their metallic mineral contents or high amount of microwave absorber minerals. It can be concluded that microwave irradiation has important influences on the strength of igneous rocks depending on the applied energy, the exposure time, and mineralogy.The mechanical excavation of rocks has been increasing in mining and civil engineering projects due to its advantages compared to drilling and blasting. However, the cutting rate is low and the wear of cutting tools is high during the excavation of hard and abrasive rocks. There are some preliminary studies on the microwave assisted hard rock breakage. The objective of these studies is to decrease the rock strength by microwave energy before cutting, and therefore to increase cutting rate and decrease cutter wear. Materials can be classified as conductors, insulators (transparents), and absorbers. Conductors reflect microwaves while microwaves pass through insulators with no effect. Absorbers soak up a part of the microwaves and produce heat. The materials absorbing microwaves are called dielectric materials. When the microwaves are absorbed by the dielectric materials, microwaves induce molecular motion by migration of ionic species and/or rotation of dipolar species. The microwave heating of a material depends primarily on its dissipation factor which is the ratio of the dielectric loss or loss factor to the dielectric constant of the material. The dielectric constant is a measure of the ability of the material to retard microwave energy as it passes through. The ability of the material to dissipate energy is called loss factor. In other words, the loss factor represents the amount of input microwave energy that is lost in the material by being dissipated as heat. Therefore, the material with high loss factor is easily heated by microwave energy. Minerals and rocks are dielectric materials and, the dielectric constant and the loss factor of a rock totally depends on its mineralogy and petrography. Each mineral has its own dielectric properties, whereas the complex of several minerals together results in completely new dielectric properties. Some other parameters, such as grain size, mixture percentage, water content, ambient temperature, and the applied microwave frequency reflect the final dielectric properties of the rock. In conventional heating, the rock specimen is heated homogeneously. However, microwave energy heats rocks depending on the dielectric constants of their inherent minerals. Because each type of mineral has different dielectric constants, their heating degrees and thermal expansions will be different after being exposed to microwave radiation. The differential thermal expansion of minerals causes to the interior stresses in the mineral skeleton which leads to micro- and/or macro-cracks within the rock body. Zhu et al. Several researchers have studied the effects of microwave treatment on the rock strength. The aim of these researchers is to provide a base for the possible application of microwave assisted rock cutting. The summary of these studies are as follows: Znamenackova et al. Satish Motlagh Peinsitt et al. Nejati et al. Hassani and Nekoovaght Hartlieb et al. Hartlieb and Grafe Lu et al. Lu et al. Zheng et al. Zeng et al. Bisai et al. Zheng et al. Li et al. Lu et al. Some researchers have investigated the effects of microwave treatment on the mechanical properties of rocks for possible application in the microwave assisted rock excavation. However, these studies are limited, and the treatment conditions are different from each other. In this study, the effects of microwave treatment were investigated on the mechanical properties of nine different igneous rocks. Nine different igneous rocks were included to this study. The samples from different countries consists of six granites, two syenites and one gabbro ( Thin sections were prepared from each rock type in order to detect mineralogical components. The mineral types were determined as percentages under the polarizing microscope. A point-counting device was mounted to the polarizing microscope for this purpose and mineral percentages were determined with precision. Each of the studied rock show different mineralogical, textural, and alteration characteristics. In general, granitic rocks are composed of quartz, orthoclase, plagioclase and biotite minerals in different amounts ( Since all tested rocks are igneous rock, they indicate similar textural characteristics. Additionally, there are some specific textures determined from the petrographical studies. Prevalent specific texture is perthitic texture due to existence of orthoclase and microcline minerals which can be described as “intergrowth of K-feldspar and lamellar or patchy albite (Na)-rich plagioclase minerals”. The mineral types and the percentages of each mineral are given in The NQ (47.6 mm) size cylindrical and disc specimens were prepared for the experimental studies. Cylindrical specimens were about 95 mm height and disc specimens were about 24 mm height. The total number of specimens used in the tests were more than 600. Density, porosity, the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and the Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) tests were performed according to ASTM standards and ISRM suggested methods. The density, the UCS and the BTS tests were carried out on the air-dried specimens. The physico-mechanical test results of the untreated specimens are given in Smooth-cut core samples were used for the determination of densities. The specimen volumes were calculated from the average of several caliper readings. The mass of the specimens was determined by a balance, capable of weighing to an accuracy of 0.01 g of the sample mass. The density values were obtained from the ratio of the specimen weight to the specimen volume. At least three samples were tested for each rock type and the results were averaged. The effective porosity values were determined using the saturation and caliper techniques. The pore volumes were calculated from the dry and saturated weights, and the sample volumes were obtained from the caliper readings. The porosity values were obtained from the ratio of the pore volumes to the specimen volume. The BTS tests were carried out on the core samples having a diameter of 47.6 mm and a height to diameter ratio of approximately 0.5. A tensile loading rate of about 200 N/s was applied until the failure occurred. At least six samples were tested for each rock type, and the results were averaged as the BTS. The UCS tests were performed on the clean-cut and ground core samples, which had a diameter of 47.6 mm and a length-to-diameter ratio of 2.0–2.5. The stress rate was applied within the limits of 0.5–1.0 MPa/s. The tests were repeated at least five times for each rock type and the average value was recorded as the UCS. A 6 kW industrial microwave oven at the frequency of 2.45 GHz was used for the irradiation of the air-dried samples. The microwave powers of 1 kW, 2 kW, and 6 kW were applied at the different exposure durations ranging from 60s to 420s. Three samples were tested for each case. The surface temperature of each specimen was measured with an infrared gun before the microwave irradiation and immediately after removing the sample from the oven. The surface temperatures of the samples taken out of the oven were measured a few seconds. Then, the specimens were placed on the platens of the press, and the strength tests were carried out on the hot samples. The samples cooled down a bit until they failed. However, it was observed that some samples were too hot to touch, even after the experiments. It was also observed that the surface temperature of a specimen was scattered. This is due to the fact that the microwave absorption capacity of each mineral is different from each other. For example, in a coarse-grained granite (Rosa Well granite), low temperature degree was measured on large orthoclase mineral while high temperature degree was measured on the surfaces where minerals pyroxene and biotite are concentrated. The surfaces of the specimens were scanned by infrared gun and the average temperatures were recorded. During microwave treatment of the test specimens, the surface temperatures of some specimens were increased too much, and therefore macro-cracks and local meltings were observed depending on the applied power level and the exposure time (  As depicted in  As seen in At 2 kW power, the strength behaviors of granites are usually similar to that of 1 kW power except granite (Steppe Yellow) as depicted in At 6 kW power, the strength values of most granite types decrease much as shown in The effect of surface temperature on the strength was also investigated for the tested rocks. The UCS and BTS values of the tested rocks as a function of surface temperature are shown in The correlation between the UCS and the temperature of syenite (Volga Blue) is shown in The correlation between the UCS and the temperature of gabbro (Nero Turka) is illustrated in Although the granites are mainly composed of quartz and feldspar absorbing microwave energy less, The average temperature of cylindrical syenite (Volga Blue) specimens is 575 °C for the microwave radiation at 6 kW power for 180s. Moreover, the temperature of some syenite (Volga Blue) disc specimens increased about 900 °C for the treatment at 6 kW power for 120s. Even for the treatment at 1 kW power for a few minutes, the temperature of some syenite (Volga Blue) disc specimens raised to significant levels (about 200 °C). That the temperature of syenite (Volga Blue) increased to high level is due to the fact that it has metallic minerals such as pyrite (3%) and magnetite (2%) which are strong absorbers of microwave radiation. The average temperature of cylindrical syenite (Jungle Green) specimens is 476 °C for the microwave radiation at 6 kW power for 360s. The temperatures of some specimens reached above 550 °C. The average temperature of four syenite (Jungle Green) disc specimens is 419 °C for the microwave radiation at 6 kW power for 180s. The temperature of a specimen reached 864.5 °C. The observed high temperatures in some syenite (Jungle Green) specimens is probably due to the fact that these specimens have tourmaline and garnet minerals which have metallic elements such as aluminum, iron and magnesium and chromium. As shown in The average temperature of cylindrical gabbro (Nero Turka) specimens is 606 °C for the microwave radiation at 6 kW power for 180s. The average temperature of disc gabbro (Nero Turka) specimens is 572 °C for the microwave radiation at 6 kW power for 120s. Even for the treatment at 1 kW power for a few minutes, the temperature of some gabbro (Nero Turka) disc specimens raised to significant levels (about 180 °C). That the temperature of gabbro (Nero Turka) increased to high level is due to the presence of high percentages of pyroxene (42%) mineral which is a strong microwave absorber. It should be noted that some data points in Syagala et al. In this study, the strength behaviors of granites exposed to microwave energy are different from each other as shown in Two different syenite types tested in this study show different behavior. The strength of Syenite (Volga Blue) declines steeply with increasing exposure times at all power levels. The degree of reductions in the strength are approximately the same for all power levels. Another important finding is that too much reduction (approx. 50%) in the strength of Syenite (Volga Blue) occurs at the exposure times of 180s. This is owing to the fact that this rock has metallic minerals such as pyrite and magnetite absorbing microwave strongly. On the other hand, the decrement in the strength of Syenite (Jungle Green) is not as much as that of Syenite (Volga Blue). This is because Syenite (Jungle Green) has not metallic minerals. Besides it has high percentage (32%) of nepheline absorbing microwave less. There are significant decrements in the strength of gabbro (Nero Turka) specimens at the exposure times of 180s and 120s for all power levels. The decrements in the UCS values for 2 and 6 kW powers are higher than that of 1 kW power application. The BTS decrements for 1 and 2 kW powers are approximately the same at the exposure time of 180s. But, the BTS test could not be carried out for the exposure time of 180 s at 6 kW power since the three specimens cracked. It should also be noted that the reductions in the UCS values are generally less than that of the BTS values for the same exposure conditions. This is due to the fact that small samples are heated more quickly than that of large specimens. The strength losses due to microwave treatment increase generally with increasing microwave power and increasing exposure duration. The UCS loss of Syenite (Volga blue) is 50.4% for the exposure times of 180s. The BTS specimens of Syenite (Volga blue) cracked and melted even for 120s. This is probably due to the high metallic mineral contents of these specimens. The UCS loss of Syenite (Jungle Green) is 50.4% for the exposure times of 360s. Some specimens cracked and melted at this treatment duration. The BTS loss of Syenite (Jungle Green) is 47.6% for the exposure times of 180s. That the strength losses of two syenite types are different from each other is due to differences of their mineral contents. The UCS loss of gabbro (Nero Turka) is 21.8% for the exposure times of 180s. All BTS specimens of gabbro (Nero Turka) cracked at the exposure duration of 180s. Therefore, the BTS tests could not be carried out. The UCS of the granites which have a small or significant amount of microwave absorber minerals decrease generally with increasing temperature after 200 °C. Since granite (Nublado) and granite (Kaman Rosa) has no microwave absorber minerals, their UCS decrease very less ( Although the UCS values syenite (Volga Blue) declines rapidly at about 100 °C, the data points are highly scattered ( The data points for syenite (Jungle Green) fluctuate much below 200 °C ( There is a steady decrease in the UCS gabbro (Nero Turka) with increasing temperature ( The influences of the microwave treatment were investigated on the UCS and BTS of nine different igneous rocks. The heating degrees of the specimens were also evaluated in the light of mineralogy. The following conclusions can be drawn from the study: The surface temperature of the studied igneous rocks increases with increasing microwave power and increasing treatment duration. The heating degrees are different for each rock type treated by microwave power depending on the mineral contents. Too high temperatures are observed on some rock types at the comparatively short exposure times due to the content of microwave absorber minerals. The heating degree of each specimen belonging to the same rock type may differ largely from each other due to the differences of own mineral percentages. Depending on the applied microwave power, the exposure duration, and the mineral content, crackings and/or meltings were observed on some samples that their temperatures reached high degrees. Even if the percentages of metallic minerals in a rock body are too low, they increase much the temperature of the rock. The strength of the tested igneous rocks decreases generally with increasing microwave power and increasing exposure time. The strength losses are different for each rock type exposed to microwave energy due to the varying mineral contents. Unlike syenites and gabbro, no or less strength losses in granites occur at low microwave power and exposure duration. The decrements in the strength of granites is also less than that of syenites and gabbro at high microwave power and exposure time. The UCS values of the granites including a small or significant amount of microwave absorber minerals decrease generally with increasing surface temperature after 200 °C. On the other hand, the BTS values declines generally with increasing temperature after 100 °C for all tested granites. The behavior of the tested syenites and gabbro are different from that of the granites. This is due to their metallic mineral contents or high amount of microwave absorber mineral. The significant strength losses are generally observed below 100 °C for syenites and gabbro. Concluding remark is that that microwave treatment has important effects on the strength of igneous rocks depending on the applied energy, the time of exposure, and the mineral content. It can be said that the mineral type and percentages are the most important parameters affecting the heating degree for the same treatment condition. Further study should be carried out on the different igneous rocks having different mineralogy. The effects of the higher microwave power at low exposure durations should be also investigated. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank TUBITAK (The The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at