Properties of snack foods from comminuted, seasoned beef, dried under laboratory conditions at a temperature of 55±2°C were analyzed in this study. Samples were collected after 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7h of drying. The jerky products were evaluated by selected physicochemical and sensory methods. A significant influence of thermal treatment on the sample colour (L
                     ∗, a
                     ∗, b
                     ∗-values) was observed. Results of sensory examination of selected attributes of the analyzed product performed by a trained panel confirmed that dried snack products obtained from beef under non-commercial conditions had the most desirable texture attributes, i.e. high chewiness at such a dryness that the moisture-to-protein ratio (MPR) was 0.5. At this value tensile work was the largest (757.77N×mm). Such a product is an attractive offer for those consumers who are willing to accept original, convenience products meeting at the same time their growing requirements concerning high organoleptic and nutritive value.Products from dried meat, commonly referred to as “jerky” because of the characteristic appearance of the final products have been sold for many years, primarily in the USA, as snack foods. They are products available first of all in large supermarkets, petrol stations, as well as shops selling accessories connected, e.g. with hunting and angling ( In the last decade the American market of meat snack foods has reported a dynamic growth, with the sale increase of this type of products from 631.6 million dollars in 1994 to almost 2.7 billion dollars in 2004. At the same time it is estimated that 39% American families regularly buy meat snack foods ( Apart from the commercial production, the preparation of dried meat snack foods at home has become very popular in recent years. The foods are obtained from appropriately prepared meat material, seasoned and preserved through drying and/or smoking ( In the relatively few experimental studies conducted on dried meat snack foods, the primary concern is first of all to combine their good sensory quality with an appropriate shelf life ( In view of the constantly growing popularity of the convenience food sector in Poland ( The most important sensory attributes of this type of snack food are texture, colour and flavour, determined by the selection of the raw material and the effect of numerous technological factors ( The aim of the study was to investigate the mechanical properties and colour of meat snack food of the jerky type produced under non-commercial conditions using modern measuring equipment. The immediate task was to characterize changes in texture and colour of a ready-to-eat dried product made from comminuted meat with the addition of spices, using instrumental methods and to compare the results obtained with the appraisal of this product using a conventional scoring method. Raw material for the investigations was beef (short loin), which was comminuted using a meat grinder type 686.5 by Zelmer S.A. (Poland) with a mesh size of 3 According to the procedure proposed by Sensory evaluation was performed by a six-member trained panel according to a modified procedure of Dry matter content in the analyzed samples was determined using the drier method ( The colour of jerky samples was measured with a Minolta Chroma meter CR-200 (Minolta Camera Co., Osaka, Japan), which was pressed into tight contact with the surface of the examined material. Reflectance colour parameter: Determinations were conducted at least in triplicate, calculating mean value and standard deviation. To evaluate the significance of differences of the obtained mean values the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and least significant difference (LSD) procedure was applied. The critical range for each pair was calculated using a Processing of seasoned and preserved meat material under non-commercial conditions makes it possible to produce a product with attributes fitting the individual preferences of consumers.  Expected changes were also shown in protein proportions in the analyzed samples, which between the 4th and 5th hour of drying exceeded 50%. Chemical composition, especially water content, in jerky type products is decisive both for their texture and shelf life ( Among numerous criteria, which eventually determine the choice and purchase of a specific food product are its organoleptic attributes, as for example in meat products (  As the water content decreased,the texture of the dried product changed, as evidenced by the statistically significant differences (at As had been expected, with the extension of drying time distinct changes were observed in the colour of the analyzed product ( Results collected in this part of the study indicate that the production of jerky type products under non-commercial conditions is not connected with any significant technological problems. Using relatively simple technological procedures and commonly available equipment it is possible to produce snack products with very diverse quality attributes. Products obtained under non-commercial conditions differ in terms of their colour, texture and flavour from commercially available products ( Results collected within the framework of this study make it possible to formulate the following conclusions: Drying seasoned meat at a specific temperature (55 The application of a modern analyzer and the selected measuring attachment for the objective evaluation of texture in jerky type products makes it possible to describe more thoroughly changes in the product occurring during drying and to describe them using such numerical parameters as maximum force required for complete rupture of the sample, maximum elongation capacity of the sample and work required for complete rupture of the sample. Diversification of texture in jerky type meat products depending on the drying conditions was confirmed by the results of sensory evaluation of samples, performed by a trained panel. Changes in objectively assessed texture during drying were related to organoleptic evaluation by a trained taste panel. In sensory evaluation the highest scores were given to texture of jerky product dried for 5