Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans (A. ferrooxidans) was selected to experimentally study the effects of bacteria on the oxidation of chalcopyrite. The results indicated that A. ferrooxidans remarkably promoted the oxidation of chalcopyrite. The pH of the cell broth medium was observed to increase and then decrease during the bioleaching experiment. The number of suspended bacteria in the bio-oxidation process could be divided into three stages: the initial 4days, in which the bacteria attached to the chalcopyrite surface and the number of suspended bacteria slightly decreased; day 5 to day 52, in which the suspended bacteria clearly increased with time and reached a maximum of 3.58×107
                     cells/L on day 52; and day 53 to day 80, in which the number of suspended bacteria decreased. Other parameters such as redox potential (Eh) and iron ion concentrations increased with time. SEM micrographs showed that the cells were directly attached to the erosion pits on the smooth surfaces of the chalcopyrite. The erosion pits were similar to the bacteria in shape and size, and thus, the pits were likely products of dissolution by organic acids secreted by the attached cells. Compared to the unoxidized chalcopyrite, the elemental sulfur of the eroded chalcopyrite was clearly reduced, and the elemental oxygen was slightly increased. Moreover, a biofilm was present on the surfaces of the chalcopyrite particles. Therefore, the adherence of the cells to the mineral surfaces played a predominant role in altering the mineral appearance, which is important during the leaching of chalcopyrite.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The bioleaching of low-grade chalcopyrite-bearing ores with acidophilic microbes offers alternative methods to conventional leaching and has developed rapidly in many countries ( Many reports have shown that factors such as the specific surface areas of minerals, the structural characteristics of minerals, temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, the rate of bacterium metabolism, and attachment of the bacterium to the mineral surface can affect the microbial leaching rates of chalcopyrite by Three mechanisms have been proposed for the microbial oxidation of sulfides, including indirect leaching, contact leaching, and cooperative (symbiotic) leaching ( Many diverse opinions have been offered about the mechanism of sulfide bioleaching. Fowler et al. performed leaching experiments of pyrite and sphalerite with and without bacteria under constant concentrations of Fe This study aims to improve our understanding of the contribution of The highly pure, handpicked chalcopyrite used in this study was obtained from Donggua Mine in Anhui Province, China. Before the experiments, the chalcopyrite particles were washed first with HCl (1 A strain of Two 250 The concentrations of copper and iron (Fe The secondary precipitates that were collected at different time intervals for SEM analysis were incubated with 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 1.5 After being microbially oxidized, the surface of the chalcopyrite was stained with DAPI staining solution. The DAPI reagent used in the experiment was manufactured by the Beyotime Corporation. The stock DAPI solution was filtered through a 0.22 In general, the microbial oxidation of chalcopyrite is accompanied by the precipitation of iron sulfates. After 20 In the bioleaching system, the pH initially increased with time and reached the peak value of 2.6 on day 44. After day 44, the pH decreased continuously to a value of 2.2 on day 80 ( During the bioleaching process, Eh increased with time from an initial value of 275 Initially, the iron in the solution was mainly ferrous iron, and the concentration of ferric iron was very low ( The SEM micrograph of the chalcopyrite surface after exposure to Meanwhile, the ultraviolet fluorescent image of chalcopyrite after 30 After 80 The interaction of the bacteria with the mineral surface has been shown to be dependent on a number of physical and biochemical parameters ( As shown in It is generally accepted that chalcopyrite dissolves under the oxidative action of ferric ions and the attack action of protons via a polysulfide mechanism (  A fall-rise-fall pattern was observed in the amount of suspended bacteria during the bioleaching study ( The variation of the copper concentration by cells and sterile control are shown in It is well known that the leaching efficiency of chalcopyrite is dependent on the redox potential (Eh) in solution ( As shown in A comparison between EDS analyses of an unoxidized chalcopyrite surface and a partially eroded surface revealed significant differences in their elemental compositions ( The traditional hypothesis that bacteria oxidize sulfides through either a direct mechanism or an indirect mechanism ( We studied the bio-oxidation process of chalcopyrite particles using This work was supported by the