The plasma transferred arc (PTA) technique was used to produce composite coatings based on co-melting of MoS2, TiC and iron ingredients, in an attempt to obtain wear resistant layers with self lubricating properties. As a matter of fact, both molybdenum and titanium are known to form with sulfur either crystalline or amorphous compounds exhibiting special self lubricating properties. In this perspective three coatings containing the same quantity of TiC and increasing MoS2 contents were produced using plain carbon steel material as the substrate. Three other coatings containing only increasing contents of MoS2 without TiC were prepared under the same conditions for comparison.
                  The experiments have shown that both TiC and MoS2 ingredients dissolve completely in the melt under the plasma arc, whereas their elements, Ti, C and S, are redistributed in the solidification products forming new compounds. The influence of the presence of sulfur in the solidification path of the Fe–Ti(Mo)–C system is studied. Although the original MoS2 compound is totally absent in the final microstructure, the composites containing both MoS2 and TiC have formed new complex sulfides, presumably endowed with self lubricating properties. As a result, the wear tests performed with a pin-on-disk apparatus have shown that the coatings which were produced using both TiC and MoS2 ingredients exhibited improved friction coefficients and lower wear rates in comparison to the steel substrate as well as to the composite containing TiC, but exempted from MoS2.Metal matrix composite layers convenient for tribological applications should respond to the following main requirements: a) they should be hard enough and have a high load bearing capacity in order to withstand the abrasive mechanisms prevailing under the application of high loads during the wear process and b) they should possess a low friction coefficient in order to protect the surfaces, of both the coating and of the counterbody, from peeling off and from three body abrasion. In order to provide with a high hardness and a high load bearing capacity, very hard ceramic particles, such as borides, carbides and nitrides, are usually incorporated in the matrix of the composite layers On the other hand, in order to minimize friction under dry wear conditions, solid lubricants, such as graphite, diamond like carbon (DLC) As a result of the above considerations, many metals or ceramics like TiC, TiN and TiB A variety of methods have been used in order to associate a solid lubricant with a hard and tough massive alloy or substrate. MoS An inherent difficulty of the techniques involving high temperatures is the reactivity of the additives This paper concerns the study of the characteristics of coatings produced by using as ingredients TiC and MoS Two series of coatings, A and B, were prepared. In series A, three coatings containing only MoS For the preparation of the coatings a plain carbon steel (St52) with chemical composition 0.2 wt.% C, 1.4 wt.% Mn and 0.3 wt.% Si was used as the substrate material. As alloying additions in the coatings TiC was used as a 2 micron powder of 99.5% purity with a 4.93 g/cm After the treatment, some of the specimens were prepared for examination via optical and electron microscopy (Jeol 6400 and JSM 6380-LV) associated with EDS (Oxford Inca) microanalysis. Microhardness testing was performed using a Vickers Shimatzu tester under a load of 98 N for series A and 294 N for series B coatings, respectively. X-ray diffraction diagrams were obtained using a Siemens 5000 diffractometer, employing a monochromated Cu-Ka radiation. The tribological properties of the coatings were investigated with a pin-on-disk device, according to ASTM G99-95A standard. The tests were operated under non-lubricated conditions in air with a relative humidity of 15–20% at 293–295 K. The pin-on-disk tests were conducted under three different loads of 4.9 N, 9.8 N and 19.6 N for sliding speeds from 0.15 to 0.9 m/s and for a total sliding distance of 1000 m. The specimens were placed on the rotating disk, whereas a 6 mm alumina ball with 1900 HVN hardness was used as the stationary counterbody (pin). The friction coefficient of the coating/Al Spectrographic analysis was performed on specimens B10-30 and B20-30 and showed respectively 1.36%Mo–0.43%S and 2.75%Mo–0.75%S. Although the molybdenum contents are near the expected ones, the sulfur contents are much lower, showing that considerable losses of the order of 50–60% occurred by evaporation during the PTA melting process. Nevertheless, the remaining sulfur content remains high enough to form compounds with potential lubricating properties. All coatings have a thickness of about 1000 μm, they are free of unmelted particles and possess a perfect metallurgical bond with the substrate.  Between the dendritic branches a bright microconstituent is distinguished. In coating A15-00, it has the form of isolated globular particles and in coating A20-00 it forms a discontinuous network. At higher magnification, Using both EDS and WDS microanalysis and X-ray diffraction ( From the above observations, it is concluded that the MoS  There is a good metallurgical bond between the coating and the substrate and the interface shows no defects, such as cracks, porosity, unmelted powder or oxide inclusions. Furthermore, TiC reinforcing particles, distinguished as dark spots on the micrographs of  Coatings B05-30 and B10-30 ( Using X-ray diffraction performed on several samples of all coatings, the following major phases were identified: α-iron (ferrite), TiC, Fe As it is evident from the X-ray diffraction diagrams, there is no MoS Trying to identify the microconstituents on the SEM micrographs using EDS microanalysis was not reliable, since the characteristic lines La for molybdenum and Ka for sulfur are too close to be separated for quantitative or semiquantitative analysis. WDS microanalysis was, however, able to unambiguously distinguish the molybdenum from sulfur compounds. As described before, The solidification mechanism seems quite similar to that of the ternary Fe–Ti–C system The solidification process begins with the separation of primary TiC crystals from the melt, due to their high melting point. These crystals present a highly elongated form. Then as the temperature decreases, the sulfur dissolved in the melt attacks strongly these crystals and forms either a titanium sulfide (TiS) or partially replaces carbon by forming in situ a titanium carbosulfide, Ti From this point down the solidification continues as described for the ternary Ti (Mo)–Fe–C system by Ref. The hardness of series A and series B alloys is shown in The friction coefficient of coatings A10-00, A15-00, A20-00 and of the steel substrate against an Al The wear rates of the coatings, The main wear mechanism observed in all cases is plastic deformation and delamination. Soon, however, strong oxidation takes place and the tracks are covered by thick oxide layers, as in From the above results, it comes out that when MoS The friction coefficients of the reference coating B00-30 and of the coatings B05-30, B10-30 and B20-30 against an Al  The presence of TiC clearly improves the wear resistance with regard to the plain steel substrate due to its hardness, which is higher than the one of the alumina counterbody. In addition, the coarse TiC dendrites preserve the softer matrix from deformation and delamination by supporting the pressures exerted by the counterbody The presence of titanium sulfides compensates this action, by promoting the formation of a lubrication layer on the track. This results in a low friction coefficient, between 0.10 and 0.15 in the case of coating B05-30. It should be mentioned that both TiS and Ti   The difference in the wear behavior becomes clear by comparing the wear track of the reference alloy layer B00-30 with the one of the alloy layer B05-30 in the SEM, However, as it is observed in By comparing the wear behavior of series A and series B coatings, the question rises why FeS is an ineffective solid lubricant compared to TiS and Ti Looking at the Ellingham diagrams for sulfides On the contrary, both TiS and Ti It comes, therefore, out that for a solid lubricant to be effective, the existence of a layered structure is not sufficient, but it should also resist to oxidation at the temperatures developed on the wear surfaces. The plasma transferred arc (PTA) technique was used to produce composite coatings by co-melting of MoS No MoS Molybdenum formed, in all cases, eutectics of Fe Sulfur formed eutectics of FeS with iron, in the case of coatings without addition of TiC. These coatings did not present any self lubricating properties, since the FeS which could eventually act as a solid lubricant, oxidized rapidly and was not present in the contact layers. In the case of coatings with addition of TiC, sulfur reacted strongly with the primary TiC dendrites forming titanium sulfides and carbosulfides. These coatings showed low friction coefficients between 0.10 and 0.25 and reduced wear rates, which are attributed to the selflubricating properties of TiS and Ti It has been shown that thermodynamic stability is required for a solid lubricant, in order to resist oxidation and to be present in the contact surfaces under the elevated temperatures and the hard wear conditions. The State Scholarships Foundation of Hellas (IKY) is acknowledged for financial support to P. Skarvelis.