A general Darcy's law based model for batch pressure filtration of particulate suspensions is described. Based on this model, two measurement indices for quantifying dewatering performance using experimental constant pressure filtration data are formulated. Results obtained using these indices are in accordance with existing results. The proposed procedure can be particularly useful in situations where the operating pressure is known, and one is only interested in investigating the effect of chemical additives and their dosage on dewaterability of a given suspension.Solid–liquid separation is an integral requirement of several processes in the chemical, mineral and water treatment industries. In most applications, the key objective is to increase the solid content of a suspension or to increase recovery of the liquid. It has long been recognized that this objective cannot be efficiently achieved by only increasing the operating pressure. Instead, the key to efficient dewatering operations lies in the use of the right type and dose of chemical additives to control the inter-particle interactions, since these play a very important role in determining the rate of dewatering and extent of dewatering that can be achieved. Even though it is standard practice to use suitable chemical additives for controlling the inter-particle interactions, the process of optimizing the choice and dosage of additives continues to be empirical and frequently time consuming. This is mainly because of the lack of model based measures which can be employed to quantify dewaterability of suspensions using data from laboratory experiments. Constant pressure filtration experiments are often a preferred method for characterizing the dewaterability of suspensions and also for evaluating the effect of additives and their dosage on dewatering. The question addressed here is the following: The process of dewatering by batch constant pressure filtration of materials which form compressible cakes is considered in this work. It is assumed that dewatering occurs in two stages. This feature can be clearly seen in several sets of published experimental data ( Here, Empirical techniques like the capillary suction time (CST) and the specific resistance to filtration (SRF) have been widely used for quantifying the dewaterability of suspensions, especially in the wastewater treatment industry. Though these tests are simple to conduct, it has been recognized that these techniques have several limitations. Most notably, the results obtained by each of these methods depend on conditions at the start of the test. Therefore, it is not possible to directly compare test results obtained using materials differing in their solids content. The classical model based methodology for quantifying the dewaterability of materials is via the Shirato approach to the Terzaghi–Voigt model ( In the above equation, It has been recently demonstrated that the rheological modeling approach of Results using this approach for the characterization of pressure filtration results have been first reported by A second recent and very comprehensive experimental effort on dewaterability of dual polymer flocculated systems has been carried out by This brief overview of available characterization methods shows that there is a need for a method which can be used to quantify dewaterability directly from individual sets of constant pressure filtration data. For example, if an operating pressure is known apriori, such a method would eliminate the experimental effort needed to carry out filtration experiments at several different pressures — which are a pre-requisite for evaluating Detailed derivation of the model we use has been presented in the work of  It is widely recognized that modeling the consolidation stage of dewatering is a complicated task when the filter cake is compressive in nature. In general, the time of dewatering increases exponentially in the consolidation stage and an approximation to dewatering time can be expressed in the following form (  Assuming a smooth transition from stage 1 to stage 2, enables one to equate the slope of the two stages at the transition point, When the Kozeny–Carman correlation is used to model the permeability, i.e. A solution to the consolidation stage model, Eq. The empirical model comprising of Eqs. Finally, it may be noted that for systems in which the ratio of The two measures which can be employed to quantify the dewaterability of suspensions are now presented. From Eq. Somewhat surprisingly, we have also observed that the permeability free compact form of the above equation given by We argue that either of the indices In this work, we use three sets of data taken from the published literature to demonstrate the procedure for quantifying the dewaterability characteristics of materials. For these data, the compressive yield stress and hindered settling (or diffusivity function) data for each chemistry were available and these were individually fitted to power law functions of For each data set, the linearized model of  For these two systems, both the parameters, The next example we consider demonstrates that it is possible for the proposed measures to also capture the scenario when the compressibility and rate of dewatering both increase. This data is taken from the recent work of At values of From the above discussion, it can be seen that the trends in Finally, we briefly discuss an application of Eqs. For systems showing non-traditional behavior, An improved pressure filtration based approach for the rapid characterization of the dewaterability of materials has been presented. The approach has been developed using a Darcy's law based model which permits a unified treatment of both stages of the filtration process. The validity of the procedure has been demonstrated using results available in the published literature. We have also observed that neglecting the effect of the consolidation stage of dewatering, i.e. the evolution from The author is grateful to Prof. P. C. Kapur, Dr. Pradip and Sasanka Raha, of the Tata Research Development and Design Centre (TRDDC), Pune, India for their suggestions and comments. When For reasonably large Since the measured solid volume fraction, Similar linearization based approximate schemes for the rapid determination of the final solid volume fraction,