In this paper the application of poly(3,4-ethlenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulphonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as an anti-fouling modification on a glassy carbon electrode has been investigated for use in an electrochemical sensing system for continuous monitoring of gaseous tricresyl phosphate (TCP). PEDOT is a type of conductive polymer with high stability in aqueous solution. The amphiphilic nature of poly(sodium-4-styrenesulfonate) (NaPSS) helps repel the oxidation products of cresol and reduces electrode fouling. The composite modification has high reproducibility which enables the quantitative determination of gaseous TCP. Although the linear range of detection (50–300ppb) is narrower than that previously reported, this modified electrode enables continuous monitoring of TCP without the need for electrode polishing that may limit practical application of the sensor in the aircraft cabin.Increasing reports have been made concerning the illness of flight passengers and crew members due to suspicious exposure to tricresyl phosphate (TCP), one of common additives in jet engine oils The most commonly used methods for detecting TCP include: gas chromatography and mass spectrometry GC–MS Electrode fouling is a common problem during electrochemical analysis of phenolic compounds, such as cresol, and causes decay in signal response during repetitive measurements Having advantages of high electronic conductivity and porosity All aqueous solutions were prepared using de-ionized Milli-Q water (18 All amperometric experiments were performed with CH 93 Instruments (CH1910B) Bi-Potentiostat. A desktop computer was used to collect the data. Flow injection analysis (FIA) was carried out using a unicell electrode set (BASi, IN) and a switch injection unit (Valco Instruments Co. Inc.) with a 50 The electropolymerization of monomer of EDOT was performed under amperometric conditions in aqueous solution. The solution contained 5 Since Engine oil samples were prepared by dissolving the samples into methanol in 2 The oxidation process of cresol on a bare glassy carbon working electrode was studied with cyclic voltammetry (CV). In the CV curve ( The results of CV experiments demonstrating the change of the I–V at different scan rates are shown in Looking at the reversal scan curve in The formation of fouling layer was studied by SEM, EDS, and AFM. For SEM imaging, the electrodes were sputter coated prior to analysis. One electrode was left polished, while the other one was fouled by 10 injections of 10 To reduce the fouling from oxidation of cresol, PEDOT:PSS modification was applied on glassy carbon electrode via electropolymerization. One important parameter for modification is the reproducibility. To show the ability to control modification, 4 unicell glassy carbon electrodes (2 SEM was also carried out to compare the electrode surfaces modified with 0.3, 0.5, and 2 The controlled PEDOT:PSS modification described above was used to reduce fouling effect in the amperometric detection of cresol. 10 With modified electrodes, a series of cresol samples with concentrations of 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 7.5, and 10 To show the ability of detecting TCP samples, several TCP samples with 10, 20, 30, 50, 100, 200, and 300 Previously, our group reported the detection of TCP with bare glassy carbon electrodes with a linear range of 5–300 Finally, to test the ability of this system to determine TCP in air from real samples, such as samples from jet engine oils, 2 Concentrations of TCP in these oils are summarized in An electrochemical sensing system for continuous monitoring of TCP in gas phase has been developed. The electrode fouling occurring upon oxidation of cresol brought a critical problem for continuous monitoring in long term applications. PEDOT:PSS modification was controllable and was able to greatly reduce the electrode fouling. By applying PEDOT:PSS modification, this sensing system obtained reliable results from detecting TCP in the concentration range of 50–300 The authors would like to thank for the financial supports from US Federal Aviation Administration of the Office of Aerospace Medicine and AUDFS Center, grant USDA-20053439415674A. This material was based on work which supported ALS by the National Science Foundation, while working at the Foundation. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not reflect the official policy or position of the United States Air Force, Department of Defense, NSF, or the U.S. Government. The help with AFM imaging is also appreciated from Prof. Maria Auad in the Polymer and Fiber Engineering Department at Auburn University. Also the authors would like to thank L.C. Mathison and Dr. Clyde Wikle in our department for the help on electronics and mechanical work during sensor fabrication.