The thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity dependences on growth rate in the directionally solidified Al-Cu-.Ni eutectic alloy (Al-32.5 wt%Cu-%1 wt.Ni) were investigated. For this purpose, the Al-Cu-.Ni eutectic alloy was solidified at a constant temperature gradient of 4.93 K mm−1 with different growth rates, V = 9.25–2056.68 μm s−1 by a Bridgman type directional solidification furnace. The thermal conductivity (K) and electrical resistivity (ρ) of the Al-Cu-Ni alloy solidified with different growth rates were measured with the longitudinal heat flow method and DC four−point probe technique at room temperature. The dependences of K and ρ on V for directionally solidified Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy were experimentally obtained by linear regression analysis. Finally, the specific heat difference between solid and liquid phases (ΔCP) and enthalpy of fusion (ΔH) for Al-32.5 wt%Cu-%1 wt.Ni alloy were determined by means of differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) at its melting temperature.Solidification from the melt is an essential step in nearly all established sequences of metal processing. The solidification and melting are phase transformations between solid and liquid phases of the materials. Understanding the mechanism of solidification is very crucial in controlling the electrical, thermal and mechanical properties of metals [ Directionally solidified binary or ternary eutectics can produce well aligned regular structures consisting of fibrous (rod-like) or lamellar constituents. Such structures may offer substantial increases in high-temperature strength, fracture properties, or creep resistance over those of conventionally cast alloys [ Commercial aluminum and its alloys can be divided into three grades. Work-hardenable wrought compositions include the metal itself in various grades of purity (1xxx series) with or without solid solution alloying additions of Mg (5xxx series) or dispersion hardening additions of Mn (3xxx series) age-hardenable wrought compositions embrace those based on Al-Cu, Al-Mg-Si and Al-Zn-Mg (2xxx, 6xxx and 7xxx series, respectively) [ Considering performed studies [ As can be seen from literature [ First aim of the present work is to directionally solidify the Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy with the different growth rates at a constant temperature gradient. Second aim of this work is to measure the thermal conductivity (K) and electrical resistivity (ρ) of directionally solidified Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy. Finally aim is to experimentally investigate the influence of growth rates (V) on K, and ρ values for directionally solidified Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy. The experiments were performed in several steps for Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy. These orders are; preparation of the alloy, microstructure observation and the measurements of solidification parameters, thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity. Details for these steps are given bellows. In present study, the composition of alloy was taken as Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni in order to growth the eutectic phases from ternary liquid. Molten Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni alloy was prepared from 99.99% pure aluminum, 99.99% pure copper and 99.95% pure nickel using a vacuum melting furnace. The molten alloy was poured into graphite crucibles (4 mm ID, 6.35 mm OD and 200 mm in length), held in a hot filling furnace at approximately 50 °C above the melting point of eutectic alloy. The molten alloy in the crucible was directionally solidified to get a completely full specimen. Each specimen was then placed in a Bridgman type furnace within a graphite cylinder (300 mm in length 10 mm ID and 40 mm OD). In the experimental technique, the sample was heated about 150 K above its melting point and then growth was started by pulling it downwards by means of different speeded synchronous motors after the stabilizing the thermal conditions under an argon atmosphere. After 10–12 cm steady state growth, the samples were quenched by rapidly pulling it down into the water reservoir. The temperature of water in the reservoir was kept at 283 K to an accuracy of ±0.01 K using a In commercial industry, there are six kinds of synchronous motors (1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 60 rps). The maximum growth rate of the 500.0 μm s Directional solidification of the samples were done at a constant temperature gradient (G = 4.93 K mm In order to reveal the microstructures on samples, some metallographic processes were carried out on the sample. The quenched sample was cut into 15 mm length. The transverse and longitudinal sections of the specimens were flatted with several SiC papers, and samples were cold mounted by the help of epoxy-resin. After polishing, the samples were etched with a Keller's microetchant (1.5 ml HCl, 1 ml HF, and 2.5 ml HNO Photographs of microstructures were taken from the transverse and longitudinal sections of samples with a light optical microscope and a LEO scanning electron microscopy (SEM). But the resolution of optical microscope was too poor to see the microstructure of the samples solidified high growth rates thus, the microstructures of samples solidified all growth rates were photographed with a SEM. Some typical SEM images from transverse sections of directionally solidified Al-Cu-Ni eutectic samples are shown in The temperatures in the samples were measured with K-type 0.25 mm in diameter insulated three thermocouples which were fixed within the sample with spacing of 10 mm. A 1.2 mm OD × 0.8 mm ID alumina tube was used to insulate the thermocouples from the melt. All the thermocouple's ends were then connected the measurement unit consists of data-logger and computer. The cooling rates were recorded with a data-logger via computer during the growth. When the solid-liquid interface was at the second thermocouple, the temperature difference between the first and second thermocouples (ΔT) was read from data-logger record. The time taken for the solid-liquid interface phases the thermocouples separated by known distances was read from data-logger record. Thus, the value of growth rate (V = ΔX/Δt) for each sample was determined using the measured value of Δt and known value of ΔX. The temperature gradient (G = ΔT/ΔX) in the liquid phase for each sample was determined using the measured values of ΔT and ΔX. Details of these measurements of ΔT, ΔX and Δt are given in Refs. [ The electrical resistivity (ρ) is one of the fundamental physical properties of materials. In literature, a lot of works on the electrical resistivity of pure metals can be found but the studies on electrical resistivity of metallic alloys are very limited. The value of electrical conductivity for metallic alloys is affected by temperature, grain size, plastic deformation, heat treatment and composition of alloys [ In order to examine the dependence of electrical resistivity on growth rates, the values of ρ for directionally solidified Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy with different growth rates were measured by DC four−point probe method which is an apparatus that used to measure the semiconductor resistivity of the systems. It consists of four equally spaced platinum metal tips with finite radius. Each tip is supported by springs on the other end to minimize sample damage during probing. The four metal tips are the part of an auto-mechanical stage which travels up and down during measurements. A high impedance current source is used to supply current through the outer two probes; a voltmeter measures the voltage across the inner two probes to determine the sample resistivity. The constant current and potential difference for a given temperature were measured by The thermal conductivity (K) and electrical conductivity (σ) are the main fundamental properties of materials such as density, melting point, entropy, enthalpy, resistance, and crystal structure parameters. Although the values of K and σ for pure metallic materials were obtained theoretically and experimentally, there are not enough information and data available about the thermal and electrical conductivity of metallic alloys. The values of K and σ for alloys change, as in pure materials, not only with temperature and growth rates but also it changes by compositions of alloys. Many attempts have been made to determine the thermal conductivity values of solid and liquid phases in various materials by using different methods. One of the common techniques for measuring the thermal conductivity of solids is the longitudinal heat flow method. In the longitudinal heat flow methods, the experimental arrangement is so designed that the flow of heat is only in the axial direction of a road specimen. Under steady−state condition and assuming no radial heat loss or gain, thermal conductivity is determined by the following expression from one−dimensional Fourier−Biot heat conduction equation [ The measurement of thermal conductivity for solid is difficult. A longitudinal heat flow apparatus was designed to routinely measure the thermal conductivity of solid materials [ One purpose of present work is to find the relationships between the growth rate and thermal conductivity for directionally solidified Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy. Thus, the thermal conductivity measurements were performed using a similar apparatus [ To measure the thermal conductivity of directional solidified Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy, the quenched sample was removed from the graphite crucible, cut into length of 30 mm (cutting place is 10 mm above from closed end of central alumina tube while it is 20 mm down from closed end of central alumina tube) and then placed at the longitudinal heat flow apparatus. When one side of sample was heated by using a hot stage, the other side of specimen was kept cool by using a cold stage. The temperature of heater was set to 300 K and controlled to an accuracy of ±0.01 K with a The sample was annealed at least four hour under steady state condition. During the annealing, a constant linear temperature gradient was provided, K-type thermocouples (0.5 mm diameter) were used to measure the temperatures into sample and the measurements of constant current and potential difference were made. The thermal conductivity of the alloy was then calculated by using the determined values of A, Q, ΔT and ΔX from equation The difference between the specific heat liquid phase and the specific heat solid phase (ΔCp) and the enthalpy of fusion (ΔH) are the important parameters of the materials. These parameters were measured by using a The DSC curve was obtained for Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy. The value of ΔH was determined using the area under the peak and the value of ΔCp was determined by using the values of ΔH and T To determine individually the effect of growth rates (V) on thermal conductivity (K) and electrical resistivity (ρ) at room temperature in Al-Cu-Ni eutectic system, the samples were unidirectionally solidified with a wide range of growth rates (9.25–2056.68 μm s The phase diagram liquidus projection of Al-Cu-Ni alloy was evaluated and the eutectic composition of Al-Cu-Ni alloy was identified as Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni [ At a constant temperature gradient (4.93 K mm The electrical resistivity ( Thus, the Hall-Petch type relationships between electrical resistivity and the microstructure spacing or growth rate can be expressed as follows, As mentioned above, the electrical resistivities of directionally solidified samples for directionally solidified Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni alloy were measured with the four−point probe method at room temperature (300 K). The variations Hall-Petch type equations of electrical resistivity (ρ) with the growth rate (V) are plotted in It can be seen from Also, a comparison of present results with the experimental results obtained in previous works for Al–30.0 wt%Cu–6wt%Mg [ As can be seen from Eq. In Thus, the relationship between thermal conductivity and growth rate in the directional solidified Al-Cu-Ni alloy was obtained for low growth rate (LGR = 9.25–170 μm s The correlation coefficient values of k As can be aso seen from Al-Cu-Ni eutectic alloy was heated with a heating rate of 10 K/min from 300 K to 1000 K by using a Perkin Elmer Diamond model DSC and the temperature variation with heat flow for this alloy is given in In present work, Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni eutectic alloy was directionally solidified with a wide range of growth rates at a constant temperature gradient and then the microstructure, electrical and thermal conductivities at room temperature and thermal properties were investigated. The principal results obtained in this work can be concluded as follows; The microstructure of Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni have fine cellular eutectic microstructure with increasing growth rates. At a constant temperature gradient (4.93 K mm The variations Hall-Petch type equations and dependency of electrical resistivity on growth rate was obtained for low, high and all growth rates at a constant temperature gradient (G = 4.93 K mm Dependence of thermal conductivity on growth rate for directional solidified Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni alloy at a constant temperature gradient (4.93 K mm From the plot of heat flow versus temperature, enthalpy of fusion, specific heat difference between liquid and solid phases and melting temperature for Al–32.5 wt%Cu–1wt%Ni alloy were found to be 235.63 J g This work was supported by