This study compares coal mine tailings management strategies using life cycle assessment (LCA) and land-use area metrics methods. Hybrid methods (the Australian indicator set and the ReCiPe method) were used to assess the environmental impacts of tailings management strategies. Several strategies were considered: belt filter press (OPT 1), tailings paste (OPT 2), thickened tailings (OPT 3), and variations of OPT 1 using combinations of technology improvement and renewable energy sources (OPT 1A–D). Electrical energy was found to contribute more than 90% of the environmental impacts. The magnitude of land-use impacts associated with OPT 3 (thickened tailings) were 2.3 and 1.55 times higher than OPT 1 (tailings cake) and OPT 2 (tailings paste) respectively, while OPT 1B (tailings belt filter press with technology improvement and solar energy) and 1D (tailings belt press filter with technology improvement and wind energy) had the lowest ratio of environmental impact to land-use. Further analysis of an economic cost model and reuse opportunities is required to aid decision making on sustainable tailings management and industrial symbiosis.Coal is utilized in many countries worldwide as a fossil fuel. Globally, the utilization of coal is 3.4 and 3.8 times higher than use of oil and natural gas, respectively ( These numbers indicate that coal-based industries have an important contribution to make to a country's development, not only in developed but also in developing countries. In Australia, for example, more than 64% of electricity generated comes from coal, 21.3% from natural gas, 7.2% from hydropower, and 4.4% from windpower ( Coal tailings, also referred to as fine coal rejects, are produced from fine coal processing. The classification of fine coal is based on particle size in the range 0.15 mm–1.0 mm. Fine coal processing represents about 10–20% of the CHPP feed ( Although the application of LCA in mining is not as widespread as in some other fields (e.g. agriculture or food), some mining LCA studies can be found in the literature. The goals of these LCAs vary and include evaluating the environmental impact of two different alternative technologies for the disposal of mineral mine tailings ( The aim of this study is to compare the environmental performance/impact of different mine tailings management strategies, and to evaluate the magnitude impact of land-use change. To achieve these objectives, three mine tailings strategies and five improvement strategies were selected and applied at a coal mine site located in New South Wales (NSW) Australia. The potential impacts of each of these strategies were analyzed using SimaPro with two impact methods: the Australian Indicator and ReCiPe ( The case selected is an open pit mine that is projected to extract about 20 million tonnes per annum (Mtpa) of ROM coal and operate for 20 years. Four scenarios were developed in order to compare the potential impacts of different tailings management strategies, as shown in The objectives of this study were to develop an inventory of different tailings management scenarios, to assess and compare the environmental impacts of each tailings management scenario, and to determine the associated land-use impacts. In addition, the most sustainable management option for fine coal tailings management was also to be determined. The functional unit (FU) is defined as 1 tonne of fine coal concentrate slurry generated by flotation cells. A life cycle inventory (LCI) considers the input and output of a product throughout its life cycle (ISO 14044). In this study, the product was fine coal concentrate slurry from flotation cells which also generates tailings as a by-product. This section describes the system boundary and operation of each scenario, the data sources, and some of the main assumptions of this study. The LCA system boundary mainly consists of three stages: segregation of fine coal, mechanical dewatering, and tailings transportation. Flotation cells are fed with raw coal slurry originating from the de-sliming process in the CHPP, where raw coal particles smaller than 0.1 mm are separated. Two types of chemicals are utilized to separate coal from its impurities: methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) as a frother and diesel oil as a collector. The segregation process generates two products, namely coal concentrate slurry and tailings slurry. This study is focused on comparison of three options for management of the tailings slurry generated by flotation cells. The different handling methods of coal tailings are applied when flotation cells generate tailings with 20% solids or more. The first two steps of this option (i.e. flotation and thickening) are also used in options two and three. The thickener underflow 30% solids are pumped into a belt press feed sump and distributed to the belt press filter machine as shown in During the flocculation stage, the fine coal tailings are flocculated using two types of polymer: an anionic flocculant and a cationic coagulant. The free water in the flocculated slurry is drained by gravity through the drainage (lower) belt, leaving a mat of solids. Pressure is first applied in the wedge stage, squeezing the remaining water out of the tailings. Further dewatering occurs during the high-pressure stage when the tailings solids are compressed and sheared between belts and rollers. Tailings with 65% solids are discharged from the belt press filter and are transferred by conveyor to a transfer point, from where trucks transport the tailings cake to a disposal area (reject emplacement). The tailings from flotation cells flow by gravity to a tailings thickener and anionic flocculant is added to the tailings thickener to assist in the settling and aggregation of tailings. Underflow tailings from the thickener with 30% solids are pumped into a paste thickener, as an extension of the normal thickening process. An anionic flocculant is added to the paste thickener to bind the fine particles together. Flocculated particles with 50% solids settled at the bottom of the paste thickener are then pumped and transported by pipeline into the tailings disposal area. The overflow water from the thickener and paste thickener flows to a clarified water tank by gravity. The tailings from flotation cells flow by gravity to a tailings thickener and anionic flocculant is added to the tailings thickener to assist in settling and aggregation. Underflow tailings with 30% solids from the thickener are pumped and transported by pipeline into the tailings dam. The overflow water from the thickener flows to the clarified water tank by gravity. LCIA modelling was performed using Simapro 8.0 software. Necessary materials, energy, chemicals, and equipment were identified for each of the three tailings management options. Site-specific data were obtained from a publicly available consultant report (QCC Resources Pty Ltd: ‘dewatering option report’). To complete the LCI, laboratory results and information from the literature were used as supporting data. Assumptions made during the inventory analysis elaboration stage are as follows: The water used in the three options are from a close-cycle water system, with the reclaimed water generated from each tailings management process returned to the plant and reused. There are two types of disposal areas used for final tailings disposal: a tailings dam for tailings with 30% and 50% solids, and reject emplacement area for tailings with 65% solids. The energy consumption for underflow pumping was obtained from rheology laboratory results generated in previous research by Other data related to equipment maintenance/transportation, labour, revegetation, and tailings disposal site monitoring and inspections were excluded from the study due to lack of data. As shown in The method employed to analyse the potential environmental impacts of each scenario was the Australian indicator set methods version 2.01. This method is composed of 12 impact categories (midpoint): global warming (GW), eutrophication (EU), land-use (LU), water use (WU), solid waste (SW), fossil fuels (FF), minerals (MN), human toxicity (HT In order to address this limitation, the authors opted to also use the ReCiPe method as well to calculate the environmental endpoints. This method was developed by a number of institutions including RIVM and Radbound University, Institute of Environmental Sciences (CML) at Leiden University, and PRe Consultants. Three types of endpoint categories are included, as shown in Two land-use elementary flows are land occupation and land transformation, with the differences between the two associated with the land occupation type and period ( Currently, there are challenges related to land use modelling using biodiversity indicators. The use of land to support mining operations results in a number of environmental impacts. These impacts are mainly caused by functional changes in the land prior to and during mine operations. Mining companies are required to revegetate to restore the land function to its original condition. In this study, the authors assumed that the pre-mining and post-mining land quality would be similar (Q = 1). However, this assumption does not apply when permanent degradation has occurred. The four mine tailings disposal scenarios were assessed in terms of material and energy inputs as shown in The different levels of energy consumption associated with each scenario were mainly due to the differences in energy use by the installed dewatering technology. For example, the belt press used to produce tailings with higher mass percent solids than the paste thickener required 10% less energy and generated 19% fewer tailings by weight. This means that using the belt press provided two advantages (lower energy use and higher tailings solids production) over use of the paste thickener. In addition, producing higher tailings solids also means less land required for tailings disposal, as shown in The introduction of new technology into the base case scenario could reduce energy use. Technological improvement during aeration and sparging in option 1A (belt press with upgraded technology) resulted in a decrease in energy consumption by more than 45% of the total energy usage. As a result, option 1A had the lowest energy use compared to other scenarios. However, this scenario then had the highest level of chemical input including MIBC, anionic and cationic flocculant used in the flotation and belt press system. These data were assessed by life cycle impact assessment to estimate their contribution to environmental impacts, as presented in Section Data presented in Section Improvement strategies were introduced to reduce the environmental impact (hotspots percentage), as follows: 1) Technology improvement in column flotation by replacing the aeration supply system and sparging method. The aeration supply uses a blower instead of a compressor, and the agitator method is used to replace the recycle pump system; 2) Introducing renewable energy to change the current mine site energy mix. Two types of renewable energy (solar and wind) were considered in this study, with these being the two main sources of renewable electricity generation in New South Wales (NSW) after snowy hydropower ( A total of eight mine tailings management scenarios were assessed during the impact evaluation stage, as shown in The mine tailings management option that generated the highest environmental impact in most of the impact categories was Option 2 – thickener paste. All categories (GW, EUT, LU, SW, CED, and HT) were largely dominated by the operation of the flotation tank and paste thickener which consumed a large amount of energy. The highest water use was Option 1 which required 2.8 m The authors provide an example of the comparison between energy use and global warming impact to give an overview of the impact of technology and renewable energy for each option as shown in  As mentioned in the ReCiPe methodology ( Option 1 shows a higher score compared with option 3 for all damage categories. This impact score reduces significantly when technology and renewable energy (Option 1B and 1D) are introduced as shown in Land use change associated with mining operations can lead to substantial impacts including wildlife habitat loss, contamination of water and land, chemical contamination of surface and ground water, and lowering of the water table ( As noted above, the case study open pit coal mine is located in New South Wales (NSW) Australia with production rate up to 20 Mtpa. ROM coal is cleaned to produce coal with an ash content of around 24%. ROM extracted from the open pit is processed in the CHPP to produce 70% coal (product) and 30% waste coal (rejects). Coal rejects consist of 25% fine reject/tailings and 75% coarse rejects. The total tailings generated range from 0.1 Mt dry/yr in the early exploitation stage to 9.6 Mt dry/yr from the fifth year until the end of mine life. Tailings are disposed of at a Tailings Storage Facility (TSF). Three disposal options were assessed in this study, as shown in Pre-mining land use is mostly classified as class IV to VI (grazing land). The mine rehabilitation strategy indicates that post-mining land use will be dominated (more than 50%) by woodland use normally associated with rural land capacity class IV to VI ( The estimation of land-use presented in Section Introducing renewable energy in Option 1B-1E reduces the magnitude of their environmental impacts. However, this strategy also increases the area of land required for renewable energy production. Based on the area (m The choice of renewable energy technology significantly affects the land requirement. The land required for wind energy sources to generate 100% and 10% of 20 GWh energy is 2.7 ha and 0.27 ha respectively. Wind energy sources required 59% less land compared to a solar-PV energy source. Mine tailings management options provide a wide range of opportunities for mining companies to determine the best tailings disposal option based on their mining characteristics. For this case study, eight scenarios were developed and are shown in The advantages of technology improvement and renewable energy utilization are also demonstrated by the percentage ratio of environmental impact to land-use as presented in The application of ReCiPe, a European method, to calculate endpoint environmental impact in an Australian mining context has some limitations. Nevertheless, this approach was assumed to be the best available at the time, as the Australian method has even more limitations. For example in the Australian endpoint method, some of the impact categories including eutrophication, and land-use were not operational with regional normalization and weighting factors. In addition, this method only sets the greenhouse impact category as a single score. As a result, the authors opted to use ReCiPe (worldwide) for the endpoint method because it integrates normalization and weighting factors into all impact categories. However, the limitations of this approach nevertheless need to be borne in mind, as there are significant differences between Australia and European environmental impact contexts. Another challenge of this study related to data availability because these data are limited publicly. The data used were gathered from various sources including consultant reports, books, and research papers. In some cases, reasonable assumptions were also made where applicable. This might create a problem with the accuracy of results generated. For instance, the authors did not consider the quality of coal mined during the operation period. The volume of coal produced depends on the quality of the coal mined. For example, higher impurities in coal lower the amount of coal (product) generated and this may also increase water and energy consumption during processing. Finally, it should be noted that this study is specific to an open pit coal mine in NSW, Australia. Application of the method to another mine could lead to different results because of the specific characteristics of each mine. The same applies to the fact that the electricity grid mix in NSW has a very high percentage of fossil fuel energy (black coal) which might substantially increase impacts related to electricity production. Coal mine tailings can be transported in various forms including wet or dry. Wet methods usually involve use of a pipeline to transport tailings from CHPP to TSF. Dry methods, including belt press methods, seek to reduce the water content in tailings slurry to form tailings cake. Tailings cake generated by the belt press method is then disposed of. Some coal mine sites implement a co-tailings disposal method, in which the tailings cake is disposed of together with coarse coal. Alternative disposal methods provide an opportunity for mine sites to select a method that is suited to their site characteristics. Environmental impacts and land-use variables can be used as parameters to determine the feasibility of different tailings disposal methods that increasing the sustainability performance of mining waste management. The results of this study indicated that thickened tailings (Option 3) generated the lowest environmental impact compared to the belt press (Option 1) and paste thickener (Option 2) methods. However, in terms of land-use, Option 3 occupied the highest land, close to 1000 ha. This highest land-use makes this option as an unattractive proposition compared to the other two options (Option 1 and Option 2). Two strategies (technology improvement and renewable energy sources) were introduced into the belt press option that required the least area of land. These measures can significantly reduce the overall environmental impact. The two lowest ratios of environmental impacts to land-use were generated by Option 1B (0.93%) and Option 1D (0.97%). Option 1D requires less land (1.0%) than does Option 1B. This study also indicates the importance of considering the environmental impact and land use aspects of coal mine sites prior to selecting a tailings disposal method. Further analysis of economic aspects and reuse opportunities is also required for comprehensive discussion of sustainable tailings management and industrial symbiosis. The authors would like to thank Mr. Andreas Monch, Project Manager Integrated Tailings Management (CSIRO), and Dr. Andrew Chryss, Senior Research Engineer (CSIRO) for their contributions to the comprehensive discussion on tailings management. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at