The objective of this study is to find a suitable quantity of carbide lime in acid mine drainage (AMD) treatment. Carbide lime, which is a waste of acetylene gas process was used as neutralisation material in AMD treatment. This study used carbide lime, because it has high calcium content that can increase pH value of AMD. Carbide lime also has the capability to reduce certain heavy metals in water sample such as cadmium, lead, zinc etc. Water sample used in this study was collected from a tailing pond of an active tin mine and its pH was around 2.6–2.8. Jar test was used in the laboratory to investigate the capability of carbide lime in treating acid mine drainage. The optimum quantity of carbide lime obtained in treating AMD is 1.5g which can increase pH value and reduces certain heavy metals that comply with Standard A and B of Environmental Act 1974. Other quantities such as 2.0g and 2.5g carbide lime were capable to reduce heavy metals and semi heavy metal but pH values obtained were higher compared to both standards of Environmental Act 1974. Generally, the experiment results show that carbide lime is suitable to be used to treat AMD.Carbide lime or lime sludge is a waste of acetylene gas process when calcium carbide reacts with water through the hydrolysis process Previous study shows that carbide lime has high impurities caused by the reactants and reaction processes. Carbide lime can be classified as not hazardous or dangerous but in Malaysia is considered as schedule waste that needs proper managing and disposal. Carbide lime has pH Carbide lime can be used in many purposes such as agriculture, sewage, water treatment and in certain industrial processes Previous study showed that carbide lime can treat waste water effectively. It has the capability to increase pH value and also can treat heavy metals for example at pH ranges 10–11 for zinc, 9.2–11.6 for lead, 4–11.8 for iron and 7–11.8 for copper Every year global mining industry activities produce billion tonnes of solid inorganic wastes or by-product and effluent caused by its mineral processing to produce metals There are two methods to neutralise and to reduce heavy metals content in AMD using chemicals or biological mechanisms. The methods can be divided in two; (i) active that needs ceaseless input of material to control the process and (ii) passive that needs a small amount of material input during operation process The purpose of this study is to prove that carbide lime that has capability to neutralise pH and to reduce heavy metals content in AMD indirectly can assist mine operators use this material as alternative to substitute others chemicals. Carbide lime sludge was collected from acetylene gas plant in Perak, water sample (AMD) was collected from an active tin mine pond tailing from Perak. Both locations were situated in northern part of Perak State. The locations were shown in Grab sampling was used to take the samples of carbide lime and water. For carbide lime, 15 For water sample, 30–40 bottles with volume 1 X-ray fluorescence (XRF-1700, Shimadzu, Japan) was used to determine the content of metal oxides in carbide lime before reaction, Laser Particle Size Analysis (Analysette 22 Compact, Fritsch, Germany) was used to determine the fine size of carbide lime, Carbon and sulphur analyser (G4 Icarus HF, Bruker, Germany). Portable pH meter (A329, Thermo Scientific, Indonesia) was used to record pH of water sample before and after reaction, ICP-OES (Optima 5300 DV, Perkin Elmer, USA) was used to detect heavy metals in water sample before and after reaction. The method used in this experiment is a Jar Test. Jar test is one of the methods that related to active treatment. The experiments were carried at room temperature. In these experiments five different weights of carbide lime were weighed; 0.5 For experiments 1–5, pH values were recorded with interval time at 5   The results show that the weight of carbide lime is directly proportional to pH values. From the experiment, the pH value increased slowly when 0.5  This experiment demonstrated that carbide lime waste can be used as AMD treatment because of its capability to increase pH and to reduce heavy metals content in AMD water. Carbide lime waste assumed as schedule waste should be used as alternative material in AMD treatment. Jar test method is very simple and easy to carry out active treatment. The weight parameters used in this study are suitable for AMD treatment, however the best parameter chosen is 1.5 The authors acknowledge Mineral Research Centre Director, Tuan Haji Shahar Effendi Abdullah Azizi for his support and also to Universiti Teknologi Malaysia. Appreciation also goes to Mineral Research Centre staff especially Section Head of Rock Based Technology, Tuan Haji Nasharuddin Isa and his staff, staff of Mining and Quarry Branch, last but not least staff of Clay Based Technology Section.