Introduction
                  Anatomical reduction of displaced acetabular fracture is not without its’ limitations and complications. This study is conducted to assess clinical and radiological outcomes as well as complications of treating displaced acetabular fractures with emphasis on anatomical reduction in weight-bearing area, mainly the posterior column, and imperfect reduction of the anterior column is acceptable. However, stability of both columns is mandatory.
               
                  Methods
                  It was a retrospective study carried out in a Level 1 arthroplasty and trauma centre. 23 patients (17 males, 6 females) with average age of 50.1 years (range, 36–68 years) with displaced acetabular fracture treated with combined incisions and plate-cable systems were included. There were 3 elementary and 18 associated fractures according to Letournel classification. Average follow-up was 23.5 months (range, 12–38.7 months). Mean operation time was 160min (range: 75–320min). Functional scores were evaluated using Harris Hip Score (HHS) whilst reduction was assessed by Matta criteria. Any displacement of reduction, osteoarthritis, heterotopic ossification, and other complications was recorded.
               
                  Result
                  65.2% (15/23) of the patients obtained excellent HHS and 21.7% (5/23) had good HHS. There were 12 anatomical, 6 imperfect, and 5 poor reductions. No displacement was recorded in final follow-up. Complications documented: three lateral femoral cutaneous nerve injuries, two conversions to total hip arthroplasty, three Brooker stage 1 heterotrophic ossification, one pulmonary embolism and one screw irritation. No incidence of wound breakdown, infection and radiological osteoarthritis was reported.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Imperfect reduction of the anterior column provided clinical outcomes that are as good as total anatomical reduction. This approach minimizes soft tissue damage and reduces perioperative morbidities.In order to restore congruency of the articular surface and minimize perioperative morbidities in both elementary or associated displaced acetabular fractures, open anatomical reduction, stable internal fixation and early ambulation are crucial elements The approach used in this study emphasizes stability of both columns and anatomical reduction of weight-bearing area only, mainly the posterior column and finds an imperfect reduction of the anterior column acceptable. The approach aims for clinical outcomes that are as good as total anatomical reduction of acetabulum, particularly in avoiding post-traumatic osteoarthritis. In addition, this approach minimizes unnecessary soft tissue dissection and prevents injuries to the important yet high-risk neurovascular structures around the anterior column. Since 2009, above-mentioned principles were applied in treatment of displaced acetabular fractures using double incisions, plating and cables with a custom-made cable introducer. To date, there is only one paper reported fixation of transverse acetabular fracture using the same principle 23 patients (23 hips) who had combined incisions and plate-cable system for displaced acetabular fractures between June 2009 and December 2013 were retrospectively reviewed. There were 17 male and 6 female patients with a mean age of 50.1 years old (range, 32–68). The mean body mass index was 21.3 (range, 15.8–27.7). Preoperative diagnosis was made based on plain radiographs and 3-D CT scans. 22 patients suffered isolated acetabular fracture and one patient had concomitant acetabular fracture with femoral neck fracture. We classified each fracture according to Letournel & Judet classification Harris hip score (HHS) Radiological outcomes were evaluated using plain radiographs (antero-posterior, lateral, both oblique 45° Judet views) during each follow-up. Using Matta suggestion All surgeries were performed by the first author. In this case series, Dall-Miles cable (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ) and a specialized custom-made long curved cable introducer were used for all patients ( Mini iliofemoral approach with total measurement of 6–8 With traction of affected lower limb, the cable was gradually tightened at the same time that traction was applied to affected lower limb. In the event of inadequate reduction, elevation and traction of posterior column with bone hook was used. The adequacy of the reduction is assessed through intensifier imaging and finger palpation of the sciatic notch by the first author. For the anterior column reduction, bone impactor was used to indirectly reduce the elevated anterior column fragment while cable was tightened. It is recommended to add a curved reconstruction plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA) and screws after the cable reduction, for rigid stability. All patients had the same post-operative rehabilitation protocol, whereby postoperative immobilization or traction was not required. Active range of motion of the affected hip commenced the day after surgery. Patients were allowed to perform non-weight bearing walking with two clutches from postoperative day three, partial weight bearing at six weeks and full weight bearing at 12 weeks after operation. For the prevention of deep vein thrombosis, early mobilization was encouraged and mechanical thigh and calf pump with 2 weeks of low molecular heparin was given. No prophylaxis agent for heterotopic ossification was used. All date were expressed as mean and range. Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS statistical software system version 20.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Fisher’s exact test was used for categorical variables with small expected numbers, whereas student’s Patients were operated on the average 5.7 There was no occurrence of complications during operation. However, postoperatively, there were 3 cases of lateral femoral cutaneous nerve injury that fully recovered within 6 months. Two patients were converted to total hip arthroplasty (THA) due to non-union of the femoral neck fracture ( Following Judet and Letournel classification, there were 3 patients with elementary and 20 patients with associated acetabular fractures. 3 elementary fractures (anterior column) were included in this case series as they displaced more than 3 This study has several limitations. Being a retrograde study and subjected to recall bias, it is limited in its ability to generate details about the complications post acetabular fixation. Patient demography is heterogeneous with relatively short duration of follow-up without control group. As the sample size of each subgroup is small, it is difficult to conclude whether the fixation is the most effective way to manage specific fracture. Furthermore, there were no CT scans performed for post-operation evaluation. The main reason for the limitations is that displaced acetabular fractures are relatively rare and this was a single surgeon’s series. It is believed that this report supports the finding reported by Giodano et al. Standard Kocher-Langenbeck and mini iliofemoral approach were used in all the cases. This study’s approach differs from others in that perfect reduction in all dimensions was not the aim. The focus is on stability of both columns and congruency of the weight bearing area, which is mainly the posterior column and wall through Kocher-Langenbeck approach. The mini iliofemoral approach was merely used for indirect reduction of the anterior column and wire passing. Nevertheless, there was care taken to reduce the anterior column with cable as best as possible and not liberally accept displacement more than 3 It is generally accepted that accurate fracture reduction decreases the incidence of osteoarthritis and improves the overall clinical outcome 78.3% satisfactory reduction (52.2% anatomical reduction and 26.1% imperfect reduction) was achieved without any soft tissue complications. Anatomical reduction was relatively low, but it is in line with other studies Complication rate in this case series was notably acceptable. We only had one patient (4.3%) with symptomatic pulmonary embolism and 3 patients (13.0%)wit asymptomatic heterotopic ossification. One revision surgery was done in one patient due to screw irritation. No infection occurred. In conclusion, by adopting this alternative aim to manage both elementary and associated type of displaced acetabular fractures, not only the clinical result is not compromised, but also the benefit of soft tissue preservation and reducing perioperative morbidities can be obtained. However, long-term result of this series of patients particularly the occurrence of osteoarthritis will be further evaluated. There is no any funding or financial support and potential sources of conflict of interest.