In this paper, a novel process was studied for the recovery of iron and titanium from ilmenite concentrate. The ilmenite powders first underwent an oxidation pretreatment and were reduced isothermally at 1350–1450°C by graphite with the addition of Na2SO4. The influence of temperature, C/O molar ratio and the dosage of the added Na2SO4 on the metallization ratio, phase transformation and titanium grade were studied. The results demonstrated that Na2SO4 not only significantly promotes the aggregation and growth of metallic iron-grain particles but also enhances the reduction ability. Under the promotion of added Na2SO4, the highest metallization ratio reached 94%, and the theoretical calculation of the highest grade of titanium dioxide is approximately 75%. The Na2SO4 additive decreases the melting point of the slag and metal, resulting in the effect of semi-melting reduction. The carbothermic reduction order of phase transitions of pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate was also discussed.Ilmenite concentrate is one of the primary raw materials for producing titanium pigment, paint, paper, plastic and titanium alloys ( The oxidization pretreatment of ilmenite concentrate can decrease the reduction energy consumption due to the formation of a new phase and the change in crystal structure to one that is easily reduced. The additive can function as a fluxing agent, nucleating agent, or exothermic agent, all of which promote the reduction reaction. The objective of the present study is to combine the pre-oxidation process with an additive to study whether the reduction reaction of ilmenite concentrate is promoted. In recent decades, many researchers have investigated the enhancement of the solid-state reduction of ilmenite concentrate. To utilize the ilmenite concentrate efficiently and reduce consumption of energy, a novel process was proposed for the recovery of iron and titanium. In this process, ilmenite concentrate was first oxidized in air and then reduced by graphite with added sodium sulfate. In the next step, the magnetic separation process was used to separate the iron and slag, thus obtaining high-grade titanium slag. The aim of this work is to investigate the isothermal reduction behavior of pre-oxidized concentrate by graphite with a sodium sulfate additive. The influence of reduction conditions on the metallization ratio and grade of the titanium dioxide, such as reaction temperature, C/O molar ratio, and dosage of sodium sulfate, were studied. The ilmenite powder was obtained from Panzhihua Iron and Steel Group, Sichuan Province, China and the pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate powder was obtained by oxidizing ilmenite concentrate in a muffle furnace at 1100 The pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate was mixed to homogeneity with the graphite powder and sodium sulfate powder. The molar ratio of C to O (in iron oxide) in mixtures was set at 1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4. The mass of added sodium sulfate was set at 0, 4, 8 and 12% (wt). Next, mixtures with masses of 10 The products were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and optical imaging to study their phase compositions and morphology. The metallization ratio (R The Ellingham diagram of the oxide that probably exists in the reaction is shown in The phase diagram of TiO The changes in content of each phase at different temperatures are calculated by FactSage 6.2 and are shown in The change in content of each phase with a different C/O molar ratio is shown in The content of each phase with a different amount of added sodium sulfate is shown in The XRD patterns of the reduced samples reacted at 1350, 1400 and 1450 The XRD patterns of the reduced samples reacted at 1400 XRD patterns of the reduced samples reacted at 1400 The thermogravimetric (TG) analysis curves of the samples (20 As seen from The reducing gas produced by the above reactions greatly promotes the reduction of the pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate, causing the temperature of the maximum mass loss rate to decrease. When the temperature increases to 1200 According to the calculation results of the equilib module in FactSage 6.2 software, Na The trend of the metallization ratio as it changes with added Na The contour map of the metallization ratio changing with temperature and Na The trend of the metallization ratio changing with the C/O molar ratio is shown in The change in content of titanium dioxide in the reduced samples with Na The grade of titanium dioxide in the reduced sample changing with the C/O molar ratio is shown in Morphology and element distribution images of the reduced sample with different amounts of added sodium sulfate are shown in A novel process (semi-melting process) was invented to produce high-titanium slag by reducing pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate under the catalysis of 4% Na The influence of added Na Na The reduction sequence can be described as follows: first, the Fe The addition of Na The new process greatly decreases the energy consumption of smelting with promotion by the addition of 4% Na This work was supported by the