The study describes the sorption of living ureolytic mixed culture (UMC) to remove Cu(II) from aqueous solution under various conditions. The effects of various parameters such as optimum biomass, contact time, and Cu(II) concentrations on Cu(II) removal efficiency were investigated. The process was investigated using concentrations of Cu(II) ions ranging from 1 to 200mg/L in equilibrium batch tests for Langmiur, D–R, and Freundlich isotherm models. The maximum removal efficiency of 99% was obtained a 1g/L solid-to-liquid ratio with 1-min contact time for 100mg/L initial concentration of Cu(II).Heavy metal pollution is found to occur in different types of industrial wastewater such as those produced by metal plating facilities, mining operations, metallurgical engineering, battery manufacturing processes, the production of paints and pigments, electroplating, nuclear power plants, and ceramic and glass industries. The wastewater commonly includes Ni, Cu, Cd, Cr, and Cu. These heavy metals are not biodegradable and their presence in streams and lakes leads to bioaccumulation in living organisms, so causing health problems in animals, plants, and human beings. Excessive human intake of Cu leads to severe mucosal irritation, and corrosion, widespread capillary damage, hepatic, and renal damage, and central nervous system irritation followed by depression The conventional methods used for removing heavy metals are chemical or electrochemical precipitation, both of which pose a significant problem in terms of the disposal of precipitated wastes Recently, bioadsorbents have emerged as an eco-friendly, effective and low cost material option. Passive removal of heavy metals from an aqueous solution using various types of biosorbents including bacteria, fungi, algae and yeast have been extensively investigated in recent years Nowadays, ureolytic mixed culture has been produced in laboratories in order to investigate biocatalytic Ca removal from calcium-rich wastewaters. The process is based on microbial urea hydrolysis, in which one mole of urea is hydrolyzed by the urease enzyme to two moles of ammonium and one mole of carbon dioxide. These products can subsequently react to form ammonium and carbonate ions, which, in the presence of soluble calcium ions, can react and precipitate as CaCO The synthetic wastewater was prepared by taking consideration of simulating medium strength municipal, and liner paper manufacturing wastewater proposed by Holakoo UMC taken from the reactor, operated with the sludge age of 5 days in the laboratory, was used in the batch study. Then, mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS) and MLVSS values are determined, then transferred from the stock solution of biomass to 1 A thermal stirrer (ZHWY-200B, ZHICHENG Analytical Co., Ltd.) was used for the batch adsorption experiments. The metal solution was filtered through 0.45-μm membrane filters after settling. The filtrates were then analyzed using an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (Optima 2100DV ICP, PerkinElmer, Boston, MA). The pH measurements were performed using a digital ion analyzer with a combination electrode (WTW, Weilheim, Germany). Volatile suspended solids (VSS), suspended solids (SS), and sludge volume index (SVI) were analyzed as specified in Standard Methods The metal concentration in the liquid phase was determined at the beginning ( The data obtained were applied to the Langmuir adsorption isotherm using the following linear expression of this model Another adsorption isotherm, the Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R) isotherm, was calculated from the adsorption data. This isotherm is more general than the Langmuir isotherm as it does not assume a homogeneous surface or constant sorption potential. The D–R equation is expressed as follows The Freundlich isotherm was also applied to the adsorption data. This model has the following linear expression The kinetic parameters for the biosorption process were studied for the trial of sorption at 100 The effects of biomass, contact time, and initial metal ion concentration on the adsorption of Cu(II) were studied using the experimental conditions. The sorption experiments were performed in a batch reactor using stoppered Pyrex glass flasks. Each experiment was replicated three times, and the mean values were used in the analyses. If the standard errors (SE) were greater than 0.01, the test was repeated to control for errors. The effect of the mass of adsorbent on the retention of Cu(II) was studied using 100 The effect of contact time was studied using a constant concentration of Cu(II) solution at room temperature. The adsorption of Cu(II) ions has been investigated on UMC as a function of time in the range of 1–120 Adsorption isotherms or capacity studies are of essential importance in the design of adsorption systems since they indicate how the metal ions are partitioned between the adsorbent and liquid phases at equilibrium as a function of increasing metal concentration. When an adsorbent comes into contact with a metal ion solution, the concentration of metal ions on the adsorbent will increase until a dynamic equilibrium is reached; at this point, there is a defined distribution of metal ions between the solid and liquid phases. Heavy metal ion concentrations ranged from 1 to 200 Several conceptual and empirical models Langmuir, D–R and Freundlich have been used to describe the equilibrium phase distribution for the sorption of metal ions in surface systems. Langmuir isotherm model suggests that uptake occurs on homogeneous surface by monolayer sorption without interaction between adsorbed metal ions However, the D–R and Freundlich isotherms are important because they do not assume a homogeneous surface. At 293 Two kinetic models, the pseudo-first order and the pseudo-second order equations were used for testing the experimental data to examine the adsorption kinetics. The slopes and intercepts of these curves were used for determining the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order constants This paper presents the results of a detailed study of equilibrium and kinetics of the sorption process for removing Cu(II) ions from aqueous solution using a common, UMC. The maximum removal efficiencies by the UMC was obtained 99% for Cu at pH 5.40. The results in this paper provide a good indication of the different operating conditions that would be required for efficient removal of Cu(II) from aqueous solution. We also found that the Langmuir, D–R, and Freundlich isotherms could all be used to model isothermal sorption of Cu(II) on UMC. Based on the correlation coefficients, Langmuir and D–R models better described the copper biosorption isotherms compared to Freundlich model. It was found that the living UMC are a potential adsorbent for removal of Cu(II) from aqueous solutions. We thank the Environmental Engineering Department of Aksaray University for providing laboratory equipment of the work described in this paper.