Pb-CeO2 composite anodes with different CeO2 contents were prepared by a powder metallurgy method. For comparison, pure Pb and Pb-Ag (0.8 wt%) anodes were also prepared as references by melt casting. The oxygen evolution and corrosion behaviors of the anodes were evaluated by performing measurements of galvanostatic polarizations, Tafel curves, anodic polarization curves, mass increments, and ion concentrations. The morphologies and phase compositions of the anode oxidation layers after polarization were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD), respectively. The results showed that as the content of CeO2 increased, the stabilized potential of the composite anodes gradually decreased; the Pb-CeO2 (>1.5 wt%) composite anode exhibited lower stabilized potential and higher electrocatalytic activity than the Pb-Ag anode during galvanostatic polarization. The Pb-CeO2 (>0.5 wt%) composite anode showed better corrosion resistance than the pure Pb and Pb-Ag (0.8 wt%) anode. The increase in CeO2 content improves the compactness and thickness of the oxide layer formed on the anode surface, but excess CeO2 leads to high porosity of the anode, thus deteriorating the performance. The Pb-CeO2 (2.5 wt%) anode showed comprehensively improved electrochemical performance and corrosion resistance.High purity metals can be produced by various methods, among which electrowinning is a very important technique for purifying zinc, copper, nickel, etc., and has been applied in industry for decades ( To solve these problems, researchers have been dedicated to developing alternative anodes, including Pb-based multivariant alloys, porous materials, metal-based coated anodes, and polyaniline-based anodes. For example, ternary alloys (Pb-Ag-Sn, Pb-Ag-Ca, and Pb-Ag-Ti) and quaternary alloys (Pb-Ag-Ca-Sr and Pb-Ag-Sn-Co) have been made to reduce the consumption of Ag ( In comparison, as the new generation anode materials, Pb-matrix composites make use of the advantageous combination of Pb alloys and catalytic active phases, demonstrating their potential to replace Pb alloy anodes. Ceria is an earth-abundant and low-cost material that presents favorable oxygen transport properties ( To prepare composite anodes with good corrosion resistance and catalytic activity, different Pb-CeO Cerium oxide particles in a rod shapes with diameters <8 μm (≥99.99% purity, Shanghai Maikun Co. Ltd., China) and Pb powder of size <42 μm (99.95% purity, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd., China) were used as raw materials. The Pb powder was mixed with different contents (0.5, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5 wt%) of CeO Galvanostatic polarization, anodic polarization, and Tafel curves were measured by using an electrochemical workstation (CHI 760E, Huachen, China) at 25 °C. A three-electrode cell containing 160 g/L H The samples were polished with 1500-grit SiC paper before galvanostatic polarization and rinsed with distilled water after each step. During the constant-current polarization test, anodic corrosion is mainly caused by slime sloughing off of the anode surface and lead dissolving in the electrolyte. The mass increments and ion concentrations were measured to evaluate the corrosion rates of the samples. Before and after galvanostatic polarization tests, the samples were washed with deionized water, dried carefully, and then weighed. The constant-current polarization tests were conducted in 500 mL of electrolyte solution with a platinum plate as a cathode. During the polarization tests, 10 mL was taken from the solutions every 24 h to analyze the Pb and Ce concentrations by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) to evaluate the corrosion resistance of the samples, and 10 mL of solution at the same concentration as the sample collected before polarization was added into the corrosion solution at the same time. The surface morphologies of the samples after 72 h of galvanostatic polarization testing were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, QuantaFEG250, American). The phase composition of the oxide product layer formed on the sample surface after 72 h of galvanostatic polarization was identified by X-ray Diffraction (XRD, Rigaku-TTRIII, Japan) with Cu-Ka radiation.  The porosity (  According to The stabilized potentials of Pb-CeO As shown in In summary, the Pb-CeO    As shown in In terms of the performance of an anode, corrosion resistance is a critical indicator that directly affects its cost and lifetime. The mass increments of the anodes after 72 h of galvanostatic polarization at 50 mA/cm As shown in  It is known that the corrosion resistance of the anode is closely related to the morphology and thickness of the oxide layer; a denser and thicker surface oxide layer leads to better corrosion resistance. As the content of CeO  The oxide layer of the Pb-Ag anode mainly consisted of α-PbO Pb-CeO As the content of CeO Increasing the CeO Compactness and thickness of the oxide layer formed on the anode surface after galvanostatic polarization tests improved with increased CeO In the study of different composite anodes, the Pb-CeO This work was supported by Zhuzhou Smelter Group Co., LTD., Hunan, China, the