Novel aggregation-induced emission (AIE) polymers (NS1 and NS2) were prepared through reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization of poly(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether methacylate and a new AIE monomer with a vinyl group. The NS1 and NS2 copolymers were characterized by gel permeation chromatography, 1H NMR spectroscopy, FT-IR spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, which proved their successful syntheses. Such amphiphilic copolymers could self-assemble into fluorescent polymeric nanoparticles (FPNs) in water with good dispersibility, which were spherical in shape. The prepared FPNs of NS1 had a size range of 50–150 nm, strong green fluorescence in aqueous solution with fluorescence quantum yield of 31%, and low critical micelle concentration (CMC) of 0.030 mg mL−1. The NS2 FPNs exhibited size range of 200–300 nm, intense green fluorescence with quantum yield of 38%, and CMC of 0.037 mg mL−1. These FPNs were demonstrated highly biocompatible for cell imaging. By virtue of excellent biocompatibility via PEG modification, good particle stability with low CMC, and AIE fluorescent polymers with high photostability, the FPNs constructed in this work showed obvious advantages. This strategy should inspire new approaches to prepare novel biocompatible AIE fluorescent polymers for biomedical application.The development of fluorescent polymeric nanoparticles (FPNs) for biomedical applications has recently attracted great attention due to their remarkable advantages as compared with small organic dyes and fluorescent inorganic nanomaterials In this work, novel AIE polymers ( 4-Bromobenzaldehyde (99%, Sigma-Aldrich), 4-vinylphenylboronic acid (97%, TCI), benzothiazole-2-yl-acetonitrile (98%, Sigma-Aldrich), potassium bicarbonate (99.5%, J&K), palladium(II) chloride (99.9%, J&K), azobisisobutyronitrile (99%, J&K), 1,4-dioxane (99.5%, J&K), isopropanol (99.7%, J&K), tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (40% in water, J&K), and poly(ethylene glycol) monomethyl ether methacylate ( Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurements were determined on Shimadzu LC-20AD pump system, and DMF was used as the eluent at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min As shown in To synthesize the compound of NSP2E, A solution of As shown in The synthetic procedure of The cell viability was evaluated by cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assay with A549 cells. Confocal microscopic imaging of A549 cells incubated with the prepared FPNs was measured with a confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) Zeiss 710 3-channel (Zeiss, Germany), as the excitation wavelength was set as 405 nm. The specific details were adopted according to our previous literature A new AIE fluorogen of NSP2E was prepared To prepare The successful formation of The successful syntheses of XPS experiments were detected to analyse the chemical composition of The size distribution and morphology of the FPNs have been investigated by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study. The size distribution of PEGylation has been widely utilized to improve the water dispersibility of hydrophobic materials. After RAFT polymerization of the hydrophobic AIE dye with PEGMA, amphiphilic polymers were formed and self-assembled into nanoparticles in aqueous solution with high water dispersibility. The inset of Fluorescence stability of the FPNs are important for long-term imaging application. The performance study of the prepared FPNs revealed they had high water dispersibility, suitable size, strong fluorescent intensity, and excellent fluorescent stability. To apply them for potential cell imaging, the biocompatibility of the In this work, we reported RAFT polymerization of PEGMA with a new AIE monomer to obtain the amphiphilic polymers of This research was supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Detailed information about fluorescent quantum yield of NSP2E, GPC curves and colloidal stabilities of the prepared Supplementary data related to this article can be found at