Structures and textures with sedimentological variations at different scales of the lithofacies assemblage help us to constrain the basal kinematic transition from non-depositional to depositional conditions during volcanic avalanche emplacement. In the well-exposed impact-sheared contact along volcanic avalanche fault zone in the French Massif Central, we observe how the granular textures of the pseudotachylite and fault gouge have recorded the propagation of shock wave with granular oscillatory stress. Sequential events of basal aggradation along avalanche fault zone have been established related to fractal D-values, temperature pressure regime and oscillatory stress during slow wave velocity.
                  A typical lithofacies assemblage with a reverse grading shows the pseudotachylite and fault gouge. A cataclastic gradient is characterised by the fractal D-values from 2.7 in jigsaw breccias with pseudotachylite partial melt, to 2.6 in the polymodal gouge. Shock, brecciation and comminution produce cataclastic shear bands in the pseudotachylite and quartz microstructures along the basal contact of the volcanic debris-avalanche deposit. Gouge microstructures show granular segregation, cataclasis with antithetic rotational Riedel shear, and an arching effect between the Riedel shear bands. X-ray microtomography provided 3D microfabrics along the clastic vein in the sandy-gouge. From the available statistical dataset, a few equations have been developed implicating the same cataclastic origin with a co-genetic evolution of lithofacies.
                  An impact wave during primary shear propagation may contribute to produce hydroclastic matrix, pseudotachylite partial melt and proximal gouge thixotropy with v~50m/s and a T
                     <654°C. The interseismic period with oscillatory stress is related to crushed clasts and basaltic melt around ~800°C, Riedel shear bands with granular segregation along the fault gouge. The secondary shock by matrix-rich avalanche (ΔP
                     =10GPa, T
                     ≥1000–1500°C) contributes to quartz microstructures along the avalanche basal contact and quartz spheroids in microscopic cataclastic shear bands. Decompression around 654–800°C is related to tertiary sub-vertical oscillations with a backward moving shock and antithetic rotational fault megablock. Semi-quantitative analyses of seismogenic fault basement contribute to establish the localised conditions related to sequential aggradation along volcanic avalanche fault zone.Pseudotachylite and fault gouge are rare lithofacies along volcanic avalanche fault zones. Pseudotachylite is a thin layer of melted rock observed at the base of thick volcanic debris-avalanche deposits (~ The French alkaline province associated with the European Cenozoic Rift system includes the Mont-Dore volcanic massif (500 Different terminologies have been used to describe frictionites and DAD faulting with collapse structures related to specific conditions during long-runout spreading. Pseudotachylite and gouge are defined as different kinematic processes to differentiate the DAD conditions generating this lithofacies assemblage. DAD faulting during mass spreading presents different collapse structures ( DAD normal, thrust and strike-slip faults extend into an upper brittle layer overlying a ductile basal layer with a low friction angle (1 to 3.5°, Different DAD textures implicate a specific kinematic process. Jigsaw breccias are inherited textures of dilation during the first stage of mass-flow (Mt. St-Helens, Frictionites are observed along superfaults related to collapse, landslides, caldera formation and impact craters ( Seismic faulting generating breccia zones are differentiated from cataclastic fault gouge, which is granular wearing material between the sliding surface of a shear zone ( We examined how a volcanic avalanche fault zone interacts with basement to generate pseudotachylite with fault gouge. From field observations, we characterised the discontinuous lithofacies assemblage related to structural control along a DAD fault zone. Sampling of the cohesive granular contact contributes to a semi-quantitative microtextural analysis. From these data, we were able us to differentiate the From field observations, a geomorphological context and a lithofacies map were developed. Four representative outcrops are described and ten discontinuous lithofacies are identified with internal structures ( Twenty-five oriented cohesive samples were collected from the basal contact of a DAD fault zone and embedded in epoxy resin to prepare polished thin sections of pseudotachylite and sandy gouge ( Semi-quantitative microtextural analyses of pseudotachylite and gouge samples are investigated by complementary methods ( 1. Scanning electron microscopy with electron microprobe analysis (SEM, using Jeol JSM-5910LV with X-ray Spectrometer, LMV) and high-resolution X-ray microtomography at the ESRF (European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, ID 19, Grenoble, France) are used to observe microtextures of pseudotachylite related to the DAD basal contact and 3D microfabrics in sandy-gouge lithofacies. Major element compositions (in wt%, 2. From SPO analysis of the clasts ( 3. The software ImageJ analysis and Blob 3D contribute to reconstruct data, which provide information about gouge microfabrics with 3D clast shapes ( The collapse of the eastern flank of the Aiguiller volcano (1525 The proximal DAD unit (< Along the west bank of the Couze Pavin river, the Perrier plateau is a lobate plan shape incised along the N30-N70E lineaments and the EW frontal thrust ( The DAD fault zone shows overthrust megablocks extending approximately 1 Lithostratigraphic sections were cut in the DAD basal contact parallel to the lateral spreading for northeast sections 1 and 3, and to the EW frontal thrust for sections 2 and 4 ( In the northeast-southwest facing outcrop, the basal unit is a cohesive debris-flow deposit (U1, Four DAD lithofacies with reverse grading are described from the top (U4, The structural readjustments are localised along the basal contact of DAD units: crushing, matrix mixture pocket and injection structure at the base of tilted megablocks, basal shear zone of the matrix-rich DAD with pseudotachylite lithofacies. Two basaltic jigsaw-clasts are sheared and stretched along a sharp and planar contact between matrix-rich DADs and conglomerate (P in Sandy-gravelly gouge is exposed at the base of the matrix-rich DAD below a fault megablock rotation (G2 and G3 in The proximal gouge presents a sub-horizontal reworking of the lowermost conglomerate pebbles into a sandy-gravelly matrix. The SPO analysis of 71 cobbles shows conjugate, long-axis inclinations of ~ The distal gouge facies show the lateral and vertical distribution of 544 reworked conglomerates (G4 in section 4, In the N72 outcrop face, eleven oriented samples of melted and brecciated pseudotachylite contact with DAD matrix were collected from 10 to 80 Microscopic observations along the sheared basal contact of the matrix-rich DAD show a linear flow texture with a reverse grading along the sub-rounded basaltic clasts in 40 The XRD patterns of powdered sheared contact show sharp peaks of specific mineralogical assemblages ( Abundant dark breccia spheroids of basalt, representing > Detailed SEM observations show different stages of cataclastic flow ( The pseudotachylite matrix is a mixture of crushed clasts confined to the edges of the sheared clasts ( Vesiculations of clasts, spheroids (< Structural variations are correlated to sequential evolution of spheroid shapes from asymmetric collapse up to melting vein ( SPO analyses of 707 clasts differentiate the cataclastic shear bands ( The cumulative curves Fractal The cumulative curves of the grain-size distributions A logarithmic regression characterises the pseudotachylite lithofacies (Eq. 7 in We differentiate different stages of cataclasis up to partial melting and matrix transformations ( Twenty-five oriented thin sections in fault gouge have been studied to characterise microtextures and microstructures in each lithofacies related to grain-size distributions, clast/matrix and clast-shape variations using SPO analysis. High-resolution X-ray microtomography provided 3D microfabrics along the clastic vein in the sandy-gouge. Lineations and Riedel shear bands have been identified related to granular segregations along the fault gouge. Ins the matrix, quartz, opaque minerals, feldspars and brown minerals (biotite and hornblende) are the major mineral constituents with 4–5% reworked clasts such as basaltic clasts, deformed clayey clasts and stretched pumices ( The cumulative frequency The cumulative curves of grain-size distributions Three matrix gouge lithofacies are differentiated with microscopic observations related to matrix percent. (1) Primary fracturing with < The matrix percent The matrix evolution of gouge and pseudotachylite lithofacies along a brittle shear zone can be approximated as ( From high-resolution X-ray image analysis of a distal gouge sample, shapes of 686 reworked pumices and 848 basaltic larger intruders reworked along a clastic vein are reconstructed using Blob 3D software ( Aspect ratios are between 0 and 8.8 for pumices with sizes ranging from 0.1 to 1.44 Fourier shape analysis has been applied to compare clast shape parameters in thin sections of each gouge lithofacies. From proximal to distal gouge, the median shape parameters are constant and maximum values increase for Two logarithmic regressions characterise the perimeter roughness Shape parameters with the runout distance show three linear regressions for the survivor clasts with Gouge microstructures from four oriented samples in sections 1, 3 and 4 are established using an SPO analysis of 866 clasts and the software ImageJ. Maps of clasts are compared to structural maps showing the clast/matrix of lineations and Riedel shears related to clast long-axis orientations ( (1) In the thin section of the lenticular sandy layer at section 1, the long axis orientations of 195 sub-angular quartz ( (2) In the thin section of the proximal gouge at section 3, the isoline diagram shows higher clast/matrix values (0.5 and 0.8 in (3) In the thin section of the West-East distal gouge, the basaltic intruder is in a breccia mixture of quartz and reworked matrix with higher clast/matrix values (~ Between P- and R-type Riedel shears, granular microsegregation in the clastic matrix contributes to a sub-radial pattern of 130 clasts around a red clay intruder, such as the arching effect described by An SPO analysis of survivor clasts Structural maps related to textural observations show lineations, conjugate Riedel shear bands with an antithetic rotational shear, related to cataclasis and granular segregations such as an arching effect between Riedel shears. From field observations, we used complementary methods to describe at different scales textural variations of lithofacies assemblages related to structural control. We focus on sedimentary analysis to characterise the impact texture with fractal distributions and conditions related to lateral cataclastic gradients during the propagation of shock. Segregated granular structures are related to the differential evolution of cataclastic textures. From these data, sequential events of microfabric formation have been established along the DAD fault zone. The DAD fault zone with impact pseudotachylite and a fault gouge have not been reported previously. The typical reverse grading of lithofacies contributes to the lower basal stress increasing the avalanche runout: a matrix-rich DAD is overlain by a thick breccia carapace ( Vertical and lateral variations of sheared contacts between DAD lithofacies assemblages are related to different splitting conditions. 1. During pure shear in a thinning shear zone, textures and structures of the DAD seismogenic basement record the propagation of moving shock with co-seismic fluids ( 2. Shock, brecciation and comminution along basal sheared contact of volcanic debris avalanche deposits limit the mixture facies (Cantal, 3. Sheared disrupted unit at the base of the tephrite megablock may be similar to basal gliding planes of distal Chicxulub ejecta blanket and DAD shear bands below the basal detachment of Socompa Flexura block ( Sedimentary parameters show a co-genetic brecciation of pseudotachylite and gouge lithofacies with structural control (Eqs. 7–8, 11 and 14–15, A sequential syn-cataclastic emplacement along the DAD seismogenic basement related to co-genetic brecciations contributes to specific conditions generating pseudotachylite lithofacies (Eqs. 3–6), and sequential fabric formation along fault gouge during shear propagation (Eqs. 9–1, 12–14 and 16–19). Pseudotachylite lithofacies with structural control are characterised by distributions of mineralogical assemblages and major elements. Microscopic observations related to sedimentological analyses ( The matrix percent Strong shearing along DAD basal contact shows quartz microstructures in DAD matrix related to syn-seismic and post-seismic creep ( Transformation of potential energy into frictional heating along pseudotachylite is given by The strong peaks of XRD patterns are related to crystalline pseudotachylite contact with the DAD matrix. Magnetite of brown pseudotachylite along the fault is related to co-seismic frictional melting generating glass formation ( The DAD basal contact shows quartz microstructures related to pressures between 5 and 10 The following equation evaluates the runout distance Sequential evolution of pseudotachylite matrix appears during crushing related to different stages of partial melting ( The following sequence can be envisaged: (1) an impact may produce a hydroclastic matrix and crushed basaltic clasts (< Intergranular segregation along cataclastic shear bands, coseismic fluids, partial melting with clastic mixture, and matrix transformation decrease the intergranular coefficient of friction during basal fault propagation. Coseismic fluids may be interclastic along pure shear in a thinning shear zone and intraclastic in the thickening shear zone with oscillatory stress during inter-seismic periods. Quartz, mica, and feldspars are a typical mineral assemblage of fault gouge classification with shape parameters (perimeter roughness > Two fractal distributions are differentiated: the large clasts are preferentially crushed with a 2.6 The matrix percent Logarithmic and linear regressions of shape parameters implicate the same clastic impact origin with a co-genetic evolution along fault gouge with granular segregations and few matrix transformations. Gouge lithofacies display a co-genetic evolution of quartz roughness related to syn-sedimentary emplacement along the fault gouge (Eqs. 20–21, Sequential events of gouge microfabric formation are related to speed variations during shear propagation. (1) During primary shear propagation with an increasing velocity, gouge compaction with porosity reduction increases grain contact to create force chains of quartz grains, where the stress is concentrated in dilation ( (2) A decreasing velocity is related to grain-boundary sliding and matrix accommodation along Riedel shears; low fractal distribution of sub-rounded quartz contributes to a decrease in intergranular contacts with specific crushing and abrasion breaking force chains in the reworking zones ( (3) These granular heterogeneities between the intraclastic Riedel shear bands and interclastic ductile matrix contribute to the splitting of the decreasing elastic wave speed (Vp and (4) Decreasing Vp and constant Sedimentary characteristics of the interclastic pumice matrix, transformed cataclastic matrix ( At the confluence, the DAD units with a decreasing relative speed record the precursor stages of the distal transformations into lahars. A rotational shear accommodated by lateral impact occurs between the upstream lateral spreading in N30 and the thrust from West-East against the downstream Issoire horst ( Along the basal primary shear plane of the DAD fault zone, propagation of the shock wave and slowing wave during the inter-seismic period contributes to basal aggradation of pseudotachylite with fault gouge during the following sequential events ( Sedimentary methods contribute to a semi-quantitative analysis of the seismogenic basement along a DAD fault zone with rare coexistent lithofacies, pseudotachylite and fault gouge. Typical characteristics were established, such as the lithofacies assemblage of the DAD with reverse grading related to different stages of shear and interactions with the substrate; cataclastic shear bands of pseudotachylite; and mineralogical assemblages of gouge lithofacies with lineations and Riedel shear bands. Specific conditions related to propagation of the shock wave with granular oscillatory stress contribute to the following characteristics. Quartz microstructures along the basal contact of the DAD matrix are related to Pseudotachylite and fault gouge along the seismogenic basement of the DAD contribute to a correlation of the temperature pressure regime with runout velocity from the impact wave to the interseismic period. A few equations have been developed implicating the same cataclastic origin with co-genetic evolution of lithofacies. These localised conditions for propagation of the shock wave will help to constrain the DAD basal contact. This will in turn help explain the excess runout volcanic debris avalanches related to basal sequential aggradation with co-seismic fluids and transitional transformed matrix. X-ray tomography was funded by the