The expansion of China's coal-fired power industry is facing enormous pressure to reduce carbon emissions in the context of global decarbonization. Existing national-level carbon accounting is insufficient to support developing carbon reduction policies and measures tailored for specific locations. In this study, we conducted a spatially high-resolution analysis to estimate life-cycle carbon emissions from the coal-fired power industry at the province-level. The estimate is from a bottom-up perspective, including computing carbon emission factors for 22 coal-fired power technologies based on the operation data of 47.8 % of all units, measuring provincial technology structures based on the information data of 99.7 % of all ones, and weighted calculating the above two terms. We also analyzed the carbon reduction potential of the coal-fired power industry according to relevant measures by province. The estimate shows great differences in carbon emission factors of various technologies. The coupling of these factors with different technology structures causes significant variations of 0.933–1.019 kg CO2eq/kWh in the carbon emission factors of the coal-fired power industry at the province-level. In 2016, carbon emissions from China's coal-fired power industry were 3835 Mt CO2eq and intensive in the northern and eastern provinces. From 2016 to 2020, carbon emission factors in most provinces will decrease by 3 %–6 % benefiting from technology structure optimization and energy conservation. The falling of carbon emission factors leads to a carbon reduction potential of 307 Mt CO2eq in total. In particular, Beijing and Shandong achieve negative growth in carbon emissions from the coal-fired power industry during this period.With the development of the economy and the improvement of people's living standards, China has become the world’s largest electrical energy consumer with 6133 TW h in 2016, accounting for 24.5 % of the global total consumption ( China has committed that reducing its CO A first and foremost step to develop effective policy and plan for carbon reduction is to establish an accurate carbon emission inventory of the Chinese coal-fired power industry. This is critical to China’s or even global low-carbon transition and development. Previous studies give priority to estimate carbon emissions from the life cycle perspective because direct and indirect emissions related to the coal-fired power are both covered ( The above studies provide useful insights to understand carbon emission situations at the national level. However, these insights are unable to develop carbon reduction policy and measure tailored to local conditions because they only give an entire picture for the country rather than representative characteristics for spatially fine-grained regions. For China, a high-resolution carbon emission inventory at the provincial level is needed since the province is the spatial unit of the electricity and administrative district. It is more fit for reducing carbon emissions tailored for specific locations given the province-by-province variation of coal-based electricity capacity and carbon reduction target. The efforts for developing high-resolution carbon emission inventory of the coal-fired power industry are insufficient in the existing work. Ding et al. quantified provincial carbon emissions of the thermal power but did not distinguish the difference between coal-fired power, natural gas power, and oil power of which carbon emission factors are quite different ( This study peculiarly couples carbon emission factors of 22 coal-fired power technologies and the technology structure in each province to conduct a bottom-up life cycle estimate of carbon emissions from the coal-fired power industry at the provincial level. The carbon emission factors are measured from the operation data of more than 850 coal-fired power units and the technology structures are quantified from the information data of full-sample units in China. Our bottom-up estimate achieves a leap from the unit-level to the province-level to fill the knowledge gap. The main contributions of this study are: (1) to clarify the provincial technology structures of the coal-fired power industry; (2) to calculate the carbon emission factors of 22 coal-fired power technologies; (3) to estimate high-resolution carbon emissions of the coal-fired power industry at the provincial level; (4) to explore the provincial carbon potential of the coal-fired power industry in terms of technology structure optimization and energy conservation. This paper starts with an overview of the Chinese coal-fired power industry in Section We reviewed over 5000 coal-fired power units operated in 2016. The total installed capacity of these units is as high as 939.8 GW, accounting for 99.7 % of the country’s total ( China’s coal-fired power units are intensive in economically developed and rich-coal provinces. Shandong, Jiangsu and Inner Mongolia had the largest installed capacity of 92.4 GW, 76.1 GW and 75.4 GW, respectively; followed by Henan, Guangdong, Shanxi, Xinjiang, Anhui, Zhejiang and Hebei with the installed capacity between 40 GW and 60 GW. These ten provinces accounted for 64.1 % of the national total installed capacity, as shown in The technical characteristics of coal-fired power units involve the operation parameter, boiler type, cooling type and unit type ( The four technical characteristics constitute 60 coal-fired power technologies theoretically. However, only 46 of these technologies were covered by the Chinese coal-fired power industry. The mainstream technologies were USC-PC-WC-C, SC-PC-WC-C and UC-PC-WC-C with installed capacity proportions of 16.9 %, 15.0 % and 20.3 %, respectively. At the province level, the coal-fired power industry presented significantly different technology structures, as shown in The carbon accounting regarding electricity production prefers to be based on a life cycle perspective because it can provide a full picture of the whole chain from raw materials extraction to electricity production ( Currently, the life cycle data inventory is analyzed by the process, input-output or hybrid method. The process method is carried out through field research or simulation for specific processes at the micro-level while the input-output method is conducted by the correspondence between economy and material at the macro sector-level based on the input-output table ( GWP model assigns a quantitative characteristic factor to each GHG emitted from the life cycle to express the contribution to carbon emissions. The latest GWP-100yr model released by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in the fifth assessment report is used for the estimate ( From a life cycle viewpoint, the system boundary of estimate covered four stages called coal mining, coal washing, coal transport and coal-fired electrical energy generation. The upstream processes (material and energy production) and downstream processes (waste disposal and recovery) in each stage are also included in the system boundary, as shown in The functional unit is defined as generating one kWh electricity product. However, both electricity and heat products are simultaneously produced by CHP units. Their energy quality differs, despite both being energy products. Exergy is an ideal indicator reflecting energy quality and fit for the allocation of electricity and heat products ( We investigate the operation data of more than 850 coal-fired power units in 2016. The installed capacity of these units is 449.6 GW, which accounts for 47.8 % of the country’s total. These units cover 22 coal-fired power technologies, and the units involving these 22 technologies occupy 89.5 % of the national total installed capacity. Therefore, the data we collected can veritably represent the operation situation of China's coal-fired power industry. The material and waste data are collected directly, while GHG emission data are calculated via material balance. The carbon in coal is not completely converted into CO For each CHP unit, the input and output data allocated to the electricity product is calculated by Eq. The input and output data of each coal-fired power technology is calculated by weighting the corresponding data and electrical energy generation of all units using this technology, as shown in Eq. The input and output data of each province is calculated by weighting the corresponding data and installed capacity of all coal-fired power technologies in this province, as presented in Eq. We also calculate the national average input and output data by Eq. Consequently, the high-resolution data inventory of the coal-fired electrical energy generation stage based on the above calculation is shown in In 2016, coal sales in China totalled 3270 Mt, including 1449 Mt by direct railway transport, 1177 Mt by direct highway transport, and 644 Mt by land-water combined transport; the land-water combined transport involves 451 Mt by railway-waterway combined transport and the rest by highway-waterway combined transport ( The raw coal washing rate in China was 69.7 % in 2016 ( Underground mines contributed 88.1 % of the country’s total production capacity in 2016; only approximately 11.9 % of the coal mines are opencast. Underground mining technology includes fully mechanized mining, blasting mining, conventional mining, hydraulic mining and irregular mining. The production capacity proportion of fully mechanized mining was the highest of 70.2 %; followed by blasting mining and conventional mining with 23.0 % and 5.3 %. The total proportions of irregular mining and hydraulic mining were less than 2 %. Meanwhile, underground mining technology is closely related to the roof rock type and hydrogeological condition. The operation data of 57 coal mines in 2016 are collected, covering all of the above technologies. By weighting by the input and out data and production of these coal mines, the data inventory of the coal mining stage is well represented, as presented in   We also compare unit-level carbon emission factors of this study and existing research, as shown in   China’s coal-fired power industry will benefit from raising the entry barrier, accelerating energy-saving upgrade and eliminating backward productivity during 2016–2020 according to relevant plans ( Following principles of plans, USC and CHP units are given priority to deploy, CFB units are orderly developed, old SC and UC units are focused on upgrading and outdated backward units below 20 GW each need to be eliminated. The scale of new USC, CHP and CFB units are predicted to reach 105.6 GW, 36.0 GW and 5.9 GW by 2020, respectively. A total of 321.1 GW of SC and UC units and 19.8 GW of backward units are extrapolated to be upgraded and eliminated during 2016–2020, which is very close to the targets of 350 GW and 20 GW, respectively. Meanwhile, the total electrical energy generation is expected to reach 4960 TW h, almost consistent with the figures from the  On the other hand, the downward trends in Shanghai and Zhejiang are limited with both less than 3 % because the two provinces deploy few new units and the improvement of their carbon emission factors reduction only relies on eliminating backward productivity and accelerating energy-saving upgrade. Moreover, the falling proportion has an overall decrease with the decline of the carbon emission factor, indicating that reducing carbon emission factors of provinces with advanced technology structures is more difficult. For example, although Jiangxi put 6.6 GW of USC units into operation during 2016–2020, its falling proportion of the carbon emission factor is only 4.2 % since its carbon emission factor in 2016 was low enough. Therefore, technology structure optimization and energy conservation may be relatively ineffectiveness for further decarbonization in provinces with low carbon emission factors. Nationally, the carbon emission factor in 2020 is expected to be 0.931 kg CO  Apart from Beijing, Shandong has the only negative growth in terms of carbon emissions from the coal-fired power industry during 2016–2020 despite its falling proportion is only 0.2 %. This negative growth benefits from effective control on the growth of coal-fired electrical energy generation besides the carbon emission factor falling. Specifically, the installed capacity in Shandong only expands by 8.4 % and average operation time decreases by 2.7 %, which together lead to a small growth of 5.5 % in coal-fired electrical energy. Zhejiang, Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, Jiangsu, Inner Mongolia, Hainan, Shanghai and Hebei have the decreases in the carbon emission proportion rather than in carbon emissions during this period. This finding suggests that increase rates of carbon emissions in these eight provinces are lower than the national average, indicating that these provinces play positive roles in slowing the increase of the national carbon emissions. The outstanding contributions of these provinces partly benefit from the strict control of installed capacity. Especially, Shanghai and Hainan have not new units deployed and Zhejiang only puts 0.6 GW of new units into production but eliminates 2.4 GW of backward capacity. Climate change profoundly affects global socio-economic development. Successfully ensuring global average temperature stays 1.5 °C below the pre-industrial level requires cutting global coal-fired electrical energy generation by over 50 % in 2030 and by more than 95 % in 2050 ( For provinces with high carbon emission factors such as Shanxi and Inner Mongolia, technology structure optimization and energy conservation are still effective to reduce carbon emissions. After 2020, the local coal-fired power industry should continuously pursue low-carbon development by these measures. For provinces with low carbon emission factors such as Jiangxi and Jiangsu, more advanced technologies such as the 700 °C USC power generation and double reheat technologies should be developed and promoted to reduce the lower limit of the carbon emission factor ( Additionally, the development of renewable and nuclear energy is conducive to substituting coal-fired electrical energy from a supply perspective. Abundant wind and solar resources are intensive in the northern and northwestern provinces and rich water resources are distributed in the southwestern ones ( Spatially mismatch in electrical energy supply and demand requires a suitable consumption-compensation mechanism. Provinces with large electrical energy demand should ensure financial expenditures to support the construction of advanced environmental protection facilities in large coal-fired electrical energy bases. The drivers behind the decarbonization of the coal-fired power industry come from the pursuit of economic benefits and national mandatory requirements. The full implementation of the carbon trading market in the power sector and the potential carbon tax in the future force enterprises to spontaneously reduce their carbon emissions ( In this study, we conduct a high-resolution estimate on carbon emissions from the coal-fired power industry from a life cycle perspective. The following conclusions are obtained: Carbon emission factors of 22 coal-fired power technologies are ranged from 0.882 to 1.220 kg CO Provincial carbon emission factors of the coal-fired power industry presented a significant difference of 0.933–1.019 kg CO A falling trend of 3 %–6 % is appeared in most provinces during 2016–2020 due to a combined action of technology structure optimization and energy conservation. This action contributes to a total carbon reduction potential of 307 Mt CO Given the expansion of China’s coal-fired power industry in the further, the decarbonization is more necessary and urgent. Regardless of self-improvement, the deploy of CCS or CCUS or the substitution of low-carbon energy, local technology structures and resource conditions should be considered. In this research, we use the operaion data for dozens of coal mines and coal washing plants and national average data for coal transport to estimate carbon emissions in each province. Although these data are reliable, they might not represent the status quo in different provinces. Further research should incorporate such analysis in order to make the results more representative for each province. Moreover, operation data for more coal-fired power units should be investigated to improve the accuracy of the estimate in the future work.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was funded by the