We determined the kinetics of hydrogen absorption of the hypoeutectic Mg-10 wt.% Ni alloy in the as-cast state and after processing by four passes of equal channel angular pressing (ECAP). While during the first hydrogenation cycle the ECAP-modified alloy exhibited faster absorption than its as-cast counterpart, this advantage was lost after the second hydrogenation cycle; parity was regained after six cycles. We attributed these differences in the hydrogen absorption kinetics to the formation of large (tens of micrometers) faceted Mg crystals observed during the first hydrogenation cycle. These crystals were significantly larger in the ECAP-modified alloy than in its as-cast counterpart. We discussed the growth of large Mg crystals during hydrogenation in terms of self-diffusion of Mg atoms driven by the metal-hydride transformation stress. The larger size of these crystals in the ECAP-processed alloy was attributed to the acceleration of diffusion by ECAP. Our metallographic studies revealed a number of microstructural changes in the alloys upon hydrogenation, such as cracking, accumulation of plastic strain in large Mg crystals, and re-distribution of the dispersed particles of Mg2Ni phase in the partly hydrogenated alloys.Although to date Mg and Mg-based alloys did not live up to expectations in the field of automotive hydrogen storage, they are still considered as promising candidates for several important hydrogen energy-related applications. This is because the relatively low cost of Mg, its good processability, and high gravimetric hydrogen storage capacity (about 7.6 wt.% of hydrogen in pure Mg) represent a unique combination of properties making it suitable for large, utility-scale hydrogen and heat storage Batches of binary Mg–10 wt.% Ni alloy with an average weight of 1 kg were melted in a steel crucible in an electric resistance furnace at 760 °C under cover gas (CO Equal-channel angular pressing of the alloy was conducted at 250 °C using a 90° die. Cylindrical billets 10 mm in diameter underwent four ECAP passes following processing Route B Vickers hardness measurements were performed on Micromet 2004 (Buehler) microhardness tester. The applied load was 50 gf. Characterization of the microstructures and surface morphology examination were carried out with the aid of conventional (SEM, Quanta 200 of FEI) and high resolution scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM, Zeiss Ultra Plus) in the secondary electrons (SE) and backscattered electrons (BSE) image modes. Quanta 200 SEM was operated at accelerating voltage of 20 kV, while BSE images in the Zeiss Ultra Plus HRSEM were acquired at 15 kV. High resolution SE images in HRSEM were acquired at 2 kV. Phase identification was performed with the aid of X-ray diffraction (XRD) in Rigaku Smart Lab diffractometer. The instrument was operated in the parallel beam mode using 2 bounce Ge (220) monochromator with Cu K Measurements of the hydrogenation of the samples were performed using Sieverts' type apparatus combined with computerized data acquisition set-up controlled by LabVIEW software. The Mg–Ni alloy chips of approximately 2 g in weight were placed in a stainless steel reactor with internal volume of 20 ± 1 cm In In order to separate the effect of hydrogenation as such and that of exposure to high temperatures on microstructure evolution, we performed six full thermal cycles on the chips of as cast Mg–Ni alloy between room temperature and 300 °C for 18 h in Ar atmosphere. After the cycling, agglomeration of Mg The kinetics of hydrogen absorption by the as-cast and ECAP-processed samples after different numbers of hydrogenation cycles at 300 °C are shown in  For a better understanding of the microstructural changes caused by hydrogenation, samples of the as-cast and the ECAP-modified material were withdrawn from Sieverts' type apparatus during the 5th hydrogenation (to 60% of maximum hydrogen storage capacity). SEM examination of these samples was done in order to identify differences in their microstructure. The cross-sectional SEM images of partly hydrogenated as-cast sample (see After six hydrogenation cycles of the as-cast sample of Mg-10 wt% Ni, cracking and disintegration of the submicrometer-size Mg crystals is observed (  After the 9th hydrogenation cycle the surfaces of samples of either provenience become very rough and porous (see  The microstructures of the Mg-10 wt% Ni in the as-cast and ECAP-processed conditions prior to hydrogenation tests indicate that ECAP caused little global microstructural changes in the alloy. Indeed, the overall hypoeutectic microstructure, in which primary Mg grains are embedded into lamellar Mg–Mg In spite of the similarity of the initial microstructures of the as-cast and ECAP-ed samples, their hydrogenation behavior is different (see We believe that large Mg crystals formed in the samples of the material in the two conditions after the first (longest) hydrogenation cycle are primarily responsible for the observed reversal of the kinetic behavior. Indeed, large Mg crystals in the BSE images exhibit a contrast that is very similar to that of primary Mg grains. Thus, during subsequent hydrogenation cycles these crystals behave like pure Mg, which exhibits poor hydrogenation kinetics due to slow diffusion of hydrogen through the hydride phase Although the final microstructures of the two samples ( The largest difference in hydrogen absorption rates between the two alloys is observed during the sixth hydrogenation cycle. At this stage the submicrometer size Mg grains formed on the surface of the as-cast samples experience brittle fracture, thus exposing a larger surface area to hydrogenation, which accelerates the kinetics of the process (see Our cross-sectional metallographic observations revealed that in partly hydrogenated as-cast samples there is a higher areal density of Mg It was shown above that the difference in hydrogenation kinetics of the Mg–Ni alloy studied in the as-cast and ECAP-processed states is mainly determined by the difference in size of the large faceted Mg crystals formed during the first hydrogenation cycle. Also, thermal cycling of the studied Mg–Ni alloys in Ar did not produce any large Mg crystals. We believe that compressive stresses developing in residual metal phase during hydrogenation provide the driving force for the formation of large Mg crystals. Indeed, Doyama et al. Let us make some numerical estimates to prove the feasibility of the proposed growth mechanism of large Mg crystals. We will assume that the normal stress at the interface between a Mg grain and a Mg This expression is similar to the well-known formula for the rate of diffusion creep controlled by lattice diffusion (Nabarro–Herring creep Equation Hence, paradoxically, although fast atom diffusion in the ECAP-ed alloy leads to faster hydrogen absorption than in the as-cast condition during the first hydrogenation, the same fast diffusion causes the growth of very large Mg crystals, which retard hydrogenation kinetics during the subsequent cycles. It is only after these large crystals get destroyed by defects accumulated in the course of hydrogenation cycling that the hydrogenation kinetics of both alloys becomes identical. Equation It should be noted that the formation of large Mg crystal during hydrogenation is contingent upon the presence of large primary Mg grains from which the material for the growing crystals is drawn. Indeed, additional ball milling of the chips prior to hydrogenation considerably reduced the maximum size of these crystals. Such primary Mg grains are characteristic of the hypoeutectic alloys investigated in the present work, but were absent in the eutectic Mg–Ni alloy studied previously Our microstructural observations (see The results of the present study can be summarized as follows. We performed a comparative study of the kinetics of hydrogen absorption (at 300 °C) by the as-cast Mg-10 wt% Ni alloy, and the same alloy additionally processed by four passes of ECAP. The bulk ingots were mechanically comminuted to the millimeter-sized chips without any further mechanical treatment. Initially, the kinetics of hydrogen absorption was rather slow, but it steadily improved with each consecutive hydrogenation cycle. During the 10th cycle, both alloys exhibited similar absorption kinetics and absorbed about 4 wt% of hydrogen within 30 min. While during the first hydrogenation cycle the ECAP-ed alloy exhibited faster absorption than its as-cast counterpart, the latter became faster between the second and the sixth hydrogenation cycle. The hydrogenation-induced microstructure changes in the alloy in the two conditions were studied with the aid of XRD and SEM. The lamellar structural component of the hypoeutectic microstructure was found to have undergone extensive coarsening at 300 °C, which resulted in finely dispersed particles of Mg We proposed a diffusion-based model of the growth of large Mg crystals induced by compressive stresses generated during the metal-hydride transformation. An expression for the size of large extruded crystals was obtained. The estimated size of such grains scales with the square root of the product of bulk self-diffusion coefficient of Mg and the hydrogenation time. On this basis, the larger size of Mg crystals in the alloy processed by ECAP was interpreted in terms of increased diffusivity induced by ECAP. Cracking and pore formation played a more important role in accelerating the hydrogenation rate of ECAP-modified material than of the as-cast one. Cracking of submicrometer-sized Mg grains was observed in the as-cast alloy after six hydrogenation cycles. It was interpreted as a result of scarcity of dislocation sources in the submicrometer-size single crystals of Mg. The re-distribution of Mg Finally, we would like to emphasize the dual effect of ECAP on the kinetics of hydrogen absorption by the hypoeutectic Mg-10 wt% Ni alloy: on the one hand, increased atomic mobility in the ECAP-modified alloy results in faster hydrogen absorption during the first hydrogenation cycle. On the other hand, the same increased mobility results in the growth of very large Ni-free Mg crystals, which inhibit hydrogenation kinetics during the subsequent cycles. Nine hydrogenation cycles were needed to cause the disintegration of the large Mg crystals leading to the convergence of the hydrogenation kinetics of the ECAP-modified and the as-cast alloy. Part of this work was supported by