The adsorption of gold cyanide onto the surface of quartz (101) is discussed based on experimentation combined with quantum chemistry calculations. Adsorption tests were conducted by using gold cyanide and quartz power. Atomic absorption, infrared spectroscopy, energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy, and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy were used to characterize the elemental content in solution and species adsorbed onto the quartz surface. The adsorption of Au(CN)2
                     − onto the surface of quartz was simulated by using quantum chemical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) and implemented in the CASTEP module of Materials Studio. The optimal functional quartz structure is obtained with the functional GGA-PBESOL, which gives a k-point set of 3 × 3 × 4 and a cutoff energy of 440 eV. The calculated energy of the adsorption of Au(CN)2
                     − onto the surface of quartz (101) is −463.39 kJ/mol. The calculated Au1-O12 distance is 2.097 Å, and the Au1-O20 distance is 2.079 Å, which indicates that Au(CN)2
                     − adsorbs onto the quartz surface. A Mulliken population analysis indicates that some charge transfer from the Au1 atom of Au(CN)2
                     − to the O12 and O20 atoms in the quartz. A population analysis of the bond indicates that Au atoms bond to O atoms on the quartz surface. Quantum chemistry calculations are consistent with the results of adsorption experiments, which show that Au(CN)2
                     − adsorbs onto the quartz surface. Some gold cyanide is thus adsorbed onto quartz during cyanide leaching of gold ore, which affects the extraction of gold.The exploitation of gold mines is depleting the easy-to-treat gold ores, so refractory gold ore is becoming the main source of gold. One refractory ore consists of gold grains embedded in non-sulfide matrices of quartz, silicate, or carbonate minerals. In this ore, the gold grains are not in direct contact with the cyanide solution, resulting in low gold recovery [ Quartz is a typical gangue mineral in gold ores, and the adsorption of gold complexes onto quartz has received significant attention in the past. For example, Mohammadnejad et al. [ DFT is a computational quantum-mechanical simulation method that can be used in chemistry, physics, and materials science. For example, the characteristics of a multi-electron system can be determined via DFT, and Materials Studio is a popular computational package for DFT simulations and is often used to simulate gold extraction. For example, Kim et al. [ Experiments and theoretical analysis by quantum chemistry calculations show that gold cyanide adsorbs onto quartz in cyanide leaching of gold. The adsorption calculations of quartz and Au(CN) Quartz and silicates are the major gangue minerals in most gold ores in China. Requartz has very stable physical and chemical properties and forms a trigonal oxide crystal structure. The chemical composition of quartz was analyzed by using x-ray fluorescence, which gives the chemical compositions shown in As shown in Quartz was immersed in gold solution under continuous stirring. The conditions were pH = 11, a pulp concentration of 40 %, an initial gold concentration of 72.29 mg/L, a quartz particle size of 0.043 mm, and a stirring speed of 500 min   After Au adsorption onto the quartz surface, new peaks appear in the IR transmittance around 2850 and 2930 cm  As shown in The convergence criteria of the ideal structure and for the energy calculation are as follows: (a) an energy tolerance of 2 × 10 To optimize the quartz crystal, the density functional, cutoff energy, and The main problem with DFT is that the exact functions for exchange and correlation are not known. Approximations are thus made for very accurate calculations of certain physical quantities [ The initial cutoff energy is 340 eV and the   We determine the convergence of the We next test the cutoff energy for convergence when using the exchange-correlation functional GGA-PBESOL and the To summarize, the optimal correlation function GGA-PBESOL selected by optimizing the quartz structure gives a These computationally optimized lattice parameters are consistent with published results [ The comparison in Surface energy is generally defined as the reversible work required to produce a specific surface area. Surface energy is a measure of a given surface and can serve as an index for the thermodynamic stability: the lower the index, the more stable the surface, and the more accurate the surface structure [ Setting the cutoff energy to 440 eV and the For a surface with a high surface energy, a large surface growth rate is expected, and the rapidly growing surface does not reflect the resultant crystal structure [ When the atomic layer thickness reaches 5.908 Å, the surface-energy range is less than 0.05 J/m Given the thickness of the atomic layer, the thickness of the vacuum layer was measured on the surface of quartz (101) and the surface energy was calculated (see results in For a 10-Å-thick vacuum layer, small changes in the thickness of the vacuum layer have little effect on the surface energy, indicating that the quartz surface is in a steady state. Using the CASTEP simulation, the relative affinity of the quartz (101) surface and the various adsorption energies were quantified. The total adsorption energy is [ This simulation calculates the energy of the interaction between adsorbents [H Hydrogen peroxide forms during the cyanide reaction and is catalytically decomposed into hydroxyl groups by Fe As shown in Mullikan’s population analysis transforms the wave functions obtained from the molecular orbital theory into intuitive chemical information, thereby clarifying electron transfer in the molecule and the interaction between the atoms and electrons in the interaction. Au(CN) After the adsorption of Au(CN) The results given in Adsorption tests indicate that gold cyanide adsorbs onto quartz. This is confirmed by infrared spectroscopy, energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy, and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). XPS results show that Au-O adsorbs together during the adsorption process, at which point Au has a +1 valence, indicating that Au(CN) CASTEP simulations of the adsorption were done with the density-functional GGA-PBESOL, a cutoff energy of 440 eV, and a The results of adsorption tests are consistent with quantum chemical calculations in indicating the adsorption of Au(CN)  No conflict of interest is created by the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all the authors for publication. On behalf of my co-authors, I can state that the work described in this manuscript is original research that has not been published previously and is not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All the authors have approved the enclosed manuscript. This work was supported by the