Introduction
                  Ring external fixation can be a definitive treatment of high energy femoral fractures. A retrospective analysis of outcomes is presented.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  23 patients with open or comminuted femoral fractures treated with circular external fixators were included. Mean age was 33 (range, 13–81) years. Lesions were classified according to AO/ASIF. 12 fractures were open. Mean follow up period has been 26.3, (range 20–144) months. The results were assessed according to the modified criteria of Association for the Study and Application of the Method of Ilizarov. Knee functional results were assessed with Hospital for Special Surgery knee scoring system.
               
                  Results
                  22 fractures united primarily, one showed nonunion. Knee stiffness developed in two patients. No patient had deep pin tract infection. Bone results were quoted as excellent, good, fair and poor in 19, 1, 1 and 2. The functional results were excellent, good, and fair in 16, 6, and 1, on the basis of ASAMI criteria. Mean HSS knee score has been 90.1 (range 60–100).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Circular external fixation can achieve reliable rates of union and good to excellent functional outcome in open or comminuted femoral fractures. A strict rehabilitation protocol was effective in preserving knee joint function.Open and comminuted fractures of femur usually result from high energy trauma and therefore tend to be seen in patients with multiple injuries. Aim of the present study is to present retrospective analysis of radiological and functional outcomes in patients with open or comminuted femoral fractures treated with circular external fixators, in order to evaluate the potential of the method in these critical lesions. The present retrospective study included patients with posttraumatic open or comminuted femoral shaft and distal metaepiphyseal fractures treated with circular external fixators and presenting to Senior author's institutes (Hospital Sant’ Anna of Como, Menaggio Hospital, Italy) between October 2000 and April 2015. The study was approved by Institutional Review Board and Ethical committee of the institute. A dedicated team manages trauma patients in our hospital and takes decision regarding treatment of patients. The femoral fractures judged unsuitable for internal fixation are treated with external fixation. At our institute external fixation for femoral fractures is used as temporary stabilizer for damage control orthopaedics in polytrauma patients and as definitive fixation in open or comminuted fractures, or fractures with bone loss or poor soft tissue coverage or in presence of infection in the wound or in pin tracts of the temporary external fixators (for example, after prolonged stay in intensive care units). The study included only those patients with open or comminuted femoral fractures receiving definitive fixation with circular external fixators, with sensate foot and with minimum 6 months follow up. Pathological fractures, those with less than 6 months follow up and patients treated initially with external fixation but converted to definitive internal fixation were excluded from study. All patients gave informed consent for treatment with ring fixators. 23 patients (15 males and 8 females) met the inclusion criteria of the study. Mean age was 33 (range, 13-81) years. Mean Injury Severity Score (ISS) was 27.7 (range, 9-50). The fractures were classified according to AO/ASIF classification Patients were operated in supine position on fracture table under regional/general anesthesia under image intensifier control. Open fractures were thoroughly irrigated with sterile normal saline and antibiotic solution. Thorough soft tissue debridement was done and cultures were sent. Further management of wound depended on wound condition assessed regularly. Vascular surgeons repaired vascular injury in grade IIIC injuries Knee spanning fixators was applied in 8 patients. Proper placement of transarticular hinges was confirmed under C-arm in knee spanning assemblies to promote joint mobilization. Tibial rings were removed 6–8 weeks later. Proximal corticotomy was done in two patients with acute bone loss. In the post-operative period, rehabilitation team followed a strict rehabilitation protocol. Assisted passive motion of both knee and ankle joints and patellar mobilization was encouraged depending on patient's compliance and status of pain. Continuous passive motion machine was used wherever necessary. Active exercises, postural exercises and early weight bearing mobilization with crutches or walker were encouraged. Rehabilitation protocol of joint mobilization was followed after frame removal also. Distraction at an initial rate of 1 mm par day in four increments was started on day 7 at corticotomy site in patients of bone transport. The broad spectrum antibiotics were given for five days and thereafter choice of antibiotic (for another 10 days) was determined by the culture sensitivity report. Pin site care and hygiene was taught to all patients before discharge. All patients were seen in Outpatient Department with regular follow up every two weeks. Pin tract infections were classified according to Paley's classification into grade 1 & grade 2 (Labelled as superficial pin tract infection) and grade 3 (Deep pin tract infection).  The mean operative time was 86.1 (range, 60–120) minutes. Mean time to union was 23.1 (range, 12–61) weeks. The mean time in external fixation was 25.8 (range, 12–82) weeks. Fracture united primarily in 22 patients ( Goals of treatment in open or comminuted femoral fractures are to achieve union, prevention of infection, normal alignment with maximum functional use of extremity. We were able to achieve union in 96% patients in present study. We consider this value significant in a cohort of complex open and multifragmentary fractures and it compares favorably with the best reported rates of healing reported in literature. Recently satisfactory results have been achieved with early definitive fixation of open or comminuted distal femoral fractures. Common complications after external fixation of femoral fractures are pin tract infections and decreased range of motion of knee joint. Knee stiffness is a major complication of definitive external fixation in femoral fractures. Internal fixation is preferred in majority of distal femoral fractures. However, in a recent meta-analysis, distal fractures had a lower healing rate (86.6% vs. 93.7%) and a higher re-operation rate (13.4% vs 6.1%) than shaft fractures. Limitation of the present study is its retrospective nature with a small number of patients spread over a long period. We did not compare our method with other methods of fixation. A randomized comparative study of different fixation methods should be performed to investigate the effectiveness of current fixation technique. Circular external fixation can achieve reliable rates of union and good to excellent functional outcome in select, open or comminuted femoral fractures. Pin tract infections can be managed successfully with standard pin site care and judicious use of antibiotics. A proper pin placement along with a strict rehabilitation protocol of physical therapy and early ambulation in postoperative period under supervision of rehabilitation team achieves satisfactory range of motion in knee joint. No funding received from any source. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Level IV. no funding received from any source.