This paper discusses a novel method of beneficiation of ultrafine phosphate which allows the recovery of phosphate particles that are less than 20μm in size and have long been considered in the industry to be unrecoverable. It has been standard practice over many years in the phosphate industry to separate and discard the ultrafine particles, due to unacceptable processing difficulties such as excessively high viscosity and/or poor flotation recovery. In contrast with the established methods of beneficiation of phosphate where classification by hydrocyclone is mainly used to remove ultrafines as tailings, the method described in this paper allows a high proportion of ultrafines to be recovered via flotation without prior separation.
                  A number of variables and their effect on the flotation recovery of ultrafine phosphate are investigated including the pulp density and water quality during conditioning and flotation, type of flotation machine and reagents used to depress Fe2O3 and Al2O3. Some excellent results were achieved using samples containing up to 75wt% −20μm particles, including for example 91.2% P2O5 recovery to a concentrate grade of 34.7% P2O5 from a low feed grade of 6.46% P2O5 and 92.4% P2O5 recovery to a concentrate grade of 30.2% P2O5 from 10.6% P2O5 feed. Guar gum was found to be the most effective depressant for Fe2O3, whilst the Al2O3 was determined to be hydrophilic, resulting in low amounts being recovered to the concentrate, regardless of whether a depressant was used or not. The results of this work led to the development of the method described herein which is designed to recover phosphate from ores containing particles up to 80wt% passing 20μm, by flotation using a Jameson cell.Phosphate beneficiation operations around the world which use flotation as the principal mechanism to concentrate the phosphate bearing minerals, typically discard the “ultrafine” phosphate bearing particles, where for this study “ultrafine” is defined as particles being smaller than 20 Legend International Holdings Inc. major phosphate deposits Paradise South and DTree are known to average between 20 Bench scale flotation tests were initially carried out in a conventional Denver cell to confirm the poor floatability of the ultrafine phosphate and to investigate the effect of pulp density and water quality during conditioning and flotation, on phosphate recovery. Some bench scale comparison tests between Denver cells and Jameson cells were carried out, which effectively finalised the design of Legend’s beneficiation process. Lastly, the entire beneficiation process was set-up at laboratory pilot scale to test diamond drill core and RC chip samples, to enable Legend to calculate a reserve for the Paradise South and a pending reserve for the DTree ore deposits. These tests confirmed the novel process was successful using samples with highly variable phosphate feed grades and mineralogy and also established guar gum as the best depressant for Fe Examples of methods of desliming and their importance to effective recovery are discussed by There is some reference in the literature to the flotation of ultrafine phosphate with column cells such as that practised at the Barreiro concentrator in Brazil ( Jameson cell flotation machines have a number of attributes which have made them a popular choice for facilitating the flotation of fine particles in base metal and coal operations. These have been well described and documented in the past by Although conventional and column cells have been used before in phosphate flotation, there is no reference in the literature to Jameson cells ever being used. This is surprising, given they have been used for some time in potash processing ( Bench scale studies were carried out on two of Legend’s phosphate deposits, Paradise South and DTree, to determine the effect of ultrafines removal, pulp density and water quality during conditioning and flotation and depressants for Fe Batch flotation was conducted in an aerated 2.5 Continuous flotation tests using drill core and RC chip samples with highly variable mineralogy from the Paradise South and DTree deposits were carried out at laboratory pilot scale. For these tests, the −20 After conditioning, the slurry was transferred to a baffled 300 During operation of the Jameson cell, only one problem was encountered with short-circuiting. Occasionally the feed pressure to the cell would drop due to airlocks in the pump caused by excess froth in the slurry. When this occurred, it was necessary to stop-start the pump so that the feed pressure and vacuum in the downcomer were restored. Although this problem was encountered occasionally, it was quickly managed and did not affect the flotation results. Phosphorite at Legend’s DTree deposit occurs predominantly as mudstone and silty mudstone phosphorite (also known as microsphorite) with some minor occurrences of peloidal grainstone phosphorite (also known as pelletal phosphorite). At Paradise South the phosphorite is made up of pelletal phosphorites almost completely comprised of collophane (carbonate fluorapatite), mudstone phosphorite and replacement phosphorite, which is a more indurated, porcellanous phosphorite (  It can be seen from the results that leaving the ultrafines in the ore has a negative impact on the amount of P Bench scale tests using Paradise South ore, were designed to investigate the effect of pulp density during conditioning on the flotation recovery of P Further to the discussion in the previous Section In a full scale operation it is expected that all the recycled process water would be collected into a common collection tank which would then pass through a filter to remove fine particulate solids and ion exchange system to remove Ca  Bench scale flotation tests were carried out on Paradise South ore using a Denver cell to compare a number of reagents known to depress Fe The results from the bench scale work led to the refinement and finalisation of the process flowsheet. This flowsheet was then constructed at laboratory pilot plant scale at Amdel laboratories in Adelaide, Australia to carry out beneficiation tests on Paradise South and DTree ore, to enable Legend to calculate a mineable reserve for these deposits. All tests were completed without the removal of any −20  The results in With regard to Fe In terms of Al  Similar to the results discussed in Section The Fe  From the results in The results from all of the test work discussed in this paper culminated in the design of Legend’s beneficiation process which is summarised here and is currently in patent pending status following the submission of an international patent application ( The slurry is formed by milling the ore in a rod mill, followed by classification using a hydrocyclone to provide a size fraction of at least 80 A pH adjusting agent such as soda ash (Na The method comprises a step of diluting the conditioned aqueous slurry to provide a solids content of no more than 35% by weight and preferably 20% solids by weight. The diluted conditioned slurry is introduced to the one or more downcomers of a Jameson flotation cell. Rougher, scavenger and cleaner flotation is carried out using Jameson cells to obtain a 32% P The water used in the method may be fresh water, recycled water or a mixture. It is particularly preferred that the water used in the method has a concentration of no more than 10 A process has been designed which successfully beneficiates phosphate ore with highly variable mineralogy and ultrafine (−20 Thanks to Legend International Holdings Inc. for funding the research and providing the ore samples. Lyndon Ryan and Le Huynh from Xstrata Technology are thanked for their technical assistance and supply of the Jameson cells. Jim Thorpe, Adam Wilkinson and staff at Amdel Ltd are thanked for their assistance with carrying out the test work.