The main purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of deformability of joint material on the deformability of rock joints. To do this, replicas of natural rock joint surfaces were constructed using plaster and concrete materials with different values of Young׳s modulus. The replicas underwent direct shear tests with various values of normal stress. The results of 110 direct shear tests show that the deformability of asperities considerably affects normal and shear behaviors of joints. For joints with equal wall compressive strength values, those having higher deformability show higher shear strength. This is due to the fact that higher deformability of asperities results in increasing the contact area during shearing. Based on statistical analyses of the experimental results, the Young׳s modulus of joint material was incorporated into the Barton–Bandis empirical relationships in order to better estimate the peak shear strength, shear stiffness, rate of dilation, and the shear displacement corresponding to the peak.Fractures can significantly affect the mechanical behavior of rock systems, especially in the vicinity of the ground surface where the stress level is low. The deformability behavior of a rock mass is mainly controlled by the joints as their number increases. Hence, the factors controlling the behavior of rock joints under different stress fields must be identified and incorporated into an appropriate constitutive model to describe the mechanical behavior of discontinuous rock media The mechanical behavior of clean joints depends on different factors such as surface roughness, joint wall compressive strength ( Nevertheless, the impact of deformability properties of joint material on the normal and shear behaviors of rock joints has been neglected, and only the strength and frictional characteristics of the joint material have been considered in the existing constitutive models. In other words, the models proposed for the shear behavior of rock joints have been established based on the two mechanisms of shearing and sliding of surface asperities. However, elastic/inelastic deformations of the joint materials play an important role in the joint shear behavior In this study, the effect of deformability properties of joint material on the shear behavior of rock joints has been investigated through physical modeling and laboratory mechanical experiments. Plaster and concrete replicas of natural rock joints with different deformability and strength properties were prepared and subjected to normal and shear loads. The direct shear tests were conducted under a wide range of surface roughness and normal load values. Application of the two types of material (i.e. plaster and concrete) for joint replicas provided a direct observation of the influence of the deformability of asperities on the joint shear behavior. The results of the tests were statistically analyzed in order to determine the role of Young׳s modulus of joint material in the constitutive equations of rock joints. To avoid the effect of individual difference in the morphological properties of fractures (e.g. roughness and aperture) on the normal/shearing process with different deformability properties, several replicas were prepared from natural rock joints. To ensure that the deformability properties of the replicas are significantly different, they were produced using different plaster and concrete materials. Four natural joints with different degrees of surface roughness were selected as the parent joints. The natural rock joints were taken from the Gol-e-Gohar iron ore mine (Iran), and silicon molds of them were prepared. The profiles of the natural joint surfaces were mapped by a contact method using a profile comb. The preliminary estimation of the joint roughness coefficient ( To obtain mated replicas of natural rock joints, the upper (or lower) surface of the natural joint was first molded and constructed using a silicon mold with plaster or concrete. Then, the other surface of the joint replica was molded and superimposed on the first surface. All the samples were formed cylindrically with a diameter of 60 For each parent joint, a number of fracture replicas were produced using a high-strength plaster material with the commercial name of Crystacal D which mostly consists of CaSO  To find suitable concretes for constructing the replicas, different mixtures of water, cement, super plasticizer, and silica sand were examined. At this step, the purpose was to achieve materials having strengths close to the strength of the plaster samples, and different values of Young׳s modulus. For twenty-one different concrete mix designs, unjointed cylindrical samples with the length to diameter ratio of 2.5 were prepared and were preserved in water for twenty-eight days. Then, the samples were kept outside the water at the laboratory temperature for twenty-four hours to be dried out. Thereafter, the specimens underwent the uniaxial compressive strength test. Four mixtures were finally selected to produce the concrete joint replicas. The mechanical properties of these four concrete mixtures are listed in Experimental study of the effect of deformability of joint material on the mechanical behavior of rock joints was conducted through performing several direct shear tests under CNL conditions at the rock mechanics laboratory of the Gol-e-Gohar iron ore mine. Test equipment includes a shear box comprising two wedge-type sample holders with the width, length and height values of 135, 175, and 170 A set of plaster and concrete replicas of joints with different Thirty-six plaster joint replicas and fifty concrete joint replicas with four degrees of roughness were prepared. In order to control the reproducibility of test results, ten tests were randomly selected and retested. The maximum difference between shear strength of each pair of the tests was 2.3% of the lower shear strength value. Fourteen saw-cut samples were also prepared for performing direct shear tests on smooth surfaces. In total, 110 direct shear tests were carried out. Their specifications are listed in  As can be seen in curves At the consolidation stage, it was observed that the plaster and concrete joints showed different normal behaviors, while the values of their wall compressive strength were equal. The reason for this difference in the normal behavior must be sought in the difference between the deformability of joint materials. The amount of deformation of surface asperities caused by the local stress concentration is inversely proportional to the deformability modulus. Therefore, despite having the same values of compressive strength and morphological properties, the joints made of materials with higher deformability (here, the plaster) have larger closure values, and thus demonstrate lower normal stiffness. Under similar morphological and strength conditions, it was observed that the joint made of materials with higher deformability (here, the plaster joint) demonstrated higher shear strength,  The results of our research show that material deformability has a significant effect on the shear behavior of rock joints. In this section, this phenomenon is studied quantitatively. The shear stiffness describes the pre-peak shear behavior of rock joints. There are several definitions for shear stiffness, among which the slope of the line tangent to the shear stress–shear displacement curve at the point of 50% of the peak shear strength has been used here. The values of shear stiffness were calculated for all the tests. The correlation coefficients of the shear stiffness with each of the parameters Based on the statistical analysis of the experiments results, the following regression relationship with the determination coefficient of Among different shear failure criteria for rock joints, the Barton criterion has been widely used in engineering. Since the Barton criterion has been suggested for the normal stresses within the range of 0.01 The coefficient of The peak shear displacement is of great importance in characterizing the deformability behavior of rock joints. In the Barton–Bandis constitutive model, The results of the tests performed in this research show that the effect of roughness on the peak shear displacement varies depending on Young׳s modulus of joint materials. For the joints made of highly deformable materials, The following regression relationship with The dilation occurring during the shearing depends on the joint roughness and normal stress. The results of the tests performed show that for materials with equal joint wall compressive strength, the pre-peak dilation behavior is the same regardless of the deformability of joint materials. In the Barton–Bandis empirical model, the joint dilation is estimated by the following equation In Eq. The effect of deformability of surface asperities on the mechanical behavior of rock joints was investigated through performing laboratory direct shear tests on plaster and concrete replicas of natural fractures. The experiments were carried out within a wide range of joint surface roughness, joint wall compressive strength, Young׳s modulus, and normal stress values. The observation of the normal behavior of the joints at the consolidation stage indicated that in spite of having the same values of compressive strength and morphological properties, the joints made of materials with higher deformability (here, the plaster) had larger closure values, and thus showed lower normal stiffness. At the shearing stage, it was observed that the joints made of materials with higher deformability showed higher shear strength and greater peak shear displacement. The mechanism through which the deformability of joint material influences the shear behavior is related to the degradation of the asperities. As the closure increases with increasing deformability, the effective contact area at the shearing stage increases. Accordingly, the damaged area of the joint surface increases and the dilation angle after the peak decreases with the increase of the deformability of the joint material. Because of experiencing high degree of asperity degradation, samples with lower Young׳s modulus have higher shear strengths. The effect of joint material deformability on asperity degradation, and its role in mobilizing joint shear strength have been considered in none of the constitutive models presented for the shear behavior of rock joints. The results of the present research show that shear strength, peak shear displacement, and shear stiffness all depend on the material deformability. Based on the statistical analysis of the experimental results, regression relationships were developed for estimating the parameters of shear behavior of rock joints. The effect of joint material deformability has been incorporated into the constitutive equations of rock joints in terms of Young׳s modulus. We would like to thank the