The present research investigated the removal of zinc from BOF (basic oxygen furnace) sludges in an attempt to reuse the iron content of the sludge in the production of sinter. The study consisted of two main steps: (i) the characterization of fine and coarse fractions of BOF sludges and (ii) the hybrid treatment of sludge to selectively remove zinc from iron. The characterization study showed that the Fe/Zn ratio is 132.6 in the coarse fraction and 11.6 in the fine fraction; the amount of zinc proved to be 8.5 times higher in the later fraction, while the total content of iron ranged between 50 and 60% in both fractions. Zinc could also be identified in the sludge as zincite (ZnO) and franklinite (ZnO.Fe2O3), whose last phase is quite stable and insoluble in NaOH solutions. Other characteristics, including the granulometry, morphology, and toxicity of both fractions of the sludge, were also determined. To improve the zinc removal efficiency, franklinite must be decomposed by a thermal treatment. For this reason, a hybrid route was investigated using the fine fraction of the sludge. The effect of various materials and reagents was evaluated concerning the decomposition of franklinite, in which NaOH was found to be the most effective. Operating variables, such as temperature, time, and NaOH/sludge ratio were studied. The treatment was found to be quite efficient in the selective removal of zinc from the sludge (zinc removal higher than 90% was obtained with practically no iron extraction), thus improving the Fe/Zn ratio in the fine fraction to approximately 200.The use of iron-bearing byproducts, such as sludges, dusts, and slags, has been applied in many instances and is common practice in many iron and steelmaking industries due to its associated benefits. In fact, the management of industrial wastes has become an important issue due to ever-tightening environmental regulations. One such iron-bearing byproduct is the basic oxygen furnace (BOF) sludge, which is a typical residue generated in oxygen steel mills ( A number of applications have been proposed in the literature for the reuse of BOF sludges. These include the incorporation of sludge in the manufacture of ceramics, the use of sludge as an adsorbent to remove metals from wastewaters, the briquetting of sludge to load blast furnaces, the use of sludge in the pelletizing of iron ore, among others ( The present research assesses the reuse of BOF sludges in the production of sinter. To avoid zinc accumulation in the steelmaking process, zinc (including franklinite) must be selectively removed from the sludge. The use of hot concentrated sulfuric acid solutions seems to be rather disadvantageous, given that iron oxides are also dissolved in this process. This dissolution consumes a large quantity of acid and requires the leaching solution to be treated to be able to remove the iron and other unwanted metals ( The present study used BOF sludges generated by ArcelorMittal Monlevade (Brazil). Samples of the fine and coarse fractions were collected directly from the industrial plant, on different days, according to the Brazilian standard Both samples (fine and coarse fractions of BOF sludge) were weighed and put in an oven at 75 The identification of phases was done by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Philips diffractometer (model PW1710). The morphological and chemical compositions of the particles were obtained by means of Scanning Electronic Microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS), using a Jeol microscope (model JSM 5410). The elemental analysis of sludge was determined by Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS) using a Perkin Elmer spectrometer (model AAnaliyst 300). For such analysis, 1.0000 Both samples were finally dry screened to get their granulometry. The fine fraction of the sludge was also analyzed using a Cyclosizer, as a significant amount of the material was found to have particle sizes of smaller than 37 The characterization study demonstrated that that zinc content is relatively lower in the coarse fraction of the sludge. For this reason, specific treatment tests were carried out using only the fine fraction. It could also be observed that zinc predominantly appears in the sludge as ZnO (zincite) and ZnO.Fe The following materials and reagents were evaluated in the tests of thermal decomposition of franklinite: ladle furnace slag, HR scale, Ca(OH) NaOH was chosen as the most adequate reagent to decompose franklinite from the sludge. For this reason, tests at different operating variables were performed in an attempt to better understand the effect of each variable on the removal of zinc. The procedure used in the previous step was repeated. Subsequently, to investigate the thermal decomposition of franklinite, the following variables and levels were evaluated: (i) temperature (°C): 150, 300, 450, 600, 750; (ii) time (h): 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; and (iii) NaOH/sludge ratio (w/w): 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00, 1.50. Replicate tests were performed in the intermediate and under both extreme conditions. After each test, the sludge was leached using the condition of T The composition of the BOF sludge determined by AAS for some elements is shown in The phase composition of the BOF sludge determined by XRD revealed that iron phases, such as FeO (wustite), Fe The toxicity of the BOF sludge was determined according to the The morphology and the chemical composition of particles of the BOF sludge were obtained by means of SEM-EDS. As regards morphology, the fine fraction was characterized by particles of irregular shape (see The particle size distribution of the BOF sludge is shown in A comparison between different materials/reagents (ladle furnace slag, HR scale, Ca(OH) The relative higher decomposition of franklinite with the use of NaOH, as compared to Ca(OH) The effect of temperature on the removal of zinc from the fine fraction of the BOF sludge using NaOH is shown in The results shown in The effect of the NaOH/sludge mass ratio shown in It can be seen that, for the operating conditions investigated, the following sequence was found to be more significant on the decomposition of franklinite from the fine fraction of a BOF sludge: temperature After leaching, it was verified that alkalis content (Na, K, and Ca) are easily removed from the treated sludge by washing. The present study characterized the fine and coarse fractions of BOF sludge, and a method for the selective removal of zinc was investigated in an attempt to reuse its iron content in the sinter process. The following main results can be drawn: Iron was found as a predominant species in both fractions of the sludge (50.65% in the fine and 67.61% in the coarse fraction), while zinc was found mainly in the fine fraction (4.37% and 0.51% in the coarse fraction). The Fe/Zn ratio was 11.6 in the fine fraction and 132.6 in the coarse fraction. The presence of cadmium, lead, and chromium was quite low; The following phases were identified in the BOF sludge: FeO (wustite), magnetite (Fe In the fine fraction of BOF sludge, approximately 60% of the zinc may be zincite, while the remaining 40% may be franklinite; The BOF sludge evaluated in this study was classified as a non-inert class IIA (not hazardous) residue according to the Brazilian standards; The average particle size of the fine fraction of BOF sludge is 37 The use of ladle furnace slag, HR scale, and Ca(OH) The leaching with NaOH was found to be very selective to zinc over iron; The decomposition of franklinite from BOF sludges tends to reach a maximum at around 300 to 450 No effect of time was observed for the conditions studied; and, A quite linear trend could be verified in the decomposition of franklinite over NaOH/sludge ratio. The authors are grateful to