Magnetite with an aspect ratio of 10:1 was prepared by a seeding growth approach with a 0.35T magnetic field applied. Studies show that magnetic field induced self-assembly of 50nm diameter spherical particles, leading to the formation of a chain-like structure in alkaline media or a rod-like structure in acidic media. The addition of a small amount of seeds increases the yield of rod-like magnetite particles. The seeds are prepared by aging ferrous and ferric solution with sodium hydroxide as a precipitator. The aspect ratio of the rod increases with a decrease ratio of seed to iron salt. Seeds accelerate the initial reaction. A dependence of the morphology on the size of the seed is observed. Magnetic measurements reveal that magnetite rods are ferromagnetic with a saturation magnetization of 75.7emu/g and coercivity of 386Oe. Enhanced coercivity compared to without seeding is explained in terms of an increase of shape anisotropy.Magnetite, an important magnetic material, has attracted a lot of attention for its magnetic properties. Rod-like magnetite particles have high anisotropy and coercive force as well as magnetic properties compared to other shapes, and are widely used as high magnetic density media, magnetic devices and microwave materials In this manuscript, a seed-mediated growth approach to make rod-like particles in an aqueous solution is reported. Spherical magnetite particles are generated by oxidation and serve as seeds for rod synthesis. These seeds are added to a solution containing iron salt and urea, and provide nucleation sites for magnetite rod growth. By adjusting the seed size and ratio of seed to metal salt, different aspect ratios and yield of rods can be obtained. The effect of seeding on initial reaction rate and magnetic properties is discussed. Ferrous sulfate (FeSO An 80 The reaction cell was three-neck round-bottom flask, which was inserted into the gap between two pieces of permanent magnets. In such a way a definite external magnetic field could be added. A 100 The composition of synthesized magnetite was characterized by Max-RA X-ray diffractometer. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on a field emission FEI SIRION 200 and JEOL JSM 5600-LV microscope. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was taken with a Hitachi model H-800 microscope with an accelerating voltage of 200 SEM images of magnetite particles grown under various applied magnetic fields in the absence of seed particles are shown in Under a 0.35 In a solution with a pH value of 6.5, ferrous and ferric ions are initially precipitated as “green rust”. Green Rust are hexagonal plate-like particles and transform into magnetite spontaneously, which releases additional ferrous at the same time When the pH value is increased to 9.0 or 10.0, all ferrous and ferric ions are initially precipitated as Fe(OH) It is clear from To understand the role of seeds on magnetite nanorod growth, some experiments under the same conditions except the addition of different volumes (40, 20, 5 It is observed that decreasing the seed volume significantly increases the aspect ratio. When the seed volume is 40 The role of seed acts as a nucleation site, the ferrous and ferric ions transfer to its surface and grow into a large magnetite particle. When the seed amount is appropriate, the seeds eliminate additional nucleation. The nucleation and growth are carried out separately. The seeds are dispersive in the suspension and favor the growth on existing crystals to reduce the supersaturation. As a result, uniform rods are obtained. When a large amount of seeds were added, the seeds can induce second nucleation and generate new nuclei. The nucleus number would be increased leading to a large amount of short rods. When the amount of seed is too small to provide enough nucleation sites, ferrous and ferric ions in the growth solution coprecipitate to generate new nuclei. The growth and nucleation occur simultaneously. The growth proceeds at different initial times leading to a wide aspect ratio distribution and low yield of rods. Fewer seeds should lead to more growth on the existing seeds and get a larger aspect ratio. So it is important to keep an appropriate seed to growth solution volume ratio. It was also found that the introduction of seeds leads to rapid formation of magnetite. The relationship between the product amount (Fe In the absence of seed, the aspect ratio is about 2.7 but the reaction rate is slow. It is interpreted that a slow initial reaction rate leads to a slow particle growth. Magnetic force is negligible compared to the Brownian motion for the small size particles. Only when the particles grow over a critical size, that either oriented growth of the magnetite or aggregation would occur. It occurs usually in the final stages of the synthesis process, which results in short rods. The results in  In the preparation of seeds, the solution was aged for different periods to increase the average size. Then the seed solution was added into the growth solution in a similar procedure described as that without aging. The seed volume was fixed at 5  In summary, rod-like magnetite particles were successfully prepared following a precipitation in the presence of magnetic field. The intensity of magnetic field and pH value has an obvious effect on the morphology. With the addition of seed, the yield and aspect ratio of rod-like particles are increased. The aspect ratio can be adjusted by the ratio of seed to iron salt. The large size seeds are favorable to formation of chain structure and the small ones are beneficial to rod. Seeds increase the initial reaction rate. Magnetic measurement reveals that these rod-like particles are ferromagnetic at room temperature. Rods produced from seeds exhibit larger coercivity than those produced without seeding. This work is supported by