Microwave heating is a promising technology in coal processing and coal seam permeability enhancement. It is vital to investigate the influencing factors for microwave heating of coal to ensure the optimal heating effect and the best energy efficiency. To address this, different types of coal samples with various water saturation were treated with various microwave powers and irradiation times. Thermocouple and infrared thermal image system were used to measure the temperature of coal samples during and after microwave treatment. Through analysing the temperature, the effects of dielectric property and water saturation of coal, microwave power and treatment time on microwave heating were investigated. It was found the heating rate of coal samples increases with the loss factor at the initial heating period, which then changes as the composition changes under microwave irradiation. It was also found that coal samples with low water saturation have much better microwave heating effects. Moisture not only impedes microwave heating but also facilitates uniformed heating, which impedes the formation of thermal fractures. Additionally, the experiment results suggest the average temperature increases with microwave power and irradiation time. However, extending the microwave irradiation time is more effective when the microwave power increases to a certain extent.Coalbed methane (CBM) is recognized as a cheap and clean energy source in recent years [ Coalbed methane (CBM) has four occurrence states in coal seam: adsorbed within micropores, trapped in coal matrix, dissolved in moisture and as free gas in fractures [ The mechanism of microwave fracturing mainly includes selective heating, moisture removal and steam flow. As we know, the microwave energy absorption ability is determined by the material's dielectric property. Comparing to the carbonaceous matter with negligible dielectric loss factor, moisture and minerals within the coal body are the two major content that absorb the microwave energy [ It was reported the microwave heating behaviour is highly sensitive to the dielectric property [ To fill the research gap, experiments were carried out to study the influence factors for effective microwave heating, including dielectric property and saturation of coal samples, microwave power and irradiation time. Firstly, three different coal samples (Shanxi, Chongqing, Anhui) were treated under the same microwave condition, whose temperatures were recorded over time. Combining with the proximate analysis and complex permittivity measurement of these samples, the effect of dielectric property on microwave heating effect was discussed in detail. Then, coal samples with various water saturation were treated under different microwave conditions. After that, infrared thermal image system was used to measure the surface temperature of coal samples after microwave irradiation (MI). Finally, the effects of microwave power, MI time and water saturation of coal samples were discussed in detail through analysing the average and standard deviation of surface temperature. This paper provided detailed experiment data concerning coal permittivity and temperature under MI, which can be helpful in verifying and calibrating numerical model in microwave heating. The work is also instructive in optimizing microwave parameter for microwave assisted coalbed methane enhancement and industrial coal processing. The experimental samples were taken from Shanxi, Chongqing and Anhui province. They were then crushed, pulverized and screened in the lab. Pulverized coal with particle size between 0.154 and 0.180 mm were selected for the experiments in In order to measure the dielectric property of coal samples with vector network analyser, coal powders have to be processed into hollow cylinder. The mould used in this study is shown in Coal samples taken from Shanxi province mentioned in 2.1.1 were drilled into large coal cores with 50 mm diameter and 50 mm height. These coal cores were kept in the vacuum drying oven for 2 days until their weight remain stable. They were then completely saturated with vacuum saturation system and their weight was recorded after stabilization. The weight of their target water saturation (0%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100%) can then be calculated based on the weight of their fully dried and saturated conditions. These saturated coal cores were kept in the vacuum drying oven (50 °C) until reaching the designated weight, which were wrapped with plastic wrap immediately after taking out of the drying oven. Finally, the coal cores were unwrapped and put into microwave oven for experiment when they cool to room temperature. The experiment procedure is shown in In order to investigate the correlationship between microwave time and temperature of coal body, a large coal core SX-0 was repeatedly treated with microwave for a certain time (see To investigate the microwave heating effect under various microwave powers and water saturation, 8 coal cores (from SX-1 to SX-8) were treated with various microwave power and other 5 coal cores (from SX-9 to SX-13) were processed to the same saturation before microwave treatment, as shown in The paraffin-mixed coal specimens are assumed to be uniformly mixed with coal and paraffin, and the mixed dielectric is assumed to be isotropic, symmetric and homogeneous [ The complex permittivity ε The complex permittivity of coal samples is measured with an Agilent E5071C vector network analyser. First of all, the test system was set up by connecting the vector network analyser, coaxial cable, the connection part and a coaxial air line, as shown in The microwave oven used in this study consists of a microwave transmitter, a wave guide, a thermocouple, cooling system and a control panel. Its microwave power is continuously adjustable ranging from 0 to 2.0 kW and its microwave frequency is 2450 MHz. The temperature of the object that contact with the thermocouple inside the oven was recorded, which can be monitored and exported through the control panel. The surface temperature of the coal cores was measured with an IRS-S65 infrared thermal image system. These infrared thermal images were then processed with the IRS RDIRs analytic software. As shown in The permittivity measurement results of paraffin-mixed coal specimens were displayed in The temperature variation of three samples under MI were recorded and depicted in Although the temperature rising rate of all the samples showed a decreasing trend over time, the temperature variation of different coal samples differs a lot. For instance, the temperature variation of SX can be divided into two stages. In the first stage, the temperature quickly increased to 340 °C in 100 s. Then, it almost remained the same in the next 140 s, during which yellow smoke with pungent smell was observed. On the contrary, there is no such limit for CQ. Although CQ's heating rate is less than SX at the beginning, its temperature surpasses that of SX after 189 s and keep increasing after 4 min. The difference in the temperature variation pattern between various samples is resulted by their compositions. As carbonaceous matter can hardly absorb microwave energy, most of the microwave energy is absorbed by the moisture and minerals within the coal body. This selective heating will lead to different heating rates and thus result in differential expansion rate and structural embrittlement of coal [ The infrared thermal images of the front side (see Based on these infrared thermal images, the average temperature of the whole surface and the section were calculated and displayed in As the mass of load is more than 10 times of the SX coal sample in The average temperature and standard deviation of temperature of coal cores (SX-1 to SX-8) after MI are displayed in Furthermore, the standard deviation of temperature should also be considered in microwave heating. Larger standard deviation of temperature means the coal sample is more unevenly heated, and thus has better microwave fracturing effect. As shown in In conclusion, choosing an appropriate microwave power is of great importance for microwave heating. The laboratory experiments show that low microwave power has little microwave heating effect. However, when the microwave power increases to a certain extent, further increase of power is not as effective as extending the MI time. Besides that, further investigation is required to find an appropriate microwave power for field application. In field application, the best microwave power should achieve the similar heating rate as coal seam's heat conductivity. When the microwave power is too large, the heating rate will be much larger than the heat conductivity, where the generated heat will not be able to transfer rapidly to the adjacent coal seam. This will lead to a rapid temperature rise in the coal seam close to the microwave generater and may result in overheating and fire hazard. When the microwave power is too small, the heating rate will be very limited and thus cannot achieve targeted heating effect. The average temperature and standard deviation of temperature of coal cores (SX-9 to SX-18) after MI are displayed in As shown in It is worth to mention that the temperature of coal sample with 0% saturation is only slightly less than that with 25% saturation, which is much higher than the rest samples. As most of the microwave energy is absorbed by the moisture and minerals within the coal body (the coal matrix itself can hardly absorb microwave energy), it can be concluded that even the dried sample have strong capacity in absorbing microwave energy with the minerals and bound water. As for the most suitable water saturation, an experimental study reported that microwave fracturing effect increase exponentially with water saturation from 1% to 15% [ It can also be seen from In this study, the influencing factors for microwave heating, including dielectric property and water saturation of coal samples, microwave power and treatment time were studied in detail. It was found the microwave heating rate increases initially with the increase of coal sample's original loss factor. During microwave irradiation, the changes in composition lead to the change of loss factor, which reduces the heating rate to various degrees. It was also found the moisture within coal reduces microwave heating efficiency. High water saturation lead to uniformed heating of coal, which seriously impedes the microwave fracturing effect. Moreover, the results show the average temperature increase with microwave power and irradiation time. However, when the microwave power increases to a certain extent, further increase of power is not as effective as extending the MI time. For field application, microwave fracturing is more suitable for the coal seams with low saturation and relatively large loss factor. And extending irradiation time instead of increasing microwave power seems to be a better choice to achieve great microwave heating effect and high energy efficiency. Most of the previous studies focused on the evolution of coal petrophysical properties under MI, while few experiments have been conducted to investigate microwave's heating effect on coal. The experiments in this paper filled the research gap in investigating the influencing factors for microwave heating of coal. The experiment results discussed the relation between coal permittivity and microwave heating effect in detail, which can be very useful in verifying and calibrating existed numerical models. Even though the findings are valuable in optimizing microwave parameters for coalbed permeability enhancement, further field experiments should be carried out before on-site applications. Thermal analysis should also be conducted to evaluate the risk of coal spontaneous combustion [  We declare that we have no competing financial, professional, or personal interests that might have influenced the performance or presentation of the work described in this manuscript. This project is partially supported by the visiting scholar project from the State Key Laboratory of Coal Mine Disaster Dynamics and Control at