Clay-rich fault gouge in the principal slip zones of faults stores abundant water within pores and between clay interlayers. During the preparation of thin-sections and rock chips for microstructural observations, fault-gouge samples are commonly air-dried at room temperature or in an oven. However, during the drying process, remnant liquid water between gouge grains produces an inter-particle adhesion force (liquid-bridge force), which rearranges the grain-to-grain structure, likely resulting in a disturbance of the original fabric. For this study, we prepared gouge samples from the Itozawa fault, northeastern Japan, using a t-butyl alcohol freeze-drying method that mitigates drying-induced fabric disturbance. We then compared the microstructure of our samples with those prepared using the conventional air-drying method. The freeze-dried samples preserve a smooth fault plane, clearly defined nanoparticles, and well-developed shear-sense indicators, including slickenlines and Riedel shear planes. In contrast, the air-dried samples underwent shrinkage during drying, which distorted the geometry of the fault plane. These air-dried samples lack nanoparticles and display only a weak shear fabric. We conclude that microstructural observations on samples prepared using the t-butyl alcohol freeze-drying method, compared with conventional air-drying, could preserve more evidence for the retrieval of fault information, including the kinematics, slip stability, and dynamic weakening mechanism of a fault.The principal slip zones of faults comprise fine-grained gouge that commonly contains abundant clay minerals (e.g., Prior to the preparation of thin-sections and rock chips for microstructural observations, clay-rich gouge samples are typically air- or oven-dried to remove water in pores and adsorbed onto the surfaces of clay minerals, which have large water storage capacities owing to their high specific surface area. During these drying methods, the surface tension force associated with water in the samples can potentially disrupt or destroy original fabrics (e.g., In this contribution, we used a Fault rocks comprise particles of various sizes, with several adhesion forces acting between the particles. The main adhesion forces are van der Waals, electrostatic, and liquid-bridge forces. A liquid bridge forms between two particles when liquid is present in the gap between those particles ( Water vaporization during air- or oven-drying results in the formation of liquid bridges, generating liquid-bridge forces that act on sub-millimeter particles, causing them to aggregate ( We collected four gouge samples from the principal slip zone of the Itozawa fault (samples A to D). The mineralogy of the gouge samples is described in section Samples C and D were prepared using the freeze-drying technique. As samples containing abundant water begin to dehydrate when exposed to air, these samples were immediately packed into polypropylene bags filled with ethanol and bound with cotton yarn to prevent sample collapse during transport to the laboratory ( Samples C and D were dehydrated by replacing water in the samples with ethanol, before employing the The ethanol substitution and Water in samples C and D was replaced with ethanol as follows: (1) The samples were immersed in ethanol for 7 days; (2) a mixture of water and ethanol was removed from the samples and replaced with ethanol; (3) steps (1) and (2) were repeated four times. To prevent rapid dehydration, the samples were immersed in a 70% ethanol solution for the first iteration of steps (1) and (2), followed by 100% ethanol thereafter. Approximately one month was required to complete ethanol substitution in the samples. Owing to the tight packaging of the samples, some parts were not in direct contact with ethanol. Therefore, we wrapped the samples with paper towels to ensure that the entire surface of the sample was in contact with ethanol ( This procedure was conducted used Ethanol in dehydrated samples C and D was replaced by Following Edge-to-face contacts between clay crystals form in unconsolidated sediments deposited in pure water (e.g., The April 2011 Hamadoori earthquake (Mw 6.6) occurred in Fukushima Prefecture, northeastern Japan ( The earthquake surface rupture (Site 1 in SEM photomicrographs on the XZ plane of sample A (prepared using the air-drying method) reveal a substantially distorted fault plane ( As our samples were collected from the fault plane that slipped during the 2011 earthquake, we expected them to preserve Riedel shear planes indicating normal slip. However, in contrast to sample C, sample A does not contain Riedel shear planes. Smectite crystals in sample A were likely aggregated during air-drying, similar to the air-dried smectite sample collected from the Tsukinuno bentonite mine. We therefore conclude that any Riedel shear planes that were present in sample A were destroyed during smectite crystal aggregation and an associated change in the distribution and morphology of smectite crystals. Gouge from the Itozawa fault comprises three distinct minerals: smectite, quartz, and plagioclase ( SEM photomicrographs of sample B (prepared using the air-drying method) taken normal to the fault plane reveal weak slickenlines on a rough fault plane ( In contrast, SEM images of sample D (prepared using the Slickenlines are formed when particles sandwiched between fault surfaces erode the surfaces during fault slip ( Previous laboratory and field studies have attributed the formation of nanoparticles in clay-bearing faults to the (1) thermal decomposition and (2) hydrothermal alteration of clay minerals, and (3) grain comminution (e.g., Sample B displays only weak slickenlines and a rough fault plane. The weak slickenlines do not definitively indicate that the fault plane underwent brittle slip. No nanoparticles were observed in sample B, and the fault plane comprises several crumbs of various shapes and sizes. As shown in section During laboratory friction experiments at sub-seismic slip rates, grains on rough slip surfaces aggregate during slip ( Nanoparticles have been observed in faults within carbonate rocks (e.g., We used SEM examinations of clay- and water-rich fault-gouge samples from the Itozawa fault in northeastern Japan to compare the effects of two different sample dehydration methods (air-drying and Air-dried gouge samples preserve distorted and rough fault planes with only weak slickenlines and no clear shear-sense indicators or nanoparticles. We conclude that the microstructural signatures of faulting were disturbed as a result of particle aggregation during air-drying. In contrast to the air-dried samples, samples prepared using the Our results indicate that air-drying can greatly affect the microstructure of unconsolidated fault rocks. In contrast, water-saturated and clay-rich fault-gouge samples prepared using the We thank Takahiro Iida (CERES) for his assistance in processing the samples. The comments by Luca Smeraglia and an anonymous reviewer were insightful and greatly improved the manuscript.