Image analysis as a tool for monitoring and controlling flotation froths has become quite widely used in the minerals industry. One of the challenges is to be able to use the image analysis data to predict the performance of a flotation cell. One of the key parameters to be predicted is the water recovery from the froth, since this is intimately related to the gangue recovery and thus the grade. Recent theoretical developments have allowed for the calculation of this water recovery based on the air rate, froth stability and the bubble size distribution. The problem is that all that can be seen of a froth is the bubble films at the top surface. This paper uses physics based simulations of the froth structure to show that the relationship between the size distribution of the films seen at the top surface and the underlying bubble size distribution is a complex one. The paper presents some preliminary results on the statistical relationship between these distributions.In recent years image, analysis has become an increasingly widespread technology on flotation plants. It is usually used as an additional indicator in order to aid the operators in their control of the plant, though recently some attempts have been made to stabilise the froth behaviour by controlling the air rate in order to give a steady flux of froth out of the cell. One of the biggest challenges is to use the image analysis data to predict the cell performance. Empirical approaches to this challenge have been presented in the literature (e.g. This paper will use the prediction of water recovery as an example, since the theory relating the recovery of water to the flow rate of gas and structure of the foam has already been produced ( Typically, the average size of the bubble films on the top surface and the horizontal velocity are returned by image analysis software. This paper will demonstrate that in order to obtain accurate water recovery predictions not only is the correct average internal bubble size required, but also the bubble size distribution. The water flow rate into the concentrate, Due to the opaque and ephemeral nature of foams it is extremely difficult to obtain these relationships experimentally and so the approach used for this work is to use computers to generate physically realistic foam models on which theory can be based. The following section outlines the procedure by means of which these structures are produced. The method used in this paper is to simulate realistic foam/froth structure and examine the effect of changing the bubble size distribution. The reason why simulated foams/froths were used, rather than making use of the experimental data is due to the ephemeral and opaque nature of most foams/froths, which makes accurate measurements of the structure very difficult. In order to produce a starting topology for these simulations a Voronoi tessellation was used (see The foams are simulated by producing minimum surface area structures. By using minimum surface area structures, it is assumed that the surface tension is constant with respect to position. In static, non-draining froth or foam, surface tension gradients will disappear as a result of the Marangoni effect. This effect is the result of surfactant being drawn from regions of high concentration towards those of lower concentration due to surface tension gradients. If liquid drainage is occurring, surface tension gradients can be induced by surfactant on the interfaces being dragged along by the liquid. The attached surfactant cannot travel far, though (unless it desorbs), since the film interfaces are discontinuous (each bubble has its own interface). This means that most of the gradients will be at the scale of the individual bubbles. The Marangoni effect counteracts these gradients. Since changes in the surface tension are typically proportional to the log of the change in the surfactant concentration, large changes in the surfactant concentration are usually required for even modest changes in surface tension. This means that this effect will typically only have a minor impact on foam structure and since it would be very complex to model without significantly influencing the results, it will not be included. A potentially more important effect in flotation froths is that the system might not be at equilibrium, since the foams are quite rapidly stretching and deforming as they flow. This effect will not be included in this study, but is worthy of future study. The generation of the minimum surface area structure based on this initial structure was accomplished using the Surface Evolver software ( In order to ensure that the foam structure did not represent a relatively high energy local minima, a procedure similar to that employed by In order to investigate the relationship between the top surface of a foam and the internal structure, a fully period foam is not appropriate. In order to generate a surface, the foam is sliced through one of the periods. This produces what is in effect an infinitely large slab of foam with a free surface at the top and bottom. Since gravity is not considered when the structure is determined, having two free surfaces simply increases the accuracy of the statistics by doubling the number of surface bubbles. Once the structure has been sliced it is relaxed to a new minimum energy structure (see If the froth surface was only the exposed interface of a slice through an otherwise unchanged foam, then the statistics of the film sizes at the surface would be relatively easy to calculate, since it would be analogous to the stereological problem when slicing through ore samples, but with the simplification that the bubbles are quite regular in shape. The problem in this case is that the films are influenced by the fact that they are at an interface. The bubbles rearrange themselves and the films change size and shape in order to minimise the surface area.  In This is especially noticeable if the size distribution for the internal bubbles and the surface films are compared. In   In order to understand the relationship between the size of the internal bubbles and the surface films, a large number of simulations have been carried out. This is an ongoing project, with only the low to moderately poly-dispersed end of the spectrum having been investigated thus far. While the ultimate aim of this project will be to produce a correlation function linking the bubble size distribution and the film size distribution, this paper will illustrate some of the statistical relationships that have been obtained thus far. The starting point for this discussion will be the key structural parameter for drainage, namely the length of Plateau borders per volume of foam, What this implies is that if we knew the standard deviation of the internal bubbles and the  The second and probably more important relationship in calculating the water recovery is the relationship between the This paper has demonstrated that the relationship between the structure of a froth surface and the underlying structure is a complex one. It has shown that even mono-dispersed foams have a reasonably wide distribution of film sizes at the froth surface. Relationships between values of the two different mean bubble radii required for calculating the liquid drainage as calculated based on the surface films and the actual internal bubble values are given, though the preliminary nature of this work means that the range of poly-dispersity used is limited, being restricted to relatively low poly-dispersity foams.