When low-grade high-silica bauxite undergoes desilication by alkaline leaching, a large amount of alkali-silicate solution will be produced. To realize its recycling, the alkali-silicate solution needs to be desiliconized. In this study, the effectiveness of red mud and a mixture of red mud and CaO as desilication reagents of the alkali-silicate solution are compared and the desilication mechanisms were analyzed. Results show that when adding 30–50g/L of red mud, the desilication rate is only 36–38% while adding 30g/L of red mud and CaO mixture with a calcium-silicon ratio of 1 reaches a desilication rate of ∼89%. Analyses by SEM-EDS and other mean show that this is mainly due to the growth of sodalite seed crystals in red mud and its synergistic desilication with CaO. Bauxite underwent cyclic desilication and the alumina/silica ratio was increased from ∼4.1 to >7.5. Effective utilization of red mud and alkali-silicate solution greatly reduces the cost of the desilication process, thereby making it applicable to low-grade bauxite in the Bayer process.Silicon is the main impurity in high-silica bauxite The obtained ASS has a high silica concentration, which makes it difficult to be treated directly with CaO or other relevant calcium compounds, and requires considerable CaO for desilication Red mud (RM) seed crystals have been used for the desilication of sodium aluminate solutions for a long time On the other hand, the sodium aluminate solution and ASS components are inherently different In this study, the ASS desilication process using RM and an RM and CaO mixture is assessed to determine the desilication mechanism and efficiency. Although the structure of the desilication reagent is not known, its availability and recyclability render it suitable for industrial applications. Therefore, this study can provide useful information for the comprehensive utilization of solid wastes and provide a considerable prospect for the production of alumina Sodium hydroxide (Shanghai, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., AR, 96.0 In the initial stages of this study, extensive research was conducted on roasting–alkali leaching desilication. In order to prepare the ASS, alkali leaching desilication was done by maintaining a liquid–solid ratio of 10:1 at a constant temperature (95 RM obtained from an alumina plant in Guizhou (data not shown, details of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements are provided in Section The main composition of the roasted bauxite and red mud used in the desilication process are listed in A schematic of the silica removal from bauxite and the desilication process is presented in The concentrations of caustic soda and alumina in the ASS were measured by titration, while the silica concentration was determined by silicon molybdenum blue spectrophotometry. XRD (X’PertPowder, PANalytical X’pert Pro MPD, the Netherlands) was performed on the active seeds. The PSD was measured using a laser particle size analyzer (LS13320, Beckman Coulter, USA), and the micro-morphology was observed by SEM (SIGMA, Carl Zeiss AG, Germany). Initially, research was conducted on using CaO (lime) for ASS desilication. Although lime is an effective desilication reagent for the ASS, a high Ca/Si ratio (C/S >1) is required to improve the desilication ratio, and a high dosage of CaO is necessary to meet this requirement. This greatly increases the cost of desilication. In addition, large amounts of silicon slag (silicate products) are generated, which further aggravates the degree of environmental pollution in the alumina production process. According to literature reports, cancrinite and sodalite minerals, which are present in RM, have desilication ability and can be used as seeds for the desilication of sodium aluminate solution systems However, as the sodium aluminate solution and the ASS systems are different, the desilication ability of RM in the ASS must be verified. The desilication ability was first examined by using 10–50 To further reveal the desilication ability of RM, 30 The result shows that the first cycle had a high desilication ratio of 36%, then the desilication capacity gradually decreased as the number of cycles increased. Using RM The desilication ability of the RM Xu et al. The PSD curve of the original RM seeds (trace 1 in In order to further reveal the desilication mechanism using RM, the main phases causing grain growth were analyzed by XRD. When the RM At 95 As shown in The EDS analysis of the desilication products after using the RM According to the analysis above, the best desilication reagent was the 30 Cyclic desilication experiments were conducted on low-grade bauxite under laboratory conditions based on the optimal conditions for ASS desilication ( The results showed that a small amount of silica was accumulated during ASS desilication. However, following several desilication cycles, the ASS desilication ratio was maintained at approximately 88%. As a result, the caustic soda concentration increased marginally. Therefore, after desilication by alkali leaching, the concentration of caustic soda in the ASS was essentially saturated at ∼106  A desilication reagent with satisfactory ASS desilication capacity was successfully identified. The desilication ability of RM When using RM alone as the desilication reagent, the desilication mechanism of the ASS was mainly due to the crystallization of sodalite. When the RM RM The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from the Projects U1812402, 51574095, 51774102, and 51564003, supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China; and projects Talent Team Giant [2015] 4005, Platform Talent [2017] 5788, and KY (2015) 334, supported by the Talents of Guizhou Science and Technology Cooperation Platform. The authors sincerely acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for their insights and comments to further improve the quality of the manuscript.