CO2 mineralization is an effective route to reduce CO2 emission. But the commercialization of CO2 mineralization process is impeded by the poor or even negative profit. MgCO3·3H2O whisker was prepared by indirect CO2 mineralization of MgSO4-(NH4)2CO3 in the presence of Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS) to improve the profit. MgCO3·3H2O whisker with an average length of 40 μm, average diameter of 1 μm, and aspect ratio as big as 40 was successfully prepared with the presence of SDS. SEM, AFM, XRD and TGA were used to characterize the morphology and structure of MgCO3·3H2O whisker, and XPS was used to characterize the compositions of MgCO3·3H2O crystal planes. The regulating mechanism of MgCO3·3H2O whisker growth orientation was studied systematically. The SDS ionizes CH3(CH2)11-OSO3
                     - in the solution, and then combines with the active site Mg2+ complex on the crystal plane in the [100] direction. The (CH3(CH2)11-OSO3)2Mg faces the liquid phase with the hydrophobic group CH3(CH2)11-, which separates the [100] direction from the liquid phase, hindering the growth of the [100] direction crystal plane. Therefore, MgCO3·3H2O whisker is oriented and grows easily on the [010] direction with high aspect ratio.With the rapid development of the global economy, a large amount of CO Recently, Nesquehonite (MgCO Currently, the preparation of MgCO It is of paramount importance to explore the controllable preparation of MgCO Magnesium sulfate heptahydrate (MgSO The MgSO The structure and morphology of the synthesized samples were characterized by X-ray Diffraction (XRD, DX-2700, Dandong Haoyuan, China) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, SU3500, HITACHI, Japan). The XRD patterns were recorded on a diffractometer with a Cu-Kα radiation at wavelength 1.54 nm and scanning range 10-70°. The morphology and particle size were characterized by SEM. 100 whiskers were selected randomly from the SEM images to measure their length and diameter with a relative standard deviation of 0.35. The average length and diameter were then obtained for further analysis. The surface morphology of the product was examined by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM, Innova, Bruker, Germany) using a standard Silicon Probe in the tapping mode. The AFM images in this paper were all processed by Flatlen. The thermal stability and weight loss of the sample was examined by Thermogravimetric Analyzer (TGA, STA449F3, Netzsch, Germany) in N The Mg The first stage is nucleation induction period. In this period, only very small amount of Mg   The chemical structure of the samples is examined by FT-IR in The TG-DTG analysis of MgCO SDS will greatly affect the crystal growth and morphology of MgCO The XPS spectra of synthesized MgCO The elemental compositions of MgCO The surface morphology of MgCO  The reason why additives affect the morphology of crystals is that they can be selectively adsorbed on specific crystal planes in solution, reducing the surface energy of these crystal planes to inhibit their growth, and changing the crystallization process of the crystal planes. The crystal planes grow in different directions, which has a regulating effect on the crystal morphology [ The SDS is dissolved in water to ionize Na MgCO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful for the financial support of the