Zinc recovery by solvent extraction with D2EHPA from its leach solutions has been successfully commercialised. As Fe(III) is strongly extracted by D2EHPA, 6M HCl is employed in the process to remove it in the organic bleed solution. The use of HCl complicates the process because extra process must be conducted to regenerate the HCl. In order to possibly avoid the use of HCl, zinc extraction and separation from impurities using Ionquest 801 and its mixtures with D2EHPA were studied. Zinc extraction with Ionquest 801 is lower than that with D2EHPA. However, the stripping of Fe(III) from the Ionquest 801 system using 4M H2SO4 is more effective than that from the D2EHPA system with 6M HCl. Therefore the use of HCl could be avoided leading to a simplified process. The application of the mixture of Ionquest 801 and D2EHPA for zinc recovery from its leach solution was also discussed.Zinc sulphide ore has been the major source for zinc production. The process involving Roast–Leach–Electrowin (RLE) has been used to treat this kind of ores ( Ionquest 801 (2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester) and Cyanex 272 (di-2,4,4-trimethylpentyl-phosphinic acid) can also extract zinc strongly and selectively over other base metals ( The selectivity of zinc over calcium significantly increased from D2EHPA to Ionquest 801 and further to Cyanex 272. As a result, gypsum formation would not be a problem with Ionquest 801 or Cyanex 272 during zinc extraction from acidic sulphate leach solutions. The extraction of Fe(III) is stronger than that of zinc for all three extractants. Effective stripping of Fe(III) from the Ionquest 801 system can be achieved using 400 No detailed investigations were conducted for zinc recovery from its ore leach solutions by Ionquest 801 without pH adjustment due to its lower extraction capacity for zinc than that with D2EHPA ( Ionquest 801 and D2EHPA from Chemorex (Cyprus) with >98% purity were used without further purification. Shellsol D70, an aliphatic hydrocarbon solvent supplied by Shell Chemicals of Australia, was used as the diluent for the organic solutions. A synthetic aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving corresponding analytical grade metal sulphates and calcium chloride in de-ionised water. Chloride, fluoride and silicon in the synthetic solution were added as analytical grade sodium chloride, sodium fluoride and sodium silicate, respectively. The composition of the synthetic feed solution simulated to the feed solutions in Skorpion zinc process ( The organic solution and aqueous solutions were mixed at a temperature of 40 Batch continuous counter-current extraction tests were carried out to simulate the zinc extraction operated in the Skorpion zinc process with 3 stages as shown in The organic solution was loaded with a synthetic ferric sulphate solution containing 0.5 The extractions of the main metals including Zn, Fe, Cu, Al, Mn and Ca in the synthetic solution with various organic systems in batch shakeout tests are shown in Obviously, the Fe(III) extraction was very strong and almost complete with all tested organic systems. Zinc extraction decreased as D2EHPA content decreased gradually from 40% D2EHPA (56.1% Zn extracted) to 40% Ionquest 801 (48.2% Zn extracted). Aluminium was substantially co-extracted and also decreased with the decrease in the D2EHPA concentration. An appreciable amount of calcium (8%) was extracted by the 40% D2EHPA system ( The selectivity of zinc over the main impurities in terms of separation factors is given in The distribution ratio of Zn and Al with various organic systems is shown in The reactions of metal extraction with the mixed systems consisting of D2EHPA (AH) and Ionquest 801 (BH) can be expected as follows: Batch continuous counter-current tests were carried out and the results are shown in Zinc distribution profiles in the organic and aqueous phases with the 40% D2EHPA, 20% D2EHPA and 20% Ionquest 801, and 40% Ionquest 801 systems are shown in The distribution profiles of the impurities in the organic phase with the three organic systems are shown in The separation factors (SFs) of zinc over some impurities in each stage are shown in Fe(III) was much more preferentially extracted than zinc with D2EHPA and Ionquest 801 as shown in From Although zinc extraction capacity with the Ionquest 801 system is lower than that with the D2EHPA system, a number of advantages make it an alternative to the D2EHPA system as shown in the proposed flowsheet in The metallurgical performance of Ionquest 801, D2EHPA and their mixture for zinc recovery from the leach solution relevant to the Skorpion zinc process was compared in the present study. In batch tests, the extraction of zinc with the 40% Ionquest 801 system was 48% compared to 56% with the 40% D2EHPA system. In three-stage batch continuous counter-current tests, the zinc recovery with the 40% Ionquest 801 system was 58% compared to 73% with the 40% D2EHPA system. The zinc extraction with the Ionquest 801 system was lower than that with the D2EHPA system, but the co-extraction of impurities such as aluminium, zinc, calcium was much less or the selectivity of zinc over impurities was much higher than that with D2EHPA system. Over 43% Fe(III) was removed by stripping with 4 The authors would like to thank Drs. Keith Barnard, Wensheng Zhang and Dave Robinson for reviewing this paper and providing valuable comments. The support of the Minerals Down Under National Research Flagship is acknowledged.