The dissolution of metal sulfides, especially chalcopyrite and the development of porosity in samples of two different low-grade ores during chloride leaching have been studied by synchrotron-based micro-CT. Quantitative analysis of the changes was achieved by using a data-constrained modelling (DCM) approach. The result indicated that void spaces developed from the surface gradually into the core of a sample, which increased from 0.08% to as much as 11.1% in the Chilean ore, and from 0.05% to 0.93% in the Mongolian ore. Combining the results of DCM modelling and CsCl distribution test, no pore structure stretching into the core of the samples was found. As a result, the leaching of metal sulfide mostly happened in the out rim of both samples, where the mineral is directly exposed to the solution. For the Chilean ore, the volume fraction of metal sulfide decreased from 4.45% to 4.06% in 17 h in the sample as a whole, and from 1.23% to 1.2% in the core. For the Mongolian ore, the volume fraction of metal sulfide decreased from 0.23% to 0.21% in the same time span. This study provides clear evidence that contact of the target mineral with leaching solution is the primary premise for metal dissolution to happen. It also demonstrates that the combination of synchrotron CT and DCM is a useful approach for mineral micro-structure analysis.The treatment of low-grade copper-bearing minerals by heap and dump leaching has emerged as a promising alternative process for metal extraction, responsible for around 25% of global copper production ( Exposure/contact of mineral to leaching solution is the primary premise for metal dissolution to happen. Therefore, information about the porosity between and within particles and the connectivity of these pores are of vital importance in understanding lixiviant contact with valuable mineral particles, both liberated and encapsulated within gangue matrices ( For the dissolution of a single mineral particle, the shrinking core model is widely applied. However, this approach is only suitable for ore particles that have homogenous porosity and valuable mineral dissemination ( X-ray CT is a non-destructive 3D imaging technique that permits visualization of the internal structure within the sample ( Taking the advantage of quantitative multi-energy imaging at synchrotron, a subsequent data-constrained modelling (DCM) analysis could be conducted to reveal structural features at the micron scale. DCM uses mathematical optimization to generate such a 3D compositional map that is consistent with statistical physics and the available X-ray CT datasets, where different mineral phase have different photon-energy dependence in their X-ray attenuation properties ( Seawater could be beneficial to the hydrometallurgical processing of copper sulphides, including chalcopyrite due to the presence of chloride ions ( In the present paper, the progression of the dissolution of metal sulfide, in particular chalcopyrite, and the development of porosity in the course of the leaching of two different low-grade ores in chloride media have been characterized by synchrotron-based micro-CT. Subsequent quantitative analysis of structural and compositional changes was achieved by using the DCM approach. Two types of crushed low-grade chalcopyrite ore samples (in size of 1cm The X-ray CT scan was conducted at the Imaging and Medical beamline (IMBL) of the Australian synchrotron. The data collection was run at two different resolutions. A Ruby detector was used in the low-resolution scan, which gave a pixel resolution of 5.97 μm. The high-resolution scan was carried out using a Diamond detector with 4× objective lens, which gave a pixel resolution of 1.62 μm on the projection. The CT scan was then carried out at in a series of selected monochromatic X-ray energies based on X-ray absorption properties of the sample. For the sample after CsCl solution immersion, CT scans were run at both sides (35.5 keV and 36.5 keV) of the Cs K-edge (35.958 keV) to give a maximum contrast of the Cs distribution in the sample. For each scan, the projection was taken every 0.1 degree from 0 to 180 degree which gave a total of 1800 projections. A total of 50 dark-field and 50 flat-field images were taken both before and after the CT scan for normalization purpose. The exposure time of 0.4–0.5 s for each scan for low resolution scan with the Ruby detector was optimized based the counts on the detector. A fixed exposure time of 2.0 s was employed for the high resolution scans with the Diamond detector. The slice reconstruction was performed using the CSIRO X-TRACT software ( The data-constrained modelling analysis was conducted using the CSIRO DCM software (  The slices of the Mongolian ore are shown in The information obtained from a 2D slice reflects only a single layer of the sample, which is less statistically reliable. In addition, the assignment of mineral phases based on visually checking of the greyscale is arbitrary. To overcome these shortcomings, a 3D volume of the sample was built up using the DCM software. A quantitative analysis of the composition of the sample was performed based on the absorption coefficients of different phases at two different energies, which give a more accurate estimate on the mineralogy change and porosity development of the sample ( The DCM analysis of void development within boundary built based on the unleached sample is shown in From the 3D graphs, the thickness of the void ring increased with the progress of leaching, which indicates the shrinking of the sample. Some pore structures may develop into the outer surface of the ore after more than 11 h of leaching of the Chilean ore, as indicated by arrows in the The changes of the metal sulfide fraction are shown in Compared with the Chilean ore, the changes of the metal sulfide particles in the Mongolian ore was less obvious. The presence of the particles in the mineral is quite similar over the time of leaching. Only a few noticeable changes happened at the edge of the sample as marked out by cycles. The quantitative analysis indicates that the fraction of metal sulfide decreased from 0.23% to 0.21% during leaching. The percentage of metal sulfide removal is 8.6%, compared with 10.7% in Chilean ore with the largest metal sulfide grain decreasing from 0.013 mm Based on the above analysis, most of increased voidage came from the shrinking of the sample and increased surface erosion. From The spatial heterogeneity of metal sulfide dissolution in low-grade ore leaching has also been noticed in previous studies.  In this paper, the dissolution of metal sulfide and the development of porosity of two different low-grade ores in chloride leaching have been studied by synchrotron-based micro-CT. The quantitative analysis of the changes was achieved by using data-constrained modelling (DCM) approach. The result indicated that void developed from the surface into the core of a sample, which increased from 0.08% to 11.1% in the Chilean ore, and from 0.05 to 0.93% to the Mongolian ore. According to results of DCM modelling, no deep pore structure stretching into the sample core was identified. In addition, the CsCl penetration test indicates the leachate penetration broadly followed the visible pore structure that formed during leaching. As a result, the leaching of metal sulfide mostly happened within the outer rim of both samples, where the mineral was directly exposed to the solution. In turn, the dissolution of metal sulfide beyond this leaching front was very marginal. And for the same reason, faster conversion of metal sulfide was found in the Chilean ore compared with the Mongolian ore, which possessed a smaller voidage from the outset. The authors would like to thank the support from