Despite over thirty years of work, microwave pre-treatment processes for beneficiation of ores have not progressed much further than laboratory testing. In this paper we present a scaleable pilot-scale system for the microwave treatment of ores capable of operating at throughputs of up to 150tph. This has been achieved by confining the electric field produced from two 100kW generators operating at 896MHz in a gravity fed vertical flow system using circular choking structures yielding power densities of at least 6×108
                     W/m3 in the heated mineral phases. Measured S11 scattering parameters for a quartzite ore (−3.69±0.4dB) in the as-built applicator correlated well with the simulation (−3.25dB), thereby validating our design approach. We then show that by fully integrating the applicator with a materials handling system based on the concept of mass flow, we achieve a reliable, continuous process. The system was used to treat a range of porphyry copper ores.Microwave treatment of metalliferous ores has long been investigated as a means to enhance the recovery of valuable minerals and reduce the comminution resistance of ores ( Whilst the mechanistic principles are well established, the scientific and engineering challenges of developing a commercial scale system are immense. Typical throughputs of a large copper mine can be in excess of 5000 tph of milled ore ( The following paper details the design, commissioning and operation of a system which was the culmination of over fifteen years of research and development activity. This resulted in a high power microwave treatment process, capable of operating continuously at throughputs of up to 150 In Focussed work using single mode cavities, post-2000 resulted in reductions in the energy required, greater understanding of the breakage mechanism and also characterisation of the electromagnetic properties of such cavities ( The work which directly supported the development and evaluation of the pilot-scale system is outlined in The design and testing of these choking structures was considered in detail in The aim of this work was to design and demonstrate the viability of a pilot-scale system that can be then be further scaled to a commercially relevant system for deployment at a mine site. Specific objectives for the pilot scale system were to: Demonstrate that metallurgical effects observed in pre-piloting batch scale testing could be re-produced in continuously flowing ore at pilot scale. Evaluate the impact on the system performance and process stability of feed ore presentation in the applicator. Specifically aspects such as particle size; shape; moisture content; voidage; mineralogy and ore texture Assess engineering issues such as wear and reliability of the system components Produce statistically large volume test samples for subsequent use in proposition analysis The evaluation of the pilot-scale system addressed the key questions around electromagnetic engineering, materials handling design and optimisation, operability, sample generation/value quantification and techno-economic analysis. The engineering vision of the pilot-scale system was rooted in the concept of frequency scaling using a single mode cavity surrounding a vertically aligned tube used in pre-piloting studies as described in Section In a single mode system which supports an area of well-defined electric field, in order to maximise the treatment efficiency, the tube should span as close to the full width of the applicator as possible. It then follows that the size of the applicator section then defines the width of the process tube and thereby the throughput. The applicator dimensions are fixed by the frequency of the applied microwave energy. Only specific frequencies are allowed for use and are defined in the Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) bands. For a single mode applicator system based on the use of microwave energy at a frequency of 433 The maximum throughput is non-linear with increasing flow path diameter, due to basic area principles but also due to reduced solids flow rate for large particles compared to the flow area. Given that flow properties of ore do not scale, and the requirement to handle large particles in the pilot system, the 100 In order to define a clear route to scale-up, a 1000 Critical to the success of the pilot-scale system was the integration of a continuous vertical flow microwave applicator, based on the use of corrugated circular chokes to confine the field (Katrib et al., 2016), with a materials handling system to yield a continuous flow process to treat porphyry copper ores. The performance of any microwave-based processing system (particularly continuous processes) is dependent on the integration of a suitably designed applicator with a competent and robust materials handling system. This is critical because the handling system presents the process material to the applicator such that the energy can be reliably and stably transferred to it. Therefore, it is then a cornerstone of the successful scale-up of any microwave based process. A range of different concepts were evaluated during the design phase of the system for transporting material through the microwave applicator including free fall, vibratory feeders, belt conveyors and packed beds. These were evaluated against the following criteria: footprint; materials of construction; material velocity and residence time control (to control delivered energy dose to the ore); voidage (to prevent arcing) and dust control (to protect the microwave and sensor systems). A packed bed mass flow concept was judged to be the most suitable materials handling option for the system. It is similar to a free fall concept, except that the process material completely fills a tube or other handling system. Typically the material is held in place and is common in distillation and separation processes. By arranging the tube vertically, it can be filled from the top and the process material can be gravity fed through the tube by carrying away the material at the bottom using a conventional feeder. Providing that the appropriate material is selected for the tube, which is microwave transparent and exhibits the necessary mechanical robustness, this concept has stand-out advantages over those previously described. The voiding inherent to a free fall system is removed because the ore is essentially mechanically locked together. This also allows close control of residence time and energy dose. It is also scaleable because the essential design of the tube would not change to accommodate larger throughputs. As the system is enclosed, dust issues are also removed. By having the applicator aligned vertically, it also realises the smallest footprint of the systems considered. In terms of scalability, system performance and technical simplicity, a packed bed concept using a vertically aligned tube was taken forward in the design of the pilot scale system. The basis of design is shown in The proposed location of the pilot-scale system was to be close to the University of Nottingham in an industrial unit. Therefore, specifically for this system, its location imposed constraints in terms of plant foot print and height, which then fed into the BoD and would not be associated with a typical mine site. In addition, space available for storage of feedstock material was limited, which also imposed a constriction on the amount of feedstock that could be stored on site. Single-mode microwave applicators are characterised by supporting a well-defined area of electric field, associated with the propagation of the first order mode at the frequency of the applied energy. However, such an applicator will be rendered ineffective if the energy delivered to it does not meet the requirements of the process. Currently the highest power microwave generators available commercially are 100 To ensure the material flowed through the system without blocking, the width of the inner pipe has to be at least five particle diameters, based on established bulk solids handling theory ( The applicator was designed using average bulk dielectric properties of a quartzite ore previously described ( Another key consideration in the specification of the system is upper limit on the treatment energy required. The process would be uneconomical if more energy is required in the pre-treatment of the ore then is saved in downstream processing. Preliminary value analysis shows that treatment energies above 2 The initial system had a maximum throughput of 100 In the present configuration, ore is held in a specifically designed mass flow hopper at the top of the microwave applicator and choke arrangement held in a vertical position. This hopper is supplied with ore by a material transport system comprising of bulk in-feed hoppers and associated conveyors. The hopper and associated equipment has been designed to achieve mass-flow of material to avoid segregation and to ensure that a consistent packed bed of material could flow at the fastest possible velocity with minimal voidage to maximise throughput. Material held in the hopper above the applicator is drawn down a tube through the upper choking sections, passing through a box section of waveguide into which the microwave power is applied, before moving out of the applicator after passing through the lower choking sections. The material flows down the inner processing tube as a packed bed controlled by an apron feeder at the bottom of the system. As this conveyor runs, it draws material out from the base of the tube drawing material downwards. The throughput of the system is then controlled by the speed of the apron/belt feeder. The general arrangement of the system is shown in The pilot plant layout is illustrated in  Two distinct types of choking structures are used in the applicator. The first are the concentric rings of variable geometry immediately above and below the single mode cavity. These so called Careful consideration was also given to material selection for the inner pipes. In the TE The electromagnetic field confinement of the choking structures in the as built applicator was evaluated by measuring the scattering parameters (S The modal mineralogy of these ores is described previously in ( Before the applicator was installed in the plant, the attenuation performance was measured and compared to that of the simulation to ensure compliance with the required OHS and EMC legislation. The central portion of the applicator – defined as the single mode cavity and the first five reactive choking corrugations either side of it (including quartz liner) was filled with Ore 1, then WR975 round to rectangular transitions attached to either end. Three co-axial to WR975 waveguide transitions were then attached to the infeed and outlet of the applicator and the microwave in-feed section of the applicator with a Vector Network Analyser. A sliding short was connected to the microwave out-feed section of the applicator. The three port scattering parameters S The attenuation is around 10 The applicator waveguide section itself is terminated using a moveable sliding short. By moving the position of this short, the position of the incident and reflected waves can be superimposed on each other to adjust the position of the area of highest electric field intensity (the ‘hot spot’). This then serves to optimise the material treatment efficiency. As a function of sliding short position (as per the experimental measurement), the average power density was calculated within the quartz liner of the applicator for each of the ores. This analysis allowed the determination the optimum short positon for the operation of the plant. It showed that the applicator exhibits a non-uniform power density through its cross-sectional area. To determine the optimum sliding short positon, the Power Uniformity Index (PUI) ( Considering Ore 1 ( It can be seen from In microwave based systems one of the key challenges is the reliable delivery of power to the process material. This is dependent on the effective integration of the materials handling system with the applicator ( In the present system, based on a column of ore moving down through the applicator as a packed bed, the prevention of blockages was also a fundamental consideration in the design of the bulk solids handling systems used in the plant. Blockages in the lower area of the process tube could result in a stationary load in the applicator, which if occurring during processing, could result in thermal runaway as the heated phases of the ore become progressively more microwave absorbent as their temperature increases. An absence of material in the applicator occurring as a result of a blockage above it would result in high reflected powers and the possibility of damaging the generator magnetron. To address these issues, bulk solids storage and handling theory first developed by Jenike and Johanson ( The following sections describe the design of these materials handling components and their integration to provide effective material transport though the applicator. The applicator feed hopper was designed to achieve mass flow as it is discharged. That is, that all the material is in motion as it moves out of the hopper ( For many materials, flow problems can be eliminated by ensuring that a mass flow pattern exists in the hopper. The first step in achieving mass flow is to ensure that the converging walls are steep enough, and have friction low enough, to allow the bulk materials to slide along them. Flow properties tests were performed by the Jenike approach similar to that shown by The outlet of the hopper must also be large enough to prevent cohesive and mechanical interlocking arches from forming. Given the relatively large particle size and low moisture of the handled ore, cohesive arches were secondary in the pilot plant. Arching due to mechanical interlocking was far more important due to the requirement to handle large particles in a small hopper. The outlet geometry was modified from a simple cone to minimise the mechanical interlocking arching potential. The geometry also allowed a higher discharge rate compared to a simple cone. The hopper was designed for handling ore having an average bulk density ∼1300 In order to maintain mass flow through the applicator and prevent blockages caused by mechanical bridging of the particles at the in-feed (mass flow hopper outlet) and out-feed ends of the applicator (interface with downstream feeder), transition sections at these points were designed. The geometry of the mass flow hopper outlet was previously described in Section As is typical with bulk solids handling projects, the withdrawal of product from the bottom of the system controls the flow of solids above. This is no different to the pilot plant design. A belt feeder interface was used to control the discharge rate in the pilot plant. In addition to preventing blockages, the interface with the belt feeder that controls material flow through the system also prevents pulsatile flow as a result of the characteristic particle flow behaviour when the ore is transported as a packed bed. As material flows through the vertical applicator tube a dilation wave propagates upward at a time period consistent with the system geometry, material properties and flow rate. This dilation wave results in transient loads applied to the applicator tube. An example is given in Minimising the pulsatile loads, or dilation wave, minimised the loads applied to the applicator tube which ensured robust system operation. Failure of the treatment tube due to high stresses could result in damage to microwave system components. Finite element analyses were conducted to ensure the design minimised the tube stresses. Arcing is a common issue in microwave based processing systems. It is undesirable because it can damage the material being processed, materials of construction of the applicator and the magnetron housed in the generator itself. It may also reduce the efficiency of the system, as microwave power is transferred to the arc event rather than into heating the process material. In order to produce samples for subsequent metallurgical testing, it was necessary to use single size classes of the test ores, rather than use a typical Run of Mine (ROM) size distribution as this would then enable evaluation of the fracture process as a function of particle size. Commissioning tests showed that processing of these single size classes (−50.8 The voiding created as a result of running a single size class is shown in It quickly became apparent during commissioning of the system that in order to reliably deliver power to the single size classes needed for the Phase I sighter testing, the use of a filler material to close out the voids and improve material flow at high throughput was required. This necessitated the blending of size classes together for each of the test ores. Of course in a real process the feed would be present as a distribution, rather than as single size classes so this aspect of the work was particular to the pilot scale operation. It is included here to give guidance to the reader as to the importance of bulk density of the feed column of ore to both the maximisation system throughput but also the reliable delivery of power to it. Flow testing of a 50:50 mix of −50.8 The results of subsequent discreet element (DEM) modelling of the particle flow reflected that observed during sighter tests. To address the problem, a distributor system was developed to ensure that blended material transferred into the hopper was evenly loaded. This comprised of a hood positioned in the path of the inflowing ore and a distributor cone directly below it. The original design and the subsequent modification is shown in Segregation was also found to occur due to side-to-side segregation of product on the conveyor filling the mass flow hopper. Modifications to uniformly load the conveyor solved the side-to-side conveyor loading issue. The results of the hopper and conveyor modifications can be seen in Following evaluation of the sighter test results ( Section In order to effectively move ore through the applicator at this increased throughput, it was necessary to ‘fluidise’ the particles in fine material. This took the form of a mixture of Ore 1 and 2 in the size class −6.35 The central portion of the applicator comprises the single mode cavity and four reactive choking structures above and below it. To create the dual applicator system, a second applicator (built to the same specifications) was added in series with the original. Given a fixed height between the hopper and apron feeder, the outer reactive chokes were removed, and the length of the resistive choking structures increased to maintain the total 4 Again as described in Section A comparison of the distribution of electric field intensity at the optimum short position for the single and dual applicator configurations is shown in Using Eqs. It can be seen from During the commissioning process and sample production under the Phase I (single applicator) and Phase II (dual applicator) test programmes, the pilot scale plant has processed around 900 tonnes of ore, of which approximately 300 tonnes was under microwave power. A typical run is shown in The material processed in the run is flowing at a throughput of 150 By integrating electromagnetic design with a materials handling system, we were able to yield a pilot-scale microwave system capable of stably treating porphyry copper ores at throughputs of up to 150 The performance of the applicator was validated by evaluating scattering parameters measured experimentally of the as built system to FDTD simulations. Good correlation between the two was observed, particularly for Ore 1 (S By adding a second applicator in series with the first, an increase in the cross-sectional area covered by the size of the areas of highest power density is significantly increased. This results in a decrease in PUI from 0.64 to 0.27. Combining this with an increase in throughput capacity from 100 The authors greatly acknowledge Rio Tinto Technology and Innovation along with their research and industry partners for engagement and collaboration throughout the MicroHammer™ project.