A study was carried out for recovery of scandium from KOH sub-molten salt (SMS) leaching cake of fergusonite. Major metals in the cake were rare earths (RE), K, Th, U and Ca, and minor metals were Pb, Nb, Ta, Ti, Fe, Si, Sn, Al, Bi and Mn. Scandium content was about 0.94% in the cake. Experiments for the recovery of scandium involved washing of the cake with water for potassium removal, leaching of scandium from the cake with HCl, solvent extraction with tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) and precipitation of scandium with oxalic acid. Effects of liquid-to-solid ratio and leaching temperature on leaching of scandium as well as impurities such as uranium, thorium and other rare earths such as yttrium and lanthanides were investigated, with the aim of both increasing scandium leaching and selectively pre-separating the impurities. And also, the separation characteristics of scandium and the impurities were evaluated in the solvent extraction with TBP. Finally, we proposed a process for recovery of scandium from the KOH SMS leaching cake of fergusonite.Scandium has been widely used in the fields such as optical, electronic, aeronautical, automotive industries and it’s demand is growing ( Some niobium ores contain considerable amount of scandium. For example, the niobium deposits in Russian Arctic area contain Sc Hydrometallurgical processes for recovery of scandium mainly involve leaching, solvent extraction and precipitation ( Neutral and acidic organophosphorus compounds such as tri-butyl phosphate (TBP), di(1-methylhepthyl) methyl phosphate (P350), di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (HDEHP) and 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (HEH[EHP]) have been mainly used in the separation of scandium from leaching solutions by solvent extraction ( Scandium is usually precipitated from a loaded strip solution with oxalic acid ( In general, direct leaching of rare earths from fergusonite is difficult with inorganic acids, because fergusonite is a complex tantaloniobate of titanium, rare earths, thorium and uranium ( The cake obtained by treating fergusonite concentrate through KOH SMS leaching was supplied by Analytical reagent grade hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%), oxalic acid (H Potassium content was 19.90% in the cake as shown in Leaching behaviors of scandium as well as impurities mainly depend on type and concentration of leaching agent, liquid-to-solid ratio, temperature and time in the treatment of alkaline materials such as red mud with inorganic acids ( Based on the previous studies ( HCl was used as a scrub solution in order to remove the impurities co-extracted into the organic phase with scandium. The HCl concentration was set based on the separation dependence of scandium and the impurities on the acidity of the aqueous phase. In the scrubbing, the phase ratio (O/A) and the temperature were 1:1 and 25 ± 1 °C, respectively. The contact time was 10 min. After the scrubbing, scandium was stripped from the organic phase with water. In the stripping, the phase ratio (O/A) was 3:1, and the temperature and the contact time were the same as in the scrubbing. When the rare earths are precipitated from an aqueous solution with oxalic acid, a high acidity of the aqueous solution causes a solubility increment of the rare earth oxalates ( The composition of the cake washed with water is shown in In general, Sc, Al and Pb are amphiprotic metals and Si may be present as soluble silicate in an alkaline solution ( In leaching the cake with HCl, not only the behaviors of scandium but also of the other RE, U, Th, Ti, Mn, Ta and Nb were investigated, because these metals can be co-extracted from HCl media with scandium during the solvent extraction with TBP after the leaching. The dependence of scandium leaching on the liquid-to-solid ratio  The leaching percentages for Fe, Ti, Mn, Ta and Nb are shown in    As shown in The distribution ratios of Th and U increased with increasing the acidity of aqueous phase. The uranium extraction was remarkably carried out at the acidities of aqueous phase higher than 6.0 mol/L, which is in agreement with the extraction behavior of uranium ( The distribution ratios of Ti and Mn were a little higher than that of thorium at the acidities of aqueous phase except for 10.0 mol/L, which may be caused by the fact ( The distribution ratio of iron was much higher than that of scandium, which indicates that it is difficult to separate iron from scandium in 100% TBP-HCl solvent extraction system. However the iron content was relatively low in the solid chloride prepared for the aqueous phase as shown in Based on both distribution ratios of metals and separation factors of scandium over other metals against the acidities of aqueous phase, scandium was extracted by a single contact between 100% TBP and the aqueous phase at the HCl concentration of 10 mol/L. The concentrations of several metals in the initial aqueous phase and the equilibrium organic phase are shown in  The stripping experiments were carried out aimed at investigating the scandium stripping from the loaded organic phase with water. The isotherm and McCabe-Thiele diagram of the scandium stripping is shown in Based on the above results, we propose a process for recovery of scandium from the KOH SMS leaching cake of fergusonite ( A study has been carried out for recovery of scandium from KOH SMS leaching cake of fergusonite, and the following results are concluded. Water washing was very efficient in the removal of potassium in the KOH SMS leaching cake of fergusonite. More than 97% of potassium was removed from the cake through two successive washing cycles with the solid-to-liquid ratio of 1:5. Sc, Pb, Al and Si were concentrated during water washing. The scandium leaching increased with the increase in both the leaching temperature and the liquid-to-solid ratio The distribution ratio of scandium rapidly increased with the increase in acidity of aqueous phase in 100% TBP-HCl solvent extraction system. The distribution ratios of the other rare earths also increased with the increase in acidity of aqueous phase. Especially, the distribution ratios of lanthanides increased with the increase in atomic number, that is, with the decrease in ionic radius. The separation factors of scandium over the other rare earths and thorium were the highest at the acidity of aqueous phase of 8.0 mol/L. Impurities except for U and Fe could be removed from the loaded organic phase through two successive scrub cycles by using 8.0 mol/L HCl, where the total loss of scandium was about 3.2%. More than 99.9% of U and Fe were removed from the loaded strip solution through two precipitations with oxalic acid. Finally, scandium oxide was obtained with a purity of over 99% and a yield of 88.3%. The authors would like to thank Prof. U-Jin Kim for valuable suggestions and detailed discussions.