Surface properties of respirable silica, which represents a major occupational safety concern, were investigated computationally, and a model for quantitative characterization of crystalline silica surface sites was developed. It was found that the surface energy of crystalline solids, such as silica and silicates, can be calculated as a product of the surface site density and site energy. The energies of sites formed by faceting tetrahedral silica polymorphs and aluminosilicate were determined by parametric fitting ab initio surface energies to site densities. Boltzmann’s statistics was used to describe the distribution of faces as an exponential function of unrelaxed surface energy in the comminuted crystalline solids. Using these findings, crystallographic face distributions on fractured quartz, coesite, tridymite, and cristobalite were derived and average silanol hydroxyl densities in fractured particulate of these materials were estimated as 0.070, 0.059, 0.058, and 0.055Å−2, respectively. The proposed method of quantitative characterization of the surface bridges the gap between microscopic simulations and measurable observables, such as cytotoxicity of respirable silica.Fracture of network crystals, such as quartz, involves breaking of highly covalent bonds and formation of surface sites. The structure, chemistry and density of surface sites to a large extent drive physical–chemical processes at the mineral surface The experimental information about the molecular structure of crystalline silica surface sites is scant due to complexity of quantitative 2D-surface measurements. One of the few appropriate methods reported to date, which allows the determination of specific site densities on silica surfaces, is solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Silica polymorphs also represent a class of materials known as insulating oxides. Together with bulk silicon, properties of these materials are of prime importance in microelectronics and nanotechnology In the present work we use an approach of molecular modeling complementary to experimental methods to gain new information about the site densities on silica and aluminosilicate surfaces. First, we describe the computations of surface energies of quartz and kaolinite surfaces using the periodic density functional theory (DFT) method. Second, we use these energies to find average energies of surface sites. Next, we employ the Boltzmann statistics to derive the distribution of crystal faces on fractured silica using the calculated surface energies. We employed molecular modeling techniques to estimate the density of surface sites on specific crystal faces. Bulk crystals were faceted and analyzed using the Cerius Several crystalline silica polymorphs including low-tridymite, low-cristobalite, coesite and stishovite, and a typical representative of layered aluminosilicates, kaolinite, were considered. Unlike many brittle crystals, silica polymorphs typically do not reveal perfect crystallographic planes of cleavage α-Quartz is the most abundant form of crystalline silica. It represents a tetrahedral silica polymorph, whose structure can be viewed as a network of corner-linked silica [SiO In addition to tetrahedral bulk forms of silica, large amounts of silicon dioxide are present in the crust in the form of tetrahedral sheets coordinated with metal salts or metal oxides. Kaolinite, a 1:1 phyllosilicate mineral is, perhaps, the most abundant of them. The structure of kaolinite represents a succession of dioctahedral gibbsite and tetrahedral silica layers, in which each silica tetrahedron is connected to a single-layer alumina octahedron via an apical oxygen atom Several techniques are available for calculation of surface energy, including methods based on semi-empirical inter-atomic potentials Model slabs were faceted using the optimized bulk structures along the cleavage planes with desired Miller indices. The simulation supercells consisted of a model slab with an added vacuum layer of 10 The specific energies of unrelaxed surfaces were calculated as Statistical analysis was performed using JMP-5.0.1a and SAS 8.02 software (SAS Institute Inc. Cary, NC). The distribution of sites on a surface is determined by the crystallographic orientation and position of the terminal plane. Since several cuts along a cleavage plane with given Miller indices are possible, in this work we used lowest energy cuts The calculated unrelaxed surface energies for lowest energy cuts, as discussed elsewhere Cleavage along the (1 Inspection of ab initio calculated surface energies of quartz plotted versus densities of single and geminal silanol sites given in Note, that the best fit regression plane crosses the origin, indicating that excess surface energy of quartz fracture was entirely dependent on the number and type of broken bonds or emerged surface sites. There was no “residual energy” associated with the creation of surface-plane structure itself, i.e. the surface energy was independent of the structure of site-less part of the surface, including the crystal bulk on which it rests. Since Eq. It is important to mention that the linear regression model rests on an assumption of additivity of site energy, which is appropriate only at sufficiently low surface site densities precluding inter-site interactions. The largest deviation from the fit, 6.8% of the ab initio number, was found for the {1 Based on the idea of independence of surface energy on the structure of underlying bulk solid material, we carried out a similar multivariate regression analysis of the surface energy of kaolinite. Five types of surface sites were observed on the kaolinite fracture. They are tetra- and penta-coordinated aluminum sites, uncoordinated hydrogen atoms of aluminol groups, and single and geminal silanol sites ( Cleavage planes of low fracture toughness as well as other factors, such as the charge effect, bond density, elastic modulus and surface energy, have been suggested for commonly shaped crystal fragments obtained by comminution It is well known that thermodynamics governs the morphology of grown crystals. Already in the early twentieth century Wulff postulated that a point can be found within a crystal in thermodynamic equilibrium with its surroundings, from which the distances to the different crystal faces are proportional to the surface free energies Boltzmann statistics suggests that the normalized probability, An early report by Bloss and Gibbs A hypothesis of association between the frequencies of occurrence of faces on fractured quartz particles and The association between the energy of unrelaxed quartz surface and probability of its formation in a stochastic process of mechanical comminution helps to explain the observed diversity of singular surfaces on fractured quartz Since all tetrahedral polymorphs of silica are populated with similar surface sites and share a common propensity to conchoidal fracture Stishovite adopts a rutile-type crystal structure with silicon atoms octahedrally coordinated by oxygen atoms, which are in turn tri-coordinated by silicon atoms. Due to these high coordination numbers of both the silicon and oxygen atoms, most cleavage planes in stishovite do not expose under-coordinated atoms. Thus, the only low-index surface, which may have silanol sites, is the {1 Densities of silanol groups on surfaces of silica polymorphs ( Kaolinite surfaces are characterized by a low concentration of silanol sites (see This study showed that unrelaxed surfaces energies of silica and silicates can be calculated from surface site densities and average site energies. From the study of quartz and kaolinite low-index surfaces, we estimate the average energy of single silica The surface energies of unrelaxed low-index surfaces of quartz calculated using a periodic spin-paired DFT method were found to determine the distribution of crystallographic planes in mechanically comminuted quartz through the Boltzmann law. The fitted Boltzmann factor of 33 The model developed in this work can also be extended to other materials and nanometer-size (ultrafine) particles. Manufactured nanoparticles can have numerous surface site combinations The authors thank Helen Lang, Larry Halliburton, Bill Wallace and Dan Sorescu for helpful discussions. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the authors’ parent institutions.