Literature-related discovery (LRD) is the linking of two or more literature concepts that have heretofore not been linked (i.e., disjoint), in order to produce novel, interesting, plausible, and intelligible knowledge (i.e., potential discovery). LRD has two main components that differ in their methodological approach to discovery: Literature-based discovery (LBD) produces potential discovery through analysis of the technical literature alone; Literature-assisted discovery (LAD) produces potential discovery through both analysis of the technical literature and use of selected authors of that literature. These authors generate potential discovery as proposers, workshop/panel participants, or in other active roles.
                  The open discovery systems (ODS) component of LRD starts with a problem to be solved, and generates solutions to that problem through potential discovery. We have been using ODS LRD to identify potential treatments or preventative actions for challenging medical problems, among myriad other applications. The previous four papers in this Special Issue describe the application of ODS LRD (specifically, the ODS LBD variant) to Raynaud's Phenomenon (RP), cataracts, Parkinson's Disease (PD), and Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
                  One goal of the present study was to determine whether LRD could be successfully applied (for the first time) to a challenging non-medical technical problem to generate potential discovery. The second goal was to explore the use of both LRD variants (LBD and LAD) to a non-medical technical problem. We selected the problem of water purification (WP) because of universal applicability and sponsor interest.
                  We used LRD to identify purification concepts, technology components and systems that could lead to improved water purification techniques. We accessed many disparate disciplines to identify purification concepts from literatures not normally associated with water purification. We used two LBD approaches, Cluster Filtering and Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI), to search for potential discovery. We generated voluminous amounts of potential discovery, and believe we have only scratched the surface of what is possible. We also ran a short experiment using LAD to identify experts associated with potential discovery concepts, and use their expertise to generate potential discovery for water purification.The previous four papers in this Special Issue describe the application of ODS LRD (specifically, the ODS LBD variant) to Raynaud's Phenomenon (RP) Cluster Filtering was inspired by the use of cluster analysis in query development. When we clustered retrievals of records relevant and non-relevant to some topical query, we noticed that the clustering tended to segregate the relevant from the non-relevant records. As stated in the first author's patent: “Document clustering tends to group documents into groups that are at similar levels of relevance. A technical expert then samples documents from each group, and performs a final judgment as to the relevance of each group.” LSI-based discovery was an attempt to use more sophisticated algorithms to help identify potential discovery candidates. It allowed much easier access to very remotely related literatures compared to the manually intensive methods described above. Even though the Cluster Filtering approach started chronologically much later than the LSI approach, the Cluster Filtering approach will be described first. It is more closely related to the RP approach than is the LSI approach. The LAD approach will be summarized briefly at the end. Water purification is the process of removing contaminants from a raw water source. The goal is to produce water for a specific purpose with a treatment profile designed to limit the inclusion of specific materials; most water is purified for human drinking water consumption. Water purification may remove large particulates such as sand; suspended particles of organic material such as parasites, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, bacteria, algae, virus, fungi; minerals such as calcium, silica, magnesium; and toxic metals such as lead, copper and chrome. Some purification may be elective in its inclusion in the purification process, such as remedies for smell (hydrogen sulfide remediation), taste (mineral extraction), and appearance (iron encapsulation) The major areas of water treatment and the prevalent technologies that are associated with them are listed below. Particle filtration — coagulation/flocculation/clarification, multi-media filtration (anthracite, sand, garnet), continuous micro-filtration Organics removal — carbon filtration, UV, ozone Water softening — ion exchange, chemical precipitation De-ionization — reverse osmosis, ion exchange, electro de-ionization Particle removal — ultrafiltration, nanofiltration Some ancillary areas of water purification include Disinfection — chloramines, chlorine dioxide, ozone Corrosion control Biofouling control A typical water purification plant operates using six main steps: pre-treatment, pH adjustment, coagulation and flocculation, sedimentation, filtration, and disinfection Pre-treatment. The first step in purifying surface water is to remove large debris such as sticks, leaves, trash and other large particles that may interfere with subsequent purification steps. pH adjustment. Distilled water has an average pH of 7 (neither alkaline nor acidic) and sea water has an average pH of 8.3 (slightly alkaline). If the water is acidic (lower than 7), lime or soda ash is added to raise the pH. Coagulation and Flocculation. Together, coagulation and flocculation are clarification methods that work by using chemicals which effectively “glue” small suspended particles together, so that they settle out of the water or stick to sand or other granules in a granular media filter. Sedimentation. Water exiting the flocculation basin may enter the sedimentation basin, also called a clarifier or settling basin. It is a large tank with slow flow, allowing floc to settle to the bottom. Filtration. After separating most floc, the water is filtered as the final step to remove remaining suspended particles and unsettled floc. The most common type of filter is a rapid sand filter. Disinfection. Disinfection is normally the last step in purifying drinking water. Water is disinfected to kill any pathogens which pass through the filters. Because this was the first LBD study of a non-medical technical topic that reported potential discovery, a number of heuristic approaches were tested. They all had the following common features. The first step was to generate a query for retrieving the core WP literature. For very specific core topics (e.g. membrane fouling), terms were used for a query that would retrieve a literature focused on the topic of interest. For membrane fouling, the records retrieved would be viewed by experts in the field as pertaining to membrane fouling. Then, phrase frequency and proximity analyses of the retrieved records were performed. Phrases and phrase combinations were selected that generalized the fundamental mechanisms represented by the core literature. In the membrane fouling case, terms such as foul For less focused core topics (e.g. water purification), an iterative approach was used to define a more comprehensive core literature Since there were many phrases in the core water purification literature that could be generalized, some general phrase selection criteria were necessary. Documents such as Sandia's Water Purification Roadmap Irrespective of how the expanded literature was defined, the following method was used to identify potential discovery. A document clustering algorithm The clustering methodology also was used to examine the expanded literature clusters and specific abstracts to identify  Below we provide some potential discovery records; format is Abstract excerpt followed by the reference and rationale linking the concept to water purification. These have been vetted via the procedure discussed in “...plasmin specifically hydrolyzes proteins participating in cell adhesion (fibronectin, vitronectin, and laminin) and does not affect nonadhesive proteins...” Plasmin or some derivative thereof with respect to proteins that allow cells to attach could be used to create anti-fouling coatings for use on/in filter membranes in water purification systems “It is shown how the complex, ‘composite anatomical structure’ of roots results in a ‘composite transport’ of both water and solutes. Parallel apoplastic, symplastic and transcellular pathways play an important role during the passage of water across the different tissues. These are arranged in series within the root cylinder (epidermis, exodermis, central cortex, endodermis, pericycle stelar parenchyma, and tracheary elements)… there is a rapid exchange of water between parallel radial pathways because, in contrast to solutes such as nutrient ions, water permeates cell membranes readily. The roles of apoplastic barriers (Casparian bands and suberin lamellae) in the root's endo-and exodermis are discussed. The model allows for special characteristics of roots such as a high hydraulic conductivity (water permeability) in the presence of a low permeability of nutrient ions once taken up into the stele by active processes...” Biomemetic membranes based on plant root physiology could be used as efficient water purification methodologies. “The effects of surface magnetism, using perpendicularly polarized magnetic media, are evaluated on Bacillus licheniformis…. At different spin directions we are able to observe a change on the biofilm formation, protein synthesis, and cell growth rate. Given that surface energy can easily penetrate through cells, this approach is an advantage over existing techniques that require direct physical contact to target cells. It also presents a new technique to cell adhesion and synthesis of surface proteins” Magnetic fields or magnetically charged membranes could be used to deter fouling of water purification membranes or other important components in water purification systems. “Fresh-water atyid shrimps are an ancient group of carideans that uses “passive” cleaning mechanisms to protect their gills from fouling… Gill cleaning in atyids involves epipod-setobranch complexes, associated with their pereiopods, and multidenticulate setae on the posterior end of the scaphognathite.” The passive cleaning mechanisms of the atyid shrimp could be reproduced and used to clean and/or prevent the fouling of filters and membranes in water purification systems. “Recently, non-leaching, permanent, sterile-surface materials have been developed in which one end of a long-chained hydrophobic polycation containing antimicrobial monomers is attached covalently to the surface of a material, for example, cotton or plastic. The polymeric chain allows the antimicrobial moieties to permeate into, and kill, the cells of the pathogen. These sterile-surface materials kill both air- and waterborne pathogens and are not susceptible to existing resistance mechanisms” Previously, sterile surface materials have been considered to prevent surface infections in medical-based applications. Our discovery in this case is the fact that the specific sterile surface materials discussed in this abstract may be incorporated into water purification membranes to deter or eliminate fouling “Despite their high nutritional value and a lack of physical defenses, most marine sponges appear to be minimally affected by predators, competitors, and fouling organisms, possibly due to sponge chemical defenses.... Formoside and other triterpene glycosides from Compounds (triterpene glycoside) could be used to create anti-fouling coatings or materials (perhaps non-leaching) for use on/in filter membranes in water purification systems. Compared to the medical topic queries, the water purification queries were more complex. This was due in part to the absence of a MeSH taxonomy equivalent in the SCI. It was also due to the broader scope of the indirectly related literature relating to all the many facets of water purification technology. In the SCI, many words/phrases were required to cover a category, whereas in MEDLINE, a MeSH term could perform the same function. Future non-medical topic studies could be based on the same generic core-directly related-indirectly related expansion process used for the medical topic. The clustering selection process for potential discovery would be used on both the directly and indirectly related expansion literatures. While the clustering procedure of visual inspection is manually intensive, the clustering does offer time savings relative to the visual inspection procedure used for the RP study, and it also allows for groups of potential discoveries to be located in addition to specific individual discoveries. Also in future studies, once groups/items have been identified (in the expanded literature) by the clustering methodologies listed in the previous section, the SCI itself can be queried to produce individual discoveries if the keywords taken from the Abstracts or individual clusters are specific enough. This method is useful for searching focused areas of much larger scientific areas, such as the filtration of water in the kidney literature, or filter feeding animals in the “filter” literature. Two examples from each of these areas are listed below. “ The kidneys filter the plasma in special filtration units-glomeruli-and thereby excrete low-molecular-weight waste products into the urine. The mechanisms of glomerular filtration have been a matter of controversy for several decades, but recent data have revealed new details about the molecular nature of the filter and have demonstrated a central role for the podocyte slit diaphragm in the filtration process.” The functionality of the kidney, and specifically its glomular filtration capability along with the mechanics of its ability to separate fluids (with the use of its slit diaphrams, fenestrated endothelium, glomerular basement membrane (GBM), and epithelial filtration slits) may be used to create new membranes for use in water purification membranes. “ The article is devoted to individual behaviour of autozooids (mainly connected with feeding and cleaning) in 40 species and subspecies of marine bryozoans from the White Sea and the Barents Sea. We present comparative descriptions of the observations and for the first time describe some of autozooidal activities (e.g. cleaning of the colony surface by a reversal of tentacular ciliature beating, variants of testing-position, and particle capture and rejection)” Using the same cleaning processes that autozooids employ, namely the movement of the cilia, it may be possible to create self cleaning filters, or self cleaning membranes. Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) is a special case of Latent Feature Indexing (LFI, proposed by the first author). One of the earliest references to the general application of LSI to objects and descriptors can be found in Berry's paper In LFI, use of any feature is allowable, not only Abstract words or phrases. If Authors are substituted for Words/Phrases, then the mathematical operations are the same for reduced dimensional approximation of We were initially provided a set of documents that had been produced via a Simulated Nucleation process We first identified the core documents by tagging those documents as core if they matched a focused core water purification query. Some of the terms that were included in this query include “water purification OR water treatment OR water recycling OR water disinfection OR water desalination.” Documents that matched this query were marked as core documents and the remaining documents were marked as expanded core documents. After the documents were divided into a set of core and expanded core documents, the document collections were subjected to standard stop word removal and stemming procedures. The document collection was stemmed using our own implementation of the Porter stemmer After the documents were encoded using a vector space scheme, duplicate documents were removed. Documents were marked as duplicates if the cosine of the angle between the vector space encoding of the documents exceeded a threshold The use of singular value decomposition as an alternative to conventional keyword indexing was first proposed by Deerwester A rank In the current LSI-based LBD approach, The projection of the data serves the purpose of preserving and emphasizing semantic relationships among documents. In any dimensionality reduction technique, once the projection of the data to a lower dimensional space is performed, one can compute the dissimilarity in the reduced rank space. The hope is that the dissimilarities in the reduced rank space give more faithful representations of the relationships among the data. Gordon and Dumais Our approach extends that of Gordon and Dumais in several ways. In their original paper, they alluded to the fact that one could identify associations between articles rather than concepts. However, they did not employ this as part of their LSI-based LBD procedure. Our software implementation allows a user to query for, and have returned a set of, core articles, based on LSI-obtained indexing using the reduced rank matrix The second extension on the original work of Gordon and Dumais utilizes a minimal spanning tree (MST) as a means to investigate the set of core to expanded core term relationships in the LSI-obtained term space. We had previously suggested the use of MSTs in order to identify interesting article associations between disparate corpora Within the venue of the current work, one first computes the interpoint distance matrix between the various terms in the article collection in the LSI-projected space. The interpoint distance matrix is obtained using 1 minus the cosine similarity measure of the terms. Viewing the collection of terms as a graph, one node per each term, this interpoint distance matrix can be used to determine a complete graph between the terms. A complete graph is one in which there is an edge between each pair of nodes, One can then compute a MST on this complete graph. A MST serves as a simpler less complicated graph that encompasses the information contained in the complete graph. A traversal through the MST provides an ordering of the terms that is equivalent to a divisive clustering of the term interpoint distance matrix under a complete distance metric. In fact, making a sequence of longest length cuts on the MST is equivalent to a divisive clustering of the term interpoint distance matrix. Therefore, the ordering of the nodes (terms) in this case would be the order that would come out of such a clustering. This MST-based space and its associated ordering allow the user to explore more quickly the set of possible core to expanded core term relationships within the document collection because it provides a contextually meaningful arrangement of the terms.  This initial query within the core literature was performed using keyword indexing in order to find those core documents with the phrase “membrane fouling.” As shown in In  The rightmost window displays a folded version of the minimal spanning tree as computed on the cosine similarity obtained interpoint distance matrix in the LSI projected term space. Our current software lists the top 1000 nodes and this tree display would become much too busy without folding a portion of the tree in order to hide its presence from the user. The white box in the tree is the term that has the current focus in both windows. In this case the term is “bromotyrosine.” Several of the terms that are near this term in the MST have similar “similarity to antifouling” scores and these come from the same article. For example, one can see “dibromotyramin” as a stemming of “dibromotyramine.” The tool provides the user with the capability to drill down, from either window, in order to identify those articles that contain this particular term. A few potential discoveries (obtained using the LSI-based discovery methodology) are listed below. These discoveries run the gamut from strategies to defeat membrane fouling to ideas for biological agent deactivation within water and even include an idea with regards to a new desalination methodology based on eel physiology. We believe that this list of potential discoveries represents the tip of the iceberg in terms of number of discoveries that are possible using this strategy. “Previous studies have shown that high molecular weight non-dialysable material ( High molecular weight non-dialysable materials derived from cranberry juice can be used to prevent membrane fouling in water purification membranes. Specifically, discrete flavonoids called condensed tannins, or proanthocyanidins (PACs), have previously exhibited documented anti-adhesion properties. “In this work, we show the potent antifouling effects of two compounds, Brominated clyclopeptides or their derivatives may offer a means of preventing membrane fouling in water purification membranes. The effects of the compounds responsible for the sponges' antifouling mechanism are reversible and nontoxic. “In the present study, we investigated the antibacterial and antifungal effects of Coniferous essential oils might provide a means to deactivate microbes and fungi in water. The exact mechanism of the action of these essential oils is still being studied. “Complementary DNAs encoding homologs of the mammalian aquaglyceroporins (termed AQPe) and aquaporin-1 isoforms (termed AQP1) were isolated from the European eel. The AQP amino acid sequences share 35–54% identity with other known human AQPs. Although AQPe mRNA expression was approximately equivalent along the entire length of the gut, AQP1 expression was the highest in the posterior/rectal segment. Saltwater eels have adapted to life under conditions of extremely high salinity. Study of desalination methodologies employed by the eel along the length of its digestive track may allow for the development of radically new desalination methods. “The vital barrier function of the skin resides primarily in the top stratum of the epidermis, the Materials that mimic the barrier function of the skin and the stratum corneum could be created and used as new membranes for use in water purification systems. Specific studies of the properties of keratin might aid in the development of new membrane-based systems. “ A novel filter may be created for use in water purification systems that mimics the functionality of the filter feeding mechanisms of Doliolum. Nanotechnology-based approaches may offer an implementation strategy for such filters.  These really represent the “tip of the iceberg” in terms to the potential discoveries that can be identified using our methodologies. The reader is referred to The cluster-based methodology obtains candidate discovery terms via either a phrase frequency or cluster analysis of the expanded core. It then uses these discovery candidates to go back into the literature and obtain additional articles that are related to the particular discovery term but which might not have been downloaded as part of the initial topic area data collection, in this case water purification. These articles are then subjected to human inspection and additional analyses which could nullify the proposed discovery, strengthen it, or lead the user into a totally different discovery area. We have demonstrated the application of an LSI based approach to LBD in order to discover new methods of water purification. Our proposed methodology allows one to make discoveries in two different ways. Both approaches start off with a core/expanded core document collection as obtained via the simulated nucleation procedure. In the first approach, one locates those expanded core articles that are near a collection of core articles in LSI space. It is expected that the original collection of these core articles of interest would be returned based on a keyword query into our existent core/expanded core dataset. We have use various techniques to determine the core query including terms obtained from reading the literature, terms based on a simple phrase frequency analysis of the core document collection, and terms extracted as part of the clustering of the core literature. Once the collection of relevant core articles is returned, the user then explores the expanded core nearest neighbors for this core article collection. In the second discovery approach, one locates expanded core terms that lie near a core term in LSI space. Once again, it is expected that the user provides an initial core term and, once again, these terms can be selected based on user intuition/interest, simple phrase frequency analysis of the core literature, or phrases extracted as part of clustering the core literature. The user then explores the expanded core terms that are near this core term, using either a sorted drop down list or a MST-based interface. In either case, our proposed approaches allow a natural interaction between the LSI discovery process and phrase frequency analysis or cluster analysis. We will now take a moment to compare the two approaches. The LSI-based approaches initially use a phrase frequency analysis or clustering of the core articles as a starting point for the discovery process. The cluster-based approach uses a phrase frequency analysis or clustering of the expanded core articles as a starting point for the process. Both discovery methodologies are exploratory in nature, in that a human user helps to decide what particular cluster or phrase is a good candidate for additional analysis. In a real sense, neither approach is fully automated. The other difference between the two methods is that the LSI-based method is a closed method which looks for discoveries on a pre-existing set of core/expanded core documents while the cluster-based approach is an open system that allows the user to bring additional documents into the discovery process. One might imagine a hybrid system that incorporated both approaches. One could for example use the cluster-based approach to bring in a collection of new documents that represents potential discoveries and then render these in LSI space. One could then look for relationships between the original core documents and this new collection of expanded core documents. This could be at the core document to expanded core document level or at the core term to expanded core term level. The hope would be that this analysis might indicate to the human user another discovery that was not anticipated when the human user initially obtained the new set of potential discovery documents. In addition, we have illustrated the use of a MST-based approach to the exploration of the core term to expanded core term discovery relationships. In future work, we plan to illustrate the application of the procedure to other non-medical problems, to attempt to quantify the benefits of the application of the MST-based approach to discovery term exploration, to investigate the relationship between choice of Finally, we have placed a more comprehensive list of potential discovery candidates in Appendix 12 of A Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) is a continuously open announcement by a Federal funding agency intended to solicit research ideas for the purpose of investment. Even though BAAs are posted on widely accessible sites, Program Managers in charge of the BAA will usually send notice of the announcement to experts in the field of the BAA, to insure they are aware of the posting. There is no set number of recipients, but the distribution range is usually from a few tens to a few hundreds. The objective of the BAA notification study was to insure that researchers from disciplines not normally associated with water purification would be aware of a water purification BAA. This could potentially result in proposals from disciplines not normally associated with water purification being submitted, with the higher potential for radical discovery. The overall approach was to develop a core literature query for water purification, generalize the core literature query into an expanded literature query, retrieve the relevant core and expanded literature articles from appropriate databases, and insure that the authors of the articles received notice of the BAA Announcement. The same water purification core and expanded literature queries that were used for the water purification LBD studies described earlier in this paper were used for the BAA Notification study. The queries were entered into the Science Citation Index and the NSF Agency Awards database, and a few thousand articles were retrieved. Announcements were sent to the authors of these articles. About 300 pre-proposals were received as a result of the BAA posting, three times the number that were received a year earlier resulting from a similar water purification BAA. Because of the sensitivities of the competitive and proposal evaluation process, no details related to the evaluation or eventual funding can be provided. However, we evaluated the relationship of each proposed concept to what is normally associated with water purification, and calculated an overall statistic for the received proposals. About 2/3 of the pre-proposals were judged to have originated in technical disciplines not normally associated with water purification. Many of these appeared to offer potential for real discovery. The lessons learned from this experiment are discussed in the last paper in this Special Issue