In copper-gold flotation plants, pyrite which is depressed in copper flotation is often floated subsequently with the addition of sodium sulfide (Na2S) to recover the associated gold. For the first time, this study investigated the role of Na2S responsible for the flotation of pyrite depressed in chalcopyrite flotation through flotation tests and Cyro-XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) analyses. It was found that the application of Na2S improved pyrite flotation to the same extent as the application of PAX and the combination of Na2S and PAX further increased pyrite recovery. It is interesting that PAX and Na2S promoted pyrite flotation through different mechanisms. PAX reduced the hydrophilic metal oxidation species and adsorbed on pyrite surface, resulting in the flotation of depressed pyrite. Unlike PAX, Na2S increased the hydrophobicity of pyrite and pyrite flotation by forming elemental sulfur and polysulfide on pyrite surface. The application of PAX and Na2S at the same time further enhanced the hydrophobicity of pyrite and pyrite flotation as a result of the combined actions of PAX and Na2S.In porphyry copper-gold ores, gold is commonly present as free gold, copper-associated gold and pyrite-associated gold which are recovered through gravity separation, copper flotation and pyrite flotation, respectively ( Lime is the most commonly used pH modifier to depress pyrite in copper flotation ( To float pyrite depressed in copper flotation, sodium sulfide or sodium hydrosulfide is normally used to activate pyrite. In fact, sodium sulfide or sodium hydrosulfide is commonly used as a sulfidizer of oxidized sulfide minerals ( Sodium sulfide was also found to induce the collectorless flotation of sulfide minerals. Despite the studies on sulfidization and collectorless flotation with sodium sulfide, few studies have been conducted to understand the role of sodium sulfide in the flotation of pyrite depressed in chalcopyrite flotation which was a subject of this paper. This study provides insights to improve the flotation of gold associated with pyrite. Chalcopyrite and pyrite single minerals, supplied by GEO Discoveries, were crushed through a jaw crusher and a roll crusher, and then screened to collect +0.71–3.35 mm particle size fractions. The elemental content of iron and sulfur of the pyrite sample was 45.4 wt% and 50.5 wt%, respectively. XRD analysis of the sample revealed a composition of 96.0 wt% pyrite with minor quartz, galena and copper minerals. The chalcopyrite sample contains about 95.0 wt% chalcopyrite and 5.0 wt% pyrite. The processed samples were sealed in polyethylene bags and then stored in a freezer at a temperature of −20 °C to reduce surface oxidation. RTD11A (a dithiocarbamate type collector), potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) and DSF004 were used as the chalcopyrite collector, pyrite collector and frother, respectively. They were of industry grade and used as received. Other chemicals were of AR grade. Deionized water was used in all experiments. Fresh chemical solutions were prepared daily for flotation tests. The mixture of chalcopyrite (20 g) and pyrite (80 g) was combined with 100 mL water and ground with 3.6 kg of stainless steel grinding media in a laboratory stainless steel rod mill for 4.4 min so that 80 wt% of the particles were less than 106 μm. The pulp was then transferred to a 1.5 L Agitair flotation cell and agitated at 600 rpm. Lime was added to adjust the pH to 9.5. 18 g/t RTD11A and 30 g/t DSF004 were added and conditioned for 2 min for each reagent. Four chalcopyrite flotation concentrates were then collected after cumulative times of 1, 3, 6 and 10 min at an air flow rate of 6 L/min with a scrapping time interval of 10 s. After chalcopyrite flotation, Na The feeds to pyrite flotation under different conditions were taken from the flotation cell and frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen (−196 °C) before the analyses by Cryo-XPS. XPS data was acquired using a Kratos Axis ULTRA X-ray photoelectron spectrometer incorporating a 165 mm hemispherical electron energy analyzer. The incident radiation was monochromatic Al Kα X-rays (1486.6 eV) at 150 W (15 kV, 15 mA). Survey (wide) scans were taken at a pass energy of 160 eV, and multiplex (narrow) high resolution scans were taken at 20 eV. Survey scans were carried out over the 1200–0 eV binding energy range with 1.0 eV steps and a dwell time of 100 ms. Narrow high-resolution scans were run with 0.05 eV steps and 250 ms dwell time. Base pressure in the analysis chamber was 1.0 × 10 To avoid the sublimation of elemental sulfur or other volatile compounds formed on mineral surfaces under the ultra-high vacuum condition, samples for Cryo-XPS analyses were cooled in the loading chamber to −160 °C before evacuation and maintained at that temperature during the sample analysis using liquid nitrogen. The resulting spectra were charge-corrected using C 1s as a reference with a binding energy of 284.8 eV. Data processing and fitting were carried out using CasaXPS.  After chalcopyrite flotation, pyrite flotation was conducted to recover the depressed pyrite.  It was noticed that the addition of Na  After copper flotation, the tailings mainly containing pyrite without and with the addition of 30 g/t PAX, 480 g/t Na High resolution scans were conducted to identify the oxidation status of each element by decoupling the spectra.  It is interesting to find that the addition of 480 g/t Na  Flotation tests and Cryo-XPS analyses in this study indicate that pyrite may be depressed in copper flotation with the addition of lime despite copper activation occurring on pyrite surface. The hydrophilic calcium and iron oxidation species may form on pyrite surface and be responsible for pyrite depression. The depressed pyrite may be floated with the addition of either PAX or Na  The current study indicates that pyrite depressed in chalcopyrite flotation may be floated to the same extent by the addition of PAX or Na PAX and Na The financial support from