This article presents the results from an experimental study on the application of acoustic emission (AE) analysis to assess the damage progression of self-consolidating rubberized concrete (SCRC) mixtures under four-point flexural tests. Self-consolidating concrete (SCC) mixtures incorporating four variable replacements of crumb rubber (CR) including 0, 10, 20, and 30% were examined to study the effect of CR content on the AE damage detection and quantification capability. Normal concrete (NC) and normal rubberized concrete (NRC) mixtures, with 0 and 40% CR respectively, were also tested for the comparison. Two prism samples were tested from each mixture under monotonic loading conditions, while being constantly monitored via two attached AE sensors until failure. The acoustic emissions obtained from these sensors were related to the damage evolution of the tested prisms from all mixtures. The effects of variable mixture types and CR content on different AE parameters were highlighted. The considered AE parameters included signal characteristics (in terms of signal amplitude) as well as number of AE hits and cumulative signal strength (CSS). In addition, AE b-value and intensity analyses were further performed on the amplitude and signal strength of all AE signals to evaluate the extent of damage by means of three additional AE parameters including b-value, historic index, H (t), and severity, Sr
                     . The outcomes of the AE analysis indicated the usefulness of the considered AE parameters in the detection of two early damage stages including micro- and macro-cracking before failure, irrespective of the CR content. Eventually, the intensity analysis parameters (H (t) and Sr
                     ) were correlated to the stages of micro- and macro-cracking in all mixtures for the purpose of damage classification via developed chart.Waste rubber disposal is considered a critical problem in some countries owing to the growing number scrap tires every year Self-consolidating concrete (SCC) is a highly flowable concrete type used in several applications with congested reinforcement Acoustic emission (AE) phenomenon can be defined as the release of strain energy (resulting from any source of damage) leading to the initiation of elastic waves that can be collected by AE sensors. AE analysis is a well-established non-destructive testing (NDT) method that can be used for damage detection and characterization of concrete materials/structures under various damage mechanisms. In this technique, the micro- and macro-cracking resulting from any source of stresses in materials can be identified and localized via AE sensors AE analysis can identify different fracture stages in different types of concrete under loading, which makes it a good candidate for application in structural health monitoring (SHM) of actual concrete structures This experimental investigation examines the effectiveness of various parameter-based AE analysis techniques in characterizing the cracking behavior and damage evolution of SCC and NC mixtures containing CR using four-point flexural tests. The parameter-based approach was selected for this investigation since the source of damage in this study is limited to the crack development in the tested specimens. The study examines the impact of varying concrete type and CR replacement on the resulting AE parameters calculated based on the AE data attained from these tests. In particular, the effect of incorporating high volumes of CR (up to 40%) on the wave propagation characteristics is highlighted. The use of well-established AE methodologies including b-value and intensity analyses of the AE signal amplitude and signal strength data for the damage detection and quantification of SCRC is implemented. These AE analyses methods have been applied successfully in several previous studies performed on different concrete materials. Thus, the sensitivity of these AE analysis techniques to various stages of damage in SCRC mixtures will be investigated in this preliminary study prior to its potential application in real-time SHM of concrete structures in-situ. The analysis of AE signals has successfully been implemented in evaluating the cracking performance of different concrete mixtures in previous investigations This study involved the development and testing of six mixtures: one normal concrete (NC) mixture, one SCC mixture without rubber (the control mixture), and four rubberized concrete mixtures. These four rubberized concrete mixtures were developed in another investigation Two supplementary cementitious materials namely metakaolin (MK) and fly ash (FA) were used. The specific gravity of MK and FA are 2.27 and 2.5, respectively. The CR used in the rubberized concrete mixtures had a maximum size of 4.5 mm and a specific gravity of 0.95 with no water absorption. The SCC and SCRC mixtures were designed with a target slump flow of 700 ± 50 mm according to ASTM C1611 In this study, prism specimens (100 × 100 × 400 mm) were tested under four-point flexural load setup and monitored via AE sensors during the test. For each mixture, two prisms and three cylinders (100 mm diameter × 200 mm high) were cast. After casting, all of the cylinders/prisms were cured at 25 °C in a moist curing room for 28 days before testing. The cylinders were used for testing the compressive strength at 28 days, as per ASTM C39 The prism samples were constantly monitored throughout the four-point flexural tests using attached AE sensors. These sensors were piezoelectric AE sensors with an integral preamplifier (R6I-AST)  As previously mentioned, three cylinders and two prisms were cast and tested from each mixture in this study. The results of the average compressive strength of the cylinders and maximum load and flexural strength of the prisms are all shown in As seen in A number of AE signal parameters were investigated in this study in order to be correlated to the damage evolution of all tested prisms. First, the amplitude, number of hits, and cumulative signal strength (CSS) were analyzed versus the test time. Then, an additional b-value analysis on the amplitude/number of signals was completed to develop an additional parameter (b-value). The b-value analysis has successfully been employed to assess the cracking development in concrete structures in previous studies (For example: The b-value was obtained based on the slope between log In addition to the b-value analysis, another parameter-based AE analysis method namely intensity analysis was also completed in this study. This analysis uses the AE signal strength data to generate two intensity analysis parameters including historic index ( In Eqs. The value of the constant (a) On the other hand, a constant value of In this study, the variations of different AE parameters recorded or calculated throughout the flexural test period were correlated to the different stages of damage progression for the purpose of the detection of micro- and macro-cracking. For instance, Previous studies indicated that the locations of sharp variations in the number of hits, CSS, and After the identification of micro-cracking in the same prism sample based on the analysis of the number of hits, CSS, The above AE analysis was similarly conducted on all other tested specimens in order to identify the micro- and macro-cracks. The outcomes of this analysis on all samples enabled the identification of micro-cracking at approximately 35–45% of the maximum applied load. Besides, the macro-cracking was observed using the AE analysis in all specimens before the observation of failure by visual inspection during the experiments. These results indicate the effectiveness of the previously described AE analysis in the detection of micro- and macro-cracking in the variable mixtures tested herein including NC, SCC, NRC and SCRC. This conclusion was confirmed in all specimens based on the detection of the macro-cracking visually during the tests. It is worth highlighting that, all other tested specimens followed similar trends of variations in the studied AE parameters during the tests to those of NRC40% S1 presented in Two concrete types without CR were evaluated in this investigation including NC and SCC. These mixtures exhibited variable compressive and flexural strengths as can be seen from The addition of CR to concrete was expected to contribute to the AE wave attenuation due to the increase in the damping ratio and sound absorption  The findings of the preceding sections demonstrated that the intensity analysis parameters ( AE monitoring is a well-established NDT method for the characterization of different types of cracks in cementitious materials. The analysis of several AE parameters has proven its effectiveness in the detection of various damage mechanisms including crack growth of concrete under different loading conditions. This analysis was exploited in this research to monitor the micro-cracking, macro-cracking, and fracture of novel concrete mixtures under four-point flexural tests. Six mixtures containing four variable levels of CR replacement (NRC, SCC, and SCRC) in conjunction with a NC control mixture were tested in this study. Two prism specimens cast from those six concrete mixtures were continuously monitored using attached AE sensors throughout the four-point flexural tests till failure. A series of AE analyses on the data acquired from these tests were implemented and compared with the results of crack initiation/development and applied load history. The following conclusions were attained from the analysis of the results of this research: The analysis of the AE parameters (the number of hits, CSS, b-value, The detection of macro-cracks was achieved right before reaching the maximum load and was associated with the maximum values of number of hits, CSS, The SCC control mixture exhibited higher average number of hits, CSS, The increase in the replacement level of the CR from 0 to 40% led to an overall decline in the AE signal amplitudes attained at both the micro- and macro-cracking stages. This decline was expected due to the contribution of the CR to sound absorption and wave attenuation. Nevertheless, it was possible to detect both micro- and macro-crack development in all mixtures using the AE analysis, irrespective of the CR content. In general, the increase in the CR content resulted in a linear decline in the average compressive strength, maximum load, and flexural strength of both NC and SCC mixtures. Yet, the reduction in the compressive strength due to increasing the CR content was found to be higher than that of the flexural strength of the same mixture. This reduction was also associated less cracking activities and lower AE events in terms of lower average number of hits, CSS, The outcomes of the AE intensity analysis were integrated to develop a damage classification chart capable of identifying the extent of damage (micro- or macro-cracking). This chart may be valuable in predicting the damage level in any specimen before failure based on the recorded/calculated values of The authors would like to acknowledge the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: