Jarosite precipitation is a very important phenomenon that is observed in many bacterial cultures. In many applications involving Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, like coal desulphurization and bioleaching, it is crucial to minimize jarosite formation in order to increase efficiency. The formation of jarosite during the oxidation of ferrous iron by free suspended cells of A. ferrooxidans was studied. The process was studied as a function of time, pH and temperature. The main parameter affecting the jarosite formation was pH. Several experiments yielded results showing oxidation rates as high as 0.181–0.194g/Lh, with low jarosite precipitation of 0.0125–0.0209g at conditions of pH 1.6–1.7 with an operating temperature of 35°C.  Ore bioleaching involves the dissolution of metal sulfides (MeS) by presumably an indirect mechanism, involving the oxidation of Fe Hydrogen sulfide is usually a component of many modern day gas streams such as biogas. It is a highly toxic component and is usually removed by means of hydrogen sulfide scrubbers and other mechanisms like the Claus process. This reaction goes to completion very rapidly and the hydrogen disulfide is removed efficiently. Ferrous sulfate obtained from the first step is further treated by The ability of Another application of the iron oxidation by There are several factors that play a role in the rate of oxidation of ferrous ions by Moreover, the pH and temperature have significant effects on the oxidation kinetics of iron by Therefore, the pH and temperature at which the bacterial operation and oxidation rate are at a maximum are approximately 2.0 and 30  Since there is consumption of hydrogen ions, the pH of the liquid media initially increases. However, this pH increase is counteracted by the hydrolysis of ferric iron Therefore, it is quite visible that the pH of the system has effect on the extent of the oxidation and hydrolysis reactions. Furthermore, there is a reaction in competition with the hydrolysis reaction giving products of basic ferric hydroxysulphates with the formula MFe Since the 9K medium contains a high concentration of Jarosite formation has negative effects on many applications that require the use of The precipitation of jarosite is widely used in the zinc industry to remove iron solubilized in the processing circuit ( Also, in the process of coal desulfurization, the formation of jarosite on the surface of the biooxidized metal sulfide particle significantly decreases the rate of bioleaching by deactivating the surface. Jarosite formation in coal desulfurization results in residual sulfur, which cannot be removed, from coal. Furthermore, jarosite formation in immobilization matrices limits the amount of biomass retention since ferric iron deposits occupy most of the available space ( As mentioned above, due to the abundance of A recent study has been conducted in order to characterize the composition of different types of jarosite produced biologically by using X-ray diffraction. It was found that ammoniojarosite has an elemental weight composition of 14.6% Several studies have been conducted in order to determine the importance of jarosite formation in bioreactors. For example, jarosite precipitation has been directly related to the number of attached cells ( For our procedure, the bacteria were grown in 11 All the chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade, including 100% H This experiment deals with the effects of two parameters, pH and temperature, on iron oxidation and jarosite formation. Therefore, the experiment was divided into two parts, dealing with varying pH and temperature. For the first part of the experiment, the effect of varying pH on jarosite formation was tested in order to find the optimal range of pH in which the bacteria operate efficiently with minimal jarosite precipitation. Eleven 250 When more than 90% of Fe For the second part of the experiment, the appropriate pH range obtained from the first part, displaying the optimum pH, was selected in order to test for the optimum temperature. This allowed us to obtain the optimum pH and temperature combination in which the bacterial iron oxidation rate is maximal with minimum jarosite formation. To start this part of the experiment, we selected the appropriate optimal pH, with minimal jarosite precipitation, from the first part of our experiment. We then selected the appropriate number of 250 The mean ferrous iron oxidation rate (in g/L The analysis of ferrous and ferric iron concentrations at different times in our bacterial samples was done using a precise quantitative method, which is not affected by the presence of iron or This experiment consisted of two parts analyzing the effect of pH and temperature on jarosite precipitation. For each parameter, we will discuss the data and observations. Several experimental runs were performed testing the effect of the various pHs, range from 1.0 to 3.0 in 0.2 intervals, taking samples initially, at 22 Therefore, the jarosite formation was only observed at the 46-h period with jarosites precipitating on the walls, in suspension with the fluid and the bottom of the flasks, possessing a yellowish-brown color. The 2.96 pH flask was found to have the most precipitation of jarosites while flasks of pH 1.0–1.6 displayed no visible jarosite precipitation. From  The optimal pH at room temperature was determined to be in the range of 1.6–2.0. Using these pH values in 0.1 intervals and varying the temperature to 25, 30, 35, and 40  From the analysis of The main purpose of this work was to investigate the operating conditions for the Fe We would like to thank the National Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the University of Western Ontario for providing the financial support for this research.