This paper is concerned with the gravity separation of fine particles in a Reflux Classifier, a fluidized bed device with a system of parallel inclined channels located above. A significant advance is reported here over what was previously possible, through the application of a recent discovery described by Galvin et al. (2009). By using closely spaced inclined channels it is possible to achieve significant suppression of the effects of particle size, and hence produce a powerful separation on the basis of density. Experimental work was undertaken on the continuous steady state separation of coal and mineral matter, with a very narrow channel spacing of 1.77mm used to process a feed finer than 0.5mm in diameter, and a channel spacing of 4.2mm used to process coarser feeds finer than 2.0mm. These results are compared with previous findings reported in the literature for wider channels. The gravity separation performance is shown to be remarkably high, with a significant reduction in the variation of the separation density with particle size, and a significant reduction in the Ecart probable error, Ep
                     . For example, over the particle size range 0.25–2.0mm the composite Ep
                      for the size range decreased from 0.14 for the wide channels used in previous studies to a typical level of 0.06 for the closely spaced inclined channels used in the present study. The separation performance was also shown to be insensitive to feed pulp density and feed solids throughput over a very broad range.In coal and mineral processing, gravity separation of fine particles less than 2 The Reflux Classifier is a relatively new gravity separation technology that combines a system of parallel inclined channels above a conventional fluidized bed, as shown in The present paper builds upon our recent discovery that particles can be elutriated on the basis of density using a Reflux Classifier incorporating closely spaced inclined channels ( Thus, as part of this introduction we begin by providing a summary of the key previous findings obtained using the wider inclined channel design. In this previous work channel spacings of 60 The loss in separation efficiency, as the particle size range increases, places a constraining limit on the size range to which gravity separation technology can be applied. It is noted that these data were produced using a solids feed throughput of up to 45 Following the work of The purpose of this study is to report on the significant improvement in separation performance achieved through the use of closely spaced inclined channels. As illustrated in Particles in the Intermediate Settling Regime exhibit a terminal settling velocity that increases in proportion to the particle diameter. Similarly, these particles experience a local fluid velocity that is proportional to the diameter when they reside at the inclined surfaces. Thus at a sufficient hydraulic velocity the simultaneous match of the settling velocity with the local fluid velocity along the tangent direction of the inclined channels can be achieved for particles of very different size, as illustrated in  Because of the industrial need for efficient gravity separation of fine particles up to 2.0 Fine particle gravity separation is difficult to achieve over a broad range of particle sizes, and its limited effectiveness below 0.100 In principle, the total sedimentation area of a Reflux Classifier includes both the vessel area and the horizontal projected area of the inclined plates. Hence, the effective vessel area is larger than the actual vessel area by the factor, Combining Eqs. Eq. When closely spaced inclined channels were used, with For a particle resident at the inclined surface, the local fluid velocity is defined by the value one particle radius from the inclined surface. Noting the exact velocity profile for laminar flow through a channel ( Eq. The capacity of the Reflux Classifier depends upon both the internal channel spacing, perpendicular to the inclined plates, and the thickness of the plates. The plate thickness is an arbitrary quantity which in practice can vary considerably. In the study by The effective vessel area is easily estimated by multiplying the lower vessel area by the ratio The model developed by  The transport of the particles up through the steep inclined channels is governed by two possible mechanisms. Consider the case involving closely spaced inclined channels governed by laminar flow. A particle residing near the upward facing inclined wall experiences a velocity just sufficient to carry it up the incline. If we now double the channel spacing it is necessary to also double the superficial flow velocity in order to carry the same particle up the inclined surface via the same separation mechanism. Note the flow Reynolds number must increase by a factor of four. Similarly, if we increase the channel spacing by a factor of 10 (eg to Some comment is required on what constitutes closely spaced inclined channels. This paper describes the results obtained from a series of experiments conducted using a laboratory scale Reflux Classifier under continuous steady state conditions. The device, shown schematically in The lower section of the device had a height of 1.0  The first two experiments involved feeds normally processed by flotation, with an upper particle size of about 0.50 Because of the relatively fine particle size used in the first two experiments, the solids throughput used was relatively low. In the first experiment the solids throughput was 8.6 The remaining five experiments involved coarser feeds with a nominal upper particle size of 2.0 The samples were analysed by an independent commercial laboratory for their solids content which, in turn, provided accurate data on the solids rates. Then the samples were analysed using sieves to produce a series of narrow size fractions. The ash % was determined for each of these size fractions. The results obtained are tabulated in Partition curves provide a valuable and detailed description of the gravity separation performance achieved using a given technology. This description is largely independent of the feed and in fact provides a highly effective basis for modelling the separations achieved for very different feeds. In the context of gravity separation, the partition curves are expressed as a function of the particle density, and need to be obtained using relatively narrow size fractions in order to ensure the curves are not influenced by the effects of the particle size distribution. A sample of the feed, product and reject streams are taken while the process operates at steady state. Each sample is separated into a series of narrow size fractions. Particles of a narrow size fraction are then fractionated using a series of dense liquid baths, each at a different density. Particles that float in one bath but sink in the next have a density, nominally, at a value midway between the densities of the two baths. The objective is to obtain information on the proportion of the feed particles of a given nominal density, within a narrow size range, that report to product. This proportion is described by a partition number, A typical partition curve based on a narrow particle size range is shown in The purpose of this section is to examine the gravity concentration of ultrafine particles with an upper particle size of 0.50 In  A total of five continuous steady state separations were conducted using a Reflux Classifier design based on inclined channels 1.0 Run 3, based on Feed C involved a low cut point. Runs 4 and 5, based on Feed D, were conducted at a low and a high cut-point respectively. For Run 6, based on Feed E, a moderate cut-point was applied. The solids feed flux was deliberately set to relatively low levels, typical of that used in a conventional up-flow classifier, the aim being to focus on separation efficiency. Hence the solids feed flux used was typically 8–12 The data obtained on the samples were then used to produce partition curves for each of the narrow size fractions, showing the proportion of the solids that reported to the product stream as a function of the particle density. These partition curves were then used to determine the separation density for each of the narrow size fractions, and the separation error, For Runs 3–6, the monotonic decrease in the The corresponding separation errors, It is noted that one of the experiments, not reported here, was conducted using a different experimental procedure to that used in the four runs. Using Feed C, additional water was injected at a location below the normal feed entry position. This action had a negative effect on the autogenous dense medium, resulting in a lower separation efficiency for the coarser particles. The reduction in the lower bed density coupled with the higher volumetric flow rate produced a broader partition curve. Hence the approach was not repeated in the other runs. The feed washability curve was produced for Feed D covering the size range 0.075–4.0 Run 7 denoted by the asterisk and Run 8 denoted by the plus symbol in In practice, as the feed enters the Reflux Classifier, a fluidized bed of particles evolves within the lower section, while particles are conveyed up through the inclined channels. Some particles report to the overflow while others are withdrawn via the underflow when the bed density exceeds the target value. Eqs. In the continuous steady state separation of a feed the actual hydraulic velocity does not play such a direct pivotal role in governing the separation. The solids not discharged as underflow must, by default, report to the overflow. Thus, when the underflow rate, and hence the proportion of the feed solids reporting to the underflow decreases, the solids rate to the overflow must increase. Invariably this leads to a solids concentration increase, and hence more hindered settling within the inclined channels. This change is similar to the effect of an increase in the hydraulic velocity given that denser particles will tend to reach the overflow. It is evident that there exists a high potential for self correction, through hindered settling, to produce a hydraulic condition that in fact matches the natural separation density as defined by the proportion of the feed solids discharged to the underflow. There are other circumstances that will lead to a change in the solids rate that must report to the overflow, such as a reduction in the solids feed rate. For convenience, we assume here the water rate is fixed. It is natural to expect that a reduction in the solids feed rate produces a reduction in solids concentration and hence an increased tendency for particles to segregate and slide down the inclined channels. However, such an effect must produce an accumulation of solids below the inclined channels due to the on-going feed addition. The net effect is that the solids concentration within the inclined channels is self-adjusted to the level needed for the transport of the solids to the overflow. Of course the steady state concentration of the solids within the inclined channels will be lower. Hence, this change is similar to the effect of a reduction in the hydraulic velocity as some particles, of an intermediate density, that previously reached the overflow, might now fail to reach the overflow. Those particles will then need to compete with the particles that would normally be expected to report to the underflow. If those particles of an intermediate density cannot be accommodated in the underflow, then their concentration will simply rise to a level that is sufficient for their transport up through the inclined channels. Thus, the disturbance produced by a decrease in the feed solids rate has little effect on the overall separation. In general, the entire system has one major control variable, the suspension density of the lower bed, which is measured and used to control the proportion of the feed solids that report to the underflow. So, how does the inclined channel zone provide for improved separation performance? A given suspension density in the lower fluidized bed can, in principle, be achieved using a combination of low and high density particles. Thus, the setting of a given target bed density does not necessarily guarantee a high separation efficiency. Obviously the relatively large and dense particles will tend to report to the underflow, even in the absence of the inclined channels. The smaller and higher density particles, however, will tend to convey towards the overflow. The large effective vessel area produced by the presence of the inclined channels results in a stronger tendency for these particles to segregate, and hence return to the lower fluidized bed. Their solids concentration rises, which in turn produces a stronger dense medium effect, which in turn displaces larger lower density particles from the lower fluidized bed. This effect is known as layer-inversion ( Gravity separation of coal and mineral matter was examined in this study using closely spaced inclined channels to promote a new and powerful density based separation mechanism. For relatively fine feed, less than 0.50 The University of Newcastle and Ludowici Australia have a Research and Development Agreement on applications involving the Reflux Classifier. The University of Newcastle owns relevant international patents, and the technology is licensed to Ludowici Australia. The first author of this paper, KP Galvin, is a beneficiary of the University of Newcastle’s policy on intellectual property. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council, Anglo Coal, and the Australian Coal Association Research Program, and the on-going support of Ludowici Australia in this work. The provision of coal samples from the Bloomfield group and from BHP Billiton-Mitsubishi Alliance (BMA) is gratefully acknowledged. None of the above organizations were involved in the decision to produce this manuscript.  