Riccardin D is a new compound extracted from liverwort Marchantia polymorpha L. It has been proved to be useful in antifungal therapy and reversing the resistance of Candida albicans against fluconazole. However, the poor solubility leads to the poor bioavailability and limits its development. In this study, nanocrystals were prepared in the evaporative precipitation into aqueous solution (EPAS) and the microfluidisation process. The characterizations of nanocrystals were compared by transmission electron microscope, size distribution, and zeta potential. In the EPAS method, the drug was dissolved in the organic phase and F68, HPMC, PVP K30 were dissolved in water with the mass ratio of 2:1:2:1. In the microfluidisation process, two key factors – pressure and number of cycles were screened and 8 cycles at 2000bar was the most efficient parameter. The nanocrystals made in EPAS process were smaller, more uniform and had a narrower distribution than the microfluidisation nanocrystals. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffraction confirmed the crystalline states that were both reserved. The solubility was greatly improved by the two methods and the EPAS nanocrystals were more soluble due to the smaller size. An enhanced dissolution was obvious in vitro. And the stable nanocrystals were successfully achieved by the two methods.Riccardin D (RD, Active entities with high permeability and low aqueous solubility are classified as Class II APIs by the Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) ( The existing strategies for nanosizing can be divided into “bottom-up” method and “top-down” method. The bottom-up method means that the nanocrystals are constructed from molecules while the top-down method intends that the nanocrystals are comminuted from coarse powders to fine powders. The bottom-up methods based on precipitation include evaporative precipitation into aqueous solution (EPAS) ( The EPAS method relies on the nucleation and the growth of drug crystals to form the crystalline or semi-crystalline drug nanoparticles. In general, the hydrophobic drugs are dissolved in an appropriate organic solvent such as methanol, ethanol, acetone, tetrahydrofuran or N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone at a supersaturation concentration to obtain the nucleation of drug seeds. The stabilizers including F68, lecithin, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), Tween 80, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) are dissolved in the antisolvent. The stabilizers are used to inhibit excess crystal growth or particle aggregation ( In the microfluidisation process, firstly mechanical energy is transferred to fluid particles under high pressure. It is a jet stream principle. The solution is pumped and accelerated with a high speed to an interaction chamber. In the “Z” type chamber, the suspension changes directions of its flow leading to shear forces and particle collision. And in the second type chamber, “Y” type, the suspension stream is divided into two microstreams which then collide against each other ( Although the nanocrystal formulation process is simple, keeping the nanosize is a key challenge ( In this study, as the bulk drug is rare, we need a simple and material-saving way. So we choose the EPAS process as the bottom-up process and the microfluidisation as the top-down process. The two methods were both optimized and compared. Stabilizers were screened and the physicochemical characterizations including the particle morphology, size distribution, DSC and XRPD were assessed. Of course, the key properties-solubility and dissolution rate were all evaluated. The RD was first studied in terms of pharmaceutics. Due to its poor solubility, LC–MS and HPLC were both used to examine the content of the drug. Riccardin D was isolated from liverwort RD nanocrystal suspension was prepared by an antisolvent precipitation technique. 10 The same content of RD, F68, PVP K30, HPMC as the optimal prescription in Section The nanosuspensions were immediately dried with a freeze drier. 3 Size evaluation of the nanoparticles followed by the different size reduction processes was assessed via laser diffraction (LD), with the machine MasterSizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). The surface charge of the nanoparticles was evaluated by zeta potential measurements using the Delsa™ Nano C Particle Analyzer (Beckman Coulter, Inc.). All measurements were made at least in triplicate. The morphology of the two different nanocrystals was observed by TEM (H-7000, Hitachi, Japan). One droplet of the nanocrystals suspension was placed on the 200-mesh copper grid and then negatively stained with 2% phosphotungstic acid for 30 The thermal properties of the lyophilized powder samples were investigated with a DSC-41 apparatus (Shimadzu, Japan). The scanning temperature for each lyophilized powder sample was set from 25 to 400 The crystalline state of the samples, including the drug, the excipients, the physical mixtures, cryoprotector and freeze-dried powders were performed with an X-ray diffractometer (Digaku, Japan). XRPD was carried out in symmetrical reflection mode using Cu Ka line as the source of radiation and the wavelength was set at 1.5405 As the low solubility of RD, common HPLC cannot detect its saturated concentration in water. So the liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry assay was necessary to be used. The Agilent 1100 system (PaloAlto, CA, USA) was equipped with a vacuum degasser unit, a binary pump and an autosampler. The HPLC system was coupled to an API 4000 quadrupole mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystem Sciex, Canada) via a TurbolonSpray ionization (ESI) interface. Telmisartan ( Working solution of RD (1, 5, 25, 50, 100, and 250 HPLC analysis of RD was performed on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system (Agilent, USA) with a variable wavelength UV detector and an autosampler system. The detection wavelength was set at 210 One of the goals to make nanocrystal suspension is raising the drug solubility. To confirm the change of the solubility between the pure RD and the nanosizing drug, a magnetic stirrer (RCT Basic, IKA, Staufen, Germany) was used. The physical mixture powder was used as reference. Samples containing equivalent RD (10 As the dissolution of the drug has an influence on the bioavailability, the dissolution behaviors of the RD suspension dried powders in vitro were conducted below. Powders containing equivalent of RD (10 Different types and concentrations of surfactants and polymers were designed to screen for the optimal formulation which could have long term stability. The polymer screening was the content of the PVP K30 and the HPMC and the surfactant screening was the content of the F68 and lecithin. The addition of the adjuvant is necessary for the stability of the nanoparticles. However, the excess of the surfactants and polymers may cause side effects (such as anaphylactic response and irritability), so the optimal formulation is necessary. The particle size, zeta potential and stability were all taken into consideration to get the optimal prescription. After single-factor test, we found lecithin was not suitable as a surfactant. In this study, 12 formulations were tried in the EPAS process as shown in Formula 3 mentioned in Section  The morphologies of the two nanosuspensions prepared by two methods were examined by TEM. The morphological characterization of them was shown in After the two methods, DSC study was carried out. DSC is commonly used to find out the differences in crystalline state for the physical or chemical changes during the preparation process. As shown in XRPD was further studied for examining the changes of RD crystalline state. The crystalline form is a key factor to influence the drug solubility. An enhancement of solubility may be caused by changing to a more amorphous crystalline state. Amorphous nature with no intense peaks was got in other nanocrystal experiment ( Combined the DSC and XRPD studies, we can conclude the crystallinity was preserved during the two methods. The increased solubility benefits from the small particle size instead of the changing crystalline state. With the help of LC–MS, the equation of the calibration curve was as follows: In order to confirm whether the rate of dissolution of RD was improved, the drug release study in vitro was carried out. The dissolution studies of physical mixture powder, NC-A, NC-B were compared with pure RD in In the figure we can see the dissolution rate was significantly improved after preparing nanocrystal powders. F68 is a kind of surfactant which can help indissolvable drug improve its solubility. So the physical mixture can release more and faster than pure RD. Compared with the NC-A and NC-B, the effect of the surfactant is very limited. After the first minute, more than 90% RD can be released in NC-A and NC-B. However, in the time point of 24 This is an experiment designed for a practical problem in developing a new drug. And we hope to solve a series of problems about drugs with poor solubility in a systematic way. In this study, uniform design was adopted for high efficiency. The content of the stabilizers and operation parameters of the microfluidiser were screened on the basis of TEM, size distribution and zeta potential. An optimized recipe was got and the solubility of RD was greatly improved. Two different methods were used in the research to prepare the nanocrystal suspension. We first employed emulsification process (bottom-up method) to get the ideal NC-A powder. Then we used the same prescription with microfluidiser (top-down method). After screening the pressure and cycles, desirable NC-B powder was obtained. Two methods were separately carried out in this experiment. Combining the two methods could be tried for a further study. And the two kinds of nanocrystal powder would be injected into the animals’ body for tissue distribution and pharmacokinetics study soon. Two kinds of nanocrystal freeze-dried powder were successfully prepared and the physicochemical properties were systematically studied. We found NC-A was more soluble than NC-B for the smaller particle size and both of them could release more than 90% in 1 RD was found in the year 2004 and it was proved to have antifungal activities and reversal effects on multidrug resistance. However, its development was limited by the poor solubility. In this experiment, we succeeded in improving its solubility and dissolution rate. Many new chemical entities were abandoned for its low solubility. So raising solubility with the pharmaceutical knowledge instead of using organic solvents such as DMSO will help medicinal chemistry and natural pharmaceutical chemistry complete their jobs. It will benefit for the whole pharmacy development. For the abundant BSC class II new chemical entities, a systematical study appears to be essential and nanocrystal presenting a simple approach to tackle the problem must have a bright future. This work was supported by the