Highly periodic ‘drumbeat’ long period (LP) earthquakes have been described from several andesitic and dacitic volcanoes, commonly accompanying incremental ascent and effusion of viscous magma. However, the processes controlling the occurrence and characteristics of drumbeat, and LP earthquakes more generally, remain contested. Here we use new quantitative tools to describe the emergence, evolution, and degradation of drumbeat LP seismicity at the andesitic Tungurahua volcano, Ecuador, in April 2015. The signals were recorded during an episode of minor explosive activity and ash emission, without lava effusion, and are the first to be reported at Tungurahua during the ongoing 17 yrs of eruption. Following four days of high levels of continuous and ‘pulsed’ tremor, highly-periodic LP earthquakes first appear on 10 April. Over the next four days, inter-event times and event amplitudes evolve through a series of step-wise transitions between stable behaviors, each involving a decrease in the degree of periodicity. Families of similar waveforms persist before, during, and after drumbeat activity, but the activity levels of different families change coincidentally with transitions in event rate, amplitude, and periodicity. A complex micro-seismicity ‘initiation’ sequence shows pulse-like and stepwise changes in inter-event times and amplitudes in the hours preceding the onset of drumbeat activity that indicate a partial de-coupling between event size and rate. The observations increase the phenomenology of drumbeat LP earthquakes, and suggest that at Tungurahua they result from gas flux and rapid depressurization controlled by shear failure of the margins of the ascending magma column.On 10 April 2015 a swarm of long period (LP) earthquakes with unusually regular and persistent inter-event times and amplitudes was recorded by the monitoring network of the Instituto Geofísico of the Escuela Politécnica Nacional (IGEPN) at Tungurahua volcano, Ecuador ( Volcanic seismicity allows insights into otherwise hidden physical processes controlling eruptive activity at volcanoes, and is a key indicator of the state of volcanic unrest ( The data from Tungurahua in April 2015 provide an important new opportunity to investigate the occurrence attributes of LP earthquakes and the origins of drumbeat seismicity. We present analyses of multi-parametric monitoring data, event statistics, and seismic waveforms, revealing a complex evolution of variably periodic seismicity unreported from other volcanoes, significantly broadening drumbeat phenomenology. We suggest an LP source mechanism involving injection and depressurization of pulses of ash-laden gas into a resonating fracture network, but where the timing of escape is regulated by local mechanical failure of the margins of the ascending magma column. First we summarize current of understanding of the origin of LP seismicity and drumbeat earthquakes and introduce Tungurahua volcano. We then describe the data recorded by the geophysical and geochemical monitoring network of the IGEPN during April 2015, the nature of some of the recorded seismic waveforms, and detailed event occurrence statistics. Finally, we discuss possible interpretations of these data in terms of physical processes controlling earthquake generation, magma ascent, and gas flux at Tungurahua, and implications for related volcanic systems. LP earthquakes are characterized by energy concentrated between 1–5 Hz, emergent onsets, and extended coda often dominated by a restricted range of frequencies ( Shallow LP earthquakes at Galeras volcano have been interpreted as resulting from the release of a pulse of pressurized gas from the magma column, dilating and exciting cracks in an andesite dome ( Earthquake interactions and triggering mean that most tectonic earthquakes are clustered in time ( The 2004–2008 eruption of a de-gassed lava spine at the dacitic Mount St Helens was accompanied by large numbers of highly periodic LP and hybrid earthquakes (  Tungurahua is a 5,023 m high stratovolcano located in the Eastern Cordillera of the Andes of Ecuador. Historically it is one of the most active volcanoes in the northern Andes ( Seismic, deformation, and gas flux data for Tungurahua are recorded by the monitoring network of the IGEPN. The seismicity was best recorded at the nearest 1 Hz short-period vertical component seismometer located at station ‘RETU’, at 3900 m elevation. Primary seismic data manipulation was undertaken using the ObsPy python library ( We define the ‘periodicity’ of earthquake occurrence times as the ratio between the mean and standard deviation of the inter-event times. For events that are randomly distributed in time, with constant average rate We use a two-stage clustering algorithm to identify families of repeating events ( A large increase in seismic activity and the onset of moderate ash emissions on 6 April 2015 marked the start of a new unrest episode ( Early in the unrest, from 6 April to 8 April, seismic activity is dominated by a continuum of tremor-like signals, ranging from near-continuous amplitude tremor ( Overall activity levels decreased early on 9 April, with lower RSAM values than observed since the start of unrest. After 24 h of this relative quiescence, an episode of highly periodic and persistent drumbeat earthquakes began at 05:14 on 10 April ( Close inspection of the seismic data from RETU reveals a complex sequence of even lower amplitude periodic LP earthquakes preceding the onset of the more prominent drumbeat activity ( 4805 LP earthquakes were manually picked from the data recorded at RETU between 6 April and 13 April. Root-mean-square amplitudes, inter-event times, and the periodicity of these events are shown in All 4805 picked events at RETU were cross-correlated to determine the extent and properties of waveform similarity. Cross-correlation values were calculated using waveforms of 25 s duration, filtered between 0.1 and 10 Hz. Many highly similar waveforms are observed throughout the unrest episode. Some pairs of events have cross-correlation values above 0.9, suggesting that persistent earthquake source locations are active for extended periods of time (likely within a few hundred meters or less ( Cluster analysis shows that 1789 (37%) events belong to a family of two events or more, and 1135 (24%) events belong to one of the 5 families containing 50 events or more ( The relation between LP earthquake periodicity and waveform similarity is explored in As detailed in Section A complex but systematic evolution of drumbeat inter-event times, amplitudes, and waveforms, between stable behaviors, involving: step-wise instantaneous increases in both amplitudes and event rate (e.g. at the start of Phase 1; coupled increases in amplitudes and decreases in event rate (e.g. during the transition from Phase 1 to Phase 2; pulse-like transient increases in amplitudes and rates, in both pulsed tremor and discrete earthquakes ( A stepwise breakdown in periodicity, coincident with changes in inter-event times and amplitudes, but without significant changes to earthquake waveforms ( Similar waveforms for earthquakes with significantly different amplitudes during periodic activity ( A continuum of behavior between discrete drumbeat LP earthquakes, periodic pulsed tremor, and continuous tremor ( Large changes in both the nature and amplitude of seismic activity with little change in the daily tilt rate ( Eruptive activity dominated by modest levels of continuous ash emission, with a few small explosions, and no lava effusion Considering the magma composition, absence of lava extrusion, and continuum between tremor and discrete LP events, the two processes most likely to be playing a significant role in the excitation mechanism for LP earthquakes at Tungurahua in April 2015 are: (1) the flux and depressurization of (ash-laden) gases (e.g. Periodic earthquake inter-event times are expected to result from a physical system consisting of: (1) a steady ‘loading’ rate, i.e. of stress or pressure accumulation; (2) a near-constant ‘failure’ strength at which the stress or pressure is released; and (3) a near-constant slip or pressure drop ( The complex correlation is also apparent at the onset of Phase 1, where average inter-event times decrease and average event amplitudes increase suddenly (within one inter-event time). In the context of the physics outlined above, this transition cannot be explained by an increase in either the loading rate or failure strength, but would require both to increase in tandem. Transient coupled increases in event rate and amplitude during drumbeat earthquakes and pulsed-tremor require similar systematic changes in both loading rate and failure strength over timescales of a few minutes. A shallowing of the source would result in an increased amplitude for the same energy release. However, the high similarity of waveforms rules out significant changes in source location. Changes in the radiation properties of the resonating system, e.g. magma crystallinity, gas content, or viscosity, could also change amplitudes ( Continuous and discrete LP signals share many characteristics during this episode. There is clear evidence for a transition from continuous tremor, through pulsed tremor, to drumbeat earthquakes, characterized by increasing event discretization. The transition involves the onset of individual events/pulses becoming more impulsive and shorter duration coda ( At Soufrière Hills, increasing rates of periodic LP earthquakes merge to form continuous LP tremor ( In the case of a gas-driven excitation process, tremor could result from excitation through persistent gas flux, involving turbulent or choked flow ( LP earthquakes at Tungurahua in April 2015 reveal considerable complexity and characteristics that we feel cannot be readily explained by a simple LP generation model based on either: (a) magma ascent with repeated loading, shear failure, and slip along column margins (e.g. In April 2015, steadily increasing radial tilt at RETU indicates likely magma ascent ( At times of high gas flux, particularly early in the episode, gas pressure is sufficiently high to maintain a continuous pathway, but with a flux modulated by small stress changes through each increment of magma ascent, giving rise to pulsed tremor. As gas pressure falls, or perhaps some cracks become blocked with ash ( The frequency content and quality factors of LP waveforms can be used to constrain physical characteristics of the resonator element of the source mechanism ( In this conceptual model, earthquake size is controlled by the gas flux and pressure drop, whereas the timing is controlled by the shear stress and strength at the column margins. Constant rates of magma ascent and gas accumulation will result in constant rates of increase in shear stress and gas pressure. If margin failure strength and co-event gas escape also remain constant, LP earthquakes will be periodic and equal amplitude. Small variations in these parameters will result in quasi-periodic earthquakes and a (narrow) range of amplitudes. An increase in the effective strength of the conduit margin, or a slowing of magma ascent, will result in longer inter-event times, allowing time for greater gas pressure increase, and hence larger amplitudes. Inter-event times and amplitudes can have a higher degree of independence than a magma failure or gas model alone, as shear stress is not directly dependent on gas pressure, allowing for the varied statistical relations we observe. Rather than a purely passive role, if the upward flow of gas is restricted by reduced permeability at or close to the high strength horizon, the increasing gas pressure between drumbeat earthquakes may influence the loading and failure cycles at the column margins, potentially synchronizing variations in gas pressure with margin shear stress, and enhancing the periodicity and repeatability of the process. Partly synchronized fluctuations in gas pressure and shear-stress may help explain coupled increases in event amplitude and rate during pulsed tremor activity, and during the initiation of drumbeat activity ( The evolution in periodicity, waveform similarity, and amplitudes during drumbeat activity suggest a progressive degradation of the coupled magma ascent-gas flux system. This could result from the increased load due to the gradual ascent of the magma column, changes in the properties of the gas storage zone, the properties of the column margin interface ( The absence of prolonged, highly periodic drumbeat LP seismicity from the previous 15 yrs of eruption suggests that some exceptional conditions are required, despite in April 2015. Eruptive activity, other aspects of LP earthquake characteristics and rates, RSAM, gas flux, and deformation signals, were all unremarkable during this episode, and were well within the range of behaviors previously observed. The only unusual factor was the long quiescence period since the preceding significant explosive episode in October 2014. Therefore, it is likely that this quiescence played some role in establishing the physical conditions necessary for drumbeat activity, perhaps through extended healing of the magma column margins, or vertical growth of a plug due to cooling and crystallization ( The unrest episode at Tungurahua in April 2015 provides valuable new observations of highly-periodic LP seismic activity, and offers important insights into possible LP earthquake source mechanisms and conduit processes. Drumbeat LP seismicity occurred without viscous dome formation, or portending a large eruption. Waveform characteristics show a gradual transition from continuous tremor to distinct LP events, controlled by an increased discretization of individual pulses rather than event rate changes. Inter-event times, amplitudes, and waveform-similarity metrics allow quantitative analysis of changes in activity through the episode, and comparisons with analogous activity at other volcanoes. These statistics reveal a range of both step-wise and ‘pulsed’ changes in inter-event times, with coupled changes in amplitude and periodicity. A series of activation steps precede the onset of the most highly-periodic drumbeat activity, with a progressive, stepwise, breakdown in periodicity over the following days and coincident with changes in inter-event times and amplitudes. Distinguishing between models for the source of LP earthquakes is challenging. We feel that the balance of evidence available supports a two phase model for drumbeat seismicity for this episode, with earthquake excitation by gas flux and depressurization into a resonating crack network, but facilitated by the formation of transient fracture pathways during incremental ascent of the magma column. At other times, incremental magma ascent may occur without detectable LP earthquake activity if gas flux is low, or not trapped within the column. AFB was funded by a Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.