This paper presents the impacts of supercritical CO2 transport in high temperature porous media with oversaturated fines. The latter phenomenon (indicates oversaturated fines) is in which the lift force of the fine particle over pore surface is greater than the gravitational and electrostatic forces combined, where the fines are released from the pore surfaces and transport along with the permeating fluid as colloidal-suspension flow. During transport, the fines are captured in the pore-throats and thereby deteriorating the permeability and decreasing fluid recovery as well. Therefore, three sets of coreflood tests have been conducted to examine the fines mobilization in porous media during supercritical CO2 transport and the results have been compared with the results obtained from the subcritical CO2 flow. Produced suspension-colloids have been sent for microstructural analysis and its outcomes, supported the experimental results. Statistical modelling and literature data were employed and compared for model validation, which revealed high agreement.B. Kanimozhi: Experimental Setup and Work, Model Prediction, Calculation, S.Mahalingam: Experimental Setup and Work, and Supervision, Venkat Pranesh: Experimental Design and Work, Data Analysis, Wrote the Manuscript, R. Kesavakumar: Statistical Modelling and Supervision, S. Senthil: Experimental Setup and Work, SEM Interpretation, S. Ravikumar: Sandstone Rock Core and Clay Minerals Characterization, Shanthi Pradeep: SEM Interpretation and Sample Physical Properties Examination, Sandhya Senthil: Data Evaluation, Calculation and Analysis, Raji Murugan: Data Evaluation, Calculation and Analysis The phenomenon of colloidal-suspension flows and fines migration in porous materials is a common and frequent event in the petroleum, chemical, geothermal, agricultural, metallurgical, and water resource industries. Specifically, during the process of oil and gas recovery, water production from aquifers, thermal energy extraction and storage, waste management, microfiltration, crop irrigation, mineral processing etc., ( Suspended fines in the CO If the lift and drag forces are greater than gravitational and electrostatic forces then it is called oversaturated fines. This is the condition for fines detachment and migration. This can be mathematically represented below: If the gravitational and electrostatic forces are greater than lift and drag forces then it is called undersaturated fines. This is the condition for fines attachment and retention. This can be mathematically represented below: The permeability is declined under the condition of oversaturated fines. These are characterized by pore-throat capture, plugging, clogging, binding (clustering), and bridging. Where the fluid transport in the pore channel has been completely restricted. This phenomenon is shown schematically in  Also,   There are frequent reports on fines migration in porous media during CO  This section presents the materials and methods that were employed in this paper. Actually, Three sets of coreflood flow test were performed at the temperatures 120 °C (Subcritical, Sb–C), 220 °C (Supercritical, Sc–C), and 240 °C (Supercritical, Sc–C). Actually, the supercritical carbon dioxide flow performance and its impact on porous sandstone core permeability at a higher reservoir temperature was compared with the performance of the subcritical flow.   The procedure of this coreflood test is mentioned in the below points: Firstly, CO This same procedure is repeated for the other two sets of rock core temperature by supercritical CO Then, samples in the effluent were dried and sent to microstructural tests for examining the kaolinite fine particle structures that has potentially blocked/damaged the permeability of the porous sandstone rock core and gas mobilization decrease as well. Furthermore, statistical modelling was performed along with a literature data for model validation. Please note that the points c) and d) are not associated with coreflood test and they are separately executed in field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) and statistical package for social science (SPSS).  Moreover, it can be seen from   This subsection presents the fines concentration increase with respect to pore volume injection (PVI) and porous rock permeability decline with respect to injection time. Fines concentration and permeability decline are directly proportional, because higher fines concentration decreases the permeability level in the porous rock ( It can be seen from It can be seen from  The occurrence of plugging and binding is due to the formation of internal cake and pore-bridging between the rock grains or pore-throat. But, clogging also occurs near the pore-throat area, but its formation mechanism in the porous media is quite different. In general, fines clogging under suspension flow occurs in the porous media as a result agglomeration and flocculation (    Initially, both supercritical and subcritical CO First of all, there is a high level of CO The pressure in the porous sandstone media declined for increasing rate of pore volume injection and also, deterioration of the gas discharge rate was observed. Mainly this behaviour is attributed to the fines plugging, clogging, and especially, due to the platelet geometry that obstructed the pore-throat of the porous media and ultimately, damaged the permeability. It was observed from the microstructural images that fines tend to have a platelet structure and the fines have undergone binding, plugging, and clogging. These are an essential properties of fine particles in order to barricade the pore-throat and decline the permeability of the porous materials. Furthermore, the experimental model was tested against the statistical and literature models, which showed good accord. On the whole, this paper has elucidated and demonstrated the importance of super and sub-critical CO The corresponding author thank Mr. Vivek Thamizhmani, Petroleum Consultant and Assistant Professor at VISTAS, Chennai, TN, India for fruitful discussions on supercritical CO The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at