The decay of a wide range of organic monomers (short-chain volatile fatty acids (VFA’s), amino acids, glucose and a pyrimidine) was studied in marine sediments using experimental plug flow-through reactors. The reactions were followed in the presence and absence of 10mM SO4
                     2−. Degradation stoichiometry of individual monomers (inflow concentration of 6mM organic C) was traced by measuring organic (VFA’s, amino acids) and inorganic (CO2, NH4
                     +, SO4
                     2−) compounds in the outflow. Fermentation of amino acids was efficient and complete during passage through anoxic sediment reactors. Aliphatic amino acids (alanine, serine and glutamate) were primarily recovered as CO2 (24–34%), formate (3–22%) and acetate (41–83%), whereas only ∼1/3 of the aromatic amino acid (tyrosine) was recovered as CO2 (13%) and acetate (20%). Fermentation of glucose and cytosine was also efficient (78–86%) with CO2 (30–35%), formate (3%) and acetate (28–33%) as the primary products. Fermentation of VFA’s (acetate, propionate and butyrate), on the other hand, appeared to be product inhibited. The presence of SO4
                     2− markedly stimulated VFA degradation (29–45% efficiency), and these compounds were recovered as CO2 (17% for butyrate to 100% for acetate) and acetate (51% and 82% for propionate and butyrate, respectively). When reaction stoichiometry during fermentation is compared with compound depletion during sulfate reduction, the higher proportion CO2 recovery is consistent with lower acetate and formate accumulation. Our results therefore suggest that fermentation reactions mediate the initial degradation of added organic compounds, even during active sulfate reduction. Fermentative degradation stoichiometry also suggested significant H2 production, and >50% of sulfate reduction appeared to be fuelled by H2. Furthermore, our results suggest that fermentation was the primary deamination step during degradation of the amino acids and cytosine.The decay of organic matter in anoxic marine sediments is accomplished by mutualistic microbial consortia, where syntrophic interactions between different types of bacteria mediate the complete degradation of organic matter to CO Dissolved amino acids (DAA) are released to sediment porewater following hydrolysis of proteinaceous materials, while volatile fatty acids (VFA) are released during fermentation of a multitude of compounds ( This study investigates the decay rate and stoichiometry of organic monomers (VFA’s, glucose, amino acids and nucleotides) through a series of experiments using anoxic flow-through reactors ( Sediment was collected in 4.7 The freshly collected sediment cores were defaunated in the laboratory by purging the overlying water with N The reactors consisted of 4.7 The reaction rate ( A series of flow-through reactor experiments (Exp 1–10) were conducted with addition of various analytical grade organic solutes to the reservoir. The chosen organic compounds covered the most common monomers occurring in living organisms ( Exp 1 was performed to test different sediment types and to calibrate the solute and nutrient concentrations for the subsequent experiments. Acetate was chosen as a test compound to detect the response of microbial processes when water passed through reactors packed with either Fællesstrand or Kærby Fed sediment. Three replicate reactors were established for each sediment type. Initially, the reservoirs contained artificial seawater (salinity of 10) with 10 Based on Exp 1, it was decided that subsequent experiments should be conducted with Kærby Fed sediment and that all organic solutes should be added at a concentration of 6 Inflow solution from reservoirs ( Samples for TCO To test for any effect of organic additions on bacterial growth, initial and final reactor sediment in Exp 2–10 were enumerated for bacterial populations by the direct DAPI count approach of Background production (±SE, Despite the 6.5-year time interval between the first and last experiment, the background TCO Degradation of fatty acids in Exp 2–4 is best exemplified by acetate ( The glucose degradation pattern (Exp 5) in the presence of SR was similar to that of the larger fatty acids, except for up to threefold faster rates ( Degradation of non-aromatic amino acids (Exp 6–8) is exemplified by serine ( Degradation of the aromatic amino acid tyrosine in the presence of SO The cytosine (Exp 10) degradation pattern was different than the other tested compounds ( There was generally a good agreement between compound loss and sum of products for fatty acids and non-aromatic amino acids ( NH Based on the consumption of SO Bacterial abundance varied from 2.7 The supply of 0.5 Abrupt changes in reservoir composition induce transient state reactions in flow-through reactors until microbial populations adapt their enzyme production or cell numbers ( Since reaction chambers were initially maintained anoxic with surplus SO Fermentation of propionate (Exp 3) and butyrate (Exp 4) was hampered as indicated by a compound loss as low as 2–3%. The low reactions were probably caused by product inhibition following H Glucose fermentation (Exp 5), on the other hand, provided substantial generation of TCO Fermentation of the amino acids alanine (Exp 6), serine (Exp 7), glutamate (Exp 8) and tyrosine (Exp 9) was efficient and resulted in ∼100% compound transformation to VFA and TCO Since nucleotides account for up to 25% of bacterial biomass ( H It is generally assumed that acetate and H The commonly observed ∼2:1 C:S stoichiometry of carbon mineralization in sulfate reducing marine sediments suggests that electron transfer occurs directly from organic C to SO We observed >80% deamination of amino acids, and an equivalent NH Maximum rates of SR in the examined Kærby Fed sediment are within a range of 0.3–1.2 Coastal marine sediments receive organic matter from a variety of sources, and its reactivity towards anaerobic fermentation and respiration is determined by the relative content of e.g. carbohydrates, lipids and proteins ( We thank Birthe Christensen and the late Hanne Brandt for technical assistance during the experimental work and chemical analysis. T.V. was supported by the EU-project Thresholds, Contract No. 003933 and E.K. was supported by Grant #