Osteoporosis is a skeletal disease characterized by reduced bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone that results in an increased susceptibility to fractures. Osteoporotic fractures are highly prevalent in older persons and are associated with higher morbidity and mortality, reduced quality of life, disability and institutionalization. Osteoporosis and fracture risk are not routinely assessed in older persons with most people at high risk being underdiagnosed and undertreated. This chapter is devoted to the description of the mechanisms of osteoporosis in older persons as well as the methods to identify patients at high risk of fractures. In addition, evidence-based interventions for fracture prevention will be reviewed, including present and future therapeutic approaches.Osteoporosis is a skeletal disease characterized by reduced bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone that results in an increased susceptibility to fractures. As the global population ages, the number of older adults living with osteoporosis will increase. Osteoporotic fractures are highly prevalent in older persons and are associated with higher morbidity and mortality, reduced quality of life, disability and institutionalization. Osteoporosis is potentially preventable and treatable; however, osteoporosis and fracture risk are not routinely assessed in older persons with most people at high risk being underdiagnosed and undertreated. To close the gap between diagnosis and treatment, and to improve knowledge on the best management for individuals with this condition, here we address the epidemiological, pathophysiological and management aspects of osteoporosis in older persons. Osteopenia and osteoporosis are well-described as conditions characterized by reduced density and quality of bone, which leads to brittle and weak bones, and a subsequent increase in fracture risk, particularly of the hip, spine and wrist ( Osteopenia and osteoporosis are associated with aging. There is a normal age-related bone loss of about 0.5%/year after the third decade of life. In a proportion of older persons (∼ Appropriate bone turnover is the consequence of the synchronic resorption of low-quality bone by the osteoclasts followed by new bone formation by the osteoblasts ( Bone formation is conducted by the osteoblasts, which are cells of mesenchymal origin with strong capacity to produce unmineralized matrix while also facilitating its mineralization. After completing their bone forming activity at one specific bone multicellular unit, the osteoblasts could become lining cells, which keep their bone forming capacity, could differentiate into osteocytes and become embedded within the matrix, or die by apoptosis. The predominance of one of these potential cell paths will determine healthy or unhealthy bone turnover ( The osteocytes are the most abundant cells in the bone matrix, which reside in small pockets within the mineralized bone matrix called lacunae. After embedding within the matrix, osteoblasts change their phenotype and become “neuron-like” cells that send their dendritic processes (ranging from 40 to 100 per cell) through canaliculi to develop highly interconnected networks, which are used for exchange of nutrients and waste through gap junctions. Until recently, the osteocytes were considered as passive players in the bone turnover process, however, recent advances in the understanding of osteocyte biology have demonstrated that osteocytes are major regulators of turnover via the secretion of pro-osteoclastogenic factors, such as receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-Β ligand (RANKL), and important regulators of osteoblastogenesis such as sclerostin (inhibitor) or Dickkopf WNT Signaling Pathway Inhibitor 1 (stimulator) ( As the body ages, fat infiltrates bone. This process was formerly thought to be an age-related phenomenon and its pathophysiological implications were under-recognized. Lipotoxicity is the process by which body fat secretes inflammatory cytokines that have a negative impact on the growth and function of surrounding and distant tissues ( The clinically significant result of osteoporosis is fracture. Osteoporosis is asymptomatic until the point of fracture and many adults are not diagnosed with osteoporosis until after a fracture, however osteoporosis may precede the fracture for years or decades ( Several specific causes of reduced bone mass are recognized as either affecting bone directly (through changes in bone cells or matrix composition) or indirectly (by increasing endogenous or ectopic hormone production) ( The history and physical examination are an integral component of assessing a patient for osteoporosis. The information gathered by the history and physical examination should be combined with targeted investigations to assist in calculating fracture risk and therefore guide management decisions. A key component of the assessment includes a thorough falls history given fracture is the clinical endpoint of osteoporosis and falls are one of the greatest risk factors for fracture. A history of a previous fracture carries the most significant risk for future fracture and similarly, a prior history of falls carries the most significant risk for future falls ( BMD assessment is the most important investigation for making the diagnosis of osteoporosis. BMD is defined as the amount of bone per unit volume, or the amount of bone per unit area ( BMD can be measured using a variety of diagnostic tools. The most commonly used method is DXA ( Women ≥ Younger postmenopausal women and women in menopausal transition; Men aged 50–69 Adults who have a fracture at, or after the age of 50 Adults with a condition (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis) or taking medications (e.g., glucocorticoids > The presence of a minimal trauma vertebral fracture of > Bone turnover markers (BTMs) are metabolites that appear in the serum that reflect the metabolic activity of bone. BTMs are comprised of resorption and formation markers. Resorption markers include serum C- and urinary N-terminal telopeptides of type 1 collagen (CTX and NTX). Formation markers include serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BSAP), osteocalcin (OC), and aminoterminal propeptide of type I collagen (PINP). There is increasing evidence that BTMs may be useful in fracture risk determination, however, the role of BTMs in prediction of fracture healing or adherence to medications remains uncertain ( The history, physical examination and assessment of BMD should be combined to determine individual risk of fracture and to assist in management decisions. There are a variety of fracture risk calculation tools available, however few have been validated with population-based studies (    Osteoporosis is potentially preventable in the majority of adults, with multiple treatment guidelines available in the literature. Here we summarize some of the most effective evidence-based interventions to treat osteoporosis and to prevent minimal trauma fractures. Calcium plays an imperative role in normal growth and maintenance of bone and is a dynamic store of intra- and extra-cellular calcium pools ( There are varying needs in dietary intake of calcium across different life stages, and recommendations for daily calcium intake vary between countries; however, The recommended daily consumption of calcium (from foods) can be achieved by consuming 3–5 serves daily of calcium rich foods. When the calcium Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) cannot be achieved by individuals through diet alone, calcium supplements are indicated. In these circumstances, Osteoporosis Australia recommends a daily supplement of 500–600 In older-community based individuals and residents of aged-care facilities, reducing falls risk is an imperative, with the end-goal being to reduce both falls and fractures. In these settings, it is universally recommended that a combination of vitamin D and calcium supplementation be optimized in all residents of aged-care facilities ( Vitamin D is important for optimal calcium absorption and bone formation and assists in the regulation of calcium levels. The key source of vitamin D is ascertained from sunlight exposure to the skin: notably, exposure to ultraviolet B (UVB) light. Sun exposure should be outdoors, as UVB transmission is unlikely to occur through normal clear windows. Those at highest risk vitamin D deficiency are older or housebound persons, particularly residents of aged-care facilities, individuals with naturally darker skin, those that avoid the sun including persons whose bodies are covered for cultural or religious reasons, babies of vitamin D deficient mothers, and individuals affected by medical conditions that affect the absorption or processing of vitamin D ( Adequate 25(OH)D concentration is > Age-specific requirements for physical activity (in terms of types, duration, intensity, regularity) have been proposed to maximize bone health, which may also have a beneficial effect on muscle mass and function ( The goal of pharmacological therapy for osteoporosis is to reduce fracture risk. Given the large burden of osteoporosis globally and the aging population, there has been significant focus on research and development of preventative treatments for osteoporosis in recent decades. The mechanisms by which approved pharmacological agents either increase bone mass, or reduce loss of bone mass, is highly varied. Across the globe, the indications, availability and regulatory approval of pharmacological agents is variable. The NOF recommend that pharmacological therapy should be initiated in adults, in addition to the non-pharmacological measures outlined above, meeting any of the following criteria ( Minimal trauma vertebral or hip fracture; Hip or lumbar spine T-score Low bone mass and a FRAX® 10-year fracture risk (adapted to the US) of the hip ≥  Age, low socioeconomic status and/or degree of functional dependence could be barriers to initiation of pharmacological therapy for osteoporosis. Vitamin D and calcium, whilst important components of osteoporosis treatment, are insufficient on their own to treat osteoporosis. Treatment of osteoporosis in the “oldest old” may have more rapid efficacy than in younger patients (  Associated with minimal trauma at most; That starts at lateral cortex and is mostly transverse, although it may become oblique; No or minimal comminution; Complete AFF produce a medial spike, incomplete affect lateral cortex only; Lateral cortex has localized reaction result in “beaking” or “flaring.” In the mid-2000s, the advent of the association of bisphosphates with AFFs and subsequent media-reporting saw a 50% decline in bisphosphonate prescribing in the United states between 2008 and 2012 ( The prevalence of ONJ is very low, estimated to occur in up to 0.04% of patients who have used anti-resorptive therapies. ONJ is defined as: Current or past use of anti-resorptive agents; Exposure of the jaw bone or intraoral fistula persisting for more than 8 weeks; and No history of head and neck radiotherapy. The incidence of ONJ increases with duration of treatment beyond 4 years ( The effect of bisphosphonates on osteoclast inhibition may persist for years after treatment cessation. In those treated for 5 years with bisphosphonate, the antifracture efficacy may persist for up to 10 Despite advances in osteoporosis knowledge, screening, diagnosis and treatment, under-treatment is a significant problem globally. Fewer than 10% of women with an osteoporotic fracture receive the appropriate investigation, therapy and follow up ( A monoclonal antibody targeting sclerostin, Romosozumab, demonstrated significantly lower rate of fracture in osteoporosis women in Phase III trials ( Despite the high prevalence of osteoporosis and fragility fractures in older persons, only a significant minority of patients at high risk are being assessed or treated. Clinicians should be aware of the catastrophic consequences of neglecting fracture risk assessment and osteoporosis treatment in high-risk patients. Therefore a proactive approach is recommended, including the use of risk identification tools, the regular use of BMD testing, and the design of a comprehensive falls and fracture prevention plan in every patient identified as having a high risk of fractures.