This study investigated seed germination of Crataegus pseudoheterophylla Pojark using different combinations of growth promoting rhizobacteria and stratification regimes. The PGPR treatments were Azotobacter chroococcum 12, Azospirillum lipoferum OF, Pseudomonas fluorescens 169, Bacillus subtilis FzB24 and combinations (co-inoculation) using two or all PGPR inoculants. The control was no inoculation followed by stratification. Temperature regulation in the stratification regime was 1 month at the constant temperature of 23°C, then 3 months at 4°C. The alternate temperature regime was 1 month at 4°C, then 2 weeks at 23°C followed by 1 month at 4°C, then 2 weeks at 23°C, then 1 month at 4°C. The effects of these treatments were evaluated and results showed that treatments of PGPR inoculation stimulated germination in terms of percentage of seed germination, speed of germination and mean germination time, and effect was significant at (p
                     <0.05). Higher percentages of seed germination (18.33%) and speed of germination (4.82 number/day) were recorded for co-inoculated seeds by the combination of all bacterial inoculants and the alternate temperature stratification regime. Results showed a higher percentage of seed germination using alternate temperature stratification than for the constant temperature stratification regime. These results suggest that PGPRs in combination were effective in terms of promoting germination of C. pseudoheterophylla seeds.The genus hawthorn ( Hawthorn species are grown worldwide as edible fruit and for medicinal and ornamental purposes as well as erosion control practice. Hawthorn has dense branches and thorns; it is an important plant for wildlife and is a good nesting site for birds. Characteristics of this genus include abilities to survive in poor soil, promote soil conservation, and adapt to drought ( Hawthorn seeds have orthodox storage behavior ( One method used to break seed dormancy and promote germination is microbial inoculation of the seeds themselves or applied to the germination medium. Stratification is another method used to break dormancy (  Although, research has reported dormancy mechanisms of Fully ripe fruits of the Pulp was removed by wet maceration for tests reported in the present study. Nutlets were extracted from fruit and then seed viability was examined by the tetrazolium test ( Seeds with endocarp were soaked in running water for 48 PGPRs: For inoculation, seeds were rolled into bacterial suspension and a control (without bacteria) treatment, Stratification: Seeds were stratified by 3 stratification regimes: (1) non-stratified regime, (2) constant temperature stratification regime (1 month at 23 PGPRs The bacterial inoculums used in these tests were indigenous strains to Iran obtained from the microbial collection of the soil microbiology department of Soil and Water Research Institute (SWRI). They were isolated from rhizosphere of maize and wheat ( Tests were conducted according to a completely randomized design in a factorial arrangement with 3 replications and 50 seeds in each replication. Seed stratification was done in a mixed medium of moist sand:perlite:cocopeat (2:1:1) in polyethylene bags (8 After stratification, the polyethylene plastic bags containing seeds were transferred to a growth chamber with air circulation for germination. Germinated seed were counted at 3-day intervals for 60 days from the beginning of emergence of cotyledon on the soil surface. Final germination percentage was calculated when no further germination had taken place for several days. Germination tests were terminated after 10 months. A tetrazolium test for non-germinated seeds in bacteria treatments showed that all non-germinated seeds were dead. Evaluations for percentage of germination (PG), mean germination time (MGT) and germination speed (SP) were calculated according to Eqs. Distribution was tested for normality by Kolmogorov–Smirnov and all data were subjected to arc sine (√ Results showed that the effect of PGPR inoculation treatment was significant ( Higher percentages were recorded for seed germination (18.33%) and speed of germination (4.82 The highest percentages for germination and speed were obtained using the combination of all bacterial inoculants (5.7% and 0.7 Results showed that application of tested bacterium individually did not affect germination, but integrated applications led to a significant increase in evaluations for percentage and speed of germination ( Mean germination time in The co-inoculants and combinations of bacteria enhance the uptake of nutrients compared to individual forms of bacterium. Bacterial inoculation in combination using all four combinations of inocula at constant temperature stratification showed a lower mean germination time (8.7 d). In the tested PGPR strains, this can be attributed to increased hormone synthesis (IAA), siderophore production and solubilization of phosphorus. IAA is able to stimulate the production of ethylene (  Stratification had a significant effect on evaluations for percentage of germination and speed of germination for No statistical difference in terms of mean germination time was found between stratification treatments and the control ( Stratification stimulates structural GA Evaluations for seed germination percentage for stratification in the alternate temperature regime were higher at constant temperature (  In the current study, seeds of