A highly reproducible, low resource requiring disease severity bioassay for testing suppression of Pythium damping-off in sugar beet caused by Pythium ultimum in soil is described. Changing of soil characteristics and the native microflora are avoided and standardization of the assay is carried out by testing infested soils on evenly germinating plants growing in an inert medium. The disease suppressiveness of the test soils is compared to standard, conducive soil, and quantified by calculation of symptoms on the hypocotyls. The reliability of the assay was investigated in nine well characterised organically or conventionally managed soils. In the standard, conducive soil it was clearly demonstrated that disease expression is correlated with available nutrient supply (oatmeal). Addition of oospores to the test soil had no effect on disease severity and the role of inoculum level is discussed. There was a clear tendency for low clay content to result in higher disease suppression. Partial sterilisation of the selected soils by γ-irradiation and steaming at 54°C indicated that suppression was of microbial origin. Although texture may play a role in suppressiveness no clear effect, related to any management practice, was found. Tests on 64 soils confirmed that sandy soils tend to be more suppressive than clayey soils.Inhibition of spore germination in soils may be due to competition from other micro-organisms or toxic compounds ( Management practices, especially tillage and crop rotation, have been shown to influence the epidemiology of The objectives of this study were: (1) to develop a highly reproducible, low resource requiring disease severity bioassay for testing suppression of The soils were chosen on the basis of the soil texture. The disease severity bioassay was developed in two steps: first, the influence of inoculum density and nutrients on disease development was investigated then, second, the reproducibility of the bioassay to measure suppressiveness was tested using nine different soils. Finally, the disease severity bioassay was carried out on 64 test soils. Designations of soil samples in this study refer to a fertility survey of organically and conventionally cultivated soils in Denmark ( Nine soils from seven different farms were selected for development of the plant bioassay and for use in the detailed studies, as these soils were well characterised with respect to physical and chemical characteristics ( The system of soil sampling is described by Inoculum consisting of oospores of Sugar beet ( The bioassays were performed in plastic pots ( Sieved soil was thoroughly mixed with infested peat-PCB inoculum and oatmeal added as a nutrient (details below). A layer of this soil/inoculum/oatmeal mixture was added to each pot above the vermiculite (30 Each treatment was replicated five times and randomised in trays covered with plastic and returned to the growth room for a further 8 days at 15 Disease was assessed on the hypocotyl on a scale from 0 to 3, where 0 is without symptoms, 1 some brown spots on the hypocotyl, 2 the brown ring around the hypocotyl, plants not collapsed or wilted, and 3 is the severe brown ring around the hypocotyl, plants collapsed, wilted, dying or dead. A disease index (DI) was calculated on the basis of the means of scores of the 10 plants. Disease in a test soil relative to disease in the control soil was calculated as: To investigate the influence of nutrient supply and inoculum density on disease severity four different levels of oatmeal were added (0, 0.0008, 0.0042, 0.0083 The DI was scored as described previously and the fresh weight of the plants determined. The plant bioassay was performed as outlined above. One inoculum level: 500 oospores per g soil dry weight, and two levels of oatmeal: 0.0033 and 0.0083 Finally, 64 soils were tested once using two levels of oatmeal as described for the nine soils, using the same reference soil, 1. The fungistasis of soils 1 and 2 was measured as the percentage germination of encysted Thirty gram of freshly sieved test soil was placed in a petri-dish and 7 Filters bearing cysts were pressed onto the surface of the soil–water mixture in intimate contact and incubated for 1.5 The fungistasis effect was calculated as the number of germinated cysts×100/total number of cysts. The experiment was repeated three times. Soil samples 4b and 7 were treated for 30 The data were analysed by the SAS system for personal computers ( Without enrichment the level of disease development was very low ( A conducive soil, 1 was used as the control. The DIs in this soil were consistent throughout all the tests with an average DI of 1.98±0.26. Suppressiveness of eight soils was investigated and their DI scored relative to this conducive soil was set to 100. Results from two experiments are presented in The suppressiveness of 64 soils was investigated and results are presented according to soil types and management system in Two soils, the standard highly conducive soil, and a moderately suppressive soil, were included in the fungistasis experiment ( Plate dilutions of soils 4b and 7, after steaming, gave bacterial counts of 10 Sterilisation by γ-irradiation resulted in loss of suppressiveness in both the soils ( The plant bioassay used in this study addressed the potential of the soil to suppress disease caused by The finding that the number of oospores of It was proposed by It has been suggested that the saprophyte:parasite ratio of Increasing amounts of organic matter are often correlated with increased suppressiveness ( In agreement with the findings of This work was carried out within the programme ‘Research on Organic Farming no. øko-93-1’, initiated and funded by the Danish Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries. Special thanks to Dr. Susanne Elmholt for supporting data of soil characteristics and specific discussions. Karin Olesen is gratefully acknowledged for skilful technical assistance.