In this study, we investigate the effect of magnetic field annealing on the magnetostriction and deflection properties of polycrystalline CoFe2O4 thin films grown on Si(1 0 0) substrates by pulsed laser deposition. Prior to the field-annealing process, both structural and magnetic properties of the CoFe2O4 films were optimized through controlling the oxygen pressures from 7 to 13.3 Pa. A good combination of saturation magnetization (195 emu/cm3) and coercivity (690 Oe) was obtained for the CoFe2O4 films grown at 9.0 Pa. These films when subjected to field-annealing demonstrated improved magnetostriction (91 micro-strain) and deflection (730 nm) properties, as compared to the conventionally annealed counterparts. The observed enhancement in the magnetostriction and deflection in the CoFe2O4 films is hypothesized to both domain wall rotation and movement facilitated by the field-annealing process.The intriguing characteristics such as large spin-orbit coupling that exists in cobalt ferrite (CFO) can lead to a dimensional change under an applied magnetic field, a phenomenon so-called magnetostriction Thin films of CFO were grown on 100-µm thick Si (1 0 0) substrates by PLD using excimer laser (KrF) with energy and wavelength of 250 mJ and 248 nm, respectively. The required CFO target with diameter of 25.4 mm and thickness of 10 mm was synthesized by conventional solid-state sintering route and the procedure is briefly described as follows. Precursors of Co The phase composition of both as-grown and annealed films was studied by a grazing incidence X-ray diffractometer (GIXRD, make: Rigaku) using a wavelength of 1.79 Å; while their thickness and the surface morphology were analyzed by means of field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Gemimi Supra 40). The magnetic measurements were performed using super conducting quantum interference device based vibrating sample magnetometer (Quantum Design, USA). In order to measure the deflection studies, the annealed films were cut into rectangular shape (13 mm × 3 mm) and the tip deflection were measured by laser vibrometer (Polytec NLV-2500). The data collected from the gauss meter and the laser vibrometer were recorded by means of digital acquisition system (NI 6251) using Labview software. The mechanical properties such as elastic modulus and hardness were evaluated using a Nanoindenter with Berkovich indenter and the indentation was performed under applied load of 0.3 mN. The XRD patterns of CFO thin films obtained under different oxygen pressures are shown in The room temperature magnetic hysteresis loops of as-grown CFO films at different oxygen pressures measured along the in-plane (IP, ||) and out-of-plane (OP, ⊥) directions are presented in A good combination of high Both IP and OP hysteresis curves of CFO-CA and CFO-MA films are presented in The magnetostrictive ferrites such as those used for actuation applications should possess less elastic modulus and high hardness. Since, ferrites are usually sandwiched between the piezoelectric layers of magnetoelectric composites, it is important to study the mechanical properties of CFO films. Representative load versus indentation depth plots obtained from the nano-indentation test on the CFO films are shown in The deflection property due to the magneto-strictive effect is directly exploited particularly in the magneto-elastic and/or magneto-electric devices including transducers and sensors It is apparent that the deflection curves traced during increasing and decreasing magnetic fields are quite different and hence, the hysteretic behavior is observed, particularly in the case of CFO-MA film. In general, at higher applied magnetic fields the mechanisms of both domain wall motion and rotation become irreversible unless the material is sufficiently pure. This is one of the causes for the observed hysteretic behavior. In the case of CFO-MA films, the magnetic domains are pinned due to the magnetic annealing and the observed larger tip deflections can therefore be related to the irreversible behavior of domain movement. Though, it is known that the post-annealing process essentially reduces the residual stresses and thereby facilitates higher deflections Polycrystalline CFO thin films were prepared by PLD technique and their structure, magnetic, magnetostriction and deflection characteristics were investigated with respect to magnetic field annealing. The XRD patterns showed the crystallization of spinel structure and the characteristic peak intensities of CFO are found to be increased upon annealing. The annealed CFO films exhibit relatively lower surface roughness as compared to their as-grown counterparts. The reduction in the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: