A 1500
                        μm×1200
                     μm scanning mirror having vertical comb fingers has been fabricated by using silicon-on-insulator (SOI)-based fabrication processes. It is a vertically driven electrostatic scanner and composed of two structures having vertical comb fingers. The comb fingers are etched by deep inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICPRIE) and assembled by the flip chip aligner bonder. The buried oxide layer is used as an etch stop to acquire the uniform thickness of torsion bars of the upper structure. Using an oxide mask process, we acquired the uniform comb fingers at the lower structure without the planarization process. The handling difficulty of a thin silicon wafer is improved by using an anodic bonding and following mechanical polishing. This scanning mirror showed a linear actuating performance. It can be used for laser display as a galvanometric vertical scanner.Optical scanners are widely used for laser printing, bar-code reading, optical data storage, optical communications, laser machining, display and so on. Recently, much research has been carried out to make optical scanners using MEMS technology for a compact size, low cost, low-power consumption and lightweight In the case of laser projection display, linear scanning of a laser light is important to obtain an image without distortion, so the scanning mirror having vertical comb fingers has been designed and fabricated Nowadays, silicon-on-insulator (SOI)-based fabrication technology has been utilized to make various MEMS devices In this paper, we describe the SOI-based fabrication processes of a scanning mirror having vertical comb fingers. In the case of optical scanners, the part of torsion bar acting as a rotation axis is the most critical point to determine the reliability of optical devices. It is predicted that the failure will occur at the point of highest strain In this study, other modified fabrication processes were also used. Using an oxide mask process, we acquired the uniform comb fingers at the lower structure without the planarization process. To solve the handling difficulty of a thin silicon wafer, anodic bonding of glass and silicon wafers and following mechanical polishing were used. The basic structure of the scanning mirror is shown in The size of the scanning mirror plate is  The fabrication processes are mainly composed of three steps: fabrication of the upper structure, fabrication of the lower structure and assembly of the upper and lower structures.    The scanning mirror was fabricated successfully by using the modified fabrication processes with a SOI wafer.   In case of using a SOI wafer, the electrical connection must be considered additionally, because the mirror plate and vertical comb fingers are electrically isolated by the buried oxide layer between them. The supporting frame is isolated also by the oxide layer. This electrical isolation problem is solved by using a step coverage effect of Cr/Au layer coating of    Long run operation was performed for over 10 A