Longwall mining is the most widely used method in underground coal extraction. After the coal seam extraction, the strata above the mined panel will be destressed and then the overburden weights will be redistributed and transferred to the front abutment and neighboring solid sections. In this research, the height of destressed zone (HDZ) is taken as equivalent to the combined height of caving and fracturing zones above the mined panel roof induced due to longwall mining. Accurate determination of this height is essential to proper estimate of transferred loads toward the gates and pillars. In this paper, a time-independent analytical model based on the strain energy balance in longwall mining is developed to determine the HDZ. Unlike the previous analytical and empirical models, the proposed energy model incorporates both possible influencing geometrical and geomechanical parameters in calculating of HDZ. The model proposed sensitivity analysis shows that depth of cover, extracted coal seam thickness and unit weight have the direct influence and elastic modulus, Poisson ratio, uniaxial compressive strength and bulking factor have the inverse influence on the HDZ. The results of the proposed model are compared with the results of in-situ measurements and existing, analytical, empirical and numerical models reported in literature. The comparison results show that the proposed model complies with the comparable models as well as with the in-situ measurements. Therefore, it can be concluded that the proposed energy model can be successfully used to determine the height of destressed zone above the mined panel in longwall mining.Longwall mining is the most widely used underground mining method that involves the complete removal of large rectangular panels of coal seams. This method is suitable for relatively flat, thick and uniform coal beds. One of the most important advantages of this method is the automated form of underground coal mining which leads to characterized by high efficiency. The main objective of underground coal mining is to extract of coal from the ground safely and economically. However, the mining efficiency exclusively depends on the coal seams and roof rock strata overall conditions. In this method, due to the extraction of coal seams within a defined panel width, after advancing the hydraulic jacks, the immediate roof of the mined panel is unsupported and hence is allowed to collapse and cave in some distance behind the hydraulic jacks or in the goaf area. The downward movement of the roof strata then gradually extends upwards and will cause the disturbed roof strata to become destressed. Thus, the overburden pressure above the destressed zone will be redistributed toward the front abutment and the two adjacent neighboring solid sections where the main gates, the intervening pillar and the adjacent un-mined solid sections are located ( Nowadays, the main concerns of many underground coal mining researchers are to find the suitable approaches to evaluate the panel roof strata behavior during and after the panel extraction. There are common approaches for studying the progressive fracturing and caving of panel roof rock strata such as in-situ measurement and physical, empirical, numerical and analytical modeling ( The height of destressed zone (HDZ), in this paper, is considered as the combined height of caving and fracturing zones above the longwall panel. Beyond this height the overburden pressure will be transferred toward the adjacent solid sections. Therefore, accurate determination of HDZ plays a vital rule in the amount of transferrable loads to the front abutment, the adjacent access tunnels, the barrier pillars and the panel rib-sides. Accordingly, the height of destressed zone should be estimated in order to proper evaluate of the amount of additional loads induced due to longwall mining. The observations and results of previous investigations showed that there exist many effective parameters in determination the height of disturbed zones above the longwall panel ( Unlike the past investigations, in this research, the effects of both geometrical and geomechanical parameters of mined panel and roof rock strata have been simultaneously considered in determining the height of destressed zone. In addition, the strain energy consideration is taken into account in which the strain energy release can be the most important factor of the roof disturbance in longwall mining. Accordingly, a new time-independent analytical model is developed in the present study to determine the height of destressed zone (HDZ) above the mined panel based on the strain energy balance in longwall coal mining. Behavior of the panel roof strata and process of gradual destruction and upward movement have been investigated by many researchers. According to   Monitoring study of the ground movement process associated with longwall coal mining was conducted by    According to the above referred works, there are some empirical and analytical equations to predict the height of caved/fractured/destressed zone. These equations are presented in In mining operations, the energy transfer takes place in the rock mass during a transition from one equilibrium state to another, which is assumed to be an elastic continuum. This process leads to energy release and causes the roof rock strata to be fractured, caved and destressed. Energy balance and relationships between the energy components in mining have been firstly investigated by In the longwall mining, as the extraction of coal seam from the panel is started, the energy balance within the system enclosing the mine openings and the surrounding rocks is changed. In this research, state І is considered as the primary status before the coal seam extraction and state II is considered as the end of coal seam extraction inside a panel ( If the longwall panel and its surrounding rock mass are considered as a system, then the equilibrium between its energy components should be maintained. In the longwall mining, no permanent supports are used during the panel extraction. Therefore, due to the extraction of coal seams within a considerable panel width and after advancing the hydraulic jacks, the immediate roof of the mined panel is unsupported and hence is allowed to collapse and cave in some distance behind the hydraulic jacks or in the goaf area. This leads to release of the stored strain energy in the mined rock (coal) and transfer it to the panel roof strata. The released energy increases the strain of roof rock strata and causes the fracturing, caving and destressing of these layers. This process is continued until the full extraction of a longwall panel. At the end of panel extraction and after compression of caved materials, a defined zone with the height of Considering the above descriptions, it can be concluded that the total stored strain energy in the mined rock (coal) is released and consumed in fracturing, caving and destressing the panel roof rock strata. Therefore, stored strain energy in the mined rock (coal) should be equal to the stored strain energy in caved materials within the destressed zone: With regard to the complex conditions of longwal coal mining, it is required to consider the general assumptions for simplification of the problem in calculating the aforementioned components of stored strain energy. For this purpose, the following fundamental assumptions are made in the modeling: The horizontal components of displacements are taken to zero in state I. Ground surface is the horizontal plane and there is no tectonic force. Surrounding rock is homogenous and isotropic. Vertical and horizontal normal stresses are the principle stresses. Effect of body forces is ignored in modeling. In this study, the two-dimensional analysis of strain energy components is introduced. Generally, discussions of a problem are algebraically simpler in two dimensions than in three. In most instances, no generality is lost by considering the two-dimensional case. Furthermore, many problems in rock mechanics are essentially two-dimensional, in the sense that the stresses do not vary along one Cartesian coordinate. The most common examples of such problems are stresses around boreholes, around long tunnels and longwall panels. Many other problems are idealized as being two-dimensional so as to take advantage of the relative ease of solving two-dimensional elasticity problems as compared to three-dimensional problems ( Actually, a two-dimensional model can be used for the analysis of stresses and displacements in the rock surrounding a tunnel, shaft or borehole, where the length of the opening is much larger than its cross-sectional dimensions. The stresses and displacements in a plane, normal to the axis of the opening, are not influenced by the ends of the opening, provided that these ends are far enough away. However, most aspects of the theory of stress (and strain) can be developed within a two-dimensional context, and extensions to three dimensions are in most cases straightforward. Indeed, the theory of stresses in three dimensions is in general a straightforward extension of two-dimensional theory. So, it is important to study the two-dimensional analysis of a problem in the first stage. Since the stresses do not vary along the panel length, thus two-dimensional modeling is sufficient for stress analysis in this research. Therefore, two-dimensional analysis would be sufficient for accurate determination of strain energy components in longwall mining in order to estimate the height of destressed zone (HDZ) in the roof rock strata above a longwall panel. To calculate the stored strain energy in the extracted coal layer ( Based on the considered assumptions and the The components of strain and displacement tensor can be calculated by The only non-zero strain and displacement components follow from Eqs. Substitution the first part of Eq. Based on the parallel-axis theorem in statics, one can write: Now, the substitution of Eqs. Then, when Eq. According to Finally, when Eq. In general, total stored strain energy in the rock mass within the destressed zone ( If the destressed zone above a longwall panel is considered as a separate system (surface with height of By applying the above simplifications and integration of Eq. To describe the stress–strain behavior of the caved materials, the following equation can be used ( From Eq. Now, the substitution of Eqs. As mentioned previously, the stored strain energy in the mined rock (coal) releases during the longwall panel extraction. This released energy absorbs in the panel roof strata and causes the fracturing, caving and destressing of these layers. Finally, this process leads to form a destressed zone above the longwall panel. Accordingly, it can be concluded that the stored strain energy in the mined rock (coal) is equal to the stored strain energy in the caved materials within the destressed zone, as shown in Eq. In order to verify the proposed model, the obtained results are compared with the results of in-situ measurements reported by other researchers. These measurements and their corresponding results along with the results of Energy model are shown in To evaluate the effect of incorporated parameters on the HDZ, the actual dataset 3 in  As the extracted coal seam thickness changes from 0.5 In this section, obtained results from the proposed Energy model are compared with those of the comparable formulas given by As it can be seen from According to  The results of four series of information collected from the literature (indicated in In general, the results of the proposed model in this paper are in a close agreement with the in-situ measurements and with those proposed analytically, empirically and numerically by other researchers as well. Furthermore, the most important advantage of the proposed Energy model compared to the other analytical and empirical models is that it incorporates further effective parameters in predicting of the HDZ. In the previous analytical models only two parameters namely extracted coal seam thickness and average bulking (expansion) factor of the caved materials are utilized to calculate the height of caving/fracturing zone ( As the proposed model incorporates the most effective parameters and its results are in agreement with the results of comparable models, it can be successfully used to determine the height of destressed zone. Beyond this height the overburden pressure will be transferred to the front abutment and the two adjacent neighboring solid sections where the gate roads (access tunnels serving the coal face), the intervening pillars and the adjacent un-mined solid sections are located. Hence, the complete overburden pressure will not be inserted on the caved materials located some distance behind the powered roof supports in the gob-side. In fact, the difference between the longwall depth ( As previously mentioned, this study is the time-independent analysis of the height of destressed zone. Time-independent condition of the height of destressed zone is easier to model than the time-dependent. Under the pressure of roof in long-term condition, the mechanical properties of caved materials can change, so elastic modulus and coefficient of viscosity of caved materials also change over time. Indeed, the viscoplastic strain energy in the time-dependent condition cannot be ignored in calculations and required considering the rheological properties of the caved materials in modeling. This makes it difficult to model and required to measurement of material coefficients related to temperature. In contrast, the above mentioned strain energy component can be ignored in time-independent modeling, as discussed in Section 4.2. However, despite of the simplicity, the time-independent model yield very handy and reliable result that would be applicable to determine the maximum mining-induced stress as briefly discussed below. It is obvious that the goaf materials are steadily compressed during the time due to bulking characteristics of it. This process causes the further caving and fracturing of the panel roof rock strata. Accordingly, the authors strongly believe that the long-term height of the destressed zone could be much more than those considered for the short-term condition. Therefore, the difference between the longwall depth ( In this paper, a new time-independent analytical model was proposed to predict the height of destressed zone (HDZ) above the mined panel. The new model is based on the strain energy balance in longwall coal mining. To verify the validity of the proposed model, the obtained results were analyzed and compared with the results of in-situ measurements. Also, a sensitivity analysis of the model was conducted in order to evaluate the effect of involved parameters on the HDZ. Furthermore, the results of proposed model were further compared with the results of available analytical, empirical and numerical models. The results of sensitivity analysis showed that depth of cover, extracted coal seam thickness and panel roof rock’s average unit weight have direct influence on the HDZ. On the contrary, panel roof rock’s average elastic modulus and Poisson ratio along with average uniaxial compressive strength and bulking factor of the caved materials have negative influence on the HDZ. Also, the comparative analysis proved that the lower limit of Energy model is in a close agreement with the lower limit of all comparable methods. On the other hand, the upper limit of Energy model is close to the upper limit of analytical and numerical models but it is lower than the upper limit of empirical model and in-situ measurements. However, it can be concluded that the results of proposed model are in a close agreement with the results of available methods for HDZ prediction. The main advantage of the present analytical model compared to previous analytical and empirical models is that it incorporates the effects of both geometric parameters and roof rock strata properties in predicting of the HDZ. Also, the further influencing parameters are considered in HDZ determination which helps accuracy of the proposed model and thus, the obtained results will be closer to reality. In addition, the strain energy consideration is taken into account which is the main important factor of the roof disturbance in longwall mining. Since beyond the calculated HDZ the overburden weight will be transferred to the gateroads, the intervening pillars and the adjacent un-mined section, the results of this study can be used to calculate the induced stress due to longwall mining. In fact, the difference between the longwall depth and the calculated height of destressed zone can be considered to determine the transferred loads toward the front abutment and the two adjacent rib-sides.