A technique for selectively separating approximately 65 wt.% of the Si(IV) in coal has been developed. The technique first uses aqueous hydrofluoric acid (HF) to react with aluminosilicates and quartz to form fluoride complexed Al and Si species in solution. Aluminium cations, in the form of Al(NO3)3, are then added to the solution to complex fluoride as AlF2
                     + and hydrolyse the silicon fluoride species to silicon hydroxide, which precipitates as a gel and is removed by filtration. The solution is then distilled to recover a water stream, a nitric acid stream and a solid residue. The water stream is used to pyrohydrolyse the solid residue at temperatures in excess of 500 °C to liberate HF for recycling. To complete the circuit, the solid remaining after pyrohydrolysis is treated with the nitric acid stream to produce Al(NO3)3 for recycling. The technique satisfies the objective of not requiring on-going purchase of chemicals. The application of this work is primarily as part of a process for producing ultra-clean coal. As it is a technique for the selective separation of Al and Si from aluminosilicates, it may have application in other areas of mineral processing.Any commercial process for the removal of minerals from coal using chemical reagents must be able to either re-generate those chemical reagents from the products of reaction, or generate products which are more valuable than the chemical reagents. The Nottingham Fuel and Energy Centre (NFEC) at the University of Nottingham is currently developing a process for the production of ultra-clean coal (UCC) containing less than 0.1 wt.% mineral matter. UCC expands the possible uses for coal in both the areas that it is currently being used (power generation and metallurgical coke), and in new areas (such as those currently occupied by oil). In short, UCC is a high-purity carbon-based material which can be further processed to produce a wide range of fuels, chemicals and materials. Currently, a commercially viable means of producing UCC does not exist. It is generally accepted that the only way to produce UCC is via chemical leaching, and the main reagents which have been used for removing the minerals from coal are either sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or hydrofluoric acid (HF). The dissolution of minerals from coal using these reagents has been studied to a substantial extent The process for producing ultra-clean coal which is currently being developed at the University of Nottingham uses hydrofluoric acid (HF) as the main demineralising reagent. HF dissolves almost all of the mineral matter, except for pyrite (FeS The HF spent leaching solution is mixed with an aqueous solution containing Al(NO Following silica removal, the remaining solution contains mainly cationic Al fluoride-complexed species, nitrate ions and H The water stream is used to pyrohydrolyse the solid mixture of oxides and fluorides, and convert all fluoride in the solid to HF which is condensed and used for the first leach. Following pyrohydrolysis, part of the solid oxides remaining is treated with the nitric acid to form Al(NO This paper presents experimental results obtained from each section of the re-generation scheme described above. Initial experiments were performed using kaolinite (Al The kaolinite used in this study was supplied from Sigma-Aldrich and had a purity >95 wt.%. The coal used was a high volatile bituminous coal from Harworth Colliery in Yorkshire. The aqueous HF and Al(NO Kaolinite (10 g) was treated with a 1 dm Coal (30 g), crushed to <62 μm, was treated with 100 ml of a solution containing 2.42 M HF for 3 h at 65 °C. The SiO All precipitates were separated from solution by standard filtration techniques, washed with 50 ml of distilled water, and mass yields were recorded after calcining in a furnace at 800 °C. The pH of filtrate solutions was measured using a pH electrode and following standard procedures for pH determinations. Each of the precipitates were qualitatively analysed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy using a Siemens SRS 3000. This involved mixing the sample with boric acid (H Following silica precipitation, the 250 ml filtrates were placed in a spherical flask which was placed in a heating mantle and equipped with a cold water condenser positioned at an angle such that the condensed vapour could be collected. The solution temperature was raised to the boiling point and 100 ml was evaporated, condensed and collected. The remaining solution was then evaporated, condensed and collected. This second distillate was found to have a more viscous appearance than water, indicating that it was rich in HNO Both evaporated solutions were analysed for NO Following distillation, samples of solid remaining in the base of the spherical flask were placed in a small ceramic boat which was then placed midway down a ceramic tube contained in a horizontal tube furnace. Compressed air was bubbled at a rate of 1 dm  As the concentration of Al Equations for predicting the concentrations of aluminium and silicon fluoride complexes, fluoride ions, protons and molecular HF, based on theoretical equilibrium data were proposed by Steel et al. The [HF in initial soln.] equals 0.2935 M and the [Si in initial soln.] equals 0.0363 M. The data in columns 2, 4 and 5 of  The stability constants used in the model assume an ionic strength of 0.5. Injecting the known and modelled concentrations of species in solution into Where Filtrate solutions from kaolinite experiments which used 0.187 M Al These results show that it is possible to hydrolyse the nitrate in the solid residue and therefore recover essentially all nitrate as HNO For the above experiments, approximately 0.14 wt.% of the total fluoride in the solution was released in the first distillate, 3.2 wt.% in the second distillate and 6.4 wt.% in the subsequent distillates. For experiments performed using a higher concentration of 0.24 M Al For the recovery of NO The mass of solid remaining after distillation of the solution resulting from the kaolinite experiment which used 0.24 M Al The mass of solid remaining after distillation of the solution resulting from the coal experiment was 9.46 g. Samples (0.02 g) of this solid underwent pyrohydrolysis at temperatures in the range of 400–1000 °C. The furnace temperature was raised at a rate of 5 °C/min and held at the desired temperature for 5 h. In order to complete the process it is necessary to re-generate Al(NO Approximately 65 wt.% of the Si(IV) in coal was selectively separated by dissolving the aluminosilicates and quartz in aqueous HF to form aluminium and silicon fluoride complexes, and then treating the aqueous solution with Al(NO The application of this work is primarily as part of a process for producing ultra-clean coal (UCC), which generates co-products of value and does not require on-going purchase of chemicals. This scheme is a technique for selectively separating silica and alumina from aluminosilicate compounds, such as kaolinite, and therefore may have application in other areas of mineral processing besides UCC. The authors wish to acknowledge the European Coal and Steel Community for providing the funding for this work.