Mineral-based development has a special place within the field of development economics. As early as 1859 Australian economists, while welcoming Australia's gold boom, noted its negative effect on the other sectors of the economy. In the 1970s, extraction of natural gas from the Groningen fields similarly affected the structure of the Dutch economy. The Dutch disease, as it has come to be called, describes a booming minerals sector and a shrinking traditional sector, such as agriculture or manufacturing. In the most accepted version of the Dutch disease model ( The Dutch disease model of resource-based development soon came into question as the miserable track records of more and more developing mineral economies came to light. Zambia and Nigeria are the most cited examples. Economists revised their Dutch disease model to incorporate learning-by-doing effects in the shrinking sector, positing that this could explain the slower growth created by mineral extraction. But there has been little, if any, empirical work to verify this claim. Economic geographers and political scientists weighed in with explanations of the political and social dynamics of mineral economies, theorizing via a series of case-study analyses that weak mineral economy governments were captured by a politically powerful mining elite. This led to suboptimal extraction programs, via subsidy or protection, that ultimately damaged the entire economy. Alternatively, where sound political systems were in place, sudden mineral windfalls destabilized the government and created a politicized state. In these models resources have even been called a curse. William Ascher's latest book, His 16 cases, interwoven with his propositions on why governments waste, are Brazil (forests), Cameroon (forests), Chile (copper), Costa Rica (forests), Ghana (cocoa), Honduras (forests), India (copper), Indonesia (forests, oil), Malaysia (forests in Sabah and Sarawak), Mexico (oil, water), Nigeria (oil), Peru (oil), and Venezuela (oil). He uses these examples to examine the subtleties of government resource extraction and management policies, and to support his proposal that any blame for resource mismanagement lies entirely with government. In many cases natural resources provide the means by which governments finance questionable development efforts, build the central treasury, provide intraregional wealth transfers that in most cases impoverish the poor, provide intertemporal wealth transfers—from future generations to the present, and use rent transfers to buy private sector cooperation in pursuing other objectives. Although Ascher addresses the politics of resource extraction, he firmly grounds his analysis in economic theory. Optimal exploitation calculations reveal the optimal rate at which to harvest or extract the resource, and economic theory has producers choosing exactly this profile when market prices are free of distortions. He is quite clear that minerals endowments are not a curse, but, if managed at all reasonably, can enrich any nation. Actual rates of extraction that are either too slow or too fast “waste” the resource, lowering its value. In each of Ascher's cases the resource is shown to be extracted carelessly or too hurriedly, in response to artificially low prices, often with full knowledge by government policy makers that this is suboptimal. However, policy makers apparently weigh these costs—which fall on future generations or impoverished rural citizens, both of whom have little political clout—with the immediate development and political benefits received. Thus, where there have been resource policy failures, the culprit is not the export boom itself, but faulty management and poor macroeconomic policies, where governments violate fundamental principles of sound natural-resource policy. And the unsound resource policies are in turn related to economic and political objectives far beyond the natural resources sector. Natural resources are convenient sources of financing because of their sizable rents and the low political cost of distorting the extraction process. For example, Ascher shows that Indonesia's reforestation fund, a fee paid by foresters as a bond for reforestation, was used not to replant, but to finance the Indonesian state aircraft industry. The sizable reforestation fee was made palatable to loggers through stumpage fees that were set at 10 percent of the actual timber value, which encouraged excessive logging. Thus, Indonesia's deforestation was part of an intentional plan to finance Indonesia's aerospace industry via off-budget means. One can be critical or approving of the idea of economic development through aircraft manufacture, and yet either way, Ascher demonstrates that there is a sizable cost in terms of suboptimal management of a renewable resource. Despite the incredibly discouraging collage of resource abuses used to support his position, Ascher refreshingly manages to look beyond the usual pessimism that the resource curse has taken on. He is mute on the overall development impact of a resource endowment, although he is clearly not a resource pessimist. He does hypothesize that the primary development objectives — national security, regional development, income redistribution, industrialization, social services—have been just as inefficiently managed as the resource extraction used to fund them. The message, therefore, is that the natural resource rents have been wasted, and this is reflected in the title of the book. But, by asserting that governments are fully to blame for policy failures, and looking to explain these failing polices, he is able to recommend a way forward, noting that many nations have managed to reverse or avoid bad policies and prosper from their natural resource wealth, with Mexico and Chile being respective cases in point. If there is a weakness in Ascher's analysis, it is his failure to adequately identify, address, and debunk the political science literature that has examined this same issue (e.g., Ascher ends his book with a series of plausible recommendations directed at government officials who wish to prevent current or future government officials and state managers from sacrificing the soundness of resource exploitation, activists who can mobilize public support for such reforms, and officials of bilateral and international institutions that have some impacts on policy reforms in the relevant countries. These recommendations, laid out in some detail over 10 pages of text, include restoring resource control to private or communal groups, restructuring the State, and plans for activism. “As natural resources dwindle,” he concludes, “these countermeasures become more and more crucial in the struggle for sustainable development.”