The notion of economic pipe size is extended to the case of settling slurries, which are commonly found in high tonnage, long distance pipelines of mineral ores. Water, energy and pipe infrastructure costs have been considered under the premise that the objective of this kind of infrastructure is to transport solids but not water. Unit costs for pipes have been expressed based on pipe weight or diameter. In the first case, both an assumption of a linear dependency of the pipe wall thickness with outside diameter and the special case of prescribed, outside diameter-independent pipe wall thickness, have been considered. On the other hand, a typical assumption of cost expressed as a potential function of the pipe diameter has been assumed to compare with the present model. A dimensionless formulation of the problem, including the requirement of turbulent flow transport above the deposit limit is proposed. Differently from previous analyses, made for homogeneous fluids, the present approach does not require a particular form of the friction factor. To this purpose it is shown, based on the general form of the dependency of the friction factor with the Reynolds number, that the friction factor that minimizes the operation and infrastructure cost is the maximum possible within the turbulent regime, i.e. that corresponding to the laminar-turbulent transition. Optimal conditions feature: (1) the solid concentration should be the largest possible provided safe transport is ensured, (2) the optimal pipe diameter is controlled either by costs and turbulent transition or by the deposit limit condition (not both of them simultaneously), where a dimensionless parameter has been derived to identify the relevant solution. Results with the present cost scheme have been extended to the case of homogeneous fluids.The notion of economic pipeline is not new when conveying water or homogeneous fluids. In this case, the economic pipeline diameter is commonly computed as that resulting of the sum of the steel, maintenance and energy costs. The first analysis of economic pipeline diameter for compressing or pumping has been made by The problem of optimal pipe diameter in generalized fluids has been treated after the major development on the characterization of friction losses in this kind of system ( Fine slurries may be conditionally understood as a special type of non-Newtonian fluid. When fully mixed and if transport is homogenous they are commonly treated as Bingham or Herschel-Buckley fluids ( Given that slurry pipelines commonly connect long distances, sub-optimal choices of their diameter may be related to strong additional costs. As an example, a 1-inch difference using a SCH80 pipe pressure rating (say, between 5 and 6 inches in diameter) in a 100 km-line would cost, considering a The paper structure is as follows: in Section The problem is to estimate the lowest cost operational and pipeline diameter combination in industrial pipelines, given the throughput (solid phase transport rate) requirement, the pipeline topography and the operational life of the infrastructure. The formulation of the present problem implies that higher pipeline diameters reduce the energy consumption as velocities are lower, but increment the pipe cost. On the other hand, there is a cost related to water. Therefore, there is a trade-off between energy consumption, particle concentration and required throughput. There is a solid phase mass balance that acts an a restriction of the problem. Additionally, the fact that given a pipe diameter there is a critical mean flow velocity that marks a settling limit acts as a restriction for the potential solutions of the problem. While in a traditional optimization approach for optimal pipeline diameter it is straightforward to derive the minimum cost diameter via differentiating the cost function, equating to zero and solving for the diameter, in this case the referred constraints act as limiting factors that need to be accounted for. The following assumptions hold in the present approach to the solution of the problem: The operational throughput is a constant of the problem, and is defined by the transport service characteristics. The life of operation of the project is known. Given a throughput range, the rest of the components of the construction cost, including trench dimensions in buried systems, pumps and possibly dissipation stations are weakly dependent on the identification of the optimal pipeline diameter and thus can be omitted from the present analysis. This is equivalent to assume that such costs are piecewise constant in a reasonably wide range of throughputs. Singular pressure losses due to elbows, valves, etc., are negligible when compared to frictional losses. Maintenance costs to operate facilities are virtually constant both with pipeline diameter and solids concentration, and thus are not amenable to be optimized in terms of these variables. The pipeline route is fixed (or previously selected), and thus pipeline length and the corresponding earthworks (as discussed, Unit costs for energy, water and (installed) pipeline per unit weight can be estimated and set constant in the problem. The pipeline has a circular cross section and constant wall thickness throughout its length. Thus, some coefficients indicated herein (including factors of π) correspond to such geometry. There is a pre-established relation between the pipeline thickness, the pipeline internal diameter ( The flow of slurries is such that they are amenable to be transported as an homogeneous (or quasi-homogeneous) suspension. There is a deposit limit that can be described as a function of one or more characteristic parameters and its dependence on the particle concentration can be neglected. The mean flow velocity needs to exceed the minimum velocity to avoid deposit formation. To complement the previous hypothesis, it is required that transport is in turbulent flow. Additionally, laminar-turbulent transition can be described through a single dimensionless parameter (a Reynolds number). This implies that near transition the flow is hydraulically smooth. As the intent of hydraulic transport is to convey the solids rather than water, solid concentration will not be within the dilute range. The present problem is thus treated under the assumption that moderate to high solid concentrations are used for transport. Thus, the parameter that describes the deposit formation (named to herein as the Durand number) is assumed to be weakly dependent on the solids concentration. This is discussed in Section There is a maximum safe operational concentration beyond which transport is not allowed. The pumping efficiency has a negligible dependence on the concentration, within the concentration range of interest for optimization, and therefore can be treated as a constant. This assumption is reasonable when positive displacement pumps are used, which is the case in the high pressure systems. The system is not allowed to generate energy, as would occur in pipelines with a slope such that the energy consumption is exceeded by the potential-to-kinetic energy conversion. The justification of this assumption is that an energy generation system capacity would have to include strongly case-specific infrastructure costs whose estimation is out of the scope of the present paper. Assumptions 2.1–2.1 allow centering the problem of seeking the most economical pumping infrastructure and operational conditions on finding the most economical pipeline diameter, solids concentration and slurry flow. The cost function is an extension to that defined in The positive enforcing of the second term of right hand side of energy term is justified by the limitation corresponding to assumption 2.1 above. The reason to express (1) in units of flow of currency (currency over time), rather than simply currency, is that it allows to cast its components in units more familiar to hydraulic transport of solids. From a mass balance standpoint, the terms related to energy and water use can be related to the solid throughput ( The cost of energy can be expressed by means of an energy balance between two arbitrary points in the pipeline. To account for the energy consumption throughout the whole length of the system, it is convenient to consider both the start (pump station), whose tube length position and altitude are This simplification corresponds to assumption 2.1. The density of the slurry can be expressed in terms of the solid volume fraction as: The statement The present approach is based on the observation that industrial steel pipeline vendors often quote pipelines by unit weight of material ( Considering pipe costs per unit length the The corresponding optimization problem to be solved is: subject to the following constraints: Considering that available commercial pipeline diameters are available in a discrete fashion, the problem is naturally a discrete one. Although the approach proposed herein is continuous, to adapt it to a discrete one is straightforward by means of approximating results, either to closest commercial values or closest higher ones, depending on the design criteria. It is convenient to cast the optimization problem (8) into a dimensionless one. To this purpose, a set of (arbitrary) scales is proposed. Then the required flow restrictions, and the pipe thickness modeling are expressed in terms of dimensionless variables to finally solve the new optimization problem. The solid balance statement given by (2) allows to reduce from three to two the independent variables initially posed in (1), namely φ and For dimensional analysis purposes, it is convenient to re-scale variables in terms of the representative parameters in the system. According to In the case of the pipeline diameter, apart from the tube length ( The scale of the deposit velocity can be related both to the particle concentration and the throughput. The mean flow velocity can be expressed in terms of the slurry flow as This relation allows to define a dimensionless pipeline diameter, Considering the dimensionless variables It is noted that, for convenience, (15d) is expressed in terms of the diameter scale  At fully developed turbulent flow the friction factor decreases with the Reynolds number. Experimental examples of this trend with Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids can be found in Defining bounds of  In contrast with the definition of The inequality (17) can be recast in terms of a normalized parameter λ ( So far, it is not possible to treat the cost function (14) as a continuous function because no explicit form of the dimensionless wall thickness A common feature of this infrastructure is that pipe thicknesses are increasing functions of the OD. The pipe thickness can be expressed in a linear fashion as: The dominant term among the three of them will depend on the diameter range. In particular, for very large diameters the third term of the right hand side of (20) dominates over the second, whereas the opposite is expected for very small diameter facilities. In the example of Considering this approach, the simpler case of a prescribed, constant thickness When the Genereaux-type of cost scheme is used, then (22) is still valid provided Replacing (18) and (23) into (14) allows to express the cost function in terms of The relation (16) expresses an upper boundary for the cost function given that It is straightforward to see from (25), that The function (25) has an explicit dependency on the Durand number, Assuming that This expression can be either positive or negative depending on the relative weight of terms. On the other hand, the relation (28) is independent of the water unit costs, which is explained by the fact that the water cost term is related to the mass balance in the system and thus is independent of the particular transport conditions. Additionally, it is noted that the dimensionless parameter The expression (28) shows that the cost is positive and diverges when To find out whether The two solution possibilities suggested in (30) have two distinct interpretations. When The second possibility is when The previous results, in consistent units as detailed in page List of symbols, can be summarized in the dimensional expressions that follow.  Prescribed pipe wall thickness independent of outside diameter ( Linear increase of wall thickness with outside diameter ( Considering the linear fit (19) in terms the parameter β and the dimensionless coefficient Genereaux-type pipe cost scheme.   The optimal diameter is sensitive to the maximum operational concentration (  The pipeline depositional limit is bounded to small values in fine slurries.   The particular case of energy and pipeline steel costs deserves a separate mention and is analyzed in Section In the case of an homogeneous fluid there is no restriction on the mean flow velocity, and thus Actual line pressures depend on the difference between the energy line and the topography, the former depending on the frictional pressure losses and required point dissipation and the latter being strongly site-specific. The constraint (9c) requires a feasible space from the point of view of the relationship between pipe pressure rating (including materials, OD and wall thickness) and actual operational pressure. Pressure compliance then requires, after computing the optimal diameter and pipe wall thickness, to verify whether the particular choice of pipeline size and pressure rating is in accordance with such hypothesis. After an energy balance, the pressure under optimal operational conditions, A second aspect pertaining pressure compliance, beyond the scope of the present analysis, is related to operational flexibility. It might be desirable that pressure may not exceed To obtain an order-of-magnitude comparison between the present approach and existing pipeline facilities with known characteristics are presented. It is noted that there is no intention of validation with known existing pipeline diameters due to: Design criteria for the pipeline are not available. This should include the consideration of critical Reynolds numbers for the model, effective deposit velocity assumed and life of the project. Key geometric considerations such as the installation of an internal liner to protect the pipeline steel from corrosion affects directly the relation between internal and external diameters. Reported throughput in the literature might not correspond to the actual design capacity. Fine slurries reproduced approximately correspond to iron concentrate, copper concentrate and phosphate slurry. To obtain a quantitative reference on the impact of variations on costs, low and high values for both The results presented in Present results show that there is a tendency in high tonnage iron concentrate pipelines ( In copper concentrate and phosphate slurry lines, the behavior is rather dual in the sense of The same concept can be used, in the case of the energy cost component, to include the impact of the energy source on the carbon footprint when there is more than one sourcing option. In general, Modern pipeline systems need to face a number of strong restrictions that range from the economical and resourcing (water and energy) to environmental. New future pipeline designs need to cope with these new restrictions from the conception phase, where there engineering is continuously challenged to be less and less conservative in their conceptions. The present formulation for the optimal concentration and diameter shows that a multi-million investment may be adjusted quantitatively following modern environmental metrics that are blended together with engineering requisites for proper operation. The present model has been focused on the formulation of a simple, though physically-based model for the problem of slurry pipeline design in the potential presence of multiple scenarios for commodity supply (steel and energy costs), where the nature of the sources can be relevant and thus would need to be analyzed in the context of engineering design and operation. Added to imposing the condition of turbulent flow, a deposit formation limit has been included, where both restricting conditions have been referred depending of key parameters governing them rather than using particular models explicitly. One of the outcomes of the present work is the possibility to explicitly isolate the unit cost of pipeline materials. Results have been found to be consistent with previous approaches to this cost estimation. However, a significant conceptual difference with past approaches is the independence of results with market fluctuations, except by unit costs of energy and pipeline material. The more general problem of economic pipe diameter for strongly stratified slurries has not being tacked herein, featuring a static or sliding bed was not pursued, but appears as a natural extension of the present model. The author gratefully acknowledge support from the  modeling case parameter (Eq. model parameter (length model parameter (length, Eq. model parameter (dimensionless, Eq. particle characteristic size (length) pipeline diameter (length) pipeline optimal diameter (length) homogeneous fluid pipeline optimal diameter (length) reference (dimensional) diameter (length, Eq. pipeline (dimensional) diameter scale (length, Eq. dimensionless pipeline diameter ( optimal dimensionless pipe diameter energy consumption (energy/time) pipeline wall thickness (length) prescribed pipe wall thickness (length) dimensionless pipeline wall thickness (length, Eq. Durand number (dimensionless, Eq. Darcy friction factor (dimensionless) maximum value of solids throughput (solid mass/time) magnitude of gravity acceleration (mass/time friction factor in laminar flow regime (dimensionless) point energy dissipation head (length) scale of kinetic energy of fluid parcel (mass length dimensionless parameter (Eq. dimensionless parameter (Eq. dimensionless parameter (Eq. dimensionless parameter (Eq. singular energy loss coefficient (dimensionless) pipeline length (length) mass of fluid parcel (mass) exponent for pipe cost modeling (Eq. pipeline outside diameter (length) nearest higher standard pipeline outside diameter close to optimal value (length) line pressure (mass length pipe material mass (mass) scale of potential energy of particle (mass length pipeline material use (pipe material mass/time) slurry volume flow (volume/time) water consumption (volume/time) Reynolds number (dimensionless) minimum Reynolds number for turbulent flow (dimensionless) solid phase specific gravity ( pipeline schedule () time mean flow velocity (length/time) mean flow velocity corresponding to the solid deposit formation limit (length/time) dimensionless parameter (Eq. discharge point altitude (length) pump station altitude (length)  modeling parameter (length, Eq. modeling parameter (dimensionless, Eq.  arbitrarily small parameter (dimensionless) solids volume fraction (dimensionless) maximum feasible solids volume fraction in operation (dimensionless) normalized volume fraction ( solid unit cost (arbitrary) scale (currency/solid mass) energy unit cost (currency/energy unit) pipe cost per unit length (currency/unit length) water unit cost (currency/water volume unit) pipe material unit cost (currency/pipe weight) dimensionless parameter for optimal diameter control mechanism (Eq. dimensionless parameter (Eq. optimal value of λ (Eq. concentration-dependent slurry dynamic viscosity (mass length fluid phase dynamic viscosity (mass length pump efficiency (dimensionless) fluid phase density mass length solid phase density mass length slurry density mass length pipe wall density mass length life span of operation (time) cost flow function (currency/time) dimensionless flow function (currency/time)  optimal value of 