Rare-earth elements play a crucial role in modern technologies and are necessary for a transition to a green economy. Potentially economic deposits of these elements are typically hosted in minerals such as monazite, bastnäsite, and eudialyte (a complex Na-Ca-Fe-Zr silicate mineral with Cl), making these prime targets for geological research. Globally, rare-earth mineral deposits commonly show evidence of polyphase development and mineralisation processes, which need to be better understood to improve exploration strategies. The Norra Kärr alkaline complex (Sweden) contains a globally significant deposit of rare-earth elements, hosted in the mineral eudialyte. In this study, we focussed on eudialyte crystals in undeformed, cross-cutting pegmatoid veins from Norra Kärr. In order to determine their age, we refined an established micromilling method to enable sampling of minerals rich in rare-earth elements for precise analysis of major and trace elements, Nd isotope ratios, and Sm-Nd geochronology down to a scale of <200 μm. Mineral samples were subjected to detailed textural and chemical characterisation by backscattered electron imaging and laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, by which precise and accurate Sm/Nd ratios were determined to steer subsequent micromill sampling for small-aliquot Sm-Nd isotope analysis by isotope dilution thermal ionisation mass spectrometry. Given enough internal spread in Sm/Nd ratios, reliable Sm-Nd isochrons can be derived from discrete textural domains within a single crystal. This provided an age of 1.144 ± 0.053 Ga (95% confidence); approximately 350 million years younger than the magmatic intrusion of the alkaline complex (ca. 1.49 Ga). Primary compositional sector and oscillatory zoning in these eudialyte crystals shows core-to-rim enrichment in rare-earth elements and significant fractionation of K/Rb, Y/Ho, Zr/Hf, and Nb/Ta, which we attribute to crystallisation under influence of complexing ligands in a confined volume. We argue that these mineralised pegmatoid veins formed by low-temperature (<550 °C) partial melting of the agpaitic host rock during an early Sveconorwegian (Grenvillian) metamorphic overprinting event. Given the challenge of directly dating rare-earth ore minerals by conventional methods, modification of rare-earth mineral deposits may be more widespread than already assumed, which shows the importance of investigations that date the rare-earth minerals themselves.Rare-earth element (REE) mineral deposits in various geological settings commonly contain evidence for multiple stages of REE mineralisation (e.g. The Norra Kärr alkaline complex in southern Sweden (58°06′N, 14°34′E; In the case of the eudialyte-rich veins at Norra Kärr, and to a large extent for agpaitic rocks in general ( The Sm-Nd isotope system is one of the most relied-upon geochronometers. Precise Sm-Nd geochronology is often applied to date the mineral garnet ( Small-aliquot Nd isotope analyses provide an attractive prospect for micro-analyses of minerals such as xenotime, monazite, bastnäsite, and eudialyte, which contrary to garnet are rich in REE. Sufficient Nd yields can be extracted from these minerals in sample sizes several orders of magnitude smaller than currently used in garnet Sm-Nd geochronology. This is a potentially powerful tool in investigating the formation of REE ore deposits. Therefore, we developed a method that is built up of detailed sample characterisation by SEM imaging and laser ablation ICP-MS analysis and subsequent micro-sampling for small-aliquot ID-TIMS Sm-Nd isotope analysis applicable to eudialyte and other REE-rich minerals. This method will be applied to obtain new age constraints on the ore-forming processes in the Norra Kärr alkaline complex, which will provide insight into dynamic REE mineralisation processes that will be of general applicability. The Norra Kärr alkaline complex is situated in southern Sweden (58°06′N, 14°34′E; During the Mesoproterozoic, the Protogine Zone was intruded episodically by granitic, syenitic, and mafic rocks. Firstly, 1.57 Ga mafic intrusions occur as amphibolitised Värmland dolerites north of Lake Vänern and age-equivalent metabasite and metadolerite occur along the Protogine Zone south of Lake Vättern ( Southwestern Scandinavia, including southwestern Sweden, was affected by Sveconorwegian (Grenvillian) orogeny, which was active between 1.14 and 0.9 Ga. The Sveconorwegian belt is subdivided into various domains. The Eastern Segment is delimited to the west by the Mylonite Zone and to the east by the Sveconorwegian Frontal Deformation Zone. South of Lake Vättern the Sveconorwegian Frontal Deformation Zone converges with the Protogine Zone ( Although most of the Eastern Segment in southwestern Sweden consists of a high-grade metamorphic gneiss complex, the extent of Sveconorwegian metamorphism in the eastern part of the Eastern Segment and close to the Protogine Zone may be limited. For example, whereas the >1.4 Ga Jönköping Anorthositic Suite and Axamo dykes were subjected to amphibolite facies metamorphism, the 1.27 Ga Moslätt dolerites in the same area contain a pristine magmatic mineralogy ( The Norra Kärr alkaline complex consists of varieties of alkaline rocks with a dominantly agpaitic mineralogy, which occur in a quasi-concentric structure ( For this study, material was selected to date cross-cutting eudialyte-bearing pegmatoid veins by small-aliquot Sm-Nd geochronology. Sample NK7, collected from drill core NKA09006 at a depth of 150.43 m ( Eudialyte crystals in a polished and carbon-coated rock slab of sample NK7 were inspected by backscattered electron (BSE) imaging using a Hitachi S-4300N scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a solid-state BSE detector at the Department of Earth Sciences, University of Gothenburg. The image contrast and brightness were adjusted to reveal within-mineral textures and zoning patterns. Mineral identification was aided by qualitative X-ray spectrometry analyses using an Oxford Instruments X-MAX 20 mm In order to aid sample targeting prior to precise Sm-Nd isotope analysis and to provide a context for interpretation, we investigated the relative and absolute abundances of major and trace elements in eudialyte, in particular the REE concentrations and Sm/Nd ratios, by laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) of selected crystal textural domains. We used an ESI 213NWR (TwoVol2) laser ablation system that was connected to an Agilent 8800 ICP-QQQ in no-gas mode at the Department of Earth Sciences, University of Gothenburg. Samples were ablated using a focused, pulsed laser beam with 20 μm diameter and 5 Hz repetition rate at a fluence of approximately 5.3 J/cm Measured intensities were calibrated against NIST SRM 610 glass element concentrations defined by  Measurements of Sm/Nd ratios of standard glasses NIST SRM 612, GSD-1G, BHVO-2G, BCR-2G, and GSE-1G were all individually identical (at the 2SD level) to ratios derived from ID-TIMS concentration data for Sm and Nd ( Eudialyte crystals in the cross-cutting vein are idiomorphic and up to a few millimetres in diameter. The crystals display sector zoning in the core, which transitions into rims with oscillatory zoning, and show brightening electron backscatter intensity from core to rim. The preservation of oscillatory zoning implies that these crystals were not modified by pervasive recrystallisation. Exceptions are small secondary crystals of REE-rich fluorbritholite-(Ce), visible as a BSE-bright phase both in BSE-dark eudialyte cores and along fractures in eudialyte and surrounding its outer rims ( One eudialyte crystal was selected for further studies, due to its size and the presence of growth zones that were large enough to target with a micromill. The sample locations for characterisation by LA-ICP-MS of REE patterns, Nd concentration, and The large, oscillatory zoned euhedral eudialyte crystals with a significant spread in Sm/Nd ratio were targeted as the best candidate of a primary REE-mineral formed during cross-cutting vein crystallisation. Calculated Submillimetre-scale sampling of eudialyte aimed for ID-TIMS Sm-Nd isotope analysis was carried out with a microscope-coupled micromill (Merchantek/New Wave MicroMill), broadly following the method described for plagioclase by A fine-tipped tungsten carbide drill bit was used, which had a ca. 150-μm-wide rounded tip. For a eudialyte with 7000 ppm Nd, sampling a 75-μm-deep hemisphere of eudialyte (assuming a density of 3 g cm The micromill's motorised stage X, Y, and Z motors were calibrated between each milled pit. The offset between microscope and drill mode was calibrated by drilling a ca. 10-μm-deep hole in alkali feldspar or nepheline close to the target eudialyte crystal. The milling process was controlled manually by the operator, since the automated drilling did not provide the necessary precision. The drill was run on the lowest speed (5%). Eudialyte is a brittle mineral and lower rotation speeds resulted in much smoother pits. The bit was carefully lowered in 5–10 μm increments using the Step function, until the resonance of the spinning drill bit touching the sample surface could be heard. The drill was lowered in 5 μm increments until the desired depth was reached (in this case 75 μm: half the diameter of the drill tip). Upon reaching the final depth the drill was left to dwell in place for a few seconds and then raised above the sample surface, where it was left to dwell again in the droplet for a few seconds. The drill tip was left inside the droplet after the drill was turned off. The droplet containing the fine eudialyte powder was then transferred to a Teflon® beaker with a tight lid. The sample area was rinsed at least five times with water, which was also collected. The procedure was repeated for each individual sample. One grain of eudialyte from the well-characterised sample LV01 ( Eudialyte sample “slurries” (<100 μL) were dissolved in 1 mL 6 N HCl. Samples were aliquoted and spiked with a calibrated mixed After separation, Sm and Nd were analysed by thermal ionisation mass spectrometry (TIMS) on a Thermo-Finnigan TRITON at Boston University. Nd was loaded onto Re filaments with 2 μL of a Ta The sample Nd yields are given in Full major and trace element compositions of eudialyte for all spots are available in the Supplementary Material. The total concentrations of REE In the centre of the crystal the Y/Ho ratio is increased (up to 41.7) with respect to chondrite (27.7, Sm-Nd data produced by ID-TIMS analysis of micromill-assisted sampling of eudialyte from Norra Kärr are presented in Of the remaining ID-TIMS data, M6 is regarded as an outlier. Close inspection of the REE patterns recorded by LA-ICP-MS surrounding M6 reveals that the domain was likely depleted in LREE by secondary fluorbritholite-(Ce), which would cause an increase in Sm/Nd ratio ( The Sm-Nd data for samples M1–4 prove a Sm-Nd isochron with an age of 1144 ± 53 Ma (95% confidence, MSWD = 1.9) and an initial The eudialyte in this sample from Norra Kärr has textural and chemical characteristics in common with cumulus eudialyte from the layered kakortokite in the agpaitic Ilímaussaq complex, South Greenland (cf. There is a gradual increase in Mn# from core to rim, which has been suggested as a monitor for magmatic differentiation (Fe/Mn ratio: In the inspected eudialyte crystal, from core to rim, there is a decrease in ratios of geochemical twin pairs Y/Ho, Zr/Hf, and Nb/Ta. Fractionation of these elements relative to each other is rare, but has been observed for example in granitic zircon (Zr/Hf: e.g. Eudialyte from the magmatic layered kakortokite unit in Ilímaussaq most clearly displays core-to-rim trends in large-ion lithophile elements (LILE) whereas high-field-strength elements (HFSE) remain relatively constant. The sectoral and oscillatory (magmatic) growth zones are overgrown by irregular rims of varying composition, possibly representing crystallisation from late isolated pockets of intercumulus or mush melt ( The presence of high Li concentrations in granitic magma has been shown to increase the solubility of columbite and tantalite in the melt, whereas the solubility of zircon and hafnon is decreased. Hafnon is, however, relatively more soluble than zircon and tantalite is more soluble than columbite, which causes the preferential retention of Hf and Ta in the melt and decreasing Zr/Hf and Nb/Ta ratios with fractionation ( The observed decreasing trends from core to rim in Y/Ho, Zr/Hf, and Nb/Ta in eudialyte from Norra Kärr stand in contrast with possible trends in magma differentiation in Ilímaussaq and Lovozero. Among the possible explanations, we attribute this unusual chemical zoning to the geochemical dynamics not being controlled mainly by ionic charge and radius and solid/liquid partition coefficients, but that differences in complexation with ligands such as F and Cl controlled solubility of these element pairs in the melt, which is a common feature of highly evolved (alkaline) magmas and aqueous fluids ( We have demonstrated that LA-ICP-MS is a reliable method to probe the Eudialyte-group minerals are commonly altered to a pseudomorph of secondary minerals, which can host minerals with higher REE content than the original eudialyte, such as fluorbritholite-(Ce), fergusonite-(Y), nacareniobsite-(Ce), allanite-(Ce), monazite, and other unidentified REE silicates (e.g. The magmatic intrusion of the alkaline rocks of Norra Kärr took place at ca. 1.49 Ga ( The solidus temperature may have been exceeded during the metamorphic overprinting of the Norra Kärr alkaline complex, evidence for which is widespread. Rather than being produced purely by Metamorphic temperatures in Norra Kärr, determined by geothermometric calculations based on jadeite-rich clinopyroxene compositions in the foliated nepheline syenites ( We have determined by Sm-Nd dating that the oscillatory crystal growth of eudialyte in a fabric-cross-cutting nepheline syenite vein formed at 1.14 Ga, approximately 350 million years after the magmatic activity in the alkaline complex. The age of the eudialyte-bearing pegmatoid shows that the cross-cutting vein indeed is not a primary igneous component of the alkaline complex, but instead formed as part of its overprinting. The Sm-Nd age of the eudialyte-rich cross-cutting vein approximately resembles general metamorphic ages of the 1.14–0.9 Ga Sveconorwegian (Grenvillian) orogeny to the west of Norra Kärr. This age is also in accordance with an uninterpreted 1148 ± 5 Ma Ar-Ar stepheating plateau age derived from arfvedsonite in Norra Kärr ( Our interpretation of the younger cross-cutting veins is that they represent the crystallised products of variably pooled volumes of low-temperature (<550 °C) partial melts of metamorphosed agpaitic nepheline syenite. The prevalence of primary euhedral catapleiite laths in these cross-cutting nepheline syenite veins points toward initially high H Some eudialyte contains secondary fluorbritholite-(Ce) rich in light rare-earth elements (LREE: La-Sm). The fluorbritholite-(Ce)'s REE are sourced from the eudialyte itself, which at its core displays a strong negative La anomaly (see B1 and C5 in Akin to Norra Kärr, a metamorphic overprint has also been suggested to characterise the Red Wine and Kipawa (Canada) and Sushina Hill (India) occurrences of agpaitic nepheline syenite ( The combination of full rare-earth element profiles and trace element distribution with precise Nd isotopic characterisation of exceedingly small sample volumes within mineral textural domains provides an exciting new source of petrogenetic data, in particular for REE deposits with multistage development. This method is not only suitable for studies of eudialyte, but is equally applicable to other REE-rich minerals such as monazite, xenotime, and bastnäsite, both in mineral deposits or as accessory minerals in other geological settings. At Norra Kärr, partial melting during metamorphic overprinting resulted in a localised remobilisation of REE into pegmatoid veins. The formation of pegmatoid veins led to a textural grain size increase that could have economic implications for a mineral deposit, for example in terms of its comminution characteristics and liberation of ore minerals from associated minerals.  Non-destructive micro-textural and micro-chemical characterisation of rare-earth element minerals by BSE imaging and LA-ICP-MS greatly facilitates the selection of suitable sample sites for precise Sm-Nd studies. Detailed textural and chemical context adds dimensions of validation to subsequent ID–TIMS data and can for example aid in avoiding and identifying isotopic contamination by mineral inclusions. LA-ICP-MS is capable of precise and accurate determination of Sm/Nd ratios in geological media with Sm and Nd concentration ranges spanning from parts per million to percentage levels. Due to the relatively fast nature of LA-ICP-MS measurements, sample material can be screened for suitability prior to more labour-intensive ID-TIMS measurements, which increases the chances of successful Sm-Nd isotope studies. Micromilling of rare-earth element minerals achieves the extraction of sufficiently large sample masses for precise Sm-Nd isotope studies by conventional ID–TIMS analysis. With enough spread in Sm/Nd ratio, Sm-Nd isochrons with meaningful precision can be derived from individual mineral domains as demonstrated by us in a eudialyte sample. This procedure is applicable to isotopic studies of other rare-earth element ore minerals from different deposit styles. Eudialyte hosted by cross-cutting leucocratic pegmatoid veins formed at 1.144 ± 0.053 Ga (95% confidence), ca. 350 million years after the magmatic intrusion of the Norra Kärr alkaline complex. Based on correlation with melting experiments and thermodynamic modelling, we suggest that these veins formed by partial melting of the agpaitic host rocks at temperatures below 550 °C, causing widespread textural and chemical changes to the rare-earth element deposit. By extension this process could be important in other localities, such as the Red Wine and Kipawa alkaline complexes (Canada) and Sushina Hill (India). The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We are grateful to Leading Edge Materials (formerly Tasman Metals) for providing the sample material used in this study and geological support by Magnus Leijd and Johan Berg. This work was conducted as part of a PhD project by A.S., which is funded by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at