On 16 and 17 October 1998, the Neville G.W. Cook Conference was held at the Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, California, USA. The Conference was held to commemorate the many contributions that Professor Neville Cook made to rock mechanics and rock engineering. Most of the presentations at the Conference were given by Neville’s former students and colleagues. This Special Issue, containing a selection of those papers, is thus dedicated to the memory of Neville Cook. Drs Chin-Fu Tsang and Larry Myer organized the Neville G.W. Cook Conference and have kindly acted as Guest Editors for this Special Issue, arranging the submission and reviews of the papers. They have written a Preface which explains the background to the commemorative Conference. They have also compiled a series of seven reminiscences by former colleagues of Neville Cook into the one article, ‘Remembering Neville G.W. Cook: The Scientist, Colleague and Friend’, which follows their Preface. Then, there are thirty papers which have been collated under the headings: Part A: Theoretical Studies and Numerical Modeling (7 papers), Part B: Combined Theoretical Studies and Laboratory Experiments (10 papers), Part C: Laboratory Techniques and Field Studies (7 papers), Part D: Reviews and Discussions (6 papers). Neville was able to work theoretically, in the laboratory, in the field, and in any combination of these, and so it is gratifying that we have such a good distribution of papers under the different headings. (Note that all contributions have been treated in this Special Issue equally as papers — because it would disturb the sequence of the contributions if they were separated into papers, technical notes and discussions.) It is also appropriate that the papers from the Conference are being published in this Journal. Neville had a long association with the Journal, being on the Editorial Board from the very first issue in 1964 and continuing right through to 1998. He also authored and co-authored a total of 15 papers published in the Journal, beginning with one in the second Issue of the first Volume in 1964 and ending with the two-part paper with Steve Blair in the Issue published at about the same time as the Conference in 1998, see the list below. The reminiscing contributions in the article following the Preface provide some insights into the circumstances that led to these and Neville’s other papers. Cook NGW. The application of seismic techniques to problems in rock mechanics.  Calculations of energy released during rockbursts in SA. Cook NGW. The failure of rock.  Full explanation of energy changes during rock failure and how to obtain complete Wiebols GA, Cook NGW. An energy criterion for the strength of rock in polyaxial compression.  Proposes triaxial failure criterion Hallbauer DK, Wagner H, Cook NGW. Some observations concerning the microscopic and mechanical behaviour of quartzite specimens in stiff, triaxial compression tests.  Experiments using a 2GN/m stiff testing machine on Witwatersrand quartzite. Complete Cook NGW, Hood M, Tsai F. Observations of crack growth in hard rock loaded by an indentor.  Punch tests on Sierra granite, interaction between adjacent punches, AE event counts, complete F– Kemeny J, Cook NGW. Effective moduli, non-linear deformation and strength of a cracked elastic solid.  Studies of the influence of single and multiple cracks in the development of rock failure, emphasis on Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM), strain softening. Ewy RT, Cook NGW. Deformation and fracture around cylindrical openings in rock — I. Observations and analysis of deformations.  Ewy RT, Cook NGW. Deformation and fracture around cylindrical openings in rock — II. Initiation, growth and interaction of fractures.  Deformations, moduli variations, stress paths, dilation, time dependency, lab scale failure around circular holes, borehole breakout, freezing of fracture geometry by Woods metal saturation, detailed studies of crack formation. Cook NGW. The Jaeger Memorial Dedication Lecture, Natural joints in rock: mechanical, hydraulic and seismic behaviour and properties under normal stress.  Held at the U. of Minnesota 12 June 1988. “…the rock mass is not a mathematically uniform body but is broken up by a network of joints and faults…” quoted from J.C. Jaeger’s Rankine Lecture. Extensive review of the mechanical and hydraulic behaviour of rock joints, plus the seismic response. Ita SL, Cook NGW, Myer LR, Nihei KT. Effects of stress anisotropy on the static and dynamic properties of Berea sandstone. Proceedings of the 34th US Symposium on Rock Mechanics.  U. of Wisconsin 1993 symposium. Report of laboratory studies and non-linear grain contacts within Berea sandstone. Blair SC, Cook NGW, Daveler S. A zeroth-order statistical model for fracture in rock in compression. Proceedings of the 34th US Symposium on Rock Mechanics.  Also U. of Wisconsin 1993 symposium. Study of the progressive fracturing of rock, grid of stressed elements, understanding the form of Zimmerman RW, Myer LR, Cook NGW. Grain and void compression in fractured and porous rocks.  Relates ‘pressure’ in rock grains to confining pressure, pore pressure and porosity and shows that the total volume change due to an increment of confining pressure is independent of the pore structure and porosity. Yi W, Nihei KT, Rector JW, Nakagawa S, Myer LR, Cook NGW. Frequency-dependent seismic anisotropy in fractured rock. Proceedings of the 36th US Symposium on Rock Mechanics. Effects of multiple fractures on seismic waves. Blair SC, Cook NGW. Analysis of compressive fracture in rock using statistical techniques: Part I. A non-linear rule-based model.  Blair SC, Cook NGW. Analysis of compressive fracture in rock using statistical techniques: Part II. Effect of microscale heterogeneity on macroscopic deformation.  Simulation of rock failure in uniaxial compression considering crack nucleation and propagation at the grain scale. Understanding the form of complete Neville and his papers also influenced me personally. I was studying for a mining engineering degree in Edinburgh during 1962–65 at the same time as, unknown to me, Neville was conducting his pioneering work on rockbursts and testing machines in South Africa and Minnesota. Arriving at the University of Minnesota in 1965 to study for a PhD under Charles Fairhurst, I quickly became aware of the rock mechanics background, and especially of Paper 2 in the list above. Moreover, I benefitted greatly from discussions with Neville at Minnesota, especially about the validity of elasticity theory. I remember those discussions vividly. If I had to choose the paper which has influenced me the most in rock mechanics, it is ‘The Failure of Rock’, number 2 in the list above. What a succinct title, and what ramifications.… The Abstract of the paper begins, “Virtually no information concerning the non-elastic behaviour of hard rock is available, as the system usually used to determine the strength of rock specimens becomes unstable as soon as the peak of the stress–strain characteristic is passed and its slope becomes negative.” Where did Neville’s understanding — as illustrated in the Frontispiece — lead me? Helping Wolfgang Wawersik, I saw the For all these reasons, and with the help of Chin-Fu Tsang and Larry Myer, I am more than pleased that we have been able to commemorate Neville Cook’s professional life and to honour his achievements with this Special Issue. The cover photograph shows part of Neville’s gravestone in the Lafayette Cemetery. The letters of Neville’s name are deeply incised into the Minnesota granite, representing how deeply his ideas have influenced the landscape of rock mechanics. Neville’s wife, Jennifer, and son, Paul, were able to attend the Conference at the Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in 1998, and we have been able to include a paper written by Paul. I hope that they, and Ann-Marie, Neville’s daughter, will be pleased with this Special Issue — which represents the sincere and heartfelt appreciation of the rock mechanics community, many of whom, directly or indirectly, knowingly or unknowingly, now use the ideas and procedures originally developed by Neville Cook.