Conical picks are by far the most widely used drag type cutting tools employed on partial face rock excavation machines. The cutting force and specific energy are two important design parameters for the conical pick performance, and the rock cutting testing is considered as the promising tool for determining these parameters. In the absence of an instrumented cutting rig, researchers generally rely on empirical predictive plots. For this, this paper suggests predictive plots for estimating the cutting force and specific energy, in consideration of the cutting depth to define the cuttability with conical picks. In this context, rock cutting tests were carried out on six volcanic rock samples with varying cutting depths using the unrelieved and relieved cutting modes. The cutting force and specific energy were correlated with the uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, elasticity modulus, and plasticity index. Predictive plots were proposed for different cutting depths in the unrelieved and relieved cutting modes and exponential relationships were obtained among the cuttability parameters, and mechanical and elastoplastic properties of rocks.Mechanical excavation machines have been widely used for excavation of underground structures both in mining and civil purposes since 1950s. Conical picks are the most dominant rock cutting tools employed on partial rock excavation machines such as roadheaders, continuous miners, and shearer-loaders. Cuttability estimation of rocks plays a key role in the performances of mechanical excavators. The specific energy ( The unrelieved and relieved cutting modes, as shown in The optimum The cutting force, in addition to Theoretical works are concentrated on finding As an alternative method, numerical modeling has been adopted to simulate rock cutting (e.g. In addition to aforementioned methods, for simplicity upon application, researchers tried to correlate the parameters obtained from conical pick experiments with some physico-mechanical properties of rocks. Previous studies on conical pick cutting showed that Based on this, this study concentrates on rock cutting tests on selected volcanic rocks using conical picks, and suggests predictive plots with special reference to the cutting depth for site engineers with partial face machines. Six volcanic rock samples (two andesites and four tuffs) were subjected to cutting tests with vertical rock cutting rig (VRCR). Cutting tests were realized both in the unrelieved (isolated) and relieved (interaction) cutting modes. The maximum cutting force ( Partial face machines are generally used to excavate the formations having intact rock strength (UCS) between 50 MPa and 100 MPa. In this study, in consideration of the performances of partial face machines, rocks having UCS between 50 MPa and 100 MPa were selected for controlled rock cutting tests. These samples include two andesites (A1 and A2) and four tuffs (T1, T2, T3 and T4). These volcanic rock samples contain no visible discontinuity and flaw, thus they can be considered as being homogenous to some extent. UCS ( Tangent moduli of elasticity (  Rock cutting tests were carried out using VRCR. Basic components of the testing system are demonstrated in Cutting tests were conducted using the relieved and unrelieved cutting modes for simulation of field cutting conditions and isolated cutting. Isolated cutting tests were applied with varying cutting depths ( Since It is clear from the previous study ( In While correlations with the UCS ( Variations of Relieved cutting test results have implications with respect to field cutting conditions, since picks on cutting heads cut the rock by interacting with the neighborhood cutter. Hence, these results gain importance for cutter head design when determining the optimum pick spacing in the cutter head and for performance prediction as well (  In addition to the obtained correlations between dependent and independent variables, this study introduces some other findings. First, the necessity of the proposed relationships between dependent ( The conical pick cutting tests were conducted on six different volcanic rock samples both in the unrelieved and relieved cutting modes. Dependent variables (  Parameters Compressive strength ( Application of the PI with the Schmidt hammer seems to be a promising tool for estimation of the cuttability parameters, showing a better performance than the elasticity modulus and tensile strength. It is a very useful tool since it is a non-destructive testing method. It should be noted that all these correlations are pertinent to the rock group used in this study, covering the partial-face excavation machine applicability range. Suggested predictive plots will be useful for the site engineers who deal with the excavation machines employing conical picks. The cutting performance of a conical pick can be estimated using simple rock mechanics tests or non-destructive tests such as The author declares that he has no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author greatly acknowledges the anonymous reviewers who have helped to improve the quality of this paper.