In this paper, the study on damage evolution of sapphire induced in scratching process using acoustic emission (AE) technology was carried out. Single-grit scratches with ramp scratch depth were conducted on C-plane of sapphire with AE signal monitoring. Groove microstructure after scratching shows that the damage evolution process is mainly determined by the interactions among cracks, specimen surface and groove boundary. To evaluate the damage evolution, the AE waveform indexes, i.e. fractal and frequency characteristics, were fully analyzed and correlated with groove microstructure of specimen after tests. It is found that the fractal dimension (FD) can identify the three basic damage modes as well as various damage behaviors during scratching process. In addition, the model of damage evolution is further proposed. The frequency characteristics of AE signals are distinctive to various damage behaviors during their evolution, especially to the occurrences of the critical damages and removal modes. Furthermore, the characteristic frequency band (CFB) of AE signals was extracted. It is found that FD of the reconstructed AE signals in CFB (86.8–161.4 KHz herein) can highlight damage details and features during initial damage stage of sapphire in scratch test effectively.Sapphire ( To date, numerous researches on damage mechanisms of sapphire have been carried out, as overviewed in Besides sapphire, AE technology has also been widely applied for the plastic and brittle damage characterization of other ceramics, including alumina [ To detect material damages, some AE parameters are broadly utilized including AE counts, cumulative AE energy, cumulative AE hits, AE energy distribution, etc., which can distinguish different evolving damages. However, those parameters are strongly dependent on the threshold and other settings in AE data acquisition system, which are decided by researchers and experimental procedure [ The fractal theory, introduced by Mandelbrot in the 1970s, aimed to characterize the scale invariance characteristics of irregular objects based on self-similarity [ This paper aims to investigate the damage evolution of sapphire by AE technology in single-grit scratch tests on C-plane of sapphire. The fractal and frequency characteristics of AE waveforms recorded in scratching process were mainly studied. This study is conducive to elucidating the damage evolution mechanism of sapphire and contributes to the development of damage-free machining technology. Moreover, the proposed AE parameters in this paper are not limited to sapphire, but can be applied to other ceramics as well. According to the relevant researches, there are two types of damages for sapphire in scratching, i.e., the plastic deformation and the brittle fracture (crack growth). Huang et al. proved that the plastic deformation of sapphire evolved into lattice disorder, dislocation, stacking faults, dislocation glide and twins as the scratch depth increases during nanoscratch [ Brittle fracture, i.e., crack growth herein, is another AE source because crack growth produces intense stress relief, resulting in a large number of high-energy AE signals [ To clarify the theory of evaluating damage evolution by AE signal, the theoretical model of AE waveforms based on crack growth is analyzed. Based on the researches of [ For the specific case of relatively large macrocrack in brittle solids with extensions, Substituting Eq. Eq. Substituting Eq. A burst AE signal is usually represented in the form of a decaying sinusoid, as shown in Eq. Relevant studies [ The above analysis shows that AE waveform is a function of crack growth. To understand the theoretical model of AE waveform intuitively, we take the crack propagation length of 5 μm, 10 μm and 15 μm respectively as examples to analyze the AE waveforms. According to Refs. [ The single crystal sapphire sample was fabricated by Aurora Optoelectronics Co., Ltd. (China, Harbin). The crystal orientations were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization. The C-plane sapphire sample, with 22 mm diameter and 3 mm thickness, was employed in indentation and single-grit scratch tests along In this study, the scratch testing was conducted on an ultra-precision machine. As shown in The AE sensor was mounted under the sample with a sampling frequency of 2 MHz. As shown in Many methods of calculating fractal dimension (FD) have been proposed, including Hausdorf dimension method, box dimension method, capacity dimension method, correlation dimension method, etc. [ It was assumed that the recorded AE data was the vector The box dimension In this work, the box sides As a dominant factor of AE waveforms, frequency component of AE signals has been widely studied. In this work, the frequency characteristics of recorded AE signals during scratching process were investigated systemically to reveal the relationship between AE waveforms and damage modes essentially. For this goal, the normal and normalized time-frequency spectrum (TFS), the spectral centroid (SC) and peak frequency (PF) of the spectrum were analyzed. In frequency analysis, each 10,000 data of raw AE signals were processed by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to obtain the frequency-domain characteristics. In order to remove the interference of low-energy frequency components on the distribution of frequency spectrum, the points with energy proportion less than 10% were eliminated in Section The evolution of damage behaviors of sapphire during single-grit scratching process was addressed by the combined analysis of groove microstructures and AE features.  The AE features are correlated with damage evolution. It could be observed in The important damage characteristics of sapphire during damage evolution process was discussed with the aid of AE technology in this section. In order to reveal the dependence of AE features on damage modes, the fractal characteristic of AE waveforms against damages evolution was investigated. The fractal dimension (FD) of AE signals was obtained based on the calculation method described in Section 2.3.1, and the variation of FD points with scratching depth is plotted in The relationship between FD of AEs and damage behaviors in scratching process was investigated by analyzing FD features with the corresponding microstructural characteristics of groove under the same scratching depth. As shown in It should be noted that when scratching depth exceeds 149 nm, some FD values begin to enter the second-data-domain. Particularly, if the scratching depth is between 149 and 270 nm, the FD values cover both the first- and the second-data-domains, which can be attributed to the cracks growth. As shown in Similarly, once scratching depth exceeds 375 nm, the FD values will enter the third-data-domain. When scratching depth is between 375 nm and 560 nm, most of FD values are still in the second-data-domain while only a few data distribute in the third-data-domain. These data values decrease and show enlarge dispersity. Moreover, it is found that DBT occurs in the corresponding scratching depth, which means brittle removal of materials (tearing and spalling) are becoming a new damage mode in this part besides the existed crack propagation, as shown in Based on the above analysis, it is concluded that the three data domains in FD distribution, i.e. the first-, second- and third-data-domain, are related to ductile deformation, crack propagation and brittle removal (tearing and spalling), respectively, which are the basic damage modes in the scratching process. The occurrences of these three data domains are defined as initial, intermediate and serious damage stages during damage evolution, respectively. In addition, the ‘V’-styles of FD values distribution in the junctions of adjacent stages are the indicators of damage behavior transition. This is because that as damage evolves the occurrence of new (also severer) damage behavior will generate higher burst AE signals, thus result in the decrease of FD value. However, as damages are grew, the stability of relevant AE signals increase, which leads to the increase of FD values. Hence, the ‘falling and rising’ feature of FD value variation results in the ‘V’-style of FD distribution in the junction of different damage stages. From the discussions on three data domains and ‘V’-style in FD distribution, it can be argued that the damage behaviors occurred during scratching process are resulted from the development of three basic damage modes, i.e. ductile deformation, crack propagation and brittle removal. Inspired by these facts, the damage evolution mechanisms during scratching process are proposed. In general, during the scratching process, the material experiences two kinds of damage types as scratching depth increases, i.e. ductile deformation and brittle fracture, and the main damage evolution is determined by the latter. Thus, the model of brittle damage evolution is proposed, i.e. the evolution of specific brittle damages is a function of interactions among cracks, specimen surface and groove boundary, as scratching depth increases, as presented in In summary, the propagations of lateral and radial cracks in density, length and depth can change the interactions among cracks, specimen surface and groove boundary, which result in various brittle damage behaviors. As scratching depth progresses, the brittle damage evolution are determined by the variation of the interaction pairs in scratch testing. In this section, the characteristics of frequency parameters, i.e. TFS, N-TFS, SC and PF, are investigated as damage behaviors evolve in scratching process.  The N-TFS and SC are presented in The trend of PF numbers during damage evolution is presented in In order to understand the frequency characteristics of damage behaviors, the relationship between the damage evolution and the two frequency parameters, i.e. N-TFS and SC and was investigated. The shift of SC in damage evolution, which reflects the spectral changes of AE signals, shows distinctive characteristics in Therefore, the three different trends of SC variation correspond to the development of ductile deformation, initiation and growth of cracks, and spalling, respectively. Thus, the changes of damage modes and removal modes from ductile to brittle, indicated by the emergences of lateral crack and spalling, can be characterized by the occurrences of trend alteration of SC, i.e. particularly the maximum point and the fluctuation starting point, as shown in The frequency range that involves highlighted damage information and that can be used for damage characterization is defined as characteristic frequency band (CFB) in this paper. In this section, the CFB was determined, and then detailed features of damage behaviors were investigated particularly. The previous discussion shows that upon the initiation of radial crack the dominant frequency band of AE signals shifts to 124.2–131.2 KHz, around which the intermittent frequencies related to brittle fracture appear. It indicates that these frequencies involve promising information for damage characterization in scratch. After analyzing the spectrum features, the frequency band in 86.8–161.4 KHz (as illustrated in The reconstructed AE signal, obtained through inverse Fourier transform (IFT) to CFB, was investigated by fractal analysis. The reconstructed AE signals in the entire scratching process are presented in Furthermore, the FD of reconstructed AE signals is presented in The FD characteristics in the initial damage stage were investigated emphatically. In the initial damage stage, the variation of FD is significantly different at three critical scratching depth, i.e. 11 nm ( In order to verify the above conclusions and investigate the anisotropy of AE signals, the scratch tests along different crystal orientations on the C-plane with identical scratching depth, and analyzed the corresponding fractal and frequency characteristics of AE signals. In this experiment, the C-plane of sapphire is scratched in every The microstructures of scratched grooves are shown in The raw AE signals corresponding to different crystal orientations are shown in The spectrum of AE signals corresponding to different crystal orientations is shown In this paper, the damage evolution in sapphire scratching process was studied by AE technology. The fractal and frequency characteristics of AE signals in damage evolution was discussed, then the CFB of AE signals acquired was focused on to highlight damage details. This work shows that the damage characteristics and damage model during scratching process could be revealed through AE data. The main conclusions are obtained as follows: Based on the value range and dispersity of FD, the FD distribution of AE signals in scratch can be classified to three domains which are corresponded to three basic damage modes, i.e. ductile deformation, crack propagation and brittle removal, respectively. Furthermore, it is found that the FD distribution shows a ‘V’-style before and after the variation of brittle damage behavior. The model of brittle damage evolution is proposed. The interactions between cracks, specimen surface and boundary produce specific damage behaviors and the variation of these interactions, triggered by lateral and radial cracks propagation in length and depth, determines the evolution of brittle damage. When lateral crack, radial crack, DBT and brittle removal are initiated, there are distinct features in Time-Frequency spectrum. Furthermore, the dominant frequency band shifts from 18 to 22 KHz to 124.2–131.2 KHz before and after radial crack initiation. The frequency range shifts from 14.4 to 289.2 KHz to 14.4–369.8 KHz after brittle removal occurs. The SC variation trends, which increases then decreases and finally fluctuated at a balance state, are resulted from the development of ductile deformation, crack propagation and brittle removal, respectively. Besides, new PFs generate because of the above-mentioned damage behaviors, and the intermittent PFs emerge after the initiation of radial crack. The fractal features of the reconstructed AE signals in CFB (86.8–161.4 KHz herein) can effectively highlight damage details and features during initial damage stage in scratch test, e.g., the dominant damage modes change from elastoplastic deformation to plastic flow and ductile removal of material when the scratching depth reaches 11 nm. The fractal and frequency characteristics of AE signals are sensitive to brittle damage evolving, resulting in their anisotropic features with scratching along different crystal orientations of sapphire. This work shows that AE technology is an effective and promising method to characterize and evaluate damage evolution of sapphire in scratching process. In future work, the focus will be the on-line monitoring of damage evolution in the machining process via AE technology to achieve damage-free machining of sapphire elements. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by the