Accumulation of the subtle impacts of fatigue-induced rock damage may ultimately trigger rock failure. Probing, understanding and quantifying this behavior is crucial in evaluating the mechanical response under dynamic loading. We conduct cyclic uniaxial compression tests with real-time measurement of ultrasonic velocity to probe the evolution of fatigue-induced damage in shale subjected to cycles of increasing-amplitude and constant-amplitude. The stress-strain response shows hysteretic behavior and hardening effect under cyclic compression. Time of first arrival is used to estimate apparent changes in ultrasonic velocity at incremented maximum stresses. Coda wave interferometry (CWI) is applied to detect the more subtle changes in ultrasonic velocity at minimum stress (10 MPa) under fatigue-loading. Despite a continuous increase in ultrasonic velocity measured at incremented maximum stresses the subtle signal of increasing fatigue-induced damage is apparent in the sensitive CWI signal. This is reflected in the descending trend of ultrasonic velocity, especially the S-wave velocity, observed at the minimum stress (10 MPa) – and may ultimately result in failure. The evolution of ultrasonic velocity is controlled by the competing effects of irreversible healing/closure of micro-fractures, dominating at low-stresses/early-cycles, and counteracted by the creation of fatigue-induced micro-fractures, dominating at high-stresses/late-cycles. The development of fatigue-induced micro-fractures is optimally detected by the multiply-scattered coda waves but is absent in the first arrivals. Dynamic modulus and relative changes in effective velocity inferred from CWI are sensitive and discernable indicators of fatigue-induced damage prior to failure while characteristics of the stress-strain curve and the evolution of elastic moduli are inferior indicators.Rock masses and structures on and in rock are typically subjected to repetitive natural and human-induced loads ( A variety of variables have been applied to estimate damage in rocks under cyclic loading conditions, Monitoring of ultrasonic wave speed has been used to study the fatigue behavior of natural rocks under cyclic loading. Coda waves constitute the tail of a seismogram, reflecting multiple scattering in a heterogeneous medium. To address the potential of through-volume monitoring of structures in rock we apply coda wave interferometry (CWI) to measure subtle variations in ultrasonic wave-speed as an indicator of fatigue-induced damage over various loading paths. Shale specimens are subjected to both cyclic loading with an increasing stress amplitude for each cycle and to 100 cycles of constant stress amplitude. Changes in the form of the stress-strain curves and the evolution of elastic moduli are used, together with measurements of ultrasonic velocity to characterize fatigue then ultimate failure behavior of the specimens. The utility of first arrivals and time-of-flight analyses versus a full coda analysis are contrasted in defining the emergence of subtle impacts of damage evolutions under the different monotonically-increasing and uniform cyclic loading conditions. This study contributes to a better understanding of stress-sensitive ultrasonic properties and fatigue behavior of shales under cyclic loading, providing guidance in monitoring time-varying stress fields and in predicting time-to-failure of natural and constructed structures in rock. Three cylindrical specimens of shale are created from core ( We conducted both the real-time mechanical test and the ultrasonic measurement using the servo-hydraulically controlled GCTS Rock Testing System ( We applied two cyclic loading scenarios to study the fatigue behavior and ultrasonic variation of the three shale specimens along the loading direction. For the UF2 shale specimen ( In this study, we emphasized the fatigue-induced ultrasonic variation under cyclic loading based on a sensitive coda wave interferometry analysis. The ultrasonic data were collected only along the uniaxial loading direction without being monitored in the other two directions which are parallel to the beddings. Stress-induced anisotropic damages, which may occur in transversely anisotropic rocks materials depending on the direction of loading, One of the great advantages of using coda waves, compared to direct waves or single scattered waves, is their high sensitivity to weak perturbations in damage. This is primarily due to the longer travelling paths. This enables coda waves to capture subtle time-lapse variations in the medium due to various impacts of stress, The fundamental feature of CWI is to cross-correlate the coda waves to monitor time-shifts or relative velocity changes. There are two methods for the estimation of relative velocity changes, based on CWI. The seismic doublet method The relative velocity change ( In an elastic medium, compressive (P) waves usually propagate faster than shear (S) waves. The relative change in the effective velocity, inferred from CWI, is a weighted average of the relative changes of P- and S- wave velocities, This relation shows that the relative change in the effective velocity inferred from CWI depends much more strongly on the perturbation in the S-wave velocity. Theoretically, CWI analysis based on S-coda waves can be used as a sentinel for subtle changes in a medium. Dynamic elastic constants can also be determined by the P- and S- wave velocities. Assuming that a medium is elastic, homogeneous, and isotropic, then the dynamic elastic modulus The stress-strain curves for the three shale specimens cyclically-loaded in this study are shown in Monitoring the evolution of elastic modulus as an indicator damage and reduction in strength has been previously reported as following either decreasing Under constant-amplitude loading ( In this section, we discuss the stress-dependent variation of ultrasonic velocities at different stress amplitudes (Section   Interestingly, for sample UF3 under constant-amplitude loading, both P- and S- wave velocities continued to increase in a roughly linear pattern from 10 MPa to 60 MPa, indicating that there were no major changes in damage prior to the first cycle of loading to 60 MPa. However, sample UF3 failed after 23 cycles of loading/unloading at a maximum stress of 60 MPa, suggesting that fatigue-induced damage accumulated progressively with increase in cycles and eventually triggered the failure. Also note that specimens UF2 and UF3 were cut from the same intact block ( The CWI stretching method using a moving-reference frame was employed to probe the subtle changes in P- and S- wave velocities of the three specimens at 10 MPa under different loading conditions. Evolution of P- and S- wave velocities at 10 MPa, under different loading-unloading conditions, were plotted in As discussed previously, under either increasing-amplitude or constant-amplitude loading conditions, the P- and S- wave velocities tend to increase at low-stress levels and tend to decrease at high-stress-level cycles ( Despite the descending trend of ultrasonic velocities in the later stages for specimen UF2, based on CWI (marked by the black dashed elliptical line in According to the theory of elastic wave propagation, dynamic elastic constants were calculated based on P- and S- wave velocities at a stress level of 10 MPa, according to Eqs. We explored the fatigue behavior and ultrasonic characteristics of three shale specimens monitored in the loading direction, one under an increasing-amplitude of applied load test and the other two under constant-amplitude load tests. The stress-dependent P- and S- wave velocities (monitored in the loading direction) at different stresses were estimated based on first arrivals, while subtle fatigue-induced changes in P- and S- wave velocities at 10 MPa (different unloading paths) were characterized from sensitive CWI coda analysis. Conventional analyses based on stress-strain curves and the evolution of static and dynamic moduli were used to study the fatigue and failure behavior of the three shale specimens. Summary observations are as follows. The stress-strain response shows hysteretic behavior under cyclic compression. Static elastic moduli are higher during unloading relative to loading (hardening effect). Under loading at constant-amplitude, the hardening effect becomes more apparent with an increase in the maximum stress. However, the evolution of the elastic moduli could not serve as useful and robust indicator of damage to predict fatigue-induced damage and failure behavior. Poisson's ratio based on stress-strain relation may be a good indicator of fatigue-induced damage under constant-amplitude test; nevertheless, the stress-strain relation is hard to be non-destructively obtained, which is not applicable to detecting failure precursors in the field either. The P-wave velocity of shale sample UF2 (under increasing-amplitude) at the maximum stress increases with stress Variations in ultrasonic velocities monitored at the minimum stress (10 MPa) show an increasing trend at low-stresses and a descending trend at high-stresses. Prior to failure, S-wave velocity shows an apparent descending trend. This could be a good indicator of fatigue and a suitable failure precursor for natural rocks under dynamic loading. In addition, dynamic modulus and relative changes in effective stress inferred from CWI reflect micro-structural perturbations in bulk rocks and thus is well suited as an indicator of fatigue and to monitor and predict dynamic rock degradation. Last but not least, conventional first arrival methods may cause a misleading interpretation of fatigue-induced internal damage. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by The The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at