Recent sediments of Lake Arendsee, a small eutrophic lake in NE Germany, were examined in high temporal resolution in order to investigate the applicability of stable isotopes as proxies to trace paleoenvironmental conditions. The age model of the sediment core is based on varve counting and 137Cs/210Pb dating and reveals that the sedimentary record covers the last 70 years, during which the lake has undergone major changes in productivity and eutrophication in response to nutrient loading. Since 1965, TOC, TIC, TN and TP accumulation rates in general reflect the change from oligo-/mesotrophic to eutrophic level. The isotopic compositions of autochthonous organic matter and authigenic calcite (whitings) demonstrate that carbon isotope fractionation takes place in a CO2-limited pool. In accordance with the historical limnological observations, enhanced eutrophication is reflected by δ13CTOC increases of over 3‰ from 1934 to 1985 as a result of less 12C/13C fractionation by photosynthesis during intense primary productivity. Decreasing δ13CTIC values indicate that biogenically induced calcite formation occurred during enhanced primary production accompanied by CO2 limitation. The gradual trend to more light nitrogen isotopic signatures towards the sediment surface reflects the dominance of air nitrogen fixation of cyanobacteria blooms during the last decades. The δ18OTIC distribution suggests that plankton blooms between 1934 and 1978 had shifted towards the early season with lower temperatures as a result of increasing nutrient level, which subsequently favor plankton blooms even in colder waters. Since the mid 1980s, decreasing δ13CTOC and increasing δ13CTIC values since 1985 indicate a more efficient 12C/13C fractionation during photosynthesis with no CO2 limitation. This improvement in water quality is in accordance with several remediation measures carried out since the late 1970s. Linear isotopic trends are interrupted by high TIC, TOC, TN and TP accumulation rates in the early 1970s, which can be clearly attributed to the artificial drainage of a nearby wetland carried out during that time. This event can be considered an important external source for nutrient-loaded water and particulate matter and is displayed by significantly heavier δ13CTIC and δ18OTIC values in the sedimentary record.Annually laminated lake sediments can be considered environmental archives with high temporal resolution. The most recent laminated lake sediments offer the advantage that sediment records can be compared with time series of limnological data. The composition of laminae deposited within this period can be used to calibrate proxy data. Among the variety of geochemical proxies, stable isotope ratios of elements involved in biogeochemical cycles are powerful indicators to explain paleoenvironmental conditions of lacustrine systems. The information provided by these signatures in the sediments is diverse. Variations in carbon isotopes have been successfully used to detect significant changes in the rate of surface water productivity and anoxia in the bottom waters (e.g. We present here a geochemical record that contains 70 years of annually laminated sediments from Lake Arendsee, NE Germany. During this time, the lake has undergone major changes in productivity and eutrophication in response to nutrient loading from agriculture and industrialization in the lake watershed. External and internal remediation measures have been established within the last 20 years in order to improve the quality of the lake water. As the limnological history of Lake Arendsee is well described for the last 100 years, this lake is supposed to be an ideal site to study the processes of recent sediment formation. The annually laminated sediments offer the possibility to investigate in detail the stable isotope behavior of carbon, oxygen and nitrogen in response to the rapid eutrophication history of the lake and the impact of remediation measures. Lake Arendsee is located in the eastern part of Northern Germany (52°53.5′N, 11°28.5′E) in a predominantly agricultural area ( Lake Arendsee is dimictic with a thermocline between 7 and 15 m, it covers a surface area of 5.2 km At the end of the 19th century, Lake Arendsee was described as oligotrophic ( As part of a restoration program, a sewage treatment plant was built in 1973 and 3 years later a deepwater drainage system was constructed ( In March 1998, sediment cores were recovered from the deepest part of Lake Arendsee at a depth of 48 m ( Measurements of total carbon (TC) and total nitrogen (TN) contents and stable isotopic analyses (δ The carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of CaCO The δ This equation corrects a δ Total phosphorus (TP) was measured photometrically as molybdate-reactive phosphor at 710 nm (Perkin-Elmer Lambda 2S UV/Vis spectrometer) after total dissolution of the sediment samples in HNO Two independent methods (varve counting and radioisotope dating) were done to establish a chronological framework for the surficial sediments of Lake Arendsee. Varve formation takes place in summer when primary productivity takes up CO Second, low-level γ-spectrometric measurements of Five types of sediments can be distinguished in the sediment core (cf. Data of unsupported A comparison between According to the suggested age model for Lake Arendsee sediments ( The downhole distribution of average accumulation rates of TIC, TOC, TN and TP supports a general division into five units ( The TOC/TN profile in the organic-rich surficial sediments of Lake Arendsee is very uniform ranging between 8.2 and 10.4 ( The TOC/TP molar ratios show a high variability in Lake Arendsee sediments ranging between 160 and 580 ( The changing TIC, TOC, TP and TN accumulation rates are accompanied by significant changes in the isotopic composition of both organic matter and carbonate ( Lake Arendsee sediments show a large increase in the isotopic composition of organic carbon from −24.1‰ in 1935 to −21.2‰ in 1985. Between 1985 and 1992, δ In contrast to δ A similar profile is shown by δ The C/N molar ratios and δ The biologically induced calcite production is a function of epilimnetic CO Accumulation rates of units III and V ( The exceptionally high accumulation rates of unit IV ( Besides a number of factors, such as algal growth rates and cell size, CO Degradation of organic matter may have influenced the carbon isotopic composition of organic matter preserved in the sediment.  The isotopic signature of sedimentary nitrogen is under discussion as a tracer for relative nutrient utilization and the nutrient regime ( Various authors have discussed a δ However, Lake Arendsee sediments show a gradual δ Theoretically, δ In accordance with limnological observations, we rather suggest that the relatively negative nitrogen isotopic signatures in more recent sediments indicate that the nitrogen isotopic composition of sedimenting particles has changed in response to changing environmental conditions. Microbiologists observed an increasing dominance of cyanobacteria within the last decades ( The gradual decrease of δ The δ The carbon isotopic signature of the carbonates shows no clear trend throughout the sedimentary record of Lake Arendsee, contrary to the δ According to Based on these considerations, we suggest that CO Very positive carbon isotopic signatures of up to +11‰ are seen in the sediment record caused by the drainage of the wetland Fauler See between 1970 and 1973. Because δ The oxygen isotopic composition of inorganic carbonates shows two distinct trends in the depth profile ( The degree of oxygen isotopic fractionation between water and carbonates depends primarily on the ambient temperature. In order to change the oxygen isotopic composition by almost 2‰, the average water temperature must have changed by about 8°C, based on a temperature coefficient of 0.24‰ °C The significant increase in TOC, TIC, TP and TN accumulation rates in Lake Arendsee sediments shows the progressive impact of the eutrophication from 1934 to 1998, which is in accordance with available limnological data. However, carbon, nitrogen and oxygen isotopic records of organic matter and authigenic calcite demonstrates in more detail the comprehensive paleoenvironmental history during the last 70 years including increasing eutrophication, the singularly large but temporally constrained effect of nearby wetland drainage, and the positive consequences of remediation efforts. The following scenario can be drawn: As a response to the higher productivity, δ High TIC, TOC, TN and TP accumulation rates in the early 1970s can be clearly attributed to the drainage of a neighboring wetland between 1971 and 1974. This event can be considered an important source of nutrient-loaded water and particulate matter. The discharge of particulate organic matter during drainage was probably not very important as indicated by constant TOC/TN values throughout the sediment profile. Heavy δ The authors would like to thank Zsolt Berner, Markus Leosson, Stefan Norra and Gesine Preuß, for supporting stable isotope analyses. They are grateful to Manfred Gerken for preparing thin sections and to Markus Leosson for improving the English of the manuscript. Special thanks to the Sailing Club and to the Diving Club of the Arendsee community for their support during the sampling phase. The manuscript was improved by constructive comments by Mark Altabet and an anonymous reviewer. This study was supported by German Science Foundation (DFG) Graduiertenkolleg #147 ‘Ecological Water Resource Management’.