In this paper, procedures involving the use of time series models are developed for coal segregation control. In contrast to the methods of Part I of this paper, time series models directly accommodate the auto-correlated nature of the coal quality levels when estimating parameters to characterize the process. Moreover, they also provide forecasting capability that is useful in segregation control. Special attention is given in the paper to development of viable parameter updating strategies in order to deal with non-stationary applications. Performance of the time series methods is evaluated, and it compares favorably to the methods developed in Part I. Although more complicated to implement than the Part I methods, time series methods have the potential to be extended to applications where quality targets are to be maintained over small batches of coal (homogeneity control), whereas the other methods only apply to large batch quality targeting.In Part I of this paper, a class of algorithms was developed that estimated the stochastic nature of r.o.m. coal quality, in the form of an empirical or normal distribution, from the past few analyzer readings. These few analyzer readings were termed windows. For one type of these algorithms, the window widths were changed, based on statistical process control techniques (SPC), to reflect changes in the statistical nature of the r.o.m. coal quality that have been detected from the on-line measurements. A segregation decision, which is based on a cut-off level, is made for every block of coal depending on the estimated distribution. Blocks with quality lower than the cut-off are sent to the wash/reject pile while those that are equal or better in quality are sent to the nowash pile. The cut-off is computed using a segregation criterion that was developed earlier The use of this statistical approach resulted in considerable success. The algorithms yielded much more coal in the nowash pile than the industrial algorithm and met target even when the coal production came from different sections in the mine where quality levels varied substantially. In contrast, when the mine production came from two or more sections, so that the coal on the main conveyor was a random mixture of coals of various qualities, the industrial algorithm failed. In this paper, another class of segregation algorithms is developed. This class of algorithms uses time series models, optimization and SPC techniques to segregate coal. A set of observations in time sequence is defined as a time series by Time series models are used to describe such processes. A time series model may be viewed as a linear filter of a white noise process (i.e., an i.i.d. normal random series) with a parsimonious number of autoregressive (AR) and/or moving average (MA) terms Let the dark circles in The forecast is made in the form of a multivariate normal distribution, i.e., the expected value and the forecast error of The basic idea of the algorithm is very simple. A time series model is built to describe the ash values observed by the analyzer. For every block of coal, a forecast is made from the model to characterize the process (in the form of a normal distribution). A cut-off grade is computed for this block of coal from this distribution, depending on whether the block is sent to the wash pile or the nowash pile. Implementation of the algorithm requires a time series model to characterize the ash values. Therefore, such a model was fitted to the first 200 observations of the data file. These 200 observations were then discarded and the rest of the data was segregated, in a computer simulation of the segregation process, using the developed algorithms. As the algorithm segregates a new block of coal, the original time series model may no longer be valid; as we noted in the previous paper, the observed coal quality levels tend to be non-stationary. Moreover, even if the process has not changed, we will be able to obtain a better estimate of model parameters with the new value. Therefore, for each observation in the data file, a check is conducted to see if the model needs to be updated. Updating may, in principle, be repeated for every block of coal as described. However, updating a time series model is a numerically intense procedure and, therefore, while updating for every observation is a good idea, its implementation in the mine will be difficult as an observation is realized every 5 s. Also, it is unlikely that the model parameters undergo radical changes with the realization of a single observation. Therefore, to reduce the number of updates, SPC techniques were utilized to determine when a model update was necessary. SPC techniques test if the most recent observation is a likely realization of the present process. If the model was adequate, then the most recent observation would be a reasonable occurrence of the process described by the model. If the test reveals that the recent observation is not a reasonable occurrence from the model, then it is implied that the model no longer describes the process and therefore, requires an update. This test is carried out in the following way. Obtain an estimate of each observation ( Compute resultant residuals ( Compute If either the mean or the variance is found unstable, a need for a model update is indicated. The observations that were realized since the last update are used in the test for process change as well as for the update of the model parameters. The observations before the previous update are discarded as they are deemed irrelevant to the present process. The application of SPC techniques requires a minimum number of observations. The minimum number of observations, for this method, is the maximum of the minimum history and the model order. The minimum history is the absolute minimum required for SPC (usually 5). The model order, for this purpose, for a ARMA ( The model is updated using the gradient based optimization method for parameter fitting When forecasting, it is not clear as to what forecast lead to use. Short lead forecasts are more accurate in describing the present process characteristics and will, therefore, be better at target control. However, they will not maximize the yield as they are only locally relevant. Long lead forecasts will improve the yield as they are closer to the ultimate distribution, which is the distribution of all coal yet to be segregated. As explained in As mentioned earlier, SPC was a strategy to reduce the number of updates so that the algorithms could be implemented in a real time control system at the mines. The algorithm was tested (using lead five forecasts) to see if the reduction in updates had any significant effect on its performance. When the model parameters were updated at every instance, the algorithm met target in 41 out of 52 cases, yielding 49 The developed time series algorithm was next implemented using lead 1, lead 2, lead 3 and lead 5 forecasts. Several lead times were used due to the lack of theoretical guidance on which forecast lead is most appropriate. It is apparent from the table that the longer the forecast lead, fewer is the number of successful cases. This was expected, as noted above, since short-term forecasts are more accurate. However, the average percentage maximum yield is higher for longer leads. For each case, its yield was noted in terms of the percentage of the maximum possible yield. The maximum possible yield is based on optimal segregation of the ultimate distribution (which cannot be known a priori). The comparison of the actual yield to the maximum possible yield indicates the efficacy of the algorithm. For lead 1, for example, each successful case achieved on average 84.9% of the maximum possible yield. The expected trends regarding lead times are realized in the results. Longer lead time forecasts resulted in greater yield as evidenced by the higher average percentage maximum yield, while shorter lead times resulted in better target control, which is indicated from the larger number of successful cases. Better target control is also indicated by the average error. Here, the error is defined as the deviation of the achieved nowash mean from the customer specification. This was computed only for cases that failed to meet specifications. It is seen from the table that the nowash pile for the failed cases for lead 1 had, on average, 0.311% ash greater than the target. Not apparent from As can be seen in Table 2 of Part I of this paper, the time series approach performed very favorably compared to the industrial segregation algorithm. There is one problem with the time series algorithm presented earlier. All observations since the previous update were used in the computation of the new parameter set. Note that an update is conducted when a process change is detected. Detection of a process change does not mean the start of the change. Process change starts before detection. Therefore, some of the observations before detection are part of the present process. These observations, called spurious observations, preferably should not be used in the updating computations. To prevent use of these observations in the update procedure, an arbitrary method described below, called modified time series method (MTS), was used. Let us say that the first detection of process change occurs at observation The above changes in the time series method improved the performance. Also, it was robust in two section data. The problem of segregating coal with an aim to not just meet the customer specifications, but also to maximize yield, has been approached in this paper in a scientific way. Algorithms, using techniques from time series analysis, optimal estimation of model parameters and statistical process control, have been developed. The following could be concluded based on their performance. ⋅ The algorithms are robust in two section data. ⋅ They have a high success rate. ⋅ Although there is no theoretical way to establish the optimum lead, performance of the system exhibits a regular response to lead time. As the lead increases, yield improves but quality targeting gets worse. Empirically, at a given mine, one could establish the maximum lead that provides an adequate level of target control or establish an economically optimum tradeoff between yield and target control as a function of lead. ⋅ The yield and the number of successful cases are significantly higher than the industrial algorithm. ⋅ Incorporation of SPC reduced the number of updates without a significant change in the performance. ⋅ The modifications made to the time series method improved its performance. ⋅ The time series approach does not offer major performance advantages over the SPC methods in Part I of this paper for this particular mine. Moreover, it does have a disadvantage of relative complexity. However, it has the advantage of providing more precise forecasting capability and this can lead to improved target control. Moreover, short term forecasts will be important if segregation control objectives are extended in order to insure quality targets are met for small coal batches (homogeneity control). The time series method is likely to be central to extensions of segregation control to address this issue. The methods in Part I cannot be extended in this direction. The authors would like to thank DOE/EPSCoR for funding this research. The help of mine personnel at the cooperating mine is also appreciated.