Effectiveness of hydrotropic delignification using sodium cumene sulfonate for pretreatment of rye, wheat and maize stillage for further use in the production of bioethanol was evaluated. The highest stillage biomass extractives was obtained for a biomass particle size <1.0 mm, when exposed to 131 °C for 1 h at 20% v/v hydrotrope concentration. It has been shown that hydrotropic treatment causes changes in the stillage biomass structure (increase in porosity) and reduces the lignin content in biomass by 7–17%. Delignification with a hydrotrope also increased the concentration of fermentable sugars in the media prepared with stillage biomass, which led to a higher final ethanol concentration (up to ca. 3.5 g/L). Hydrotropic treatment is an effective way of pretreatment of stillage biomass. It provides a high degree of biomass bioconversion and creates the prospect of integrating the 1st and 2nd generation ethanol production process to more fully utilize the raw material.The use of various sources of plant biomass, such as wood and agriculture waste or energy crops for the production of ethanol is a viable alternative to fossil fuels, which enables for a gradual reduction of their extraction. The current state of knowledge and technology indicates that highly efficient production of cellulosic ethanol depends mainly on the effective pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass. Because lignocellulosic biomass is resistant to effective enzymatic degradation, a pretreatment stage is introduced in various versions of the technological process, which is aimed at the reduction of cellulose crystallinity, partial degradation of hemicellulose and removal of lignin ( Organosolv treatment of biomass is based on the solubility of lignin in aqueous ethanol solutions and in hydrated ethanol solutions of acids or bases. Organosolv technique causes partial degradation and extraction of lignin and hemicellulose, however, to obtain a lignin extract in a one-step process, it is recommended to use a two-phase system. In such a system, a mixture of water and 1-butanol is used, which promotes the extraction of lignin to 1-butanol, and hemicellulose into water ( An alternative to the above-mentioned methods, relatively poorly represented in the literature, is delignification of plant biomass by the hydrotropic method. Hydrotropes are low-molecular sodium or potassium salts of alkyl-substituted benzoic or arylsulfonic acid. Owing to their amphiphilic structure they reduce surface tension like surfactants. However, unlike surfactants, they have smaller hydrophobic parts and do not self-aggregate into micelles. Hydrotropes, due to their amphiphilic structure, increase solubility of compounds in aqueous solutions. Their big advantage is the ability to recover substances dissolved in their solutions by diluting with water (by reducing the concentration of hydrotrope in the solution) ( Because the concentration of lignin clearly affects the efficiency of lignocellulosic biomass degradation being a part of biosynthesis processes, the use of hydrotropic delignification in fermentation (where the source of carbon is plant biomass) seems to be a natural solution. A few studies have suggested that sodium xylene sulfonate and sodium cumene sulfonate could be used in the production of bioethanol and biobutanol from biomass. Studies on the use of wheat straw in the production of biobutanol confirmed the usefulness of hydrotropic treatment as an alternative method of enhancing the degradation of lignocellulosic biomass, but a higher concentration of fermenting sugars was obtained by combining hydrotropic delignification and acid pretreatment ( To achieve the full potential of lignocellulosic biomass in the production of bioethanol depends primarily on the effective pretreatment aimed at increasing the biomass susceptibility to enzymatic hydrolysis while maintaining a low concentration of fermentation inhibitors generated in this process, such as 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (5-HMF) and furfural. One of the factors limiting the access of cellulolytic enzymes to cellulose fibers is the high concentration of lignin. Therefore, hydrotropic extraction of lignin is one of the ways leading to increased bioethanol yield. However, the economic profitability of cellulosic ethanol production depends not only on the degree of biomass degradation but also on biomass availability and origin. The global trend in bioethanol production is the utilization of waste from the agri-food industry. Distillery stillage, which is obtained in the amount of about 200 million tons per year in the production of first generation ethanol, is a lignocellulosic raw material with a high production potential. The prospect of integrating the 1st and 2nd generation ethanol production technology seems very promising, but it is necessary to develop an effective method of stillage pretreatment, which would allow for a more complete utilization of starch raw materials in the production of bioethanol ( Due to the lack of literature data on the use of hydrotropes in the production of bioethanol from distillery stillage, we have undertaken studies to assess the usefulness of sodium cumene sulfonate for hydrotropic delignification of wheat, rye and maize stillage in the production of second generation ethanol. We have optimized the parameters of hydrotropic treatment (such as processing time, temperature, NaCS concentration, stillage particle size) to achieve the maximum level of lignin extraction from biomass. We decided to use NaCS in the extraction process, due to the relatively poorly characterized usefulness of this hydrotrope in the production of bioethanol. The main novelty of our study is the evaluation of the usefulness of this type of pretreatment in the production of bioethanol from distillery stillage biomass combined with fermentation tests. Our study presents a unique approach that is a step to integrate the 1st and 2nd generation ethanol production and to solve the problem of distillery stillage management. Dried rye, wheat and maize stillages were the source of lignocellulosic biomass used in our study. The raw material originated from an agricultural distillery (Gospodarstwo Rolne in Radzicz, Poland) which uses the classic baro-thermal technology of releasing the starch with Henze steamer. Stillages was taken immediately after whole stillage centrifugation. The material was then dried at 60 °C until constant weight (final dry weight 94.0 ± 0.5%), milled using a beater mill and sieved through two sieves to obtain fractions >2.8 mm and <1.0 mm. The content of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin in dried stillage was determined before and after hydrotropic treatment. Cellic® CTec2 preparation (Novozymes, Franklinton, NC, USA) containing cellulolytic enzyme complex with 75 FPU/mL activity was used for the enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose. The preparation was used according to the manufacturer's instructions at pH 5.5 and 50 °C. All reagents used in the study were of analytical purity and were provided by Merck® (Darmstadt, Germany). Chromatographic analyzes were performed using HPLC grade solvents from Merck®. Calibration standards for chromatographic analyzes were HPLC grade and were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich® (St. Louis, Missouri, United States). Sodium cumene sulfonate (NaCS) was used as a hydrotrope, in the form of 40% Stepanate SCS 40 preparation, provided by the Stepan Company (Northfield, Illinois, United States). The alcoholic fermentation process was carried out using an active preparation of dried yeast The study was carried out in two stages. In the first stage, the influence of extraction parameters using NaCS solutions on the reduction of dry matter content was assessed. Two previously described stillage fractions differing in particle size were examined. In the second stage, fermentation tests were carried out using optimized conditions for the hydrotropic biomass extraction (selected on the basis of the results of the first stage of the test), combined with acid pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis. The efficiency of selected parameter settings in the hydrotropic extraction process was evaluated for two fractions of wheat, rye and maize stillage, i.e. coarse (particle size >2.8 mm) and fine (particle size <1.0 mm). In order to obtain the material for extraction, ca. 1.1 g of stillage was weighed, dried at 130 °C to obtain a dry mass, and then the weight of the sample was precisely determined. Then the sample was transferred quantitatively into a 250 mL conical flask and a 20 mL hydrotrope solution of selected concentration was added to obtain a biomass concentration of about 5%. The extraction process was carried out at a temperature of 40–80 °C, during 1.5–6.0 h, with 5–20% v/v NaCS, in a shaking water bath (SWB 22 N, Laboplay, Poland). In addition, extraction was carried out in a manner analogous to that described above, but at 121 and 131 °C for 1 h in an autoclave (Panasonic MLS 3751L). Samples after extraction were filtered under reduced pressure, rinsed with hot water (ca. 200 mL) and dried at 130 °C using a WPS-30S weighting dryer (Radwag, Poland) ( In the next stage of our study, we used only the fine fraction (<1.0 mm) and hydrotropic extraction at 131 °C in the autoclave (Panasonic MLS 3751L) for 1 h with 20% v/v NaCS. The control without hydrotropic treatment was carried out in an analogous manner, with distilled water as the solvent. For extraction, approximately 3 g of dry weight (DW) lignocellulosic biomass was transferred into 250 mL conical flasks in 15 replicates, a hydrotrope or water solution (control) was added and then autoclaved for 1 h at 131 °C. After cooling, the samples were filtered under reduced pressure and dried at 130 °C to a constant dry weight in a weighting dryer. The media thus obtained were used for the preparation of fermentation tests, SEM analysis and determination of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin content. To prepare fermentation media, 4 g (DW) of substrates were placed in six 250 mL flasks, 20 mL of 0.2 M H Cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin content were determined using two-stage acid hydrolysis according to the NREL protocol ( The fermentation media were analyzed for sugars, acetic acid, glycerol and ethanol by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Prior to the analysis, samples were diluted 5-fold with the mobile phase (5 mM H We also determined the concentration of phenolic compounds that are products of degradation of lignin, including vanillin, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, syringaldehyde, transferinic acid, as well as the concentration of 5-HMF and furfural in fermentation media. The analysis was performed using an Agilent Technologies® chromatograph (model 1260) equipped with a diode detector. The separation was performed with a ZORBAX Eclipse Plus C18 (4.6 × 100 mm, 3.5 µm) column (Agilent Technologies®) using 0.3% acetic acid (70%) and methanol (30%) as a mobile phase with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. at 30 °C. Furfural, 5-HMF, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid and vanillin were detected at 280 nm; syngaldehyde and All laboratory analyzes were performed in triplicate. Statistical analysis was carried out using the Statistica software ver. 12 (analysis of variance, determination of SD). ANOVA test and HSD Tukey's test were applied at the significance level of α < 0.05. The assessment of the effectiveness of sodium cumene sulfonate in the treatment of stillage biomass was started by determining the impact of treatment parameters on the biomass extractives (the amount of biomass that got extracted). The goal at this stage of the study was to select the optimal conditions for hydrotropic extraction, providing maximum biomass extraction. Optimization of extraction conditions included the impact of temperature, time, NaCS concentration and biomass comminution on extraction efficiency. Our study showed that the efficiency of extraction is clearly influenced by comminution of lignocellulosic biomass. A higher level of biomass extraction was observed in the raw material fraction <1.0 mm, regardless of extraction parameters. For maize stillage, regardless of the extraction conditions, no biomass extractives were observed in the fraction above 2.8 mm ( It was found that temperature had a significant impact on the extraction efficiency using NaCS, which prompted further research on the influence of this parameter on the process. For this purpose, the raw materials were analyzed under autoclave conditions at 121 and 131 °C for 1 h with 20% v/v NaCS concentration ( The conducted experiments enabled the selection of the following hydrotropic extraction conditions providing high stillage biomass extractives: temperature 131 °C, exposure time 1 h, NaCS concentration 20% v/v, particle size <1.0 mm. Our study also showed the need to optimize the parameters of the hydrotropic extraction process individually for each new source of lignocellulosic biomass. The positive effect of high temperature on the extraction process using hydrotropes was also confirmed by other authors. The increase in temperature facilitates disorganization of bonds in lignocellulosic biomass, which in combination with the amphiphilic structure of hydrotropes and their ability to increase the solubility of organic compounds in aqueous solutions increases the biomass extractives in plant material ( The impact of hydrotropic extraction on the composition and structure of stillage biomass of different origin was tested on samples after extraction using NaCS under conditions guaranteeing the highest biomass extraction, i.e. at 131 °C, for 60 min and with 20% v/v NaCS concentration. Hydrotropic extraction resulted in the removal of biomass components soluble in NaCS solution, including phenolic compounds (lignin). Compared to the lignin content in biomass before extraction, the concentration of lignin in rye stillage decreased by ca. 9.52%, in wheat stillage by ca. 7.19%, and in maize stillage by ca. 17.31% ( The hydrotropic pretreatment of rye, wheat and maize stillage biomass had a significant impact on the amount of sugars obtained by acid treatment and enzymatic hydrolysis, as well as the maximum final concentration of ethanol produced during alcoholic fermentation. The highest glucose concentrations were observed in maize media because maize stillage had the highest cellulose content, which was demonstrated by our previous studies ( Hydrotropic delignification with NaCS also changed the concentration of phenolic compounds that are products of lignin degradation, such as syringaldehyde, During the fermentation process, the bioconversion of sugars into ethanol is associated with an increase in the concentration of acetic acid and glycerol. Hydrotropic treatment (or lack thereof) has no significant effect on the final concentration of acetic acid in rye media. In wheat media, the final concentration of this acid increased by approx. 0.3 g/L, relative to untreated media. In maize media there was a decrease in acetic acid concentration by about 0.25 g/L after 72 h compared to media without hydrotropic extraction ( A significantly higher initial concentration of fermentable sugars in media obtained from wheat and maize stillages after hydrotropic treatment resulted in a higher final ethanol concentration (Figs. Our previous study showed that in the production of 1st generation bioethanol from maize grain with 55% starch content, the average ethanol yield was 39.07 L per 100 kg of raw material. From rye grain containing 47% starch, 33.56 L EtOH could be obtained from 100 kg of raw material. For wheat grain containing 49% starch, the yield was 35.14 L EtOH per 100 kg of raw material ( The concentration of all phenolic compounds analyzed decreased during alcoholic fermentation as they were metabolized by yeast. Syringaldehyde concentration decreased in media prepared with rye, maize and wheat stillages by 2–4 mg/L, 5–8 mg/L, and 6 mg/L, respectively ( The use of sodium cumene sulfonate solution is an effective way of extracting organic substances from waste stillage biomass. Optimal conditions for hydrotropic extraction: particle size <1.0 mm, temperature 131 °C, exposure time 1 h and 20% v/v NaCS concentration. Hydrotropic delignification of biomass is an effective method of increasing the concentration of fermentable sugars in cellulose substrates, which has a direct impact on the amount of ethanol obtained. Hydrotropic treatment is therefore an effective way of preparing waste stillage biomass for production of cellulosic ethanol and creates a real prospect of integrating the production of 1st and 2nd generation ethanol.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was supported by the Polish Minister of Science and Higher Education, under the program “Regional Initiative of Excellence” in 2019 – 2022 (Grant No. 008/RID/2018/19). Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: