The aim of the present research work is to investigate the possibility of adding steel slag, a by-product of the conversion of iron to steel process, in the raw meal for the production of Portland cement clinker. Two samples of raw meals were prepared, one with ordinary raw materials, as a reference sample ((PC)Ref), and another with 10.5% steel slag ((PC)S/S). Both raw meals were sintered at 1450°C. The results of chemical and mineralogical analyses as well as the microscopic examination showed that the use of the steel slag did not affect the mineralogical characteristics of the so produced Portland cement clinker. Furthermore, both clinkers were tested by determining the grindability, setting times, compressive strengths and soundness. The hydration products were examined by XRD analysis at 2, 7, 28 and 90 days. The results of the physico-mechanical tests showed that the addition of the steel slag did not negatively affect the quality of the produced cement.Waste utilization is an attractive alternative to disposal in that disposal cost and potential pollution problems are reduced or even eliminated along with the achievement of resource conservation. Nevertheless, the utilization strategy must be coupled with environmental and energy considerations to use available materials most efficiently. The traditional way to utilize metallurgical slags in cementing materials is to partially replace Portland cement, which usually results in a lower early strength and longer setting times. Presence of activator(s) can accelerate the break-up of structure and hydration of slags Today, most metallurgical slags are used as aggregates for different applications, and only the ground granulated blast furnace slag is used for a partial Portland cement replacement. The partial replacement may decrease the early strength, but increase the later strength and improve microstructure and durability of hardened Portland cement and concrete very significantly Steel slag is a by-product of the conversion of iron to steel process and it presents differences depending on the raw materials and process. Fifty million tons per year of steel slag are produced as a residue in the world Because the chemical composition of steel slags is highly variable, the mineral composition of steel slag also varies. Olivine, merwinite, C The main problem with using steel slag in civil engineering is the possible presence of free lime, especially large-sized components of heated undissolved limestone, because when it hydrates, its volume increases and this swelling can lift the top layers However, a specialty steel slag cement, which is composed mainly of steel slag, blast furnace slag and Portland cement, has been commercially marketed in China for more than 20 years and uses approximately 40% of the total steel slag production Steel slag cement can be used for general construction use, especially suitable for mass concrete and pavement applications due to its special features. Furthermore, steel slag is used as asphalt concrete aggregate in some countries. The use of steel slag as aggregate for road construction and as armour stone for hydraulic structures has been reported The so far published literature has given little attention to the use of steel slag in the raw meal for the production of Portland cement. The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of using steel slag as a raw material for the production of a typical Portland cement clinker. For that reason, two samples of raw meals were prepared, one with ordinary raw materials, as a reference sample ((PC) Steel slag, coming from scrap smelting in electric arc furnaces, was supplied from Sidenor steel product manufacturing company of Greece. It was crushed in a jaw crusher and the fraction used in this study was the “0–5 The steel slag was mixed with other raw materials, such as limestone, clay, sand, and bauxite, in appropriate proportions in order to produce the raw meal to be tested for the production of Portland cement clinker ((PC) The sintering process applied was common for the production of both types of cement clinkers. The raw meals were shaped in small spheres, with a diameter of 2 The clinkers were crushed and grounded in a Bond ball mill to a specific surface area of about 3800 The soluble SO The standard consistency, the setting times and the soundness of the cement pastes were determined according to the European Standard EN 196-3 For the study of the hydration products, the cement pastes were prepared by mixing 300 As shown in The above conclusions were also confirmed by optical microscopy observations ( The chemical analysis and the potential mineral composition (according to Bogue) of the Portland clinkers produced are given in The grinding of clinkers with the required quantity of gypsum was carried out in a ball mill of 1.5 The XRD analyses of the produced Portland clinkers are given in The microstructure of the Portland cement clinkers was examined by optical microscopy in polished sections. The addition of the steel slag by 10.5% did not seem to affect its microstructure and the formation of its characteristic mineralogical phases (  The mortars of the samples under investigation were tested for compressive strengths after 2, 7, 28 and 90 days of curing. The obtained results are shown in The XRD patterns of the (PC) The addition of steel slag by 10.5% in the raw meal did not affect either the sintering or the hydration process during Portland cement production. More specifically, the sample with steel slag presented the following characteristics: The alite phase occurred as small well-formed crystals. The belite crystals were evenly distributed in relation to alite, indicating that the clinkering reaction had proceeded extensively in the direction of alite and that the raw mix was homogenous. The liquid phase occurred as fine crystals, uniformly distributed. The values for setting times, water demand and expansion were similar to those obtained with the reference ordinary Portland cement sample. The compressive strengths were at least as high as those of the reference sample during hydration. It is thus concluded that the steel slag can be utilized as a raw material in cement production, at no cost to the producer, contributing, in this way, to reduction of the process cost.