Fractures of the proximal humerus, including the management and potential complications of this injury, have been well described throughout the orthopaedic literature. The management of malunion of the proximal humerus has only recently become a more prevalent topic. It has been reported that there has been a progressive increase of proximal humerus fractures since the 1950's Most proximal humerus fractures can be treated nonoperatively, and good results can be anticipated. However, a small percentage of conservatively treated fractures, and some of those treated operatively, will result in malunion. A proximal humeral malunion is often a painful and debilitating deformity that prompts the patient to seek further treatment. Traditionally, because of the complex nature of proximal humeral malunions, they were often treated nonoperatively. When surgical intervention was necessary, it typically required an open procedure, with the associated morbidity. However, as the experience with shoulder surgery has increased over the past decades, existing surgical solutions have been refined and additional techniques developed. With the expanding use of arthroscopy, some of the problems associated with proximal humeral malunions can now even be addressed arthroscopically. The appropriate treatment for a proximal humeral malunion depends on a number of factors. Most notably, the patient's physiologic age, the overall state of health, the amount of loss of function relative to the patient's needs, and the extent of the patient's pain will guide the surgeon to nonoperative or operative intervention. In essence, there are two primary indications for surgical management of a proximal humeral malunion: (1) pain and (2) diminished function resulting from limited range of motion. It is imperative to understand which of these is the primary concern. There is no contraindication to surgery based solely upon a patient's age. However, the more elderly a patient, the more likely there will be co-existing medical conditions that must be weighed in the risk-benefit ratio. In addition, the overall medical and psychological condition must not prohibit patients from participating in the necessary postoperative physical therapy. As in all aspects of medical care, a thorough and detailed history is essential, including the initial injury, its mechanism, and associated neurovascular injuries. It is also important to identify the treatment of the acute fracture, including hardware that was previously implanted. Other pertinent information that should be ascertained includes previous injuries to the shoulder, hand dominance, and potentially complicating medical issues. A history of osteoporosis, which could limit the choice of hardware used, or metabolic disorders, which could inhibit wound healing, should be obtained. Any signs of infection, including erythema or draining wounds, must be evaluated. Atrophy of the shoulder musculature and shortening of the humerus can be anticipated in many cases. The length of the upper arm can be measured from the posterior acromion to the olecranon and compared with the contralateral side. Range of motion, particularly passive, allows an assessment of soft-tissue contractures. It should be assessed, especially in external rotation with the arm at the side and at 90° of abduction, internal rotation, abduction, and forward flexion. A classic, but not pathognomic, sign for greater tuberosity malunion is absence of external rotation with the arm in maximal abduction. The integrity of the rotator cuff should also be assessed. Resisted abduction at 90° allows for evaluation of the supraspinatus. As either or both tuberosities may not be in their anatomic position, the rotator cuff, even if intact, may have a diminished mechanical advantage. For example, weakness in external rotation can be anticipated with a displaced greater tuberosity fragment. Instability can be determined by various provocative maneuvers; however, with the greater tuberosity malunited posteriorly, the humeral head may be levered out of the glenoid and simulate anterior instability. Finally, pre-existing neurologic injury should be determined, although it is often difficult to diagnose clinically. It is important to note that sensory deficit at the lateral border of the deltoid is not a reliable indicator of axillary nerve injury. Injury may be broad and involve the brachial plexus or may be limited to an individual nerve. Evidence of scapular winging should prompt further evaluation of the long thoracic nerve or spinal accessory nerve (or both). In patients older than 50 years with proximal humerus fractures, the incidence of electromyography-diagnosed neurologic injuries may be as high as 50%. Appropriate imaging of a shoulder with a proximal humeral malunion begins with plain radiographs. At a minimum, a trauma series—an anteroposterior and lateral view in the plane of the scapula and an axillary view—should be obtained.Supplemental internal and external rotational anteroposterior views can provide additional information. Three-dimensional imaging is often helpful in properly identifying the full extent of the injury. Computed tomography provides excellent imaging of bony detail. It allows an assessment of the 3-dimensional spatial relationship between the tuberosity fragments, the humeral head, and the surgical neck. The articular surface of the glenoid and the head can also be evaluated. Morris et al Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides excellent visualization of the soft tissues, particularly with regard to the rotator cuff and labrum. Furthermore, avascular necrosis of the humeral head can be detected earlier with MRI than with plain radiographs. Unfortunately, in patients with hardware from previous surgery, artifact often diminishes the information available from MRI. The use of scanograms aids in determining the proper length of the humerus. It is helpful in proximal humerus reconstruction to ascertain the appropriate height for placement of a hemiarthroplasty. This assists the surgeon in re-establishing the proper tension on the soft tissues during reconstruction. Operative management of a proximal humeral malunion can be divided into two types of procedures: humeral head preserving and humeral head sacrificing. The humeral head preserving procedures are indicated when there is significant preservation of the articular surface and the blood supply to the head can be maintained. This includes 2-part and some 3-part fracture malunions. These procedures primarily involve osteotomies and fixation of the tuberosities and/or the surgical neck, along with soft-tissue reconstruction. Soft-tissue releases and removal of bony protuberances, performed either arthroscopically or open, can significantly improve outcome in certain cases with a supple glenohumeral joint. Finally, in extremely rare cases, such as malunion with severe neurologic deficit or previous infection, arthrodesis might be considered. Incongruity of the glenohumeral joint is the primary indication for arthroplasty. In cases in which the humeral head has developed or has a very high likelihood of developing avascular necrosis, a humeral head sacrificing procedure is indicated. Similarly, if there is extensive damage to the articular surface then the head should be replaced. These injuries will typically include some 3-part fractures, most 4-part fractures, humeral head–splitting injuries, post-traumatic degenerative arthritis, and humeral head impression defects involving more than 40% of the articular surface. Malunion of a 2-part surgical neck fracture withresultant varus deformity (Figures 1 and 2) and subsequent loss of forward elevation, abduction, and rotation is an uncommon problem. Management of greater tuberosity malunions is determined by the size of the tuberosity fragment and degree of displacement. With superior displacement, impingement and loss of abduction will occur. With posterior displacement, loss of external rotation will result (Figure 3). If, after extensive capsular and subdeltoid releases, the fragment is still unable to reach the anatomic site for reattachment, then the rotator cuff interval should be released and any scar tissue should be circumferentially lysed around the tuberosity-tendon unit. If the tuberosity is still unable to reach the anatomic site for reattachment, then the humerus should be externally rotated and a suboptimal position of either more posterior or superior must be accepted. The donor site then needs to be decorticated to a bed of bleeding bone to accept suture anchors or bone tunnels for fixation. The greater tuberosity segment can then be shaped to match the donor site. Although the bone quality in a malunion is typically adequate, it may be sclerotic and benefit from supplementation with autogenous or synthetic bone graft. Rigid internal fixation of the greater tuberosity segment to the shaft can usually be achieved with 1 or 2 AO 4.5-mm cancellous screws plus washers. The screws should be angled from the greater tuberosity inferomedially to engage the medial cortex of the humeral shaft. One must be certain that the screw is angled inferiorly enough so as not to penetrate the articular surface of the humeral head. Supplementary fixation with figure-of-eight tension band with heavy nonabsorbable suture or wire should be included (Figure 4). Certain cases of surgical neck malunion and greater tuberosity malunion may be amenable to arthroscopic treatment. In particular, surgical neck malunion with only a mild deformity or those with a more severe deformity radiographically but in which the joint has remained supple can often be treated with an arthroscopic subacromial release, acromioplasty, and resection of the prominent tuberosity (tuberoplasty) with repair of the rotator cuff. Arthroscopic treatment, as an isolated procedure, may not fully restore elevation, and this must be acceptable to the patient. Malunion of 3- and 4-part fractures and fracture-dislocations are among the most challenging problems to a shoulder surgeon (Figure 5). Open reduction/internal fixation after osteotomy of a malunited fragment remains a difficult problem and specifically depends on which fragment (ie, a tuberosity or the humeral head) needs to be repositioned. In cases in which tuberosity override is the predominant problem, then an osteotomy as described for 2-part greater tuberosity malunion can be quite satisfactory. In cases in which malunion of the head fragment necessitates an osteotomy, fixation presents the same problem as pinning an acute 2-part surgical neck fracture. Specifically, it is difficult to achieve rigid fixation in the cancellous bone of the humeral head to allow early range of motion. The choice of fixation includes the figure-of-eight tension band technique with or without an internal splint (eg, Ender's rods with a humeral head), an interlocking intramedullary nail, or a blade plate. Although anatomic reconstruction of the fracture may not be possible in these cases, a satisfactory result still can be achieved if the tuberosities can be positioned and fixed about the humeral head and shaft to allow for an improved glenohumeral joint without impingement. For most fractures with evidence of avascular necrosis, significant articular surface damage, or traumatic osteoarthritis of the humeral head, a prosthetic replacement is indicated. However, capsular releases remain an essential part of the procedure. The normal musculotendinous tension of the rotator cuff and deltoid must be restored in order to achieve a well-functioning, stable shoulder after arthroplasty. This is dependent on restoration of humeral length, tuberosity alignment and fixation, and humeral head version. In restoring the proper humeral length, the surgeon must assess the degree of comminution of the humeral shaft and be prepared to cement the prosthesis in a proud position in order to restore length. Appropriate tension on the biceps tendon is another method of assessing intraoperatively the correct height for the prosthesis. Humeral head prosthetic replacement is most commonly performed via an extended deltopectoral approach. Before the bony pathology is addressed, the soft-tissue component of the deformity should be addressed (Figure 6). The position of the tuberosities should be assessed and the need for tuberosity osteotomy determined. Greater tuberosity osteotomy is indicated when there is a block to external rotation at 20° or less or elevation is less than 90°. Proper positioning of the humeral component, with regard to its height and version, is essential to achieving a stable shoulder. The height should allow for repositioning of the tuberosities below the articular surface of the prosthesis and for proper tensioning of the soft tissues. The prosthesis is retroverted 20° to 35°. In the event of a chronic posterior dislocation, a posterior impression fracture, or recurrent instability, less retroversion may be used to increase stability. Cement is typically used for fixation of the humeral component. There are various descriptions of the techniques used to secure the tuberosities to the implant and humeral shaft. The senior author (D.M.D.) prefers to use 5 heavy, nonabsorbable sutures (Figure 8). Bone grafting with autograft from the humeral head or with synthetic bone graft and shingling of the tuberosity are critical in aiding healing of the tuberosity back to the humeral shaft. Prior to closure, the stability should be assessed and the limits of passive motion determined. The intraoperative range that does not cause undue stress to the repair of the tuberosities should be recorded. This will define the limits of the range of motion in physical therapy until there is evidence of bony healing, usually for the first 6 to 8 weeks postoperatively. The rotator cuff and deltoid are repaired, and the wound is then closed. If rigid internal fixation is achieved or if a prosthesis is implanted, passive motion exercises can begin on the first postoperative day. The limits in range of motion should be determined in the operating room. Gradually, the patient can begin assisted range of motion exercises. Once there is radiographic evidence of union of the fragment, usually at approximately 6 weeks, isometric exercises of the deltoid and rotator cuff can be initiated. At 10 weeks, resistive exercises can be begun to strengthen the rotator cuff and the deltoid further. Preoperatively, patients should be made aware of the lengthy recovery period. Because of the complex nature of proximal humeral malunions, surgical management of this entity is fraught with complications. Other than the usual risks of surgery, such as anesthesia and blood loss, one should recognize the potential for numerous other complications specific to proximal humerus reconstructions. Such recognition will allow the surgeon to inform the patient better about the risks of surgery and potentially avoid certain pitfalls in the management of the malunion. With regard to head-preserving procedures, complications arising from fixation of osteotomy fragments are common. Tuberosity osteolysis, malunion, and nonunion are among the most common problems. As this patient population is frequently elderly with osteoporotic bone, it is often difficult to obtain rigid fixation. Consequently, the race between bone healing and fatigue of hardware may ultimately result in failed hardware or a nonunion (or both). This could potentially cause the patient greater pain and less function than the original malunion. The choice of internal fixation, the use of bone graft, and the postoperative rehabilitation all are critical decisions that need to be made on an individual basis. In this patient population, the blood supply to the humeral head has already been jeopardized from the initial injury, and thus avascular necrosis is an additional risk in performing osteotomies. Malunion treated by arthroplasty has additional pitfalls that should be avoided. As mentioned previously, a patient who has had a chronic posterior dislocation of the shoulder is at increased risk for posterior instability, unless this is addressed with less prosthetic humeral retroversion, and capsulorrhaphy when necessary, at the time of surgery. In addition, resurfacing the glenoid in a patient with an irreparable tear of the rotator cuff subjects the patient to increased risk of early glenoid component loosening. Conversely, failure to resurface the glenoid in a patient with post-traumatic arthrosis may predispose to early glenoid erosion and clinical failure. Neurologic injury and infection are both potential complications, and their incidence can be minimized by good surgical technique and prophylactic antibiotics, respectively. However, these conditions may also be pre-existing but unrecognized. Neurologic deficit may result from either the initial injury or previous management. Similarly, infection may have resulted from an initial procedure performed to treat the fracture and may have played a role in the patient in whom the malunion is developing. When suspected, such conditions should be investigated with the proper studies before surgical intervention. Reporting the results of malunions of 2-part fractures of the surgical neck treated by osteotomy is limited to one study. In this study by Solonen and Vastamäki, Similarly, there are few studies in the English literature that solely look at the results of reconstructive procedures for isolated tuberosity malunions. Morris et al In a study by Beredjiklian et al, Reports on the results of prosthetic replacement of the humeral head for malunion are more prevalent. Tanner and Cofield Dines et al Norris et al In a review by Beredjiklian and Iannotti, In the study of Beredjiklian et al, Proximal humeral malunions are a complex problem that can challenge even an adept shoulder surgeon. The goals of operative management are to decrease pain and/or improve function. An algorithm is proposed in this review to guide the surgeon through the decision-making process in selecting the most appropriate surgery. Two-part malunions, depending on the severity, can typically be managed with an osteotomy and fixation or with acromioplasty, tuberoplasty, and/or soft-tissue releases. In managing 3- and 4-part malunions, it is essential to determine whether the humeral head can be preserved or an arthroplasty is necessary. For all proximal humeral malunions, it is vital to address the soft-tissue pathology in addition to the bony abnormalities. By addressing both of these components of the deformity, there is a greater likelihood of a satisfactory result.