Objective
                  To analyze outcomes after the management of mild (<1 mm) and moderately severe (>1 mm and <5 mm) breaches of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus with a goal of maintaining or restoring the functional status of the sinus.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective analysis of prospectively accrued data was performed on patients with mild and moderately severe breaches of the posterior wall of their frontal sinus who were managed with the intent to preserve the frontal sinus. Data on presenting features, pathology, details on breaches of the posterior wall, management, outcome, and complications were collected from medical records and neuroimages.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-two cases met inclusion criteria. Diagnostic categories included trauma in 34 cases, infection in 3, and other categories in another 5 cases. Five presented with cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea, and 26 had radiographic evidence of obstruction of a nasofrontal duct at time of presentation. Fifteen patients were managed without surgical intervention, and 27 underwent surgery. No complications occurred in the patients managed without surgery and 4 postoperative cerebrospinal leaks that were managed successfully with a period of drainage occurred in the surgical group. No patient developed meningitis or mucocele.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Many patients with mild to moderately severe breaches of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus can be managed safely and effectively by techniques that preserve the anatomy and function of the frontal sinus.Breaches of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus can result from trauma, infection, neoplasia, or erosion from pressure. In addition, the frontal sinus may be breached iatrogenically or by intention in the course of gaining intracranial surgical exposure. Aggressive surgical methods commonly are used to manage breaches of the posterior wall that are moderately or severely displaced, comminuted, associated with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea, have nasofrontal (NF) duct compromise, or are filled with purulence For decades, cranialization and/or obliteration has been used commonly for most significant breaches of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus This report reviews the outcomes and complication rates in a consecutively encountered series of patients with mild to moderately severe frontal sinus breaches, all of whom were managed with a consistent goal of maintaining or restoring the functional status of the frontal sinus with satisfactory cosmetic outcome and without compromising safety. Multiple etiologies for breaches of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus that come to neurosurgical attention are included in this report because of their similarities in therapeutic decision-making and management. All patients encountered by the senior author (K.R.W.) between August 1, 1998, and January 1, 2014, who had breach of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus of 5 mm or less, regardless of cause, are the basis for this investigation. Fractures were divided into 4 groups: nondisplaced, displaced less than 1 mm (mild), displaced 1−5 mm with or without comminution (moderate), and displaced greater than 5 mm with or without comminution (severe). Severe, comminuted fractures were treated surgically with a cranialization operation that does not preserve the function of the sinus. These patients were therefore excluded from the study. Additional exclusion criteria included breach of the frontal sinus that did not involve the posterior wall and death within 7 days of presentation. Patients with surgical osteotomies crossing the frontal sinus were included, as were patients having sinus breaches related to sinusitis, subdural, or epidural empyema, and Pott puffy tumor. The radiographic appearance of the NF duct did not affect the categorization of these fractures in the current study. Hospital records and neuroimaging were reviewed. This study was done with approval of the Colorado Multi-Institutional Review Board. Fractures of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus with no displacement or with displacement of less than 1 wall thickness, including those with suspicious or definite CSF rhinorrhea, were managed nonoperatively. Minimally displaced posterior wall fractures, with or without comminution, in patients who required surgical intervention for other cranial or intracranial pathologies such as depressed fractures of the cranial vault or intracranial hematomas were surgically ignored. Persistent CSF rhinorrhea lasting more than approximately 24 hours, if not controlled by bed tilt, was managed with lumbar or ventricular drainage, and antibiotics were administered during the course of drainage. Moderately depressed and comminuted fractures of the posterior wall with displacement of bony fragments greater than one wall thickness, including patients with definite or presumed disruption of dura, as evidenced by subdural air or by CSF rhinorrhea, were managed through a bicoronal scalp incision and bifrontal craniotomy. Mucosa that was disrupted, loose, or folded was removed. Loose bony fragments of the posterior wall were repositioned and aligned to reestablish normal sinus anatomy. When possible the fragments were wedged in place but some required metal plates and screws. The NF duct was explored with a probe for patency in all patients undergoing surgery in whom there was radiographic evidence of compromise and in all patients with sinusitis. If found to be compromised, the duct was expanded with a small osteotome, bone impactor, or both to reestablish a functional drainage pathway. The dura was inspected in all surgical cases, and lacerations and durotomies were repaired with running 4-0 polyglycolate suture when the dural edges could be identified and brought together. In patients with tenuous dural approximation, a free strip of periosteum was harvested and either sewn snugly over the damaged dura with 4-0 polyglycolate suture or simply placed over the area of attenuated dura and tacked in place with sutures to prevent displacement during irrigation, and the frontal bone flap was replaced. Free periosteal flaps were placed along the floor of the frontal fossa when secure, watertight closure was not possible. All patients with purulence within a frontal sinus underwent surgery to drain and irrigate the sinus and to remove any associated infection in epidural, subdural, or intracerebral locations. All contaminated bone, including free flaps, were scrubbed with either a bacitracin or providone iodine solution and returned to their normal anatomical locations In patients in whom both anterior and posterior walls of the frontal sinus were surgically breached, typically by an osteotomy crossing the upper or mid-portion of the frontal sinuses during elective craniotomy to address intracranial pathology, the disrupted mucosa was removed from the sinus within the free bone flap, the sinuses irrigated, and the NF ducts were ignored. At time of closure, all frontal bone flaps were seated snugly to obliterate the kerf crossing the sinus. A subgaleal drain was inserted in each patient and removed 1−2 days later. Intravenous antibiotics were administered preoperatively in nonemergent cases for 24−48 hours after surgery in clean and clean-contaminated cases. Longer courses of antibiotics were administered in patients with persistent CSF rhinorrhea, frontal sinusitis, or epidural or subdural abscess. Forty-two patients, 33 male and 9 female, with breaches of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus met criteria for inclusion. The diagnostic categories and associated intracranial pathologies are summarized in Thirty-four patients sustained breaches of their anterior and posterior walls, and 8 had isolated posterior wall breaches. The posterior wall breaches were not displaced in 22 patients, displaced less than one posterior wall thickness in 11, and between one wall thickness and 5 mm in another 9. The NF duct appeared on computed tomography imaging to be patent in 16 patients and was possibly compromised or indeterminate in 26. Five patients had CSF rhinorrhea on presentation, and 1 patient sustained a complex fracture extending from the posterior wall of the frontal sinus, across the middle fossa, and into the petrous temporal bone resulting in CSF otorrhea. This patient's CSF leak was managed successfully with lumbar drainage. Twenty-nine of the 34 patients with trauma sustained concomitant intracranial injuries as evidenced by pneumocephalus, intracranial hemorrhage, bullet tract, large intracerebral hemorrhage, and cerebral contusion. Twenty-seven patients underwent surgical intervention, and the remaining 15 were managed without surgery. Five of these operations were done solely to address issues confined to the frontal sinus and underlying dura Sinus mucosa was subtotally removed in 6 patients and not removed in the remaining 21. Eleven patients underwent evacuation of the frontal sinus (6 hematomas, 2 neoplasms, and 3 with purulence). None of the patients, including those with possible NF duct injury or obstruction, underwent cranialization, sinus obliteration, or placement of a temporary drainage tube through the NF duct. Forty-one of the 42 patients were alive at the time of last entry in their medical record. The family elected to withdraw care for one patient who developed sepsis and multiorgan failure. Mean follow-up time was 380 days. Six patients had CSF leaks on presentation, 5 with rhinorrhea and 1 with otorrhea. Three leaks ceased with temporary external CSF diversion, 2 stopped after a single operation, and 1 patient required 2 operations. Four patients had new CSF leaks after cranial surgery, and all of these were successfully controlled with a period of CSF drainage. One patient with blunt head trauma and CSF rhinorrhea was managed initially with external CSF lumbar drainage. The leak abated and the drain was removed after 5 days, but 2 days later the patient underwent a right frontotemporoparietal decompressive hinge craniectomy to address intracranial hypertension. Six days thereafter the bone flap with underlying epidural empyema and brain abscess, none of which were contiguous with or near the frontal sinus, were removed. Given that the infection was anatomically remote from the frontal sinus and not related to the management of its breach, this was not considered a complication in this series. The 4 complications, all being postoperative CSF leaks, in this series that are reasonably attributable to the management of breaches of their frontal sinuses occurred in patients with trauma, and 1 occurred after surgery for tumor ( Three patients presented with frontal sinusitis and intracranial purulence: 1 with erosion through the posterior wall resulting in cerebral abscess, 1 with a fibrous pus-filled fistula into the right frontal lobe, and 1 having Pott puffy tumor with erosion through the posterior wall of the sinus. All 3 underwent noncranialization surgery and a postoperative course of antibiotics. There has been no clinical or radiographic evidence of residual or recurrent infection. Distinctly different diagnostic categories of patients with breaches in the posterior wall of the frontal sinus have important commonalities which include many of the principles for management as well as types of complications and their causes. Trauma is the most common diagnostic category, but others include infection, bony disorders such as fibrous dysplasia, iatrogenic surgical entry, and erosion into the sinus by a destructive process such as a vascular malformation ( Sinus preservation may be accomplished either by nonsurgical management or by surgical interventions that protect or restore original anatomy Fear of serious complications such as meningitis, brain abscess, mucocele, and persistent CSF rhinorrhea has been the driving motivation for many surgeons to choose cranialization or obliteration for most cases of frontal sinus fracture. It is well established that complications occurring within 6 months of the posterior wall breach, for all diagnostic and age categories, include CSF leak, meningitis, and frontal sinusitis and later complications include persistent CSF leak, mucocele, mucopyocele, cerebral abscess, and osteomyelitis No complications occurred in the 15 patients who were managed without surgery and these included 8 having no bony displacement, 4 with displacements of less than one posterior table thickness, and 3 with bony displacements between one posterior wall thickness and 5 mm. None of these patients had CSF rhinorrhea on presentation; however, 8 of the 15 had radiographic evidence of unilateral or bilateral NF duct obstruction. There is sound evidence that nonsurgical management of noncomminuted, nondisplaced fractures without CSF leak is associated with low complication rates and therefore the low complication rate for our nonoperative patients is not surprising Four of our 27 surgically managed patients had complications related to the management of their frontal sinus fracture, all of which were postoperative CSF leaks (14.8%; Postoperative complication rates as high as 50% are reported in series heavily populated with cases managed by surgically aggressive routines, most commonly cranialization ( Surgical management that includes a goal of preservation of the frontal sinus tends to differ significantly from management that does not include this goal Exeneration of the frontal sinus, a very disfiguring procedure, includes removal of the anterior and posterior walls of the sinus and the supraorbital rims Cranialization is a relatively complex surgical procedure that includes bifrontal craniotomy with removal of the entire posterior wall of the frontal sinus Cranialization gained broad popularity in the early 1990s because of improved morbidities in management of posterior wall fractures A sinus-preserving option for primary management in selected less severe fractures of the posterior wall involves a transnasal endoscopic approach The frontal sinus was breached in the course of neurosurgical operations in 7 patients, spanning 4 diagnostic categories ( Intentional neurosurgical breach of the frontal sinus occurs in 2 settings: in the course of providing exposure to deal with intracranial pathology and to address pathology within the frontal sinus. Cases of the first type can be managed in the same way as iatrogenic breaches. Our 5 cases in the second category included one in which a cerebral arteriovenous malformation eroded through the posterior sinus wall, one in which a portion of the posterior wall was removed in the course of treatment of fibrous dysplasia, and three cases in which there was pus within the sinus and intracranial spaces. Frontal sinusitis with extension into the subperiosteal space (Pott puffy tumor), epidural space, subdural space, or brain parenchyma typically has been managed by neurosurgical intervention that includes cranialization of the frontal sinus; however, our patients with frontal sinusitis, all of whom had purulence beyond the sinus itself, were successfully managed with sinus preservation. Each underwent bifrontal craniotomy with a transverse osteotomy that intentionally crossed the mid-portion of the sinus, evacuation of pus and irrigation of the sinus and all other pus-containing spaces, followed by provision of a path for drainage of the frontal sinus via probing and opening of NF ducts. Both the walls of the frontal sinus and the free frontal bone flaps in these cases were definitely bacteriologically contaminated. The rationale for less aggressive surgical management is identical to that published for the successful management of other bacteriologically contaminated free bone flaps Five patients had CSF rhinorrhea on presentation, and all were related to trauma. Two ceased with a period of CSF drainage, and 3 required surgical interventions. Postoperative CSF rhinorrhea occurred in 4 of our 27 surgical cases and the rhinorrhea had been present before surgery in one of these. The incidence of postoperative CSF rhinorrhea in the current series is lower than that in published series in which more aggressive surgical managements were used. None developed intracranial infection. One of our 7 patients in whom the frontal sinus was intentionally breached during craniotomy developed postoperative CSF rhinorrhea that resolved with lumbar drainage. Although inconsistently reported as being a complication, or at least as a major one, postoperative CSF rhinorrhea, is said to occur at a rate of 3%−10% after cranialization or obliteration Considering that at least half of all CSF leaks recognized on presentation resolve spontaneously Mucocele development after fracture of the frontal sinus is an uncommon but well-known and often discussed complication that can follow either nonsurgical or surgical management of breaches of the frontal sinus and has been reported to come to attention as late as 35 years after frontal bone fracture Twenty-six of our cases had either definite or strong suspicion of NF duct obstruction, based on neuroimaging, and this reflects the severity of injury or presence of pathologies that caused the obstructions. Eight of the 26 were in the nonoperative group and the remaining the 18 were in the operative group. None of our patients with radiographic evidence of NF duct compromise, including the 9 with blood or purulence within the sinus, underwent cranialization or sinus obliteration however each NF duct was probed to ensure patency. So far, no patient in this series has developed a mucocele. We cannot exclude the possibility that a few patients' neuroimages were over-read and therefore these patients did not have NF duct obstruction but this seems an improbable explanation for the low incidence of complications. NF duct occlusion must be taken seriously and nothing in this report should be interpreted otherwise; if not addressed, mucocele or mucopycocele is the expected result. NF duct obstruction or even its suspicion, has often been considered a stronger indication for cranialization or obliteration of the sinus than has CSF rhinorrhea or posterior wall displacement Significant contour deformities have been reported following cranialization and some have required surgical attention The data of this report are consistent with the position that mild and moderately severe breaches of the posterior wall of the frontal sinus can be safely managed with preservation of the frontal sinus and with comparable or lower risk of complications. The authors recognize that a larger series with a concurrent randomized control group for each subcategory would increase the confidence of conclusions drawn from these data. However, this would require a multi-institutional study spanning several years and, until this is done, clinicians must examine and interpret the available data in the most logically and compelling way possible. It is important to not allow either tradition or the fear of relatively uncommon complications to lead to surgical interventions which have higher risks of equivalent or worse complications than those being possibly avoided.