The attrition of binary mixtures of iron powder, as a representative oxygen carrier, and limestone, as a CO2 sorbent, was investigated to examine the interactions of two different solid species. An air-jet apparatus based on ASTM D5757, with several improvements, was used to test particle attrition for various times (3, 6 and 12 h), temperatures (20, 250 and 500 °C), gas flow rates (6, 8 and 10 LPM) and particle mixture compositions (Iron:Limestone mass ratios 1:0, 0.75:0.25, 0.5:0.5, 0.25:0.75 and 0:1). Attrition was affected by the fluidization velocity in relation to the minimum fluidization velocities of the two species, and the mixture mass ratio. High temperature increased the generation of iron fines, while reducing the production of limestone fines. As expected, increasing the air flow rate led to the generation of more fines of both iron and limestone.As the global demand for low-carbon energy increases, clean energy processes involving hydrogen, as well as capturing CO In energy systems of this type, a metal oxide is employed as an oxygen carrier, transporting oxygen from an oxidizer reactor to a reformer reactor. Zafar et al. [ An important requirement for reactions involving sorbents and oxygen carriers is that there be sufficient resistance to particle attrition to provide high stability of the sorbent and carrier structure so that the reactivity can be maintained over many cycles of reduction and oxidation, or calcination and carbonation. Attrition occurs when particles strike the reactor wall or collide with each other. The resulting decrease in particle size may cause a change in the fluidization flow regime, or excessive entrainment from the operation [ Several single-species studies of limestone, iron oxide, or iron ore attrition have been reported. Pis et al. [ Attrition tests with two different solid species have received much less attention than single-species attrition. Arena et al. [ This study explores two-species attrition to provide better understanding of particle interactions. Iron and limestone were selected as a typical oxygen carrier and a common CO A modified air-jet apparatus based on ASTM D5757 [ Samples of iron from RioTinto (d The specific breakage energy of particles is calculated by dividing the breakage energy into the mass of a volume-equivalent sphere. Breakage energy and specific breakage energy can be calculated [ To study the effect of temperature on attrition, a 750 W clamshell ceramic heater was provided as a preheater; and a 1100 W clamshell ceramic fiber heater enclosed the attrition column. OMEGA CN76000 controllers were used for the heaters, and an OMEGA FMA5526 gas flow controller controlled the air flow rate. The attrition test conditions are listed in  The weight fractions of iron particles <250 μm and limestone <63 μm increased with increasing attrition time. One possible mechanism affecting the breakage of relatively coarse particles was the ‘cushioning effect’ suggested by Forsythe and Hertwig [ In To analyze the attrition test with two solid species, U/U  In When the weight percentage of iron increased, the total weight of fluidized iron particles increased, augmenting the attrition of limestone, while also increasing fines generation for the 0–63 μm bin, compared to limestone-alone attrition at 6 h.    In  Similar results were reported by Knight et al. [ Binary solids (iron/limestone) mixture attrition tests were carried out varying attrition time, solid species mass fraction ratios, temperature and air flow rate. Both iron and limestone attrition increased overall when the two species were mixed together. However, the attrition of iron increased with increasing mass fraction of iron, whereas limestone showed no significant change for an air flowrate of 10 LPM, at which the iron particles were only partially fluidized, while the limestone was fully fluidized. As expected, attrition of both iron and limestone in mixtures increased with increasing gas flow rate. Higher temperature affected the gas and particle kinetic energy, as well as the material properties of the particles, leading to reduced fragmentation and more fines generation of iron, while there was less fragmentation of limestone.  Volume-equivalent(i.e. De Brouckere) mean particle diameter [mm] Breakage energy [kg·m Specific breakage energy [m Force [kg·m/s Particle breakage force [kg·m/s Acceleration of gravity [m/s Length of column [m] Superficial gas velocity [m/s] Final fluidization velocity [m/s] Initial fluidization velocity [m/s] Minimum fluidization velocity [m/s]  Compression displacement [m] Maximum compression displacement [m] Particle density [kg/m Particle strength [N]  gas particle The authors acknowledge the financial support of the