We report a mussel-inspired route to create carbonated bone hydroxyapatite from CaCO3 vaterite microspheres. When catechol-containing dopamine, a biomimetic small molecule of mussel adhesive proteins, was incorporated during the mineralization of CaCO3, the oxidative polymerization of dopamine stabilized the formation of spherical vaterite, the most unstable phase among CaCO3 crystalline structures. Thus-formed vaterite microspheres were readily transformed to carbonated hydroxyapatite crystals when incubated in a simulated body fluid at human body temperature. We found that dopamine not only stabilized the vaterite phase but also influenced the level of conversion to carbonated hydroxyapatites. Considering that carbonated hydroxyapatites are highly bioresorbable, similar to natural bone and dentin, the synthesis of a mussel-inspired hybrid material showing good in vitro bone bioactivity should present a new prospect for future applications in the treatment of bone defects and bone degenerative diseases.Natural biominerals exhibit unique mechanical and optical properties with elaborate morphologies and functions such as navigation, storage, and homeostasis Hydroxyapatites have been widely used for bone and dental implantation due to good biocompatibility and similarity to mineral constituents found in hard tissues We introduced dopamine, a mimic of 3,4-dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine (DOPA) in the adhesive protein Mefp-5 secreted from mussels, as an organic component to induce the formation of bone minerals. Strong adhesive properties of Mefp-5 under wet conditions are known to originate from the exhaustively repeated DOPA motif found in the foot protein of mussels Granular anhydrous calcium chloride and sodium carbonate were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and Junsei (Tokyo, Japan), respectively. Dopamine hydrochloride was obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and dissolved in a 10 For the formation of DSVMs, we mixed 0.33 We analyzed morphologies and sizes of CaCO We prepared CaCO We analyzed the time-wise conversion of CaCO The presence of poly(dopamine) in the DSVMs and the converted hydroxyapatite is confirmed using Raman spectroscopy ( In order to corroborate the effect of dopamine concentration on CaCO The concept of DSVM formation and its transformation to carbonated hydroxyapatite in SBF is illustratively depicted in We demonstrated a mussel-inspired route to synthesize an inorganic-organic hybrid material that exhibits an enhanced This study was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) via National Research Laboratory (NRL) (R0A-2008-000-20041-0), Converging Research Center (2009-0082276), and Engineering Research Center (2008-0062205) programs. This research was also partially supported by the KAIST Institute for the NanoCentury (KINC) and the BioGreen 21 Program (20070301034038), Republic of Korea.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at Figures with essential color discrimination.