Introduction
                  This study aims to identify patient and intra-operative factors that contribute to non-union in locked lateral plating for distal femoral fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Systematic searches of English-language articles in Ovid Medline, PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews were undertaken in February 2018 according to the PRISMA guidelines. The search terms were (fracture or fracture*) AND (distal femur or distal femoral) AND (malunion or non-union). Eligible studies published at any time reported non-union rates and compared patient and intraoperative factors in patients who underwent locked lateral plating for traumatic distal femoral fractures. The quality of included papers was assessed using The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery levels of evidence (Wright et al., 2003), and further appraised using the Downs and Black score (Downs and Black, 1998).
               
                  Results
                  Eight studies investigating 1380 distal femoral fractures were found to satisfy the inclusion and exclusion criteria. These studies analysed a variety of patient and intra-operative factors that may contribute to non-union. These include high BMI, open fracture, comminution, fracture infection, stainless steel plate material, shorter working length, open reduction and internal fixation when compared with minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis, high construct rigidity scores and purely locking screw constructs.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This review has identified multiple factors which potentially contribute to non-union including stainless steel plate material, high construct rigidity scores and purely locking screw constructs. These findings may reflect that overly rigid plating constructs can contribute to non-union. However, they should be taken in the context of heterogeneity amongst included studies, with further research necessary to support these findings.Distal femoral fractures account for 3–6% of adult femoral fractures and 0.4% of all fractures, with a bimodal distribution typically comprising of younger patients with high energy injuries and older patients sustaining fractures from minimal trauma [ Reported rates of non-union in LLP vary widely, with some early studies demonstrating rates less than 6% [ Thus, the aim of this systematic review is to identify patient and intra-operative factors that contribute to non-union in LLP for distal femoral fractures, including patient demographics, comorbidities and fracture characteristics in addition to plate and screw variables. A systematic review of the literature was conducted in accordance with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [ Studies eligible for this systematic review included English language studies published at any time, that reported non-union rates and patient and intraoperative factors in patients who underwent locked lateral plating for traumatic distal femoral fractures. Studies investigating intramedullary nails, simultaneous arthroplasty and non-operative treatment were excluded, as were studies that failed to analyse the non-union group compared with the union group. Case reports, abstracts and conference proceedings were also excluded. The quality of included papers was assessed using The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery levels of evidence [ Due to heterogeneity in study designs and reporting methods, meta-analysis of outcomes could not be performed. The included studies were divided into three main categories based on the factors investigated: patient demographic factors, fracture characteristics and intra-operative factors. Intra-operative factors included plate and screw variables. The initial search yielded 717 articles, with 615 articles remaining after duplicates were removed. Title and abstract screening left 41 articles for full-text review. After applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 8 studies were retained for further analysis ( Included studies employed a variety of designs, with the sample size investigated ranging from 34 to 339 as demonstrated in Item 9: Have the characteristics of patients lost to follow-up been described? Item 14: Was an attempt made to blind study subjects to the intervention they had received? Item 15: Was an attempt made to blind those measuring the main outcomes of the intervention? Item 23: Were study subjects randomised to intervention groups? Item 24: Was the randomised intervention assignment concealed from both patients and health care staff until recruitment was complete and irrevocable? Item 26: Were losses of patients to follow-up taken into account? All studies investigated patient demographic characteristics including age, sex, bone mineral density, body mass index, diabetes, steroid use, dialysis and smoking status. BMI (>30) was significantly associated (p = 0.03) with increased risk of non-union by one high quality paper [ Out of six papers examining the relationship between open fractures and non-union, two papers [ From five studies directly comparing the significance of AO/OTA fracture classification, [ Peri-prosthetic fractures were not significantly associated with increased rates of non-union in four studies [ Fracture infection was strongly associated with non-union in two studies [ All eight studies examined operative factors and their association with non-union, including plate characteristics, screw density and construction, working length, metal alloy and plating technique. Five studies compared the impact of stainless steel and titanium plates. Two papers by Rodriguez et al [ Plate length was not shown to have a statistically significant association with non-union in four studies [ Minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) was compared to the traditional LCP in Molina et al [ Rodriguez et al [ Working length of a plate construct is defined as the distance between the first screws on either side of the fracture, with a longer working length hypothesised to reduce non-union rates. Henderson et al [ The total number of unfilled holes, [ Other operative factors that did not demonstrate a significant association with non-union in any study include the use of additional lag screws, [ Distal femoral fractures are a relatively common occurrence, and are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Non-union rates of up to 21% have been demonstrated in the literature [ As shown in this study, BMI is the only patient demographic significantly associated with increased risk of non-union [ Fracture characteristics associated with higher rates of non-union include open fractures, [ Surgical variables associated with increased rates of non-union include stainless steel plate material, [ Plate material selection remains a key surgical decision for distal femoral fracture repair. Although stainless steel is typically cheaper than titanium, it is a much stiffer material with approximately twice the density of titanium [ Minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis has become an increasingly popular method of treating distal femoral fractures, which in theory enables the increased preservation of blood supply, fracture haematoma and a reduction in soft tissue damage. Hoffman et al demonstrated a significant reduction in non-union in the MIPO group compared with the open reduction group. The evidence surrounding MIPO in other long bone fractures remains mixed, [ Higher construct rigidity scores were significantly associated with increased rates of non-union (p < 0.01) in Rodriguez et al, 2016. This rigidity score awarded points for increasing proximal screw density, if a screw crossed the main fracture plane and the use of a stainless steel plate. Whilst significant, the authors concede that the score likely reflects the predominant effect of plate material and design over the other included variables, with its external validity highly limited. Proximal screw constructs comprised of all locking screws were strongly associated with higher rates of non-union when compared with hybrid proximal screw constructs (OR 2.9 [1.2–7.0], p = 0.01) [ Henderson et al [ The above associations between surgical variables and non-union may support the hypothesis that overly rigid constructs increase non-union rates. However, plate length [ Clinicians should note factors identified in the present review as potential contributors to non-union for distal femoral fractures. However, there is insufficient evidence at this time to develop conclusive guidelines for optimal surgical intervention. The findings are constrained by methodological limitations within the included studies such as marked heterogeneity, varied definitions, mixed population samples, limited controlling for confounding variables, absence of randomised controlled trials and sub-optimal reporting of results. For example, Rodriguez et al, 2014 [ Whilst this systematic review synthesises important information, the findings must be interpreted in light of the review limitations. However, the surgical variables associated with higher rates of non-union are consistent with the increasing body of literature suggesting overly rigid constructs are detrimental to fracture union in the setting of distal femoral fractures [ Indeed, surgeons are faced with a difficult balance between preventing overly rigid fixation constructs and enabling callus formation, without creating an unstable fixation, with further research necessary to determine the optimal balance of intraoperative variables. It is crucial that future studies examine homogenous data properly powered for analysis purposes, with confounding variables minimised ideally through the use of randomised control trials, or otherwise accounted for in analysis of surgical cohorts. This systematic review has identified a variety of patient factors, fracture characteristics and surgical variables which influence the union rates in distal femoral fractures. Whilst evidence suggests that overly rigid constructs may increase the risk of non-union, the inconsistency in study methodology and reporting limits the development of definitive conclusions. Future large-scale randomised controlled trials or appropriately powered cohort studies are necessary to examine the optimal LLP techniques for management of distal femoral fractures.