Summit pit craters are found in many types of volcanoes and are generally thought to be the product of collapse into an underpressured reservoir caused by magma withdrawal. We investigate the mechanisms and structures associated with summit pit crater formation by scaled analogue experiments and make comparisons with natural examples. Models use a sand plaster mixture as analogue rock over a cylinder of silicone simulating an underpressured magma reservoir. Experiments are carried out using different roof aspect ratios (roof thickness/roof width) of 0.2–2. They reveal two basic collapse mechanisms, dependant on the roof aspect ratio. One occurs at low aspect ratios (≤1), as illustrated by aspect ratios of 0.2 and 1. Outward dipping reverse faults initiated at the silicone margins propagates through the entire roof thickness and cause subsidence of a coherent block. Collapse along the reverse faults is accommodated by marginal flexure of the block and tension fractures at the surface (aspect ratio of 0.2) or by the creation of inward dipping normal faults delimiting a terrace (aspect ratio of 1). At an aspect ratio of 1, overhanging pit walls are the surface expressions of the reverse faults. Experiments at high aspect ratio (>1.2) reveal a second mechanism. In this case, collapse occurs by stopping, which propagates upwards by a complex pattern of both reverse faults and tension fractures. The initial underground collapse is restricted to a zone above the reservoir and creates a cavity with a stable roof above it. An intermediate mechanism occurs at aspect ratios of 1.1–1.2. In this case, stopping leads to the formation of a cavity with a thin and unstable roof, which collapses suddenly. The newly formed depression then exhibits overhanging walls. Surface morphology and structure of natural examples, such as the summit pit craters at Masaya Volcano, Nicaragua, have many of the features created in the models, indicating that the internal structural geometry of experiments can be applied to real examples. In particular, the surface area and depth of the underpressured reservoir can be roughly estimated. We present a morphological analysis of summit pit craters at volcanoes such as Kilimanjaro (Tanzania), San Cristobal, Telica and Masaya (Nicaragua), and Ubinas (Peru), and indicate a likely type of subsidence and possible position of the former magma reservoir responsible for collapse in each case.Pit craters are volcanic collapse structures. They are elliptical or nearly circular cylinders, with overhanging or steeply inward dipping sides, and a partially or totally talus covered flat base. Their diameters and depths vary from a few metres to hundreds of metres. Diameter often increases with time due to wall slumping ( Pit craters are generally thought of as features of basaltic shield volcanoes, ( Pit crater formation is not always associated with eruption from the crater. On basaltic shields, pit craters have been observed to form after the start of flank eruptions ( Pit craters are worthy of study because their evolution may be related to, or even control, near surface magmatic activity ( Various mechanisms of formation have been proposed for pit craters, and a distinction must be made between those occurring along rift zones and those at the summits of volcanoes. We have carried out a range of scaled analogue experiments in order to obtain information on the mechanisms and structures of summit pit crater collapse. We built a system aimed at producing subsidence by the underpressuring of a cylindrical reservoir. Different conditions may trigger subsidence over different lengths of time. Possible candidates include flank eruption, magma degassing, reintrusion elsewhere, and possibly volume reduction by hydrothermal dissolution and alteration ( The experiments were carried out in a 3D apparatus In the experiments we used silicone as analogue magma and a mixture of sand and plaster as analogue rock ( For scaling we used the procedure introduced by We present three series of experiments, each of which reveals a different collapse mechanism ( Surface deformation in the experiments with a roof aspect ratio of 0.2 shows a subsided area delimited by the first outward dipping reverse fault (R), which appears on one side of the depression ( Cross sections show that the roof is weakly flexed ( The experiments with a roof aspect ratio of 1 show that a coherent, elliptical piston collapses, forming a fault scarp ( Cross sections reveal the existence of a complex pattern of faults, the dips of which vary markedly from one serial section to another one ( We first describe the experiments carried out at a roof aspect ratio of 2. These show no surface deformation; however, a very complex pattern of deformation occurs at depth ( The results suggest that a critical roof aspect ratio between 1 and 2 may exist. Additional experiments show that the transition between the two mechanisms occurs at an aspect ratio of about 1.1–1.2 ( The experiments reveal two basic mechanisms of collapse into a fluid-filled reservoir, for a relatively large amount of collapse compared to the roof thickness. The first occurs at low roof aspect ratios (0.2 and 1). In these cases, subsidence of an essentially coherent piston occurs along outward-dipping (60–80°) reverse ring faults, which form at the margins of the silicone reservoir. Collapse along the faults is accommodated by marginal flexure of the piston and opening of fractures at the surface (0.2), or by the creation of inward dipping normal faults (1). The second mechanism is produced at roof aspect ratios greater than 1. In this case, collapse occurs in a non-coherent or chaotic fashion, forming a cavity at depth whose height is approximately equal to its width. The overlying roof only collapses at aspect ratios of 1.1–1.2 or remains stable if it is sufficiently thick (aspect ratio of 2). A notable feature in these experiments is the formation of outward-dipping reverse ring faults that guide the subsidence, at least at lower aspect ratios. Such faults are created because the trajectories of Our experiments reveal interesting similarities with mining subsidence models. Both show two mechanisms of collapse, depending on the roof aspect ratio. Extensive reviews of mining subsidence processes have been given for collapse over horizontal and rectangular openings in the SME Mining Engineering Handbook ( Using our analogue experiments, we can make comparisons with the morphology and structure of some natural summit pit craters. Some of the features already observed at pit craters were created in the experiments. This may allow interpretation of the subsurface structure of natural pits and several examples are described below ( Surface morphology and exposed structures at the Masaya summit pit craters ( The main Santiago pit crater is a 150-m-deep collapse pit with vertical walls. The crater floor (ignoring the inner pit crater) is flat, with small scree fans at the edge. The original crater floor morphology is not known, although in 1933 The original vent of the inner crater was about 20 The other two pit craters of Telica volcano, Nicaragua, is a basaltic andesitic stratovolcano with a shield-like construction ( A 200-m-deep pit, 400 The pit crater (700 Ubinas is an andesitic to dacitic stratovolcano in Peru ( The summit of Kibo, the main peak of Kilimanjaro, is composed of a large crater, 2.5 The central crater is a shallow pit, only 100 This experimental study indicates that the different collapse mechanisms proposed by previous authors for pit craters are not contradictory but relate to different roof aspect ratios. Although the experiments have implications for the formation of summit pit craters ( Depending on the roof aspect ratio, we can envisage a range of collapse mechanisms, from coherent (piston type) to non-coherent (chaotic) collapse, as also shown by mining subsidence models ( Coherent, piston type collapse is expected for roofs of small aspect ratio. Subsidence occurs along reverse faults, leading to the formation of subsurface fractures and peripheral normal faults that eventually delimit crater terraces. These reverse faults may be the favoured sites for syn-collapse to post-collapse eruptions. Internal secondary deformation manifest as tension fractures at the roof base and small faults could render the final structure less coherent and favour subsequent small intrusions. In this context, for the smaller roof aspect ratios, the exceptionally well-exposed inner structure at Nindiri could represent a typical case ( Collapse over a small and deep reservoir is more likely to occur in a non-coherent manner, by roof brecciation and stoping. Such non-coherent collapse is likely to appear within pit craters where small magma bodies intrude the subsided roof (e.g. Masaya). Such deep collapses may lead to the formation of a cavity with a stable roof if this latter is strong. Rock assimilation and deep magma accumulation could then be expected, possibly leading to shallower magma bodies and reduction of the roof aspect ratio. This mechanism can form near surface magma bodies without a space problem. In the case of a weak roof with pre-existing faults and joints, this cavity may progress upward and eventually reach the surface, as proposed by Observations at Hawaiian pit craters ( Hazel Rymer and Steve Martel provided helpful reviews. Thanks to Norman Kerle for deciphering the old German papers on Masaya, and to Jean-Claude Besson for help in measuring the physical properties of the granular materials. Financial support was provided by the Observatoire de Physique du Globe de Clermont-Ferrand and by the Centre de Recherches Volcanologiques.