As the restrictions on water usage become more prevalent throughout the world, mining operations are required to understand the impact that water recycling will have on them. Not only owing to operational needs, but also from an environmental stand point. As would be expected recycling is likely to lead to increased dissolved ions, increasing the ionic strength, which may impact plant performance. By conducting flotation tests under varying degrees of ionic strength of synthetic plant water it is possible to better understand the effect that water recycling could have on the recovery of a mining operation. The effect of such an increase in ionic strength is discussed.Researchers have long been aware of the possible effects that ions present in recycled water may have on the flotation operation ( Platinum group elements (PGE) are recovered from the Merensky reef in the Bushveld complex, South Africa, by flotation in a number of operations. Each operation has developed a unique reagent suite, yet all include the use of a polysaccharide depressant to reduce the amount of NFG, present in all sections of the reef, reporting to the concentrate. Merensky reef ores contain approximately 1% sulphide minerals in the form of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite and the PGE’s are strongly associated with these sulphides. Although talc/serpentine is present in small quantities (<5%) it has a disproportionate effect as it is found along pyroxene grain boundaries and leads to significant quantities of NFG reporting to the concentrate ( Over the last 5 An ore typical of the Merensky reef was acquired from one of the Merensky processing operations. The bulk sample was crushed, blended, riffled and split using a rotary splitter into 1 Standard plant water ( The 1 The collector, SIBX, was supplied by Senmin. The Stypres 504 depressant was supplied by Chemquest. The frother, DOW 200, was supplied by Betachem. All the chemical salts used to make up the synthetic plant water solutions were supplied by Merck. An air flow rate of 7 In a flotation cell material reports to the concentrate in two ways, either via true flotation or entrainment. For each ionic strength condition it is evident that adding an increased amount of depressant results in a significant decrease in the amount of solids reporting to the concentrate. At the same time there is generally a decrease in the amount of water recovered for increased depressant dosage implying that there is a decrease in froth stability as the amount of NFG reporting to the concentrate is reduced. It is assumed that at a dosage of 500 The increase in the frothability on increasing the ionic strength is more difficult to explain since the frother used in this series of tests was a poly glycol ether type, Dow 200, and as such is a non-ionic frother and was not considered likely to be significantly affected by changes in the ionic strength. A series of 2-phase flotation tests in the absence of any solids were carried out at a fixed frother concentration and the mass of water recovered determined as a function of time for the four ionic strength waters. These results are show in The effect of changing the ionic strength on the amount of NFG recovered as a function of the water recovered is shown in At a dosage of 100 In assessing flotation experiments, it is important to keep in mind that the ultimate goal is the recovery of valuable minerals. Because of the large variations in froth stability the effect of ionic strength on the recovery of the sulphide minerals can be best examined by determining the recovery as a function of the mass of water recovered ( The recovery of both pentlandite and chalcopyrite, because of the close association of the PGE with these minerals, can be used as indication of the effect the ionic strength may have on the recovery of the valuable minerals. Chalcopyrite is recognised as a fast floating mineral and is represented by the copper recovery, while pentlandite, as represented by the nickel recovery, floats slower. An increase in the ionic strength of the system resulted in an increase in froth stability, leading to increased mass pulls and water recoveries. The affect appears to be directly related to the 2-phase frothing property of the frother rather than changes in the hydrophobicity of the particles entering the froth. The increase in ionic strength had no apparent affect on the recovery of the sulphide minerals as measured by copper and nickel recoveries, however the grades were somewhat decreased as the higher mass pull and water recovery at higher ionic strengths introduced more NFG to the final concentrate. The use of high dosages of depressant reduced final nickel recoveries presumably by depressing gangue/pentlandite composite particles. On the other hand the copper recoveries were not affected by the high depressant dosage. In the absence or presence of depressant the increase in ionic strength caused a decrease in the amount of NFG reporting to the concentrate per unit water which appeared to reach a maximum value. The decrease in the amount of NFG recovered from the increase in ionic strength was small compared to the reduction in the amount of NFG reporting to the concentrate from the addition of depressant. With the potential limitation in water resources even higher ionic strength waters need to be examined. The members of the UCT RRF: Anglo Platinum, Impala platinum, Lonmin platinum for their continued support.