This article investigates an alternative method to deal with data sets in the presence of trends. Median polish kriging (MPK) was introduced as an alternative solution to universal kriging or intrinsic random functions of order k (IRF-k) for estimation in the presence of trends. The maps obtained using the original MPK algorithm show banding artefacts which do not appear in the reference data set. A modified version of MPK was introduced to attempt to remove the banding artefacts. The results confirm the improvement in quality of estimate using the modified version of MPK (called MPKm), which takes into account the problems of clustered samples and boundary effect associated with the re-addition of the trend along bands. The variation introduced in the median polish algorithm proved to be satisfactory in eliminating the artefacts.Ordinary and simple kriging (OK and SK, respectively) assume that the mean of the attribute being modeled is unknown and known, respectively. Another necessary condition required by these methods (and most of the other kriging methods) is the existence of second-order stationarity or quasi-stationarity about the mean, and the existence of a finite variance ( When using ordinary kriging, the unknown and constant mean, In the presence of a trend, the estimator is no longer unbiased, and in this case the random function can be separated into two components. The value of the drift within a certain domain is the expected value of the random variable and varies progressively (nonstationary part). The residual after removal of the drift within the domain is the difference between the actual value and the drift. The residuals hold the stationarity property (at least intrinsic). First, the drift is removed and the intrinsic stationary residuals are measured for spatial continuity. UK is used to estimate the residual component, which is added to the estimated drift to obtain the final interpolated value. When working with residuals, the problem of bias associated with variograms calculated using these residuals arises naturally. This is particularly important when using methods such as UK ( UK needs to be discussed further to clarify the problem in estimating the variogram for the residuals. UK uses a decomposition similar to Eq. To continue with UK, a variogram is required for the true residuals, which cannot be solved as the real drift is not known. This problem is known as the indeterminacy in the underlying variogram discussed in The available kriging methods including UK, IRF-k, which efficiently deal with complex trends, are mathematically considered complex by many practitioners. In what follows, a simpler method will be introduced to be used in the presence of trends without affecting the quality of the estimates. Median polishing kriging (MPKm) is an estimation method developed to provide unbiased estimates when the geological attribute studied exhibit trends. Median polishing was introduced by Basically, MPK uses this decomposition to generate two new data sets: the deterministic component and the residuals. The second is analyzed for spatial continuity. After a variogram model is fitted to the experimental variogram, ordinary kriging is used to estimate point or block values at the required sites. Simple kriging would be more correct method to estimate the residuals; however, ordinary kriging was used in order to handle variation in the local mean. The deterministic trend is added back to the estimated residuals. Median polishing consists of decomposition of the observed spatial data into large- and small-scale variations. Decomposing the trend using the median is robust and resistant to outliers and removes trends in the data. The remaining residuals later can be used with any geostatistical method originally inappropriate for nonstationary data sets. The trend extracted by median polishing, Median polishing starts by subtracting the median along the columns for each fixed row and fixed level. The value of the median is calculated using the data from the first row. After the median of the first row is subtracted from each of the original values located along the grid nodes in the first row, the resulting value substitutes the original data at their locations. The median is displayed in the extra column added at the end of this matrix. This procedure is repeated for all other rows. When the row polishing is completed, the process is repeated along the columns including the column resulting from the row median polishing ( If a grid node value is missing in a certain geographical position, this grid node is ignored when the median along the row/column/level (in 3D), which includes this node, is calculated. Where there are no samples along an entire row, column, or level, the effect is still calculated and is obtained by averaging the row or column or level effect value from the previous row or column or level and from the adjacent row/columns/levels. This interpolation is necessary in order to have row/column effects in all possible positions within the field being interpolated, regardless of samples within a specific row/column two rows, columns, or levels. This interpolation is necessary in order to have row/column effects at all possible positions within the field being interpolated, regardless of the presence of samples within a specific row/column/level. In the case, the interpolation is set to assign values along row/column/level where originally there were no samples, the interpolated residuals should be added to a certain row/column/level effect in order to bring them to the original scale. The existence of row/column/level effects covering all the geographical positions in the field guarantees that the method will work appropriately during the final step of the median polish process when the drift is added back. The residuals in the cells are obtained for a 3-D situation using the original values according to The median polishing process is repeated until no effect or modification of grid nodes within the residual matrix can be noticed. Normally, it is necessary to repeat the procedure at least three times along each column and each row until the algorithm is said to have converged (in some cases, more than three would be necessary). When the procedure converges, the matrix presents the residual effects at the positions of the original data assays plus the row, column, and all effects. The addition of the median-polished components to the residuals re-establishes the original data. MPK processes independently the two RV obtained by the decomposition, i.e. the median polishing deterministic component and the residuals. The residuals obtained in the median polish need to be checked for interactions (independence) between themselves. It is important to guarantee that the residuals are independent of their positions, and consequently that the variograms constructed from them are not biased. A proposed test for interactions uses the following equation to measure The In choosing an appropriate filtering direction, the term  The subsample in The experimental omnidirectional variogram calculated for the sample data set is presented in The data set used in this example differs in many aspects from the data set used by Each row or column is formed by a filtering band which selects the samples within this zone. The median of the selected samples in a certain band is subtracted from the original sample values included in that band. A compromise decision about the band dimension should consider the average sampling spacing. Three band widths were tested in order to verify the influence of this parameter on the final interpolated results: (i) bands of 2.7 Use of narrow bands would be the logical approach to avoid excessive averaging in filtering the drift; however, with the use of very narrow bands, the number of samples included on each band becomes limited. In extreme cases of very narrow bands, no sample would be found in a given band, creating difficulties in assigning the trend effect to that zone. For those cases, the median assigned can be obtained by interpolating the median polished from the closer bands. The residuals obtained by the filtering process also depend on the band orientation used to filter the trend, and also these residuals should be independent of their positions. The correlation of residuals and their positions tested by Eq. A new data set was obtained by filtering the trend from the clustered sample using 5.44 The maps obtained by MPK using filtering bands of 5.44 In order to minimize the artefact problem, some alternatives were tested. Initially, the influence of the filtering grid orientation was analyzed by repeating the MPK process, using filtering bands-oriented NS. The new data set, obtained after removing the median using filtering bands at NS, was analyzed for spatial continuity and the whole process repeated. The results obtained using NS filtering bands were very similar to those previously presented using filtering bands at N45E, with the persistence of the banding artefact. As no improvement was achieved using a different filtering direction, it was decided that the study should be continued with the results produced by N45E filtering bands. This direction is the logical direction to be used in filtering the trend as it coincides with the principal trend orientation. A second reason for the banding artefacts is associated with an incorrectly calculated median effect obtained in some columns. The distorted median effect is due to preferential sampling of high-grade zones in those bands (see To overcome problems in removing the trend caused by clustering, an alternative process is proposed based on a declustering step before MPK. The solution consists of re-sampling the original data set to obtain a new declustered sample, using a pseudo-regular random-sampling scheme, picking up one sample per regular-sized window ( A reduction in the banding artefact is anticipated if the trend effect is removed using the MPK method with a declustered data set. The method starts by filtering the median along rows and columns using the declustered data set and by storing the median polishing effect in a file for later use. This file contains the row and column effects without the associated problems caused by clustered samples. The next step consists of subtracting the unbiased row/column effect stored from the original data set, i.e. the clustered data set. The residuals obtained by subtracting the trend using the median polishing effect from the original sample, in this case, are not affected by the clustering problem. Bands of 5.4  The cause of this banding artefact was previously discussed and is associated with the occurrence of discontinuities in the subtracted trend effect, leading to boundary problems during the re-addition of the trend. A satisfactory-grade spatial distribution model and map should be able to reproduce the major and minor features of the sample data set without creating artificial artefacts. Zonation or banding are extremely severe in the results obtained so far using MPK, even by filtering the trend using a declustered data set. General aspects of the reference data set were reproduced by the MPK; however, a strong smoothing effect is visible, with a tendency to underestimate high values. This smoothing is typical of interpolation algorithms including kriging. For larger block dimensions, the quality of maps improved, reproducing the details exhibited by the reference map. To avoid the banding artefact shown in the previous models, an alternative process is suggested, namely, to re-add the trend herein named modified median polishing kriging ( Consider Assuming that Each new random variable, The two variables, The suggested MPKm process then becomes: use a declustered data set to filter the median polishing effect along row/columns, decomposing the RF check the residuals, use the residuals, use the median polishing effect (trend), combine the block models obtained in (iii) and (iv).  MPKm models using the kriged median polishing trend effect were validated, and the quality of the estimate of MPKm was compared with OK results ( MPKm and OK were finally checked for conditional biasedness and the results are shown in One of the theoretical assumptions when using OK is that the data are trend free (in fact intrinsic stationary); however, for practical applications, one can use OK with trends, considering a local search neighborhood ( The filtering process is obtained through an iterative process repeated until convergence is achieved, i.e. until the value for the median polishing effect is nil. The direction chosen to filter the trend did not influence the final quality of the estimates, provided that the residuals obtained with a given band orientation are independent of their positions. The band width used in filtering the trend influenced the final estimates. The selected band dimension should be close to the average sampling spacing to produce good results. The maps obtained using the MPK method without declustering the data prior to extracting the median polishing effect showed banding artefacts. A zonation structure is visible in those maps, which in fact do not exist in the reference data set. Banding artefacts were attenuated but not eliminated using the median filtered from a declustered sample. To eliminate completely the zonation artefact, a discrete grid was generated using the information from the row/column effect measured at every datum position. This grid was then combined with the interpolated residuals. This variation of the original median polishing algorithm (named MPKm) produced a smoother de-trending surface and a final model without artefacts. The solution adopted is more laborious than the original proposal because it is necessary to krige two sub-datasets separately: the residuals and the median polishing effect and combine the models at the end. Data sets with clustered samples (common in mining applications) need to be declustered prior to removal of the trend. To avoid bias in the calculated median, declustering is essential. Clustered data sets would probably displace the row/column effect upwards by the excessive number of samples at high-grade zones. In this case study, a pseudo-regular random-sampling technique was used to obtain a declustered data set; however, alternative methods to declustering could be tried. Data sets with trends are nonstationary and are inappropriate to be addressed by most kriging techniques that rely on the stationarity assumption. Median polish kriging was introduced as an alternative to universal kriging or IRF-k for estimation of datasets in the presence of trends. The results confirm the improvement in quality of the estimates using the modified version of MPK (called MPKm), which takes into account the problems of clustered samples and boundary effect associated with the re-addition of the trend along the bands. The variation introduced in the median polish algorithm proved to be satisfactory in improving the original proposal. The modified algorithm consists basically of interpolating the trend effect separately from the residuals, both defined at data location, into an identical grid spacing. A comparison with UK in terms of results might be useful; however, similar results are expected. The fundamental difference of MPKm and UK lies in the manner in which the trend is removed. UK chooses a polynomial to estimate the trend on an ad hoc basis, whereas MPKm attempts to remove the trend by filtering the local medians. Financial support for this work was provided by CAPES (Brazil) and W.H. Bryan Mining Geology Research Center, (BRC), The University of Queensland, Australia.