The anodic oxidation of 1.8l of solutions with mecoprop (2-(4-chloro-2-methylphenoxy)-propionic acid or MCPP) up to 0.64gl−1 in Na2SO4 as background electrolyte within the pH range 2.0–12.0 has been studied using a flow plant containing a one-compartment filter-press electrolytic reactor with a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and a stainless steel cathode, both of 20-cm2 area. Electrolyses carried out in batch under steady conditions and operating at constant current density between 50 and 150mAcm−2 always yield complete mineralization due to the great concentration of hydroxyl radical generated at the BDD anode. The degradation rate is practically independent of pH and Na2SO4 concentration, but it becomes faster with increasing MCPP concentration, current density, temperature and liquid flow rate. The effect of these parameters on current efficiency and energy cost has also been investigated. Generated weak oxidants such as H2O2 and peroxodisulfate ion have little influence on the mineralization process. The kinetics for the herbicide decay follows a pseudo first-order reaction with a higher rate constant when current density increases. Aromatic products such as 4-chloro-o-cresol, 2-methylhydroquinone and 2-methyl-p-benzoquinone, and generated carboxylic acids such as maleic, fumaric, lactic, pyruvic, tartronic, acetic and oxalic, have been identified as intermediates by chromatographic techniques. The initial chlorine is completely released in the form of chloride ion, which is slowly oxidized to Cl2 at the BDD anode. A reaction pathway for MCPP mineralization involving all products detected is proposed.An increasing number of papers have been recently published dealing with the electrochemical treatment of organic pollutants in wastewaters by anodic oxidation. This environmentally friendly technique is based on the generation of adsorbed hydroxyl radical ( The recent use of BDD thin-film as new anode material has shown that it possesses technologically important characteristics such as an inert surface with low adsorption properties, remarkable corrosion stability and an extremely wide potential windows in aqueous medium ( An increasing accumulation of herbicides has been recently detected in US and European ground waters and surface waters at relatively high contamination levels ( In previous work we have reported the efficient mineralization of acidic aqueous solutions of chlorophenoxyacetic acids such as 4-chlorophenoxyacetic, 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic at pH 3.0 by anodic oxidation with BDD using a small electrolytic cell of 100 This paper presents a study on the degradation of mecoprop in acid and alkaline aqueous media by anodic oxidation with BDD using a flow reactor operating in batch under steady conditions. Concentrated solutions of this herbicide up to 0.64 Reagent grade mecoprop (95%) from Lancaster was recrystallized in a 50:50 (v/v) ethanol/water mixture before use. 4-Chloro- The solution pH was measured with a Crison 2000 pH-meter. Before analysis, all samples extracted from electrolyzed solutions were filtered with 0.45  Solutions of 1.8 Several electrolyses of 100-ml solutions of 100 Solutions of 1.8 To clarify the characteristics of MCPP degradation in the flow reactor, the effect of current density, temperature and liquid flow rate on TOC decay of 178 The same tendency was found by varying the temperature of the above solution from 15 to 60 The concentration of generated oxidants such as H To clarify if organics react with generated weak oxidants, different MCPP solutions in 0.05, 0.10 and 0.50 The above experiments also showed a great effectiveness of the flow reactor to destroy high herbicide concentrations. As an example, The degradation of MCPP is accompanied by the release of chloride ion, as will be discussed below. The mineralization reaction yielding carbon dioxide and Cl The efficiency calculated from Eq. The energy cost (in Energy costs obtained from Eq. Electrolyses of acid and alkaline solutions with 178 Reversed-phase chromatograms of the above solutions also exhibited the peaks of MCPP ( To clarify the degradation connection of generated carboxylic acids, 100 To clarify whether MCPP can be oxidized by H The kinetics of MCPP decay was studied by electrolyzing 178  The concentration of products detected during the degradation of 643  On the other hand, overall dechlorination of MCPP is expected during its mineralization. This was confirmed by determining the concentration of chloride ion present in the above treated solutions of pH 3.0 and 12.0. A reaction scheme for MCPP mineralization in acid and alkaline media by anodic oxidation with BDD is proposed in It has been demonstrated that anodic oxidation with BDD is very effective for the complete mineralization of mecoprop up to 0.64 The authors thank the financial support and the grant awarded to C.F. to do this work from MEC (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, Spain) under project CTQ2004-01954/BQU.