Mitragyna speciosa, a tropical plant indigenous to Southeast Asia, is well known for its psychoactive properties. Its leaves are traditionally chewed by Thai and Malaysian farmers and manual labourers as it causes a numbing, stimulating effect. The present study aims to evaluate alkaloid yield and composition in the leaf extracts. For this purpose we have compared several non-conventional extraction techniques with classic procedures (room temperature or under heating). Dried M. speciosa leaves belonging to three batches of different origin (from Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia) were extracted using ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE), microwave-assisted extraction (MAE) and supercritical carbon dioxide extraction SFE-CO2, using methanol, ethanol, water and binary mixtures. The extracts were compared using an HPLC/ESI-MS analysis of mitragynine and four other related alkaloids which were present in the alkaloid fraction. The extraction technique influences both the raw product yield and the relative alkaloid content of M. speciosa leaves. Of the several methods tested, MAE in a closed vessel at 110°C (60W, methanol/water 1:1) gave the highest alkaloid fraction amount, while UAE with an immersion horn at 25°C (21.4kHz, 50W, methanol) showed the best yield for mitragynine.
                  This work may prove to be a useful contribution to forensic, toxicological and pharmacognosy studies. Although the potential applications of M. speciosa alkaloids clearly need further investigation, these results may facilitate the scaling-up of their extraction. In recent decades, extractions of  All the sonochemical apparatus, namely two probe systems, one with an immersion titanium horn (21.4 All the extractions were performed using a 1:10 plant to solvent ratio. Dried leaves were pulverized in a plant blender (Blendor, Warig Commercial) at a size range of 300–400 Fifty gram of powdered leaves were added to 500 Five grams of powdered leaves, were soaked in 50 Five grams of dried powdered leaves were soaked in 50 A mixture of dried crushed leaves (2 Two hundred and forty-three grams of leaves powder were extracted using 28.8% EtOH as a co-solvent, at 65 The crude dried extracts were suspended in water and the pH was adjusted to 3 with 0.1 An aliquot (200 Stock solutions of alkaloid extracts and isolated mitragynine were prepared by dissolving 1 The extraction techniques, conditions and reactor type, play a crucial role in the process efficiency and chemical composition of the extract. For this reason a preliminary screening of different extraction techniques and solvents was performed and the best parameters applied to the rest of the investigation. Extractions were carried out on The alkaloid fraction was separated from the crude extracts by a common acid/base partition. A preliminary investigation tested several solvents/solvent mixtures in the UAE of Thai  It is worth highlighting the fact that the highest alkaloid yield was obtained under MW and US-horn extractions using an equal water/methanol ratio. Although MAE are not so sensitive to the comminution degree as US is, the small size of the powdered leaves (300–400 LC–MS analyses refer to the five main alkaloids peaks (SIM modality), namely The estimated total amount of alkaloids ( As depicted in  We used the same extraction method, USH, met/w (1:1), to compare the alkaloid content of the three samples of In this piece of work we have shown how the extraction technique influences both the raw extract yield and the relative alkaloid content of The present work was supported by Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca (PRIN 2008) and by Regione Piemonte (NUTRAPIEM, POR-FESR). We are grateful to Dr. Stefan Messner for providing all the samples of plant material and for the local botanists supervision.