Recent interest in biomass supply chain management has stimulated research efforts in the industry and academic communities. Techno-economic modeling and optimization efforts targeted on the upstream segment of the forest biomass to bio-oil supply chain are reviewed. Key components of upstream supply chain decision making are then presented through an overview and classification of the existing methods and contributions. There is a need to classify and analyze the relevant methodologies and approaches identified in prior studies, and to subsequently assess their usefulness through empirical research and case-based analysis. Both narrative and systematic literature reviews are performed using qualitative analysis and classic bibliometric techniques to demonstrate the scope of current papers and the call for future needs. It is found, due to growing demands for bioenergy, future biomass-to-bioenergy supply chains should draw upon existing research toward the development of efficient and effective forest biomass supply chain networks. It is further concluded that a new generation of pretreatment technologies is needed for techno-economic optimization of upstream forest biomass value chains.Since the early 1970s, when the world had its first energy shortage crisis and recognized a looming environmental crisis, interest in developing new sources of energy has risen significantly Biofuels represent a promising substitute for conventional fuels for mobility and heating applications; however, availability, quality, and variability of biomass greatly affect energy self-sufficiency Increasing bioenergy availability is crucial due to its significant advantages (e.g., reduction of dependence on imported energy and GHG emissions). Supply challenges, (e.g., low energy density and bulky), are major barriers that prevent using forest biomass to produce bioenergy The economic aspect is influenced by several factors. First, biomass has the low-energy density, which results in higher costs for transport and delivery to refinery facilities Several optimization studies have focused on the development of decision support systems for forest biomass SCs Lignocellulosic biomass is the most abundant type of biomass, and is composed of lignin (15–20%), hemicellulose (25–35%), and cellulose (40–50%) Various aspects of the upstream segment of biomass to bioenergy SC have previously been discussed Bals et al. Bio-oil is a low-grade liquid fuel that can be used in industrial heating (e.g., fueling heaters, furnaces, and boilers), industrial turbines, stationary dual-fuel diesel engines, and upgrading to transport fuels Bio-char is another product of the pyrolysis process, which is a valuable fuel for industrial application since it has a high energy content (about 30 In addition to developing cost-effective production technology, an optimal and robust bioenergy system is essential to support a competitive biomass-based energy market Mathematical optimization has been widely applied over the last decade to address economic objectives in the upstream segment of biomass-to-bioenergy SCs Biomass SC optimization approaches that incorporate various decision levels (i.e., strategic, tactical, and operational) to evaluate sustainability performance have not been found in the literature that integrate conversion processes with the forest biomass SC. Thus, the specific objective of this study is to investigate the nature of the current state-of-the-science and to identify potential future directions for cost effective development of conversion technology for biomass-to-bioenergy SCs. The presented study analyzes and compares distributed and centralized processing network systems that process forest biomass into bio-oil. This study helped to define the topics explored in the literature review. The literature review was conducted using the narrative and systematic techniques and analytical and empirical methods to explore existing research methodologies and approaches. Additionally, this study identifies challenges and benefits of forest biomass supply, as well as simultaneous internal and external stakeholder needs. The methodology applied in this literature review addresses the existing methods with respect to the state-of-science and consists of two parts. First, a narrative literature review was conducted by analyzing the contents of publications in the upstream segment of biomass to bioenergy SCs, along with techno-economic modeling appearing over the past four decades. Second, a systematic literature review was conducted using quantitative and qualitative methods for publications appearing from January 1, 2000 to June 30, 2015. The narrative literature review method identifies the purpose of the research, explores key concepts, and defines chronological advancements in reported research. Narrative review addresses the challenges from the existing articles and proposes solutions to overcome some of the challenges. Herein, it identifies the evolution of research in the upstream segment of the biomass to bioenergy SC, with a focus on technical and economic aspects. The current challenges in forest biomass and bioenergy SC management are identified through the basic concepts, major work, and key contributions. Several studies reported that the upstream (e.g., harvesting, extraction, and transportation) forest fuel SC is influential on the economic viability of biomass to bioenergy SC The conventional structure of biomass to bioenergy upstream SCs includes harvesting and collection, logistics, and storage. In the earlier studies, undertaken using the conventional upstream segment structure, researchers have not considered pretreatment Since scholars have limited time to keep up-to-date in broad technological research and development, review studies play a key role in bridging science and engineering research. The systematic review (SR) method presents a series of evaluations, strategies, and analyses that assist in identifying key characteristics of previous studies and designing future studies. One of the main features of SR is reduction of author bias in comparison with narrative reviews, which often support the authors’ point of view. Thus, complementary systematic and narrative reviews were performed herein to analyze the publications, citations, and adopted research methods in the upstream biomass-to-bioenergy SC domain. These techniques have been previously applied for performing literature reviews in sustainable SC management The qualitative method provides a comprehensive characterization of current literature for classifying the research methodologies. Wacker The narrative review conducted herein identifies the qualitative evidence of the need for research to improve upstream forest biomass-to-bioenergy system performance and related mathematical modeling approaches. Biomass can be classified as lignocellulose (e.g., wood), triglycerides (e.g., vegetable oil), amorphous sugars (e.g., glucose), and starch (e.g., corn). Lignocellulosic biomass is the most abundant, cheapest, and fast-growing type Forest biomass could support the mitigation of anthropogenic carbon emissions as a renewable energy source and could help forest communities generate jobs and develop local energy sources Harvesting and collection involves several operations, such as felling, bundling, skidding or forwarding, unloading at landing, grinding or chipping, and loading for truck transport. Harvesting and collection ( Harvesting and collection are highly influential in defining SC cost effectiveness Forest residue availability may be limited by the season or extreme weather, safety, environmental aspects, or site accessibility Early studies explored harvesting operation systems, collection of large quantities of biomass for energy generation, and improvement of profitability through optimal product allocation The harvesting approach fundamentally affects the upstream decision making in terms of producing the desired shape, size, quantity, and quality of biomass at the correct time One of the challenges in the utilization of forest biomass for energy is the environmental sustainability of biomass energy Transportation is a main activity linking the individual entities within biomass-to-bioenergy SCs. Transportation costs are assumed to be a major cost driver associated with obtaining biomass Forest biomass can be delivered to bioenergy production facilities by truck, rail, and ship. Trucks transport about 90% of forestry products to mills in the U.S. According to the U.S. Department of Transportation One of the most challenging problems in transportation planning is road network optimization to minimize total transportation cost. As forest biomass has low value and is bulky, road network optimization plays a key role in efficient and cost effective forest fuel supply Guzmán Production rates, costs, and fuel consumption rates for various grinding and transport configurations were calculated by Johnson et al. Pretreatment process is one of the essential steps for further efficient conversion of forest biomass The pyrolysis process, by definition, involves chemical change brought on by heating biomass feedstock in the absence of oxygen Luo et al. Bio-oil is a viscous mixture of oxygenated hydrocarbons and water. Bio-oil has 1200 Fast pyrolysis production technology has developed rapidly since the late 1970s and reached near commercial status in the 1990s Fast pyrolysis concentrates forest biomass energy content into a smaller volume, which facilitates storage and transport Current state-of-the-art and next generation conversion technologies, and their attributes for bio-oil production are shown in Several organizations, such as Renewable Oil International (ROI) LLC Capital and operational costs of storage facilities lead to higher logistics costs Generally, an SC storage problem can be developed as a warehouse location problem, where the capital and operational costs of storage are optimized using different approaches. Biomass storage facilities ( Drums, barrels, tanks, and similar containers can be used to store bio-oil. The two main approaches to store pyrolysis oils are underground storage tanks and external storage tanks ( Czernik Techno-economic assessment has been used by investigators to explore and couple the technical and economics standpoints of the processes involved in bioenergy production from lignocellulosic biomass that represent the largest portion (~60%) of the total SC costs Based on the existing techno-economic analysis, pyrolysis process has been reported as being potentially cost-effective pretreatment method for production of transportation fuel from lignocellulosic feedstocks Polagye et al. A systematic review (SR) was used to identify leading journals and scholars and to assess the trends in biomass-to-bioenergy SC research. This SR evaluated publication data, citations, and keywords in a quantitative manner for recent literature. In addition, the key research methodologies employed by the most-cited articles were classified. In this study, the authors used the Web of Science™ (Thomson-Reuters) to gather the titles, abstracts, and keywords for relevant international conference and journal articles between January 1, 2000 and June 30, 2015. These records were collected into two databases using the following sets of keywords in the Web of Science™ queries:   A period of January 1, 2000 to June 30, 2015 is chosen for SR due to the low number of studies in forest biomass to bioenergy SCs before 2000. From 1980 to 1999, only four and eleven records were found from keyword Set 1 and Set 2, respectively. The query for Keyword Set 1 from the Web of Science™ Core Collection (1965-present) generated a database of 277 records related to forest biomass SCs. Using Keyword Set 2, 126 records were identified that were related to forest pyrolysis oil SCs. A comparison of the two databases found nine papers in common. VOSviewer software      The 394 papers contained in the combined database have been cited by 6957 other publications from January 2000 to June 2015. The most frequently cited journals in forest biomass-to-bio-oil SC research between January 2000 and June 2015 are reported in The most frequently cited publications in biomass-to-bio-oil SC research between January 2000 and June 2015 are reported in  The qualitative method is used to classify the ten most-cited studies as shown in The earliest work summarizing forest biomass SC studies can be traced to Hakkila Growing use of renewable energy resources is impacting each of the three dimensions of sustainability across the world, which includes access to low-cost, secure energy (economic dimension), reduced net carbon emissions (environmental dimension), and maintaining and developing rural communities (social dimension). It has been reported that logistics is a key activity that can improve the efficiency and profitability of the forest biomass industry Over the last 30 years, numerous studies have investigated the economic aspect of biomass-to-bioenergy SCs. In general, bioenergy production costs fall under two major categories: supply costs, which include purchasing and transferring feedstocks, and production costs, which include capital and operational costs of energy conversion. Some past studies have investigated various parameters (e.g., type of feedstock, scale of process, time, and temperature) of conversion technologies to meet economic targets. Past studies have found that some biomass feedstocks, such as lignocellulosic feedstocks, are relatively inexpensive, but are difficult to convert to useful bioenergy. On the other hand, sugars and starches are expensive biomass feedstocks but they are more easily converted to useable energy. There is a tradeoff between feedstock supply cost and production cost. Similar to feedstock delivery, lignocellulosic conversion requires large investments ($50-$100/bbl.), however, collection and delivery of lignocellulosic feedstocks are relatively inexpensive. Therefore, cost reduction in lignocellulosic biomass conversion plays a key role in biomass-to-bioenergy SC implementation One of the main roadblocks for bioenergy production is the lack of economical conversion technologies Biomass quality attributes (e.g., energy content, moisture content, particle size, ash, and contaminant content) affect the processing operations (e.g., chipping, grinding, and sorting), transportation attributes (e.g., type, capacity, and distance), and conversion and post-conversion technologies properties (e.g., resource type, product type, and capacity). Biomass yield and bulk density are two key factors impacting transportation cost – higher yields lead to reduced truck travel distance and higher bulk density reduces the number of truck trips Several studies investigated the upstream segment of biomass to bio-oil SC networks. This study extends prior work by incorporating recent research into mixed-mode networks of mobile and fixed refineries to trade off between processing and transportation costs The presented study used both a narrative review and a systematic review of the literature to assess the linkages among current studies and to identify the potential technologies and practices that would address existing gaps and future perspectives within the upstream segment of biomass-to-bioenergy SC. From the narrative review, it is clear that most studies that examine the upstream segment of biomass-to-bio-oil SCs focus on isolated problems within three main activities: harvesting, logistics, and storage. From the systematic review, it is apparent that forest biomass-to-bio-oil SC research has been a rapidly growing area of interest over the last 15 years. From both reviews, it is evident that there is a need for more focused research on forest biomass-to-bio-oil SC issues, specifically on pretreatment process development (e.g., pyrolysis) and implementation at the industry level. Also, there is a need for more investigation into modeling and optimization of pretreatment as a part of the upstream segment of biomass-to-bioenergy SCs. The review highlights the gap between work in literature and industry practice. While many studies predominantly explored the complete SC (i.e., upstream, midstream, and downstream) to tackle sustainability issues (i.e., economic, environmental, and social), there is a dearth of literature for detailed analysis of each individual segment of the SC. Exploring and addressing the gaps in each segment can raise the awareness of decision makers and, subsequently, aid in identifying alternative ways of making business more robust and sustainable. In summary, this study reveals some of the gaps in research related to the upstream segment of forest biomass-to-bioenergy SCs. Specifically, the following potential paths for a future research are defined: Development of biomass SC optimization models for integrating pretreatment processes into the upstream segment of forest biomass-to-bioenergy SCs. Exploration of pretreatment processes to identify economic, environmental, technological, and political challenges and barriers to implementation. Development of an integrated techno-economic assessment method to evaluate the investment factors by comparing different system designs and assumptions. Development and implementation of novel pretreatment processes that could be adopted by industry into practice (e.g., transportable bio-refinery facilities). Exploration of the state-of-the-art within other disciplines to integrate adopted methods and approaches (e.g., mathematical analysis and experimental design). Exploration of issues related to the existing metrics and measures for optimization based on triple bottom line sustainability. Further, there is a need to develop a detailed research plan for each of the paths proposed. Investigations into biomass-to-bioenergy SCs are increasing due to internal and external stakeholders’ needs, which include growing demand for bioenergy and for reduction of economic and environmental impacts. This study analyzed the nature of existing publications, citations, keywords, and research methodologies. Limitations of this study include the use of specific combinations of keywords for generating a database (394 papers) of prior research from the Web of Science™. Thus, this approach may have omitted some related papers from consideration. It is hoped this study will lead to production of more sustainable bioenergy and chemical products from forest biomass. The authors wish to acknowledge Phillip C. Badger (Renewable Oil International) and Ian C. Garretson (Oregon State University) for their valuable input in the development of this literature review.