Bivalve mollusks, such as the freshwater mussel Anodonta 
                     cygnea, show seasonal changes in calcification. This cycle of calcification must either be a cause or a consequence for seasonal fluctuations in the organic composition of the animal’s fluids, haemolymph and extrapallial fluid, the liquid media for biomineralization. We monitored the fluids of A. 
                     cygnea, throughout a 1-year cycle, for the presence of organic constituents, known to be important for biomineralization, such as proteins, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and hexosamines. Proteins were subjected to further study, namely through the total amino acid determination and fraction separation by agarose gel electrophoresis. GAG levels were fairly constant throughout the year, with a maximum concentration in July and a minimum in January, a feature also detected for glucosamine, although with higher fluctuations. Proteins showed highly increased concentrations during June and July, both in total amounts and individual fractions. All fractions showed similar trends throughout the year, with lowest general levels in October, the starting month of a period when some fractions were not detectable at all. All fractions ended this low period in May, when a sometimes-important increase could be detected. As to the total amino acid composition of the fluids, the general trend followed that of proteins, except for ornithine (Orn), a non-proteic amino acid. The overall fluctuations detected in the biological fluids of A. cygnea suggest that the main variation related to the calcification cycle must be quantitative, since no different compounds appear in specific periods, to achieve also specific results.Many researchers have emphasized the importance of extrapallial fluid on shell construction ( The extrapallial fluid can be defined as a complex mixture of proteins, carbohydrates (including neutral and acid polysaccharides), glycoproteins, amino acids, peptides, organic acids, lipids, and inorganic ions (  On the other hand, the regulation of the mineralization process by this fluid can have other shapes. Bivalve extrapallial fluid in high dilution markedly decreases the in vitro rate of crystallization ( From this, one can suggest that the organic composition of this fluid — and eventually that of haemolymph, since it also contributes for mineral production at the microspherules level — can be biologically controlled, in order to govern the deposition cycle, necessary for nacre production. We tried to gain some insight on these events by monitoring the organic composition of extrapallial fluid and haemolymph, collected from the freshwater mussel Lake mussels ( The specimens were transported to the Institute laboratory facilities in iceboxes containing natural pond water, and kept in the laboratory in aerated, pond water, without feeding. Mussels were processed within 24 h of collection. The animals were considered healthy if they showed active ventilation, powerful valve closing or water ejection upon disturbance and if their nacre presented a smooth and shiny look. The extrapallial fluid (20–30 ml total) was withdrawn by prying open the valves (1–2 cm) with a knife, making a tiny hole by separating some pallial muscle from the inner surface of the shell, and inserting through this hole a 0.8×40-mm needle between shell and mantle edge into the central extrapallial space, collecting its fluid with gentle suction in a sterile 10 ml syringe. During this procedure care was taken that the tip of the needle was always in contact with the inner shell surface, avoiding contamination by extraneous water or other body fluids. The haemolymph sample (20–30 ml total) was taken with a 0.8×40-mm needle attached to a sterile 10-ml syringe, inserted between the valves across the inner layer of the mantle and into the interepithelial mantle space. Samples were kept on ice during collection, and left to rest for 1–2 h. Fluids were then transferred to new vials and frozen at −70°C. Measurement of each component of interest was made on extrapallial fluid and haemolymph from at least six animals for each sampling month. Samples of both fluids were analyzed in parallel. Sulfated and non-sulfated glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) were estimated by the The need for a previous extraction with NaOH in GAG analyses was tested by the parallel treatment of 72 samples that were simultaneously extracted and non-extracted. This test yielded no significant differences between both groups ( Protein fractions present in the fluids were analyzed with seric protein electrophoresis kits (Beckman Paragon® Electrophoresis System SPE) using agarose gels in barbital buffer (pH 8.6 and ionic strength 0.05) and stained with the respective Paragon Blue Stain. Sample amounts applied were the maximum possible during 15 min of diffusion time, in order to keep the gel from drying. After the electrophoresis (25 min at 100 V), strips were stained and allowed to dry. Dried gels were then scanned in a densitometer. The concentration of each fraction was calculated on the basis of a prior total protein determination, using a turbidity analysis in the presence of TCA (Hitachi 717 Boehringer Mannhein automatic analyzer). The method used here for the determination of protein concentrations was also compared to the one described by These analyses were made through hydrolysis of the residue remaining after lyophilization of a 2-ml sample. Samples were hydrolyzed in individual sealed ampoules in 6 N HCl with 0.05% phenol for 20 h at 110°C under a nitrogen atmosphere. Hydrolyzed samples were evaporated to dryness and diluted with a sodium citrate buffer. Samples were then centrifuged, filtered, and 20–60 μl supernatant was used for amino acid analysis. Amino acids were analyzed by ion-exchange chromatography in a ninhydrin-based detection automatic system, using a standard five-lithium-buffer system (LKB 4151 Alpha Plus® Amino Acid Analyzer) designed for physiological fluid analysis, with A standard mixture, containing 0.5 or 0.25 μmol/ml of each amino acid was used for calibration. Similarly prepared standards of The overall method was tested through the recovery of each amino acid used in known concentrations. During hydrolysis, total amino acids recoveries were monitored through To confirm amino acid and glucosamine identifications by the automatic method, thin-layer chromatographic separation for visual analysis was performed according to Differences between haemolymph and extrapallial fluid results were evaluated with A correlation matrix was established for all parameters determined in each fluid type. The significance level for all statistical analyses was set at 0.05. All data are reported as means ( The consistency of the results from each fluid-type sample collected from several animals leads to the assumption that contamination between them during the collecting procedure is unlikely ( Protein electrophoresis (example in  The first two fractions are quite variable within each group, yielding fewer significant results. Fraction 3 shows a very low level in October, in which it is accompanied by fraction 4, although only in the extrapallial fluid. Fraction 4 is, in fact, the most equilibrated fraction throughout the year. It also yielded the most irregular pattern with respect to the balance between both fluids analyzed, with higher haemolymph values in May, June and October, intercalated with richer extrapallial fluids in July, August and September. Fraction 5 is the major constituent of proteins from these fluids and, apart from the high levels recorded in the first 2 months of study, this is also a rather regular fraction, only increasing in spring and early summer (from April to July). A parallel trend is recorded with respect to the last fraction detected. Since fraction 5 is the main protein constituent, as determined by quantitative densitometry, its annual curve follows closely to that of total proteins ( The general trend seen in total amino acids graphic is visible in most individual amino acids ( Ornithine, the naturally free occurring amino acid with relatively well known physiological functions in mollusks ( The direct comparison between June and January total amino acid composition of the fluids leads to the idea that different amino acid proportions are not always the same. In June, amino acids such as Asx, Glx, Val, Leu, Phe, Lys, and Arg are much increased over January levels, in an extent that also increases their relative importance in the composition of fluids in June. As an overall analysis of the amino acid profile of these biological mineralizing fluids, it can be stated that Glx and Asx are always the major amino acids, followed by Leu, Lys, Arg, Ser, Thr and Val. No major differences can be reported between haemolymph and extrapallial fluid with this respect. Glucosamine values ( Total GAGs ( All protein fractions are closely connected ( Orn, and especially its haemolymph level, is less correlated with all other amino acids. However, significant correlations can still be detected, namely with Thr, and the haemolymph levels of Ser, Glx, Gly, Ala, Leu, Tyr, Phe, Lys, His, Arg and Pro. Orn is also the amino acid with the lowest correlation coefficient between both fluids, although still statistically significant. Amino acid values are also logically related to the protein fractions they compose. However, in view of the high correlation degree detected within protein fractions group and amino acids group, it is not easy to determine significant trends between them, which would ultimately give information about the amino acid composition of each fraction determined. At any rate, some elements can be suggested. For instance, Asp and Ile in haemolymph are not correlated with protein fraction 2; Val level in the same fluid is also independent from the concentration of fractions 1 and 2, and poorly correlated with fractions 3 and 4. As Orn, glucosamine levels in both fluids are not significantly correlated. Glucosamine and GAGs, on the contrary, are well correlated with each other. At least five protein components can be separated through electrophoresis with polyacrylamide gel in the extrapallial fluid of The total protein concentration and the electrophoretic profile of proteins in each biological fluid analyzed, are not significantly different, a result also reported by This, however, seems to be a species-dependent characteristic. From all the previous works mentioned, dealing with protein electrophoretic characterization of molluscan haemolymph and extrapallial fluid, a global idea of heterogeneity can be assumed, especially when different species are compared and different techniques used.  The amino acid composition of fluid proteins does not show a similar profile to that of free amino acids in As to the statistic correlation analyses performed, the presence of some amino acids in each protein fraction constitution should be considered highly probable, whenever they are highly correlated to it. Each protein fraction is also negatively correlated with other amino acids. The presence of higher amounts of specific amino acids seems to be related to lower concentrations of one or more protein fractions, which are hence not directly involved in its composition. From this kind of data it can be seen, for instance, that the acidic amino acids Asx and Glx, which are directly correlated with fractions 3, 4, 5 and 6, are negatively related to the other two fractions, in what seems to be an acid-base balance. The richness of these proteins in Asp residues is usually associated with their calcium-binding ability ( At this point it should be stated that the actual action of these materials on biomineralization must depend on their relative mobility. In fact, the same molecules, being free in solution as they are in these fluids, will be able to cover the growing faces of crystals, isolating them from further mineral attachment. On the contrary, once fixed at the whole pre-formed assembly, and being such efficient calcium binders, they will rather attract higher amounts of this ion to their vicinity, promoting the beginning of a new mineralizing cycle. If this is so, and since the annual variations now detected in the biological fluids composition are mainly quantitative, with the same materials being present throughout the year, there should be a specific-periodic change at the nacre level, that determines whether the organic materials present in biological bathing fluids will remain in solution or be attached to nacreous microstructure. From the point of view of fluids composition, this turning point will appear as a moment of reduction in their composition, since the organic material will leave solution to become incorporated into the solid phase, or otherwise will not be apparent, if it is further produced and liberated to the fluids. Looking back to Asx or Glx annual variation one can detect a rather drastic decrease in their concentrations between December and January, perhaps representing that turning point, during a period when the whole biological cycle of the animal is probably slower, with less production of organic material. The gradual increase of Asx and Glx levels, visible after January, will probably correspond to the production rise, according to environmental seasonal evolution.  Mollusks have a particular richness of GAGs in their tissues ( A significant fraction of the insoluble organic material present in Proteoglycans inhibit mineralization ( It is also possible that these highly negatively charged entities could bind calcium ions, transport them into the mineralization site ( However, in situ works with bivalve nacre ultrastructure demonstrated that sulfate groups from acidic polysaccharides are closely associated with the nucleation event ( Because of its negatively charged constituents, the overall extrapallial fluid has been shown to behave as a strong inhibitor of in vitro mineralization ( This work was supported by a JNICT grant (Junta Nacional de Investigação Cientı́fica e Tecnológica, Portugal).