Crystal-rich intermediate magmas are subjected to both primary and secondary fragmentation processes, each of which may produce texturally distinct tephra. Of particular interest for volcanic hazards is the extent to which each process contributes ash to volcanic plumes. One way to address this question is by fragmenting pyroclasts under controlled conditions. We fragmented pumice samples from Soufriere Hills Volcano (SHV), Montserrat, by three methods: rapid decompression in a shock tube-like apparatus, impact by a falling piston, and milling in a ball mill. Grain size distributions of the products reveal that all three mechanisms produce fractal breakage patterns, and that the fractal dimension increases from a minimum of ~2.1 for decompression fragmentation (primary fragmentation) to a maximum of ~2.7 by repeated impact (secondary fragmentation). To assess the details of the fragmentation process, we quantified the shape, texture and components of constituent ash particles. Ash shape analysis shows that the axial ratio increases during milling and that particle convexity increases with repeated impacts. We also quantify the extent to which the matrix is separated from the crystals, which shows that secondary processes efficiently remove adhering matrix from crystals, particularly during milling (abrasion). Furthermore, measurements of crystal size distributions before (using x-ray computed tomography) and after (by componentry of individual grain size classes) decompression-driven fragmentation show not only that crystals influence particular size fractions across the total grain size distribution, but also that free crystals are smaller in the fragmented material than in the original pumice clast. Taken together, our results confirm previous work showing both the control of initial texture on the primary fragmentation process and the contributions of secondary processes to ash formation. Critically, however, our extension of previous analyses to characterisation of shape, texture and componentry provides new analytical tools that can be used to assess contributions of secondary processes to ash deposits of uncertain or mixed origin. We illustrate this application with examples from SHV deposits.Volcanic ash is an inevitable product of nearly all explosive eruptions. Formed by fragmenting magma and/or rock, it is a particularly important hazard in the modern day, presenting a risk to aviation as well as to human health. Additionally, the associated risk is not confined to areas proximal to the volcano, but, as demonstrated by recent eruptions in Iceland and Chile, can also have far reaching impacts (e.g., Primary magmatic fragmentation occurs either through ascent-driven vesiculation and expansion of a volatile phase or by rapid decompression, such as occurs because of edifice collapse. Typical fragmentation studies relate tephra characteristics (e.g., grain size distributions, GSDs) to the energy of the primary fragmentation (e.g. Controlled laboratory experiments have provided some links between natural variables (e.g. degree of overpressure, transport distance) and the characteristics of the associated tephra deposit. Laboratory study of primary fragmentation is typically performed by shock-tube experimentation at magmatic temperatures. Results show that for a given sample porosity, greater degrees of overpressure increase the fragmentation efficiency and thus decrease the overall grain size ( Less well studied is the role of crystals in fragmentation and ash formation. Crystals commonly form a major constituent of intermediate magmas; thus it seems likely that the abundance and size distributions of crystals would affect the size, density and shape of explosively generated fragments. In fact, crystal concentrations in ash deposits show that individual crystals typically have a limited size and density range (e.g., Here we present a multi-component analysis of experimentally fragmented pumice samples. Although the effects of both rapid decompression and abrasion have been previously investigated, we extend these experiments in several important ways. First, we focus on fragmentation of a vesicle- and crystal-rich intermediate magma by a range of methods. Second, we explore the effects of both primary and secondary fragmentation on the resulting shape, size and componentry of the particle population. Primary fragmentation is simulated by rapid decompression experiments in a shock tube while secondary processes (such as abrasion and impact in PDCs) are simulated in the laboratory by ball mill and falling piston experiments, respectively. Controlled experiments with the same starting material – pumice from recent eruptions of the Soufriere Hills Volcano (SHV) – allow us to compare the ash-generating efficiency of the different processes. Additionally, adding componentry analysis allows us to evaluate the extent to which (broken) crystals affect the grain size, shape and fractal dimension of the tephra deposit. Finally, we compare our experimental results with natural SHV ash samples from fallout deposits produced by a dome collapse and a Vulcanian eruption. All experiments were conducted using a single crystalline andesite pumice block that survived decompression during an explosive (Vulcanian) eruption of SHV in February 2010. We fragmented the pumice sub-samples in three different ways: rapid decompression at both room temperature and 880 The original sample had a dense-rock equivalent density of 2.69 Radiographs for XRCT were collected with a Nikon Meterology 225/320 All processing was conducted using the 3D visualization and segmentation software Avizo 8.0 Standard. Crystal volumes were determined from a sub-volume of ~ Mineral modes, porosity and bulk sample crystallinity were determined with a larger sub-volume of 6 A 3D rendered volume of an example sub-sampled volume ( A crystal volume distribution (CVD) extracted from the rendered tomographic volumes is shown in Porosity provides information about the potential energy available for fragmentation during decompression ( The average total porosity is 66%, with a range of 1.25% between all sample cores. Individual porosity values for the cores used in the four rapid decompression experiments are reported in Samples from the Soufriere Hills Volcano (SHV) were fragmented experimentally by three methods: rapid decompression, hammer impacts and ball milling ( Rapid decompression-driven fragmentation was performed using a shock tube-like apparatus ( Impact experiments were performed by placing a single rectangular block (~ Ball mill grinding was performed using a Planetary Ball Mill PM 100 manufactured by RETSCH Ltd. The initial GSD for the ball mill experiments, represented by “0 After fragmentation by the three methods ( All particles coarser than 125 Componentry analysis was conducted under a binocular microscope for grain sizes − The 3D morphology of fine ash samples was examined using secondary electron mode on the SEM. Ash grains within the 2φ sieve fraction were mounted on carbon-based stubs and Au coated to a thickness of approximately 5 The 2D SEM image mosaics of the 2φ grain size fraction were analysed with ImageJ software. Images of individual grains were thresholded and converted to binary format before quantifying grain shapes using axial ratio and convexity. Only grains from the ‘vesicular matrix’ componentry category were analysed for shape as they displayed the most variation between sample runs. This component comprised between 10 and 60% of the total depending on the fragmentation mechanism. Axial ratio is the ratio of the axes of the particle's best-fit ellipse: Convexity is defined as the ratio of the perimeter of the grain and its convex hull (the smallest convex polygon that contains the 2D shape): It is a measure of the surface roughness of the external shape boundary ( Where a crystal comprised at least 10% of the entire grain, areas of crystals and matrix were also calculated separately by manually varying the greyscale threshold to generate separate binary images, then calculating the pixel area of each. Abrasion is expected to decrease the relative proportion of glassy matrix adhering to crystals. For this reason, The adherence factor is bounded between one (matrix only with no dominant crystal) and zero (for a crystal with no adhered matrix) and therefore we expect AF to decrease with increasing abrasion. The grain size distributions (GSD) of all sample sets are limited to a maximum of − Vesicular grains (i.e. all those that were not dominated by a single large crystal of over 10% of the total grain) were analysed for two shape parameters: axial ratio and convexity. Axial ratio is a representation of particle elongation, while convexity quantifies the smoothness of the grain exterior ( Componentry analysis of the pyroclasts generated by rapid-decompression required the proportions of free mafic and felsic crystals (those with < Within the 2φ fraction ( The crystal populations within the original SHV pumice cores and the pyroclasts produced by rapid decompression were quantified by analysis of X-Ray CT ( Effective diameters are converted to the φ scale, the volumes falling in each φ bin summed and converted to weight % to form the “Rock” data set in The crystal population generated by decompression is determined by averaging the mass of mafic/felsic crystals within each size fraction of all decompression experiments. We average because no significant difference in componentry was observed when changing fragmentation overpressure or temperature. These data are then converted to weight % of total crystals and form the “Ash” data set in The size distribution of crystals within the ash relative to those in the SHV pumice ( Photomicrographs of the 2φ ash fraction produced by rapid decompression reveal characteristics of broken crystal surfaces ( Finally, sub-circular cavities, including some with protruding glass strands, are a rare but ubiquitous feature of crystal surfaces in the experimental products. Similar features were observed by We have explored several techniques to characterise both experimentally generated ash and its parent material ( Since the idea of fractal behaviour was introduced to Earth Sciences (e.g., It has long been noted that tephra produced from volcanic eruptions commonly has a much higher fractal dimension (larger fine ash component) than expected from simple crushing or rock disaggregation ( We analysed the fractal dimension of the total GSD for all experimental fragmentation methods by converting raw data (mass proportion of particles in different size bins; We analysed the fractal dimension of the total GSD for all experimental fragmentation methods by converting raw data (mass proportion of particles in different size bins; The log(N) vs. log(L) data for the rapid decompression experiments ( The log(N) vs. log(L) data for the rapid decompression experiments ( Our experimental data show that secondary fragmentation can progressively increase D from an initial value resembling rapid decompression-driven fragmentation to higher values. Yet, even after considerable milling durations (5 Our analysis confirms results from previous experimental studies, including the effect of mechanical fragmentation in shifting the GSD to smaller sizes ( Our experiments also show that the mechanism of fragmentation has a significant effect on the characteristics of individual pyroclasts. Of particular note is the variation in the axial ratios of matrix fragments between the three fragmentation mechanisms studied ( A sizeable portion of the experimental products includes crystals with adhered matrix ( To interpret the mechanisms responsible for adhered matrix produced by different fragmentation methods, it is also important to consider the effect of crystal breakage on AF. We identified broken crystals by recording whether the crystal displayed at least one intact ring of zoning or whether the zoning was interrupted. In the products of rapid decompression, the crystals with a lower AF value were typically broken. However, there is no obvious correlation between crystal breakage and AF in the products of milling and impacts ( To interpret the mechanisms responsible for adhered matrix produced by different fragmentation methods, it is also important to consider the effect of crystal breakage on AF. We identified broken crystals by recording whether the crystal displayed at least one intact ring of zoning or whether the zoning was interrupted. In the products of rapid decompression, the crystals with a lower AF value were typically broken. However, there is no obvious correlation between crystal breakage and AF in the products of milling and impacts (Fig. S2); this lack of correlation may be due to these two mechanisms not dramatically increasing the number of broken crystals. As a consequence, the matrix is stripped from the outside without breaking the crystal, resulting in many whole crystals with a low AF value. In contrast, the low AF of broken crystals within products of rapid decompression suggests that, as crystals break, internal crystal surfaces are exposed and the area of adhered matrix decreases. Therefore we suggest crystal breakage is the main mechanism for reducing AF during rapid decompression. Crystals commonly form a major constituent of erupting magmas and there is the potential for the abundance and size distributions of crystals to affect the size, density and shape of fragments generated in explosive eruptions. The componentry analysis presented here demonstrates that free crystals contribute a significant mass (up to 40%) to specific grain size fractions produced by rapid decompression ( High proportions of crystals within a grain size fraction have the potential to alter the bulk ash density, especially at coarser grain sizes. This, in turn, will cause differential settling of crystals relative to glass fragments of similar size, particularly if the glass is vesicular (e.g., Crystal size distributions may also help to explain the production of crystal pyroclasts devoid of glass coatings. If a whole (micro)phenocryst were to be extracted from the fragmenting magma, the surface would likely be at least partially coated in a glass. However, if internal broken fragments of a once larger phenocryst are extracted, then the relative chance of a glass-coated surface is low. Knowing the surface properties of ash has implications for remote sensing applications and surface leachate studies. Our componentry study suggests that free crystals in the ash generated by rapid decompression represent broken fragments from once larger whole crystals; this is likely because during rapid decompression fragmentation, the crystals cannot accommodate deformation and hence fracture ( Crystal fracture topographies indicate that breaking of crystals in our decompression experiments was dominantly along cleavage surfaces (type 1 fractures) with only about 10% of fractures cross-cutting cleavage planes ( To compare with our experimental results, we also studied two ash samples from fallout deposits produced by a dome collapse event (on 31 March 1997) and a Vulcanian eruption (on 26 September 1997) of Soufriere Hills Volcano. The dome collapse event generated PDCs but no plume at the vent, making the fallout deposit entirely co-PDC in origin ( To compare with our experimental results, we also studied two ash samples from fallout deposits produced by a dome collapse event (on 31 March 1997) and a Vulcanian eruption (on 26 September 1997) of Soufriere Hills Volcano. The dome collapse event generated PDCs but no plume at the vent, making the fallout deposit entirely co-PDC in origin ( The 2φ fraction of both natural samples comprises approximately 30% dense material (crystals, phenocrysts and vesicle-free glass). The Vulcanian sample however, contains 15% crystals with adhered glass whereas the dome collapse sample contains approximately 20% ( The 2φ fraction of both natural samples comprises approximately 30% dense material (crystals, phenocrysts and vesicle-free glass). The Vulcanian sample however, contains 15% crystals with adhered glass whereas the dome collapse sample contains approximately 20% ( Although this natural case study is illustrative only, and uses a single grain size fraction at a single location for each eruption, both the components and the AF distributions are distinctive. The differences in componentry (vesicle and microlite content) of the natural samples can be explained by the fact that they experienced different ascent and fragmentation histories and different transportation modes (PDCs vs. plumes); both of which should affect the mechanical properties. The Vulcanian sample includes both particles transported directly in a plume and particles that were first transported in PDCs before being entrained into co-PDC plumes. These two events can be observed, respectively, in Three fragmentation methods (rapid decompression, impact and milling) have been explored to constrain fragmentation associated with three different eruptive processes ( We support this hypothesis by analysis of particle shape ( To further explore the role of crystals, we analysed the crystal content of volcanic ash derived from rapid decompression. Most crystals fracture along cleavage planes, leaving a smooth and clean breakage surface. During the evacuation of a crystal-rich magma body driven by rapid decompression, crystal fragmentation is inevitable and indeed characteristic of the associated tephra fallout. The proportion of free crystals depends on the grain size considered. X-Ray CT measurements combined with componentry allowed us to describe the shift in crystal size during fragmentation by rapid decompression. These data are important because the size fractions dominated by juvenile crystals show enhanced sedimentation because crystal densities exceed those of vesicular clasts. Thus we suggest that consideration of crystal sizes and proportions could improve settling calculations that inform hazard maps and dispersion models. Finally we illustrate the application of our analysis techniques to two samples from Soufriere Hills Volcano, Montserrat: one dome collapse sample with co-PDC ash only, and one Vulcanian sample with contributions from both primary and co-PDC fragmentation ( The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at We thank the Henry Mosely X-Ray Imaging Facility, University of Manchester for their support with the XRCT. Klaus Mayer and Cristian Montanaro are thanked for their support with the shock tube experiments. KVC acknowledges the support of the