Sulfidated nano zerovalent iron (S-nZVI), stabilized with carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), was successfully synthesized on site and injected into the subsurface at a site contaminated with a broad range of chlorinated volatile organic compounds (cVOCs). Transport of CMC-S-nZVI to the monitoring wells, both downgradient and upgradient, resulted in a significant decrease in concentrations of aqueous-phase cVOCs. Short-term (0–17 days) total boron and chloride measurements indicated dilution and displacement in these wells. Importantly however, compound specific isotope analysis (CSIA), changes in concentrations of intermediates, and increase in ethene concentrations confirmed dechlorination of cVOCs. Dissolution from the DNAPL pool into the aqueous phase at the deepest levels (4.0–4.5 m bgs) was identifiable from the increased cVOCs concentrations during long-term monitoring. However, at the uppermost levels (∼1.5 m above the source zone) a contrasting trend was observed indicating successful dechlorination. Changes in cVOCs concentrations and CSIA data suggest both sequential hydrogenolysis as well as reductive β-elimination as the possible transformation mechanisms during the short-term abiotic and long-term biotic dechlorination. One of the most positive outcomes of this CMC-S-nZVI field treatment is the non-accumulation of lower chlorinated VOCs, particularly vinyl chloride. Post-treatment soil cores also revealed significant decreases in cVOCs concentrations throughout the targeted treatment zones. Results from this field study show that sulfidation is a suitable amendment for developing more efficient nZVI-based in situ remediation technologies.Sulfidation is a recent development related to the use of zerovalent iron (ZVI) based materials for groundwater remediation ( In contrast to the biogenic processes described above, abiotic sulfidation can be achieved by modifying the nZVI particles with sulfur compounds; mainly sulfate ( Multiple pilot- and field-scale studies have been conducted to evaluate the efficacy of nZVI for In this study, we have reported results from a field synthesis and injection of carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) stabilized S-nZVI to remediate groundwater and soil contaminated with cVOCs. To assess the effectiveness of CMC-S-nZVI for the Located in Sarnia, Ontario, the site was home to cVOCs production facilities, resulting in the accumulation of a multicomponent dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) source zone. A description of the site can be found in our previous publication ( The wide range of cVOCs production processes on this site contributed to the formation of a complex source zone, with major compounds previously reported as tetrachloroethene (PCE), trichloroethene (TCE), and chloroform ( Eight multilevel bundle piezometers were installed, six downstream (NA1, NB1, NC1, NA2, NB2, and NA4) and two upstream (NA3 and NB3) of the injection well ( Details on the synthesis procedure and characterization of the CMC-S-nZVI particles were described previously ( Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) coupled with Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) of CMC-S-nZVI, from synthesis barrels, confirmed the presence of two different types of particles after sulfidation ( Groundwater samples were collected using 40 mL VOA (volatile organic analysis) glass vials, leaving no headspace and preserved with 0.2 g of sodium bisulfate (NaHSO For cVOCs in soil, background samples were collected during the installation of the wells (25–28 days before CMC-S-nZVI injection), followed by post-injection sampling at 94 and 554 days. The soil cores were logged and sub-sampled at either pre-determined depths or targeted locations considered to be highly impacted by cVOCs. Post-injection boreholes were located between the locations of the monitoring wells, 0.3–0.6 m apart, to sample along the CMC-S-nZVI flow path. Bulk soil samples were collected and stored in 60-mL jars, filling the container to the brim and leaving no headspace to minimize losses, in accordance with EPA Method 5035A. Jars were stored on ice, transported to the laboratory, and kept in a cold room at 4 °C. In the laboratory, 10 g of soil sample was quickly transferred into pre-weighted vials containing 10 mL methanol and the vials were kept on shaker for 30 min for the cVOCs extraction. The extractant solution was then diluted with water. Analysis of the cVOCs was performed with a GC-ECD and a GC-FID, as described above. Chloride was analyzed using a high-performance liquid chromatograph equipped with a conductivity detector (Model 432, Waters, Milford, MA), a 4.6 × 50 cm IC-Pak Anion column (#Wat007355) using a 12% water-acetonitrile eluent as mobile phase. For elemental analysis, soil samples were digested using U.S. EPA Method 3051A. Digested samples, as well as total iron and total boron in water, were analyzed as reported previously ( Background samples were collected from NB1-White and NB2-White 28.5 h before injection and preserved in 40 mL VOA vials using NaHSO Detailed results for the fate and transport of CMC-S-nZVI suspension at this site were discussed previously ( The distribution and concentrations of cVOCs in groundwater samples could have changed due to both chemical transformations as well as physical processes such as dilution and displacement. Contaminant transformation can be assessed by CSIA ( Stable carbon isotope values were measured for PCE, TCE, Before injection, the δ After injection, PCE, TCE, and The extent of cVOCs transformation is also explored through chloride analysis. Chloride ions are generated via reductive dechlorination of cVOCs (Eq. The background chloride concentrations in the monitoring wells were in the range of 6597–32120 μM ( Similar to chloride data, the depth profiles for cVOCs show that the concentrations of all the cVOCs decreased at NB1-White on day 3 ( Though significant concentrations of ethene were present in the background samples, considerable changes in the ethene concentrations were noticed after the CMC-S-nZVI injection. On day 3, the trend for ethene was also similar to that of the intermediates, with decreased concentrations at the lower levels and increased concentrations at the upper levels of NB1 ( To evaluate the extent of dilution, the inorganic conservative constituent boron was analyzed. Total boron at NB1-White, where chloride concentrations decreased after injection, increased approximately seven-fold in comparison to total boron at the Black level ( A previous field study in the adjoining area showed significant cVOCs transformation in a three-week period after CMC-nZVI injection, indicating the occurrence of short-term abiotic transformation that was then followed by long-term enhanced biotic transformation ( Significant CMC-S-nZVI transport was found at 0.86 m (NB1-White), 0.91 m (NC1-White), and 2.7 m (NA4-Blue) downgradient as well as 1.71 m (NA3-White) upgradient of the injection well ( NB1-White showed a noticeable decrease in all the cVOCs on day 3 ( CMC-S-nZVI migrated to NA3-White during injection, with total iron concentrations remaining relatively high for an extended period (i.e., 220 μM total iron on day 17). Like NB1-White, NA3-White showed a noticeable decrease in almost all cVOCs concentrations on day 3 that continued until day 17 ( NA4-Blue was another well with good CMC-S-nZVI breakthrough during injection. In this well, concentrations of PCE, Although limited CMC-S-nZVI migrated to NB2-White during injection, a significant amount of total iron (219 μM) was retained in this well up to day 17. At this location, limited change (<10%) in concentrations of parent compounds PCE, CCl Proximity of the Blue and White levels (4–4.5 m bgs) to the DNAPL pool along with the dilution/displacement effects by CMC-S-nZVI injection make it challenging to distinguish between the various processes that govern the changes in cVOCs concentrations. A clearer picture of potential dechlorination can be deduced from the changes in cVOCs concentrations at the uppermost level of NB1 (Black level - 2.90 m bgs), positioned approximately 1.83 m above the source zone ( As stated above, the short-term changes in cVOC concentrations were influenced simultaneously by dechlorination, dilution, and displacement. Thus, due to the complexity of the system, changes in cVOC concentrations would not yield a straightforward correlation with changes in total iron, total boron, or sulfate (CMC-S-nZVI constituents) concentrations. For example, the concentrations of intermediates (e.g., NB1-White and NB1-Black were selected for analysis of long-term dechlorination. NB1-White lies just above the DNAPL pool whereas NB1-Black, the uppermost level located 1.5 m above, is expected to be least affected by the source zone. Short-term monitoring indicated a significant decrease in concentrations of parent compounds (PCE, CCl Lack of visible black particles and noticeable decrease in total iron and sulfide concentrations in the monitoring well samples, during the long-term sampling events, indicated the absence of injected CMC-S-nZVI suspension. This suggests that CMC-S-nZVI did not play a direct role in the long-term dechlorination of cVOCs. Previous field studies have also shown that abiotic dechlorination (caused by the initial ZVI corrosion) diminishes during long-term monitoring, while biotic dechlorination becomes the primary degradation pathway ( It is challenging to determine if changes in cVOCs concentrations were due to abiotic or biotic transformation. While the CSIA results for NB1-White confirmed the chemical transformation of chlorinated ethenes, distinguishing between biotic and abiotic (i.e., via CMC-S-nZVI) processes typically requires comparison of the isotope signatures of the dechlorination products For short-term dechlorination, CSIA results confirm the generation of TCE as a product of PCE transformation in NB1-White ( For long-term dechlorination, the formation of intermediates (e.g., DCE isomers, chloroform, and DCM) at NB1-Black and NB2-Black indicate hydrogenolysis as the dechlorination pathway. Significant decrease in Visual observations in the form of staining/sheening of soil cores as well as OVM measurements (  Results reported herein demonstrate the suitability of CMC-S-nZVI as an effective technology for soil and groundwater remediation at existing contaminated sites. A rapid decrease in cVOCs concentrations was observed in groundwater samples immediately after injection, followed by sustained long-term dechlorination. Although CMC-S-nZVI injection resulted in some dilution and displacement of cVOCs, the changes in intermediate concentrations and an increase in ethene concentrations clearly indicate dechlorination. CSIA serves as another line of evidence, confirming the direct impact of chemical transformation as shown by the changes in stable isotope values of key chlorinated compounds. Proximity to the DNAPL pool resulted in mass transfer of non-aqueous constituents into the aqueous phase at the deeper Blue and White levels (4–4.5 m bgs), although, significant ethene generation indicated concurrent dechlorination. In contrast, the uppermost level (Black), which is expected to be least affected by the source zone, observed a continuous decline in cVOCs concentrations accompanied with the generation of ethene, confirming dechlorination. Transformation was not limited to the aqueous phase as concentrations of soil cVOCs also decreased significantly at 94 and 554 days after injection. Presence of dithionite might additionally have resulted in reducing the native Fe(III) to the reactive Fe(II) species which can degrade cVOCs. Long-term success of As fundamental work about synthesis, characterization, and overall mechanisms of CMC-S-nZVI reactivity is ongoing, this study is the first pilot test to upscale the application of abiotically sulfidated CMC-nZVI from laboratory to field. With the growing interest from all sectors of the remediation community, as evidenced by the introduction of new commercial products of sulfidated (n)ZVI ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support for this project was provided by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at