Magnetic properties and FMR of pulsed laser deposited Y3Fe5O12 (YIG) thin film on Gd3Ga5O12 (1 1 1) substrate have been investigated in the temperature range 4.2 ≤ T ≤ 300 K. The effective saturation magnetization (4πMeff), obtained from Ferromagnetic Resonance at room temperature, is found to be 2600 G, which is higher than SQUID measured 4πMS value of 1770 G. This implies that the value of 4πMeff can only be accounted by considering a negative anisotropy field (HU) of around 830 Oe at room temperature. Such an anisotropy is attributed to a compressive stress (−1.70 × 1010 dyne/cm2) induced in the film closer to the film-air interface. The presence of this stress in YIG film was confirmed using multiple {hkl} stress measurements with grazing incidence X-ray diffraction performed at different depth of penetration on the YIG film.Yttrium iron garnet (YIG) or Y Liquid Phase Epitaxy (LPE) is usually employed to prepare high-quality epitaxial YIG thin films on Gadolinium Gallium Garnet (GGG) substrate. Compared to LPE, pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique is better suited to deposit ultrathin (<100 nm) epitaxial YIG films (on GGG) and polycrystalline YIG films (on substrates other than GGG) In this paper, we report studies on PLD deposited YIG thin films on GGG that explains the reason behind the observed higher value of General details of the thin film deposition process have been reported in our previous paper The crystal structure of the film was studied by XRD (X’pert Pro, PW 3040) using Cu Kα Similar to our earlier work The room temperature FMR spectra, measured at different frequencies, showed a symmetric single resonance mode. The inset of The bulk YIG has a small cubic anisotropy field In order to gain more insight, FMR spectra (both perpendicular and parallel field) were measured in the temperature range from 4.2 to 300 K. The values of The ‘ As hypothesized and discussed above, one of the possible reasons for a large difference between During the measurement, the angle Changing of angle  Secondly, we also observe certain peaks, which are not seen in a standard YIG XRD (cubic structure). For example, a peak around 43.5 degrees [Rhombohedral ( The third important feature seen from this figure is a shift in diffraction peak positions with the change in the value of ω. For example, in a zoomed in image of the (4 4 0) peak in The stress analysis was carried out for different value of ‘ω’ utilizing a commercial software (PanAlytical X’pert stress plus), with cubic YIG ( The residual stresses determined from the GIXRD patterns at different It was confirmed from It can be noted in the XRD patterns, the doublet peak around ( We have studied the structural, magnetic and microwave properties of epitaxial YIG thin film grown on a GGG (1 1 1) substrate. The FMR and SQUID measurement were employed to determine magnetic parameters of the film in the temperature range 4.2–300 K. The dc magnetic measurement shows a The authors are thankful to IRCC, IITB, for SQUID measurements, SAIF IITB, for FMR measurements. The authors also acknowledge School of Physics, UWA for the broadband FMR measurements. The authors also acknowledge National Facility of Texture & OIM lab, IIT Bombay for GIXRD measurements. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: