The total amount of fine chromite gravity tailings in Turkey is around 3,000,000 tons with a quite high Cr2O3 content of about 9–20%. These fines are produced as a result of the inefficiency of conventional separation equipment at fine particle size due to finely grained feed and optimization problems.
                  In this study, the applicability of enhanced gravity concentration technique for recovering fine chromite from the gravity tailings of four different chromite concentrators of Turkey is investigated using a laboratory/pilot scale Mozley multigravity separator (MGS). The results of the investigation have revealed that a considerable amount of fine chromite can be produced from the fine gravity tailings of Turkish chromite concentrating plants. The amount of recoverable chromite fines from the stockpiled or ponded Turkish chromite gravity tailings is around 300,000–400,000 tons. Two types of MGS fines recovery units were proposed. Type A is foreseen for treatment of already stockpiled tailings and Type B is thought as a retrofit in an existing plant for recovering of fines during production. Preliminary economical evaluations showed that both types of MGS fines recovery units have very short pay back times.The remarkably high value of fine chromite in the tailings of gravity chromite concentration plants has been reported by many investigators. A number of investigations have been run to determine the most economic process applicable on the fine tailings of Turkish gravity plants. Currently, two basic processes seem to be promising, namely flotation and fine gravity separation using centrifugal force gravity separators ( In this study, the applicability of fine gravity concentration technique for recovering fine chromite from the gravity tailings of four different chromite concentrators of Turkey is investigated using a laboratory/pilot scale Mozley multigravity separator (MGS). The fine gravity tailings of Kop/Birlik madencilik A.S, Karagedik/Eti Holding A.S, Kayseri/Dedeman Madencilik A.S. and Aladag/Pinar Madencilik A.S. chromite concentrators were investigated. For the MGS tests only the −106 μm fraction of the samples was taken. The head sample was wet screened at −106 μm to obtain sufficient amount of feed for MGS tests. A laboratory/pilot MGS of type C900 with a nominal capacity of 150 kg/h was used for the tests, Feed rate: 75 kg/h; pulp density: 25% by wt.; wash water: 5 l/min; shaking amplitude: 15 mm; shaking frequency: 4.8 cycles/s. The results of MGS test obtained under optimum conditions are summarized in As seen from Despite its low capacity, and the high amount of already stockpiled gravity tailings, the MGS process unit type A is proposed for Karagedik, Kayseri and Aladag. This unit is foreseen only for the processing of the stockpiled or ponded tailings. The principal flowsheet and the required equipment of the unit are given in The MGS process unit type B, as a retrofit into the Kop concentrator, would receive the fine tailings as feed. The mass/metal balance of a proposed MGS fine chromite recovery unit type B, and its impact on the overall plant performance is shown in Based on the results of this study the following can be concluded: Mozley's MGS can be used with success for reducing fine chromite losses in the gravity tailings of Turkish chromite gravity plants. Typical chromite recovery values using the MGS for the −106 μm fraction of the Turkish gravity tailings are about 65–80%. The amount of recoverable chromite fines from over 3,000,000 tons of stockpiled or ponded Turkish chromite gravity tailings is estimated to be around 300,000–400,000 tons. The proposed MGS unit type A is capable of treating economically these stockpiled or ponded tailings. The proposed MGS chromite fines recovery unit type B retrofitted in an existing chromite gravity plant can increase plant chromite concentrate yield by up to 11%. The MGS is a technically and economically suitable machine for increasing the concentrate yield of a chromite gravity plant, due to the simplicity of the process and the remarkably low production costs. Preliminary economical evaluations showed that both types of MGS chromite fines recovery units have pay back times of less than one year.