 Subhash Chander, Professor of Mineral Processing and Geo-Environmental Engineering at Penn State and Editor-in-Chief of this journal, died suddenly in State College, PA on Sunday, December, 10, 2006. He was 60. Dr. Chander was born on September 25, 1946 in the village of Satnaur, Punjab, India, son of the late Sansar Chand and Dayawati. He graduated from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur with the degree of B. Tech. in metallurgical engineering in 1968. His formal education was completed at the University of California, Berkeley with MS (1970) and PhD (1973) degrees from the Department of Materials Science and Mineral Engineering. After graduation, he remained at Berkeley serving as Assistant Research Engineer and Lecturer before returning to India in 1974 to take up the position of Assistant Professor in the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at IIT Kanpur. In 1981, he returned once more to the United States, first as Associate Research Engineer and Lecturer at UC Berkeley, before accepting an appointment as Associate Professor of Mineral Processing at Penn State in 1983. He was promoted to full Professor in 1989. He was a popular teacher, earning the Wilson Distinguished Teaching Award of Penn State's College of Earth and Mineral Sciences in 1994, and was held in especially high esteem as mentor and friend by his many graduate students. Professor Chander was a world authority on the electrochemistry of sulfide minerals as applied to mineral processing. He pioneered the use of contact angle measurements on mineral electrode surfaces to investigate the electrochemical aspects of the floatability of sulfide minerals. More recently, he extended the electrochemical studies to include the use of AC impedance measurements for investigating surface films and demonstrated the application of the technique to an analysis of the growth characteristics and properties of surface coatings on pyrite and chalcopyrite. This work led to the first satisfactory explanation of the extreme variability of chalcopyrite flotation response. Another, potentially very important, application of his electrochemical studies was to the use of electrochemical sensors in flotation process control. Chander's contributions were by no means limited to electrochemistry. He and his students at Penn State carried out an insightful analysis of the kinetics of the coal flotation process, with particular emphasis on determining and accounting for observed distributions of rate constants. By studying the flotation response of individual components, they were able to determine the distribution of rate constants and evaluate the relationships between composition and flotation rate. Other areas where he provided valuable insight include the adsorption of heavy metals on low-cost adsorbents, the charge on aerosol particles and the use of surfactants for airborne dust control. Dr. Chander was a Distinguished Member of the Society for Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration SME and played a leadership role in its activities throughout his professional career. He was Chairman of the Mineral and Metallurgical Processing Division, 2002–2003 and member of the Board of Directors of the Society of Mining, Metals, and Exploration Inc. (SME) from 2002 to 2006. He was an active participant in numerous technical conferences and chaired several major symposia for the SME and the Engineering Foundation. Chander received the Taggart, Gaudin and Aplan awards from the SME for his noteworthy research contributions. Chander served on the editorial board of the International Journal of Mineral Processing from 1992 and was appointed Editor-in-Chief in 2005. Under his leadership the Journal has flourished with leaps and bounds. His persistence and time spent on IJMP has brought respect and credibility to that journal. Subhash is survived by Neera, his wife, counsel and partner of 28 years, a son Ankit, a daughter Charu, and by four sisters. He was a good and gentle man; totally unselfish, academically as well as personally. He will be sorely missed by his students, colleagues and friends, world-wide. Contributions in his memory may be sent to Mineral Processing Division Scholarship Fund, SME, 8307 Schaffer Parkway, Littleton, CO. 80127.