The effect of chemical composition of diaspores on their electrokinetics was studied. Increasing SiO2 content in a diaspore sample was found to decrease its isoelectric point. The X-ray diffraction and SEM microanalysis showed the absence of distinct SiO2 phases. A linear correlation was found to exist between the measured isoelectric point and alumina to silica mass ratio in diaspore samples. The linear regression analysis of the experimental data suggests a more significant impact of silicon content than aluminum content, indicating a preferential adsorption of dissolved silicon on diaspore samples and/or preferential dissolution of aluminum from diaspore samples.Surface charge plays a significant role in a variety of disciplines, ranging from processing industries to biological functions and life sciences. In ceramic processing, for example, surface charge controls the suspension dispersion and processibility, which in turn determines the quality of the formed ceramic product. In life science, on the other hand, the presence of substantial surface charges ensures the mobility and function of individual biological cells in a blood serum. In mineral processing, surface charge often determines the interaction of flotation reagents with minerals and hence selective separation of various minerals for valuable metal extraction. In the synthesis of nanoparticles, surface charge could play an even more important role in controlling particle dispersion and hence limiting undesirable interparticle aggregation and sintering. It is therefore of vital importance to understand the effect of bulk chemical composition on the electrokinetics of a solid. Electrokinetics of colloidal particles is a useful measure of surface charge characteristics. The measurement of electrokinetics, such as electrophoretic mobility or zeta potential, can be considered an in situ technique for determining surface dissolution and adsorption of charged species in a colloidal system. The variation of the zeta potential of a clay mineral with exchangeable or soluble calcium ions in the clay has been reported In this study, naturally occurring diaspores containing a different amount of silicon are used as a model material to examine the effect of silicon content on electrokinetics of the diaspores. The results obtained in this study should shed more lights on the role of doping elements in the synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles. The diaspore samples of varying Al To determine mineralogical phases of the samples, a powder diffractometer (Shimadzu) in the reflection mode was used with graphite-filtered Cu The zeta potential of mineral suspension was measured using a Brookhaven Zeta Plus instrument. In this instrument, photocorrelation of Doppler shift resulting from particle movement in suspension under an alternating electric field was measured to determine electrophoretic mobility of the particles. The instrument provides zeta potential values directly, which is calculated based on the determined mobility using either the Hückel or Smoluchowski equation, depending on particle size and electrolyte concentration. The ground diaspore samples were dispersed in an electrolyte solution containing 1 mM KCl as supporting electrolyte, to 0.01 wt% solids in a 40-ml beaker. The suspension at a given pH was agitated for 20 min with a magnetic stirrer and transferred to a square sample vessel. Zeta potential was measured following the procedures described in the instrument manual. The repeating tests with this instrument showed a measurement error of ±1 mV. It should be noted that within experimental error, agitating suspension for a 10-min period resulted in the same zeta potential value for a given sample at a specified suspension pH. The suspension pH reported in this communication was measured at the end of agitation to an accuracy of ±0.02 with a REX Model PHS-3C pH meter. A Jeol JSM-5600LV scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to examine the morphology of the mineral samples. Microanalysis of major elements was performed with a Noran energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (Vantage-4105) attached to the SEM. SiO The crystal structure of diaspore consists of hexagonal closest packed (hcp) oxygen sheets with Al filling two-thirds of the octahedral site To understand the effect of chemical composition on electrokinetics of colloidal particles, it is important to determine the state of individual elements in a particle. The X-ray diffraction method was used to identify various phases of solids. The XRD patterns of the samples shown in To further confirm the association state of various elements, the scanning electron microscope was used to perform microanalysis of mineral samples. For illustrative purposes, only the SEM micrographs of Di-ZZ and Di-120, which contain the intermediate and highest level of silicon, respectively, are shown in Zeta potentials of Al To shed more light on the effect of impurity on measured iep values, a multivariable, linear regression procedure was applied to fitting the data given in Using the pzc values of pH 1.8 and 9.8 for silica and alumina, respectively, reported by Parks The surface isoelectric points (iep) of the different diaspores from Henan varied from 5.2 to 6.8. Increasing SiO Charging mechanism of diaspore particle surface was found to be closely related to interaction of water with mineral particle surfaces, resulting in incongruent dissolution, adsorption, and ionization. Overall zeta potential of mineral particles depends on the contents of all mineral phases, the crystal imperfections, chemical compositions, crystalline forms, and surface crystal structures. Further research is necessary to better understand the role of chemical composition on charging mechanisms of a mineral particle surface. The authors would like to thank the China's Important Basic Research Program (G1999064901) and National Fund for Distinguished Young Scholar (59925412) for the financial support of this research.