The introduction of extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) in 1980 has revolutionized stone treatment, and the first therapy study, performed using the Dornier HM 3, which yielded a remarkable stone-free rate of 90%, opened a new chapter in stone therapy. Numerous studies attempted to identify parameters that allow prediction of ESWL outcome such as spatial anatomy of the lower pole collecting system, stone composition (Hounsfield units in CT), or body mass index (BMI) of the patient. The following discussion will present some arguments, proving that ESWL is still—even 28 years after introduction into clinical routine—a good therapeutic choice for the treatment of the majority of upper urinary tract stones. There is consensus that ESWL is the standard therapy for renal stones of approximately 2 cm, located in the upper/middle calix and renal pelvis. Modern lithotripsy systems with a flat table and flexible positioning of the shockwave system enable the treatment of ureteric stones independent from their localization. Several authors state in their comparative studies of ESWL vs ureteroscopy that ESWL should be considered as first-line treatment for ureteric stones because of its noninvasive nature, the lack of requirement for general anesthesia, and low complication rate. Obesity and skin-to-stone distances >10 cm will, in general, not affect the ESWL outcome, as proposed by the retrospective evaluation of Pareek. Renal anomalia make stone therapy technically more demanding and require an extensive expertise for all stone therapies. Anomalia such as horseshoe kidney or renal dystopia present a problem for ESWL because of the ventral position of the kidney and the impaired passage of stone fragments. Nevertheless, ESWL monotherapy achieves a stone-free rate between 50% and 85%, as reported by several authors. The hardness of urinary calculi and their responsiveness to shockwaves depend on the stone composition. Ringden and Tiselius The most important requirement for a good stone clearance is the complete fragmentation of stone into small pieces, thus facilitating easier passage through the urinary tract system. The findings of several studies indicate that a reduction in the shockwave rate to 60 SW/min and an energy escalation strategy are useful to optimize the comminution effect. Further aspects are additional measures such as physical therapy or medication to assist the passage of stone debris, especially from the lower pole collecting system. Mechanical percussion, diuresis, and inversion therapy (PDI) after ESWL of lower pole calculi provide a significant higher stone-free rate compared with ESWL alone. The typical complications of ESWL are transient gross hematuria and renal colics because of stone passage. Severe side effects such as infected hydronephrosis or renal hematoma are rare conditions. The induction of arterial hypertension or diabetes mellitus as proposed long-term effects are under lively discussion since the publication of the long-term follow-up study of Krambeck et al. The main criticism on ESWL is that the success in regard to stone-free rate is inferior to endoscopic stone removal. However, the literature neither produces a clear consensus for the definition of stone free nor how it should be verified. Only the complete absence of stone remnants after treatment should be considered as stone free. Some authors include patients with stone fragments of <5 mm, the so-called CIRF (clinically insignificant residual fragments), into this group. The plain abdominal X-ray (KUB) is accepted as the first-line diagnostic method for follow-up examination after stone therapy but mostly overrates the stone-free rate. Noncontrast spiral CT seems to be the most sensitive radiological tool for the detection of residual fragments after stone therapy. Fortunately, these CIRF show remarkable dynamics. Stone-free rate at 3-month follow-up will not display the definite treatment outcome; long-term studies displayed a continuous stone passage of stone fragments up to 24 months after shock wave therapy. Despite the regularly given inferior primary success rate and higher need for retreatment compared with endoscopic stone removal, ESWL should be the preferred treatment modality for most upper tract calculi with diameter up to 2 cm. Endoscopic stone removal does not necessarily result in a higher stone-free rate and an eventually needed retreatment requires a considerable effort. The summarized advantages of stone treatment with ESWL are as follows: ESWL is the only noninvasive stone therapy besides medical treatment ESWL is anesthesia free and can be performed as outpatient procedure and even in a mobile setup ESWL treatment can be handled by a single individual ESWL can be applied repeatedly without effort ESWL is a safe procedure with a low rate of complications ESWL has no proven long-term side effects ESWL is a procedure with a fast patient recovery and return to daily activity It can be concluded that most patients with a kidney stone and even urologists will prefer the least invasive treatment procedure.