Nanoparticle engineering of drug crystals is an important basic tool for efficient and intelligent drug delivery. Recently, the wet comminution process of drug nanocrystals in the presence of polymeric stabilizers has been successfully developed, but it has not been well understood yet how to select a proper stabilizer for a drug. In this study, the nature of interactions between polymeric stabilizers and drugs was investigated by analyzing the steady state particle sizes of 7 drugs obtained by wet comminution. The surface energy of drugs and polymers measured by contact angle measurement was found to be an important factor, although it could not solely determine the steady state values of particle size. In addition to surface energy, specific interactions between functional groups appeared to play a certain role. The stabilization ability of polymers and the subsequent steady state particle size of drug nanocrystals depend on various parameters including surface energy and specific interactions.In drug formulation, the particle size of active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) is the primary variable for controlling the bioavailability of a drug In this study, the stabilization ability of two typical pharmaceutical polymers, hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC) and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP), is examined based on the steady state particle sizes of seven different drugs produced by wet comminution. The wide range of physical and chemical properties of the drugs will help us to reveal the polymer properties which are important to wet comminution. Since the interaction between polymers and drugs can be a function of surface energy, contact angle measurements are performed and the effect of surface energy on steady state particle size is also investigated. Various kinds of crystalline compounds, i.e., Naproxen (Merck), Ibuprofen (Dr. Reddy’s), Nifedipin (DY-MACH), Itraconazole (Choongwae), Hydrocortisone acetate (Tianjin Tianyao), Prednisolone acetate (Zhenjiang Xianju), and Anthracene (Aldrich), were chosen as typical water insoluble drugs and wet-milled in polymer aqueous solutions. The initial particle size of drug particles before processing was 10–200 Particle size was measured in 150 The key of drug nanoparticle processing is how to compensate the extra free energy of freshly exposed surfaces. In wet comminution process, the degree of compensation depends on the interactions between drugs and stabilizers The steady state values of particle sizes are shown in The effect of surface energy is more significant in the PVP systems. As shown in The characteristics of chemical structures might be clues to understand the complicated behavior of The polymers used in the preparation of nanocrystals should adsorb onto the surfaces of drug nanocrystals and provide steric stabilization effect The effect of interactions between stabilizers and drugs on the particle size reduction of drug crystals in wet comminution process was investigated. Two polymers widely used as pharmaceutical inactive ingredients and 7 model drug compounds were employed. The steady state values of particle size obtained by wet comminution reflected differences in surface energy and specific interactions between functional groups. The effect of interactions between stabilizers and drugs was a complicated function of various parameters including surface energy and the existence of functional groups. The authors thank Dr. Panmai at Merck & Co. and Dr. Kang at KIST for their valuable guidance for this work. Financial support from the Korea Institute of Industrial Technology Evaluation and Planning (project number 10010884) is gratefully acknowledged.