In mineral process operations, vortex separators are used extensively for solid-liquid separation. Their performance depends on the particle separation size, diameter and number of installed units in a battery. These parameters have severe impact on the concentrate and hence project economics. The design procedures are normally based on the correlation developed from historic data and for data from manufacturers. However, it is always impossible to eliminate the elements of uncertainty, which could result in concentrate losses in the tailings. It is therefore important to implement an online process monitoring of the vortex separators to correct any deficiencies to prevent low separation efficiencies and high concentrate losses. In this study, the authors develop an intelligent monitoring technology, forex to solve the problem. forex is an interactive fortran-based program in excel with graphic display that allows the user to input or modify the operating and other process parameters to yield economic separation results. For an industrial stream of 1000 tons day−1, feed concentration of 0.76 kg m−3, given an individual underflow to feed ratio of 0.1 and differential specific gravity of 1.04, forex intelligently yielded an economic battery of seven vortex separators with an individual diameter of 44.8 mm, operating at a pressure drop of 11.8 bar and an optimum particle separation size of 3.86 μm.The vortex separator, a widely used mechanical device for solid-liquid separations, operates on centrifugal principle, in which a vortex, formed by the tangential feed, separate mixtures based on their differential densities. Vortex separators can be categorized as hydrocyclones and cyclones. In hydrocyclones, only mixtures or slurries with water as the vehicle dominates whereas cyclones are concerned with mixtures in which gas is used dominantly as the vehicle. The vortex separator does not have moving parts instead mixtures to be treated are pumped through it. An engineering design of a vortex separator is based upon the desired flow rate and efficiency. A large number of small diameter vortex separators (battery), as shown in The main objective of this paper is to develop an intelligent economic model for simulating minerals and waste slurry treatment. For a given set of operating conditions, there is a need to predict the optimum values of particle size and number and diameters of vortex separators to be used in parallel. The mathematical modeling governing the economics of the vortex separation has been developed, the optimized models, as well as the accompanying numerical models and the Literature survey is used to provide a basis of the intelligent economic model. Engineering design of the vortex separators in parallel is carried to provide a physical frame for experimentation. Detailed mathematical, optimization, numerical and stochastic modeling concepts have been used to capture the theories of vortex separation for experimental simulation. Discussions and analysis of the results have been used to provide the capabilities and efficiencies of the models.   Consider a diluted slurry stream being pumped through a short flexible pipe before entering the vortex separator. The individual vortex flow rate is given by: For optimum separation, the following geometrical relationship between the inlet diameter, diameter and length of the vortex separator is important. The pressure drop across the vortex separator is also vital as it determines the energy consumption. The pressure drop with dilute slurry system being treated is given by:  Consider a battery of Therefore, for a multiple vortex separators system, the number of vortex separators, N, and the cut size, d, must be optimized. The operating costs are outlined as follows: 1. 2. 3. Summing the components of the operating costs, the primary objective function becomes: The objective function in The power costs can be established in terms of Equating Substituting And using the law of exponents, On utilizing  The fixed charges/costs can be determined by substituting The value of the lost particulates can be computed from the reduced grade efficiency distribution function as described by The centrifugal field separation efficiency,  Integrating by parts results in Thus, the costs due to unseparated solids is obtained by substituting Finally the cost components obtained in  Subject to: With the use of partial derivatives,  Substituting for To evaluate the economic model, The graphical module, on the other hand, creates charts for unit costs versus the vortex parameters. From the charts we can determine economic scenarios. In a refinery, a high-pressure hot oil stream flowing from a heating unit contained fine solid particles at an average concentration of approximately 0.1% by weight. This solid content had to be reduced to less than 0.02% by weight. Using the relevant data in The Determine an optimum vortex separators battery for the separation of clay (density=2640 kg m  As can be seen from the case illustrations, The authors intend to carry out an experimental program, which will consist of data acquisition system and a battery of vortex separators. Data from the acquisition system will go directly to the input module. An online system will compute density, differential density, flow rate, viscosity, and underflow ratio. This will help further enhance the 