This paper represent the results of an experimental study handled with developed grouting materials for fully-cement-grouted ribbed rockbolts. These experimental studies cover the effects of some mineral admixtures (silica fume, blast furnace slag, fly ash etc.) on the bond characteristics between grout and rockbolts. The effect of mineral admixtures on the grout strength of fully-grouted rockbolts and block punch index (BPI) and compressive strength (CS) of the grout on the load bearing capacity (LBC) were investigated. Totally 150 rockbolt pull-out tests were performed using ten different grouts in order to investigate and improve the LBC of grouted rockbolts for five different curing times (1, 3, 7, 28 and 90days). All grout types were prepared same ratios, and silica sand was used as fine aggregate. Grout mixtures that 15% of mineral admixtures replaced with cement by weight were prepared. The results showed that grouts produced with silica fume (SF) and metakaolin (MK) in all mixtures were yielded the highest CS and bond strength at all ages. The all strength tests of fly ash (FA) grout exhibited low values till 28days of curing time in accordance with reference grout, but a sharp increase was observed after this period. Grouts with perlite (PRL) and blast furnace slag (BFS) showed the similar strength values according to reference grout. In conclusion, mineral admixtures can be used for high-strength and low cost grout in tunneling applications. In addition, the use of waste materials can contribute to the resolution of environmental problems.The rockbolts support system has often been used in the long-term stabilization of underground excavations in rock masses. Rock bolt systems can be divided into three groups, which are mechanically anchored, friction anchored and fully-grouted rockbolts (resin and cement grouted rockbolts). Developments of setting techniques and equipment, not having a disadvantage of decreasing at intersectional area of cavern, having a reinforcement effect in addition to supporting effect made rockbolts unrivalled in tunneling and slope stability. The cement-grouted rockbolt is a fully-grouted rockbolt without mechanical anchoring. It generally consisting of a ribbed bolt inserted in a drillhole and bonded to the drillhole periphery over its embedded length. Bonding medium of rockbolts is cement mortar. The parameters controlling the LBC of cement-grouted rockbolts are shape of bolt, diameter of bolt, length of bolt, the rock and the grout strength. The major mechanism that determines the bond strength of fully-grouted rockbolts is friction. Friction depends on the shear strength at the rock-grout or bolt-grout interface. Fully grouted untensioned rockbolts have been used for many years in civil and mining engineering projects. However, only a few works have been reported on strengthening of grouting materials using mineral and chemical admixtures. The bolting system prevent the joint movements developing in deformed rock masses. Thus, it contributes to the self-supporting of the rock mass Moosavi et al. The focus of this paper is to determine the effects of different grout types on the pull-out capacity of grouted rockbolts. In order to improve applicable grout mixtures, a series of laboratory study was undertaken by taking into consideration technical and environmental reasons. In addition, some empirical formulas were determined for estimating the bolt bond strength (τ In this study, an experimental study was undertaken to investigate the effects of mineral admixtures on the pull-out capacity of grouted rockbolts and strength of grouting materials. The mineral admixtures used grout mixes were collected from different factory and processing plants in Turkey. Type of admixtures and origins were summarized in The diameter of ribbed rockbolts used in the tests was 14 Pull-out tests were carried out on rockbolts placed in six basalt blocks prepared by cutting and smoothing in a natural stone factory in Osmaniye/Turkey. Basalt blocks were prepared in 15 All mixture types were prepared under the same mixing conditions to determine the effects of different mineral admixtures on the grout properties. Silica sand to binder (cement 100 The cement types used were CEM II /B-P 32.5 R with a specific gravity of 2.91, Blaine fineness of 4503 The pull-out test equipment and rockbolts placed in the drilling holes using grout were illustrated in Rockbolts inserted in basalts were axially loaded after 1, 3, 7, 28 and 90 The failure load of any type of grout was the average value of those of three tests. A compression machine, conforming to TS EN 1015-1 The test specimens of BPI (τ CS and BPI values of grouting materials for different curing time were shown in As shown in According to these findings, FA can be used in the production of high-strength grout as an admixture material in engineering project where early strength is not very important. The above mentioned admixtures can be replaced with cement under certain circumstances. Thereby, it will be able to low-cost and high-strength grout production. In addition, the storage problem of wastes can be solved by using process wastes in grout mixtures, and the environmental damages of these wastes can be minimized. Grouts M6 with PRL and M2 prepared using BFS were shown the similar strength properties with reference grout especially until 28 It is considered that the admixtures used in this study will increase the grout strength, if these admixtures are used instead of cement at different ratios. Remarkable findings regarding pull-out load of rockbolts were determined. The P Regression analysis was performed to assess the correlations between strength of grouts and bolt pull-out test results for all curing times. Linear and non-linear regression analyses are rather referenced methods in fitting a line or a curve to a dataset of variables that show statistically significant correlations. With regard to the best fitted regression model, dependent variable values can be predicted using any value of the independent variables. In this study, regression equations were determined from the relationships between the strength properties of rockbolt and the strength properties of grout by the way of linear and nonlinear regression analyses. Both the shear strength and CS of the grout materials have a significant effect on the rockbolts behaviour. It was observed that increasing CS values of the grout materials logarithmically increases with pull-out load of rockbolts. Both CS and pull-out test were performed under uniaxial loading conditions. From the viewpoint of this technical reality, predicting the LBC of rockbolt from CS of grout was useful approach for design engineer.  Determining the relationship between τ In general, the increase in cure time has increased the correlation coefficients. With the help of the derived equations, the anchorage capacity of the rockbolts can be estimated by using the strength values of the grouts. In this study, the bolt bond strength and LBC of fully grouted rockbolts inserted in basalt blocks with grouts prepared using different mineral admixtures were investigated experimentally and evaluated statistically. All grout mixtures used grout material for rockbolts was prepared at same water/binder ratio and 15% of mineral admixtures replaced with cement by weight. Grout specimens were tested and compared with reference grout specimens for each curing times. The following conclusions were determined from the findings of this study: Compressive and shear strengths as well as LBC of fully grouted rockbolts were increased with some mineral admixture incorporation. Test results indicated that the high strengths grout produced using mineral admixture was determined to gain strengths in a shorter time than traditional grout. The presences of metakaolin and silica fume was found to increase the early strengths of grout. Such an increase in the strengths was not achieved with simektit, basalt dust nor with other admixture such as coal dust, colemanite. The usage of metakaolin, silica fume and fly ash as admixture materials in the grout mixtures increases the pull-out capacities of rockbolts by ratios of 12%, 10% and 5%, respectively. Mineral admixtures such as metakaolin, silica fume and fly ash can be preferably used in grout to achieve higher resistance in underground structures especially requested early strength. Metakaolin and silica fume improved the mechanical properties of the grout both in the short and long-term. Beneficial effect of fly ash was realized in longer period. The predictive models developed for estimating ultimate pull-out load of rockbolt and bolt bond strength were proved reliable in practical situations. M2 and M6 mixtures shown the similar strength properties to reference grout for 28 It was concluded that the combined use of basic grout components and mineral admixtures can make producing high strength concrete possible, and the grout produced in this way can be actively used in tunneling applications. Other investigations can be performed with a finer and wider range of mineral admixture types to determining the strength effect of admixtures based on findings of this study.