Hypothesis
                  The present study sought to determine long-term outcome in acetabular fracture and the factors associated with secondary implantation of a total hip arthroplasty and/or with poor functional results.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Seventy-two patients admitted between 2000 and 2005 were followed up for a maximum 11years (mean, 6.8years): 16 females, 56 males; mean age at injury, 41.6years (median, 40years). There were 45 simple acetabular fractures, 27 complex fractures and 27 dislocations. Late complications were: osteoarthritis (n
                     =29), osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH: n
                     =8) and heterotopic ossification (n
                     =2).
               
                  Results and discussion
                  Twenty-five total hip arthroplasties (THA) were performed, with a mean time to surgery of 3.7years. Associated factors for THA were: VAS (P
                     <0.0001), PMA (P
                     <0.0001), osteoarthritis (P
                     <0.0001), ONFH (P
                     <0.0002), initial dislocation (P
                     =0.0002), no functional treatment (P
                     =0.0014), surgical treatment (P
                     =0.0065), initial traction (P
                     =0.0068), anterior and posterior congruency defect (P
                     =0.0072 and P
                     <0.0001), and initial intra-articular foreign body (P
                     =0.045). Factors associated with poor or bad functional results were the same, plus: etiology (P
                     =0.0021), BMI (P
                     =0.03) and posterior wall fracture (P
                     =0.0325).
               
                  Level of evidence
                  4; retrospective study.About 3% of fractures seen in traumatology involve the acetabulum; the associated rate of short-term complications ranges from 50 to 80%, and depends on whether the initial trauma was high-energy, on immobilization following treatment and on surgical management, with long-term complications depending on the type of fracture, which may have consequences that are hard to screen for initially. Although acetabular fracture is a focus of interest, few large series have been published over the years, some still standing as references today The basic principles of surgical management were established in the 1960s by Judet et al., who first described the underlying anatomy and mechanism The present study reports results at 10 A retrospective study was conducted on all patients presenting with acetabular fracture in the Emergency Department of the Pellegrin Hospital (Bordeaux, France) and admitted between January 1st, 2000 and January 1st, 2005, whether or not undergoing THA during the 10 Data included firstly general parameters: age, gender, occupation, smoking and alcohol status, body mass index (BMI) and pre-trauma American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score. Trauma etiology was classified as road accident, high fall, fall from body height or sports-related. Work accidents were also noted. The Injury Severity Score (ISS) was determined from emergency medical records Patients were grouped according to lesion type on the Judet et al. classification Treatment was classified as: functional, by simple non-weight-bearing immobilization; conservative, by 1 For all patients undergoing conservative or surgical treatment, data for traction type and duration, hospital stay, intensive care, bed-rest-related complications, time to gait resumption and time to resumption of work and sports were collected. For patients undergoing surgical treatment, data for pre- and post-operative neurological signs, surgical approach, trauma-to-surgery time, pre- and post-operative blood transfusion, surgeon-assessed satisfaction, and reduction quality according to Matta's criteria Long-term functional status was assessed by recontacting the patients to determine the Postel Merle d’Aubigné (PMA) score, current pain on a 0–10 visual analogue scale (VAS), pain-related activity restriction on the WHO scale, osteoarthritis on recent X-ray of the operated hip, and secondary THA with trauma-to-THA interval Systematic comparative radiologic analysis between the injured and non-injured hip screened for arthritic evolution and secondary heterotopic ossification on Brooker's classification. The number of patients requiring THA was recorded, with etiology and trauma-to-THA interval. Various statistical analyses were performed, using the Fisher test, due to the small cohort size, on R software. Search of the records for patients admitted between January 1st, 2000 and January 1st, 2005 with acetabular fracture retrieved 121 cases, only 72 of whom could be traced for follow-up functional assessment. Of these 72 patients, 56 were males (78%) and 16 females (22%). Mean age was 41.4 Etiology mainly concerned road accidents (69%) or high falls (21%), followed by simple falls (6%) and sports accidents (4%). There were only two work accidents. Mean ISS was 7.36 (range, 3–16; median, 7). Only 28% of acetabular fractures were isolated. The 72 cases comprised 45 simple fractures and 27 complex fractures, with 27 associated dislocations (38%) and seven intra-articular foreign bodies (10%). Posterior wall fractures were the most frequent (25%), followed by transverse fractures (18%), associated posterior wall and transverse fractures (15%), anterior wall fractures (10%), anterior column fractures (10%), both-column fractures (8%), T fractures T (7%), posterior wall and posterior column fractures (4%), and anterior column plus semi-T fractures (3%). Initial dislocation was mainly associated with posterior wall fracture (13/27) or associated posterior wall and transverse fracture (7/27). Fourteen of the 72 patients received functional, 28 conservative and 30 surgical treatments. Fifty-six had traction: 48 transfemoral and eight transtibial. Surgical approaches were enlarged ilio-inguinal (1), Kocher Langenbeck (16), Mears or triradiate with trochanterotomy (11), plus one Hardinge approach for a primary THA. An ilio-femoral external fixator was used in one case. Mean time to surgery was 12.8 days (median, ten days; range, 1–72 days). Only three patients were operated on later than post-trauma day 20. Surgeon-assessed satisfaction after initial treatment was 90%. Mean hospital stay was 26 days (range, 2–180; median, 20 days). 17% of the patients followed up had been through intensive care. Complications following trauma and hospitalization comprised: 11 sciatic deficits (all pre-operative, including six cases of paralysis related to proven initial dislocation), eight infections and one phlebitis. Nine of the cases of initial paralysis involved the whole sciatic territory, and the other two the external popliteal sciatic territory alone; only one case of sciatic paralysis showed no recovery, and another showed partial recovery despite secondary neurolysis. The eight infections comprised: three urinary infections, one infection of a second lesion site, one external fixator pin infection, and three surgical site infections (one superficial and two deep), one of which required material ablation with resection of the femoral neck and head. Non-weight-bearing was for a mean 69 days (range, 7–120 days). Follow-up, when performed, was for a mean 6.8 Mean BMI at last follow-up was 25 (range, 18–39). Forty-eight patients had BMI less than 25 and 24 greater than 25. The mean WHO score for post-traumatic change in subjective health status was 0.53 (range, 0–2), with an overwhelming majority showing no change in level or type of activity. Mean VAS score at end of follow-up was 3.25 (range, 0–10). Mean PMA score was 14.4 (range, 3–18; median, 16). At end of follow-up, 44 patients showed excellent (17–18) or good (16–15) PMA scores, and 28 moderate (12–14) or poor (≤ Control X-ray diagnosed ONFH in eight cases (11%), osteoarthritis in 29 (40%) and secondary heterotopic ossification in only two cases (3%) on the Brooker classification, independently of initial treatment. Osteoarthritis was classified according to Kellgren and Lawrence (7 grade 1, 8 grade 2, 10 grade 3 and 4 grade 4) and to Tönnis (15 grade 1, 10 grade 2 and 4 grade 3) Twenty-five THAs were performed, at a mean 3.7 Comparing patients with and without THA highlighted various associated factors, 47 of the 72 follow-up patients (65.3%) never underwent THA, versus 25 (34.7%) who did. The two groups differed little in age or sex ratio, which did not emerge as associated factors ( Mean BMI in the THA group was 26.2 and 24.4 in the non-THA group, which was not a significant difference ( Twenty-eight of the 47 patients without THA (60%) were victims of a road accident, 13 (28%) of a high fall, three (6%) of a simple fall and three (6%) of a sports accident; the corresponding figures for the 25 patients in the THA group were 22 road accidents (88%), two high falls (8%) and one simple fall (4%); i.e., etiology was not significantly correlated with secondary THA ( Fourteen of the THA patients had isolated acetabular fracture, compared to six in the non-THA group ( A large majority of patients without THA had had a simple fracture: 11 of the posterior wall (23%), seven of the anterior wall (15%), six transverse (13%) and five of the anterior column (11%); the others had had complex fractures: five posterior wall and transverse (11%), four both-column (9%), two posterior wall and posterior column (4%), five T fractures (11%) and two anterior column and posterior semi-T fractures (4%) ( Likewise, a large majority of secondary THA patients had had simple fractures: seven of the posterior wall (28%), seven transverse (28%), and two of the anterior column; the others had had complex fractures: 6 posterior wall and transverse (24%), two both-column (8%), and one posterior wall and posterior column ( Fourteen of the 47 non-THA patients underwent functional treatment, 14 surgical treatments and 19 conservative treatment; 16 of the 25 THA patients underwent surgical treatment and nine conservative treatment. Only functional and surgical treatment were significantly associated with, respectively, non-performance ( Initial satisfaction with the reduction achieved by whatever treatment showed no significant difference between the THA (84%) and non-THA (94%) groups ( In surgically managed patients, time to surgery was not a significant factor in secondary THA. Regarding surgical approach, only the Mears approach correlated with secondary THA ( At end of follow-up, non-THA patients had a mean VAS score of 1.85 and mean PMA score of 16.2, versus 5.88 and 11.08 respectively in the THA group: VAS ( Analysis of 121 files from the period January 2000 to January 2005 provided epidemiological data in agreement with the recent literature. The ratio of one female to 3.2 males was comparable to those of Mayo's 1994 series of 161 cases and to Chiu et al.’s 2000 series of 72 patients with a ratio of about 1:2.5 Age distribution was also broadly similar to literature reports, with a mean age of 41.5 There have been many reports of poor functional results in patients aged more than 55 or 65 The role of prior health status in acetabular fracture is to be borne in mind: early evolution varies greatly according to BMI. The present results and those of Porter et al. reveal overweight as a negative factor. Porter also reported longer hospital stay, higher complications rates and poorer functional outcome associated with osteoarthritis and implantation surgery The predominant etiology is road accidents, to a variable degree that seems to evolve over time, with early reports of up to 96%. The present series showed a much lower rate, as preventive legislation has greatly reduced the rate of serious road accidents: road accidents were associated with bad functional results, but not with secondary THA. The distribution of fracture types varies between series. Letournel et al. The present study, unlike the 2009 SOFCOT round-table At end of follow-up of the 72 patients, those with posterior wall fracture seemed most at risk of a poor functional result. Judet et al. reported 18% moderate or poor results for isolated posterior wall fracture and 24% for complex fracture involving the posterior wall Forty-eight percent of stress is transmitted to the superior part of the acetabular cartilage surface, 28% of which to the anterior and 24% to the posterior wall Many authors have highlighted the need for optimal reduction to improve functional results Acetabular fracture should be seen as a bipolar rather than a unipolar lesion. The present findings illustrate how, aside from certain types of fracture on the acetabular side, it is dislocation and the consequent involvement of the femoral head cartilage or ONFH that are significantly associated with poor functional results and secondary THA. Femoral head status should be assessed before undertaking treatment Madhu et al. showed, in 2006, that interval to surgery played a significant role in achieving anatomic reduction and in medium-term functional results with both simple and complex fractures: the optimal interval is between 10 and 15 days for a good or excellent result, and five to 15 days for anatomic reduction The only contraindication to surgery is the risk of weak osteosynthesis in osteoporotic patients, of whatever age Mean time to THA in the present series was 3.7 We recommend bipolar joint examination rather than unipolar examination centered on the acetabulum in case of THA. Although the present acetabular reduction satisfaction rate was comparable to other reports, for one-third of the patients undergoing secondary THA the femur was implicated, either by ONFH or by fracture of the head. A second third of THAs were related to initial conservative management for medical reasons, with major acetabular reduction defect. The final third concerned bipolar involvement by osteoarthritis. Seventeen THA patients had had initial dislocation, with femoral head cartilage lesions; these should be systematically investigated initially on CT scan or MRI, so that lesion age and severity can be taken into account in considering primary THA as a means of improving outcome Primary THA for acetabular fracture should be considered in case of femoral head fracture or comminutive posterior wall fracture and according to any degenerative or traumatic femoral head cartilage lesion and to the patient's age. The present study highlights the importance of initial reduction. It also demonstrates the importance of correct assessment and management of both acetabular and femoral head involvement for the assessment of the risk of ONFH, secondary osteoarthritis and general functional impairment liable to require secondary THA. It is essential to assess both acetabular cartilage status and impaction and femoral cartilage status, so as to guide treatment strategy. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.