A coal preparation plant typically operates with multiple cleaning circuits based on the particle size distribution of run-of-mine coal. Clean coal product from a plant commonly has to satisfy multiple product quality constraints, including product ash, product sulfur, heating value, moisture content, etc. Numerous studies in the past illustrate that the optimal yield of the plant can be obtained by operating each circuit to produce the same incremental product quality. This equal incremental product quality approach optimizes the plant yield considering only one product quality at a time. Thus, when required to simultaneously satisfy multiple product quality constraints, the process not only becomes increasingly complex and cumbersome, but also may lead to erroneous conclusions in many cases.
                  A novel plant optimization technique was developed using genetic algorithms (GA) to maximize the overall revenue generated by a coal preparation plant by searching the best possible combination of overall yield and multiple product quality constraints. This approach is based on an evolutionary algorithm that maximizes the overall plant revenue based on a single objective function, which was developed by incorporating clean coal yield, targeted product ash content, product heating value, and product SO2 emission potential. Comparative results discussed in this publication indicate the suitability of the proposed GA-based plant optimization approach.A typical coal processing plant flowsheet integrates three or four cleaning circuits to separately clean coarse (plus 12 mm), intermediate (12 Genetic algorithms optimization technique has been inspired by Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection (  The present investigation utilized GA to maximize the overall annual revenue generated from a coal preparation plant operating with four individual cleaning circuits. The plant revenue was calculated based on both the quantity and quality of clean coal produced. Therefore, maximum plant yield did not necessarily mean maximum plant revenue. Penalty and reward factors were utilized to calculate the revenue based on whether the product quality is worse or better than the targeted product quality. Thus, the optimization model helped identify the most desirable combination of plant yield, product ash, product heating value and product SO A simplified flowsheet of a relatively large coal preparation plant studied during this investigation is given in The coal preparation plant receives raw coal from two different sections (Section 1 and Section 2) of Illinois No. 5 coal seam blended in a desired ratio (e.g., 75% from Section 1 and 25% from Section 2). The operating conditions of the individual unit operations were varied and test samples were collected from the respective feed, product and reject streams to generate the respective grade-recovery and partition data. The test samples from heavy medium vessel and heavy medium cyclone processes were collected at different medium densities whereas samples from spiral process were collected at different splitter settings. A representative sample of flotation feed slurry was collected for flotation kinetic analysis to be subsequently conducted in the laboratory. Coal partition data for heavy medium vessel, heavy medium cyclone, and spiral processes were generated using standard float-sink tests. Ash and sulfur results were obtained for each density fraction obtained from the float-sink analyses. Partition curves were generated by plotting percentage of feed reporting to the product at a particular density. Generalized (reduced) partition model equations were developed for all three density based processes. The kinetic rate-recovery equation was developed for the flotation process. Utilizing these model equations, hundreds of data points were generated for the process yield and the corresponding product ash and sulfur assays, as well as, the corresponding operating condition (medium density for the density based process, and residence time for the flotation process). The product heating value (as received) was estimated from a linear relation from product ash developed from the data obtained from the plant. Also, the SO An optimization model was developed using genetic algorithms to maximize the profitability of coal preparation plant by searching for the best possible plant yield while satisfying the multiple quality constraints, i.e., product ash, product heating value and SO For this plant optimization problem, the individual yields from heavy medium vessel, heavy medium cyclone and spiral processes at each specific gravity (in the entire range of 1.15 to 2.40 at an interval of 0.01) and flotation process at each retention time (in the range of 20 s to 6 min at an interval of 5 s) were considered as single gene of a chromosome. The length of a chromosome which consists of individual genes is as shown in An objective (or fitting) function was evaluated for all the existing chromosomes in each generation (iteration). The fitting function was suitably developed to maximize the plant revenue by simultaneously achieving ➢ the optimal plant yield; ➢ satisfying the desired limit on ash content in clean coal; ➢ satisfying the desired limit on heating value (as received) in clean coal; ➢ and satisfying the desired limit on SO The above said four objectives were included in a single objective function by converting each objective into its monetary value. The selling price of coal was determined on the basis of price of clean coal per ton; reward/penalty was added on the basis of product qualities if they were within/beyond their targeted limit. Thus, the objective function can be described as: Price per ton of clean coal, i.e., $25/ton Reward/penalty for product ash content for below/above the targeted limit by 1%, i.e., $0.50/1% above or below the limit Reward/penalty for product heating value for above/below the targeted limit by 224 kJ/kg units, i.e., $0.20/kJ/kg units above or below the limit Reward/penalty for SO Overall yield of the plant Total raw coal tonnage reporting to the plant per annum, i.e., 1 million ton In GA, the chromosome considered best is the one whose objective function (also often termed as cost function or simply cost) has the lowest negative value. The chromosomes in the initial population are sorted in a descending order of decreasing objective function. The lower half (the bottom 50%) of this population is eliminated to form a new population containing only half of the best chromosomes of the initial population. This new population is called Normalized cost Fitness value of Fitness value of Subtracting cost The couples are selected from the mating pool and random number in the interval [0,1] randomly selected crossover point in chromosomes. The newly created genes and the left over genes after the crossover point of Parent 1 and Parent 2 are swapped to give Child 1 and Child 2. Similarly, if the crossover point is selected as the first gene in a chromosome, then the genes to the right of the crossover point are swapped. If the crossover point is selected as the last gene, then the genes to the left of the selected crossover point are swapped. In Some of the chromosomes are deliberately The current quality constraints that the plant has to satisfy are described as product ash of 6.75%, product heating value (as received) of 30,238 kJ/kg and product SO Based on the data provided in Similar observation was also made for the second feed blend (60:40). Based on the data provided in In light of the above comparative results, it is concluded that the proposed GA approach may serve well to optimize coal preparation plant performance. However, although the plant revenue was maximized, one of the constraints, i.e., the sulfur emission potential of 0.79 kg/BJ was not satisfied by either of the optimization processes for the second coal blend as noted in overall yield of the plant difference of targeted overall product ash and the actual overall product ash difference of targeted overall product sulfur and the actual overall product sulfur This cost function is very sensitive to the penalty/reward factors ( The unique features of GA include faster convergence, coverage of a wider search space, the ability to get out of local extrema using mutation technique and the optimization of numerous variables at the same time. Therefore, genetic algorithms based optimization approach has been applied to address quite a many coal and mineral processing related applications in recent years. The present study utilized a GA-based approach to optimize the plant revenue and plant yield for a coal preparation plant. The multiple product quality constraints considered during the optimization process included maximum ash content, maximum sulfur content and minimum heating value. The comparative results and analysis conducted using the well known incremental product ash approach for multiple coal blends indicated the suitability of the GA-based approach. The authors express their sincere thanks to Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity and the Office of Coal Development for funding the project on the recommendation of Illinois Clean Coal Institute. The authors also express their appreciation to the American Coal Company for partially sharing the funding of the project and also to the personnel of Galatia Coal Preparation Plant for their full support extended during this study. Finally, the authors express their sincere thanks to all colleagues who directly or indirectly contributed for the successful completion of this study.