In the present study, heavy-metal tolerance and precipitation by a mixed culture of sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) were evaluated. These bacteria have been enriched during a previous study from a sewage sludge using phosphogypsum as sulfate source. Taking into account that both sulfate and zinc are naturally occurring in phosphogypsum, zinc tolerance of SRB was tested in synthetic media containing 20mM sulfate and zinc chloride at concentrations ranging from 0 to 200mgL−1. Zinc tolerance was determined by bacterial growth susceptibility and zinc removal monitoring. Bacterial growth and sulfate reduction were possible between 10 and 150mgL−1 of initial zinc concentration. Zinc concentrations more than 150mgL−1 were lethal to SRB. Zinc was removed effectively by SRB to less than 5% from medium containing 150mgL−1 initial zinc concentrations or less. Energy-dispersive X-ray analysis showed that precipitation of zinc occurred in the form of sulfide. The results presented in this paper have shown that this mixed culture might be of use for bioremediation of sulfate and heavy-metals containing wastewaters.Heavy-metals are present in industrial wastewaters discharged from industries such as battery, paint, chemical manufacturing and also from mining industry in acid-mine drainage, posing significant disposal problems that require urgent solution to avoid serious environmental contamination. Conventional technologies for removing metals from contaminated wastewaters include precipitation, ion exchange and absorption. The most effective precipitant is sulfide (H The mixed culture of SRB used in this study was from an enrichment culture which was previously developed on phosphogypsum as a sulfate source ( The culture medium was prepared oxygen free according to Experimental cultures were carried out over 10 days to investigate the zinc removal kinetics by the consortium of SRB in the presence of different initial zinc concentrations. Zinc was chosen since it is present at high amount in phosphogypsum (50–100 Na Sulfate was measured according to the turbidimetric method ( A new set of experiments were carried out to evaluate the influence on zinc removal of the bacteria cells themselves. SRB were cultivated, in one vial that did not contain zinc. After 10 days of bacterial growth, the culture solution was divided in two equal volume vials. The bacteria cells were removed by centrifugation from one vial and the SRB cells were retained in the other vial. ZnCl A culture of SRB has been previously enriched on phosphogypsum (10 The effect of initial zinc concentrations on the growth of SRB was investigated in batch experiments in the presence of increasing concentrations of ZnCl The amounts of sulfate reduced during the 10 days batch experiments with different initial zinc concentrations are shown in Sulfide production versus initial zinc concentration is illustrated in  Zinc removal was studied in the presence and the absence of SRB cells. Zinc concentrations versus time are plotted in Qualitative EDS analyses of the precipitate were performed at the end of the run. The mineral content of the precipitate was confirmed as zinc sulfide (ZnS) by the EDS spectrum shown in The metabolic properties of SRB enable them to play an important role in the bioremediation of harmful pollutants. A number of studies have been carried out regarding heavy-metal resistance in SRB ( The ability of this mixed culture of SRB to grow with phosphogypsum as sulfate source suggests that these microorganisms should tolerate high concentrations of heavy-metals. The reported toxic concentrations of heavy-metals to SRB range from a few ppm (mg In the present study, the mechanism for zinc removal was apparently precipitation with sulfide. This was confirmed by a simultaneous reduction in the concentration of S and Zn and by EDS analysis of the precipitate. On the basis of the EDS analysis the most abundant compound in the precipitate from the batch experiments at the end of the run was zinc sulfide, ZnS. In addition to precipitation with sulfide, zinc might also have been removed through sorption on the biomass. Indeed, the presence of SRB cells was shown to facilitate metal precipitation. This result was in agreement with other author’s observations who demonstrate that in addition to providing sulfide for metal sulfur formation, SRB have an additional, important role in facilitating metal precipitation. It has been suggested that the bacteria themselves may directly accelerate metal sulfide precipitation and facilitate settling of the solids by binding the metal in their cell walls ( In view of the results obtained in the present work, it can be concluded that the mixed culture of SRB was able to grow and thus to reduce sulfate when the medium culture contains initial zinc concentrations ranging between 10 and 150 This work was supported by a grant from “Contracts Programmes MRSTCD” Tunisia. We thank Pr. Zouheir Fakhfakh from the Faculty of Science of Sfax for technical assistance EDS analysis.