The hydration of calcium silicate phases dominates the application of cement clinkers and has important practical implications. The reaction mechanisms between water and calcium silicate phases are complex and remain poorly understood at the atomic level. Herein, the single water adsorption on all low-index surfaces of β-C2S and M3-C3S was investigated using DFT-D calculations. The surface energy was calculated and the influence of surface cleavage discussed. Both dissociative and molecular adsorptions were investigated. Molecular adsorption was energetically favoured on β-C2S surfaces while dissociative adsorption was energetically favoured on M3-C3S surfaces. A Wulff construction was used to describe the equilibrium morphology with and without an adsorbed water molecule for the β-C2S phase. Water adsorption promoted the solid dissolution by weakening the bond among surface atoms. Electron transfer was observed mainly from the surface atoms to water atoms during the adsorption. These findings provide a novel insight into the adsorption of a water molecule on different calcium silicate surfaces using the same level of theory, which includes a representation of van der Waals forces, therefore, laying the foundation for better understanding the hydration mechanism.The wide application of cement-based materials depends on cement hydration for strength development The majority of the literature focuses on the hydration heat, microstructure and mineralogical characterization to investigate the hydration of calcium silicate. Significant advances have been achieved through these techniques and hypotheses have been proposed to explain experimental observations. To date there has been no consensus on the process of hydration of calcium silicate. For example, two main hypotheses, namely the protective membrane theory and the dissolution theory, have been suggested to explain the origin of the induction period of C The hydration process of calcium silicate involves many steps, the initial step being the adsorption of water molecules on calcium silicate surfaces First-principles calculation is the standard technique to explore water adsorption at the atomic level. In the past decade, studies have been carried out to investigate water adsorption on calcium silicate surfaces using first-principles calculations. The adsorption of a single water molecule on the β-C The main contributions of this study are fourfold: (1) The single water adsorption on all low-index surfaces of calcium silicate was investigated. The β-C First-principles calculations were performed within density functional theory (DFT), using the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method using the VASP code The experimental unit cell from ref. The low-index surfaces of β-C The surface energy is an important parameter to characterise the low-index surfaces, which can be calculated as follows: Starting from the relaxed low-index surfaces of β-C The adsorption energy The surface energy with the adsorption of a water molecule can be calculated as follows:       Firstly, an increased energy cutoff was used in the current study (600 eV compared with 500 eV in the previous study) and the maximum residual force was set to be 0.03 eV/Å during surface relaxation (0.05 eV/Å in our previous study). Secondly, the in-plane lattice parameters were fixed during the surface relaxation while it was allowed to relax in the previous study. Finally, dipole correction was applied during the surface relaxation in the current study. Except for the maximum residual force, the DFT settings in the current study were more appropriate and accurate for surface calculation To determine the dominating sites for the molecular and dissociative water adsorption, the chemical reactivities of surface Ca and O atoms were investigated. In the current study, the Bader charge analysis was performed since it has been proven as an efficient way to represent the chemical reactivity The selection of dominating sites started from the surface Ca atom since Ca atoms have been demonstrated to be more reactive than surface O (O After that, the Bader charge of O   It was also found that the proton and the hydroxyl group would approach each other to reform a water molecule during the relaxation in most dissociated cases, except the β-C  Interestingly, the whole water molecule split into the proton and the hydroxyl group during the relaxation on M3-C  Compared with water adsorption on β-C This section compares the adsorption calculation from the current study to all DFT calculations in the literature. Zhang et al. Qi et al. A comparison was also made between the results from the current study and the results from ref. The discrepancy about adsorption configuration, surface cleavage and Thus far, we have presented the adsorption configuration and energy of a single water molecule on low-index surfaces of β-C    The comparison between β-C The surface energy with the addition of an adsorbed water molecule was calculated on all low index surfaces of the β-C A Wulff construction comparing the equilibrium morphology of the β-C The influence of an adsorbed water molecule increases the surface area for the (1 0 0), (0 1 0) and (0 0 1) Miller indices and descreases the surface area for the (1 1 0), (1 0 1) and (0 1 1) Miller indices. Therefore, from our calculations water has a stabilising effect on the (1 0 0), (0 1 0) and (0 0 1) Miller indices and these would be the dominate surfaces as the β-C Though the current study contributes to the literature in multiple ways, the authors admit that some important properties, such as metal-proton exchange and pH value, were not investigated. These proterties are beyond the scope of the current study. Those topics are interesting and significant for a better understanding of cement hydration, which will be studies in the future. A systematical DFT-D study was conducted to investigate the single water adsorption on low-index surfaces of β-C PBE functional was more suitable than PBE The influence of surface cleavage on surface structures was mainly restricted around the first layer of atoms, where the surface Ca atoms were shifted and the surface SiO Because of the complex atomic structures of cement surfaces, inward movement of surface atoms was not observed. The bond length of surface Si The lowest energy surface and highest energy surface of β-C Water preferred to absorb as a whole water molecule on most β-C The adsorption energy ranged from −1.210 eV to −0.752 eV on β-C The average bond length of surface atoms that were involved in water adsorption was increased, indicating the weakening of the bond. Electrons were transferred mainly from surface atoms to water atoms after the adsorption. As the β-C  The first author is supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: