In this study the uptake performances of the naturally occurring zeolite, clinoptilolite, and of New Zealand mordenite are compared. The uptake of fully ionised ammonium ion from aqueous solutions in the concentration range 0–200mg/l on to these two materials was compared. The influence of other cations present in water upon the ammonia uptake was also determined. The cations studied were potassium, calcium and magnesium. In all cases the anionic counterion present was chloride. The results showed that the mordenite exhibited higher overall uptake concentrations at equilibrium compared with clinoptilolite at solution concentrations greater than 80mg/l. Beyond this value, the difference in solid-phase equilibrium concentrations on the mordenite became greater at higher solution-phase ammonium ion concentrations. The effect of the other cations upon uptake of ammonium ion was relatively small. In all cases, the ammonium ion showed the highest uptake on to both the mordenite and the clinoptilolite. In the case of clinoptilolite this was rather an unexpected result since the majority of other work shows clinoptilolite exhibiting a higher affinity for potassium ion compared with ammonium ion. This may be explained by the fact that the clinoptilolite came from volcanic deposits in New Zealand. This is the first such study on this material. At solution-phase equilibrium concentrations of greater than 80mg/l, the mordenite showed smaller reductions in ammonium ion uptake in the presence of the other cations when compared with clinoptilolite.parameter in the Langmuir equation (mg/g) adsorbate equilibrium liquid-phase concentration (mg/l) parameter in the Langmuir equation (l/mg) parameter in the Freundlich equation (l/g) parameter in the Freundlich equation adsorbate equilibrium solid-phase concentration (mg/g) Many natural and industrial feed waters requiring treatment contain a mixture of polluting ions, many of which may be removed by ion exchange. However, one of the common toxic pollutants is ammoniacal nitrogen (NH The discharge of effluent waters containing ammonia and ammonium ion is coming under increasingly strict concentration limits for discharge. Ammoniacal nitrogen is present in two forms when in water: ammonia (NH In the case of water to be treated prior to recycle and end use, in addition to removal of ammonia, there may be a requirement that the overall ionic composition of species other than ammonium ion be maintained. For example, in the case of fish farm water recycle, and in the case of “bottled” drinking water a balance of ionic composition is an essential water quality criterion. Another major factor is that significant uptake of ions other than ammonia will reduce the effective uptake capacity for ammonium ion and thus the economics of the process. The cations chosen for this study were typical of those found in many natural waters and in water used in industrial recycle operations, and included potassium, calcium and magnesium. The particular ion exchangers of interest in this study were clinoptilolite and mordenite, both belonging to the group of natural minerals called zeolites. Zeolites are hydrated aluminosilicates that possess a three-dimensional framework structure. This structure is formed by AlO Mordenite is a natural zeolite with lower K content than clinoptilolite, but with a higher Ca and Na content. Both zeolites have similar ion exchange capacity and selectivity for ammonium ion. The representive formula for mordenite is Na The aim of the research here was to measure and compare the equilbrium uptake of ammonium ion onto New Zealand clinoptilolite with that onto mordenite. The effect of the individual presence of potassium, calcium and magnesium ion upon ammonium ion uptake on to each material was also investigated. The approach taken was to determine the relative ability of each of the metal ions to influence ammonium ion uptake. Although a lot of research has been done on ammonia adsorption onto zeolites, there are no literature data about the influence of other cations on ammonia ion uptake onto mordenite and New Zealand clinoptilolite. The scope of the experimental work was confined to determination of the equilibrium uptake behaviour of ammonium ion on to clinoptilolite and on to mordenite in the presence of chloride co-ion. During all experimental work the pH was maintained at a value of less than 7.5. It was assumed that all ammonia existed in the ionic form and was available for ion exchange. The clinoptilolite and the mordenite were sourced from deposits in New Zealand. Samples were crushed and classified to a size range of 0.5–0.71 The equilibration procedure adopted was as follows. 0.5 Ammonia analyses were conducted using an ion-selective electrode (Hach 50250, & Orion 95-12) following the procedure given by the manufacturer, and separate checks were made in a number of cases using the conventional Nesslerisation technique ( In order to establish the extent to which the presence of potassium, calcium and magnesium ions influenced ammonium ion uptake, further equilibration experiments were conducted. These were confined to determination of the effect of each individual ion alone upon ammonium ion uptake. The starting solutions were dosed with the appropriate metal cation at a concentration of 40 The experimental uptake equilibrium data for clinoptilolite are shown in The relationships between exchanger-phase concentration and solution-phase concentration are shown for the case of ammonium ion only, and for ammonium ion in the individual presence of magnesium, calcium and potassium ions. The aqueous phase concentrations are expressed in mg/l N-NH However, in order to quantify the selectivity behaviour of the clinoptilolite, the units of concentration were expressed in milliequivalents per gram for the exchanger phase. The values of ion uptake thus calculated for ammonium ion relative to each of the metal ions are presented in For example, the results at 200 The Langmuir isotherm relates Rearranging the Langmuir equation gives Eq. The Freundlich isotherm relates the uptake of solute onto the exchanger to the solution concentration, as shown in Eq. This isotherm can also be presented by the following equation:  In all cases the Langmuir model provides a slightly more consistent fit to the data compared with the Freundlich, and at lower concentrations the fit is satisfactory in both cases. At higher concentrations neither model provides an accurate fit. Comparison of the data with other similar published results reveals some interesting differences. Comparison of the ammonium ion uptake onto clinoptilolite in the absence of the metal ions with that measured by Results of  These contrast with our data ( The analogous ammonium ion uptake equilibria for mordenite are shown in From the results presented in The only comparison we have for New Zealand mordenite is in the data of  Values from The results of this work underline the variations which are observed in the behaviour of natural ion-exchange materials which notionally have the same chemical structure. The overall ammonium ion uptake behaviour of New Zealand clinoptilolite is quite similar to that of clinoptilolite from other sources, notably that from the Hector deposit in California. New Zealand clinoptilolite has a high affinity for ammonium ion, which is observed across a range of ammonium ion concentrations of interest in the context of water treatment. The presence of calcium ion had the most significant effect upon ammonium ion uptake, followed by potassium ion for the equivalent potassium concentration two times less than the calcium concentration since all experiments were done for the same mass metal concentration. Magnesium ion had the least effect. The results showed that the mordenite exhibited higher overall uptake concentrations at equilibrium compared with clinoptilolite at solution ammonium ion concentrations greater than 80 The mordenite showed smaller reductions in ammonium ion uptake in the presence of the other cations when compared with clinoptilolite.