Chapter 5 discusses the composition and roles of bacterial biota of the water column of lakes and the sea with particular emphasis on the degradation of dissolved and colloid organic matter and other biogeochemical processes. The role of bacteria on suspended particles of the water column and the microbial biota of stratified water columns are also documented.KeywordsMicrobial functional diversity, mineralization, microbial loop, phototrophic bacteria, sources of organic matter, water column-sediment coupling, turbulence, marine snow, vertical particle flux, N and P cycling, anoxic water columns.Chapter 5 discusses the composition and roles of bacterial biota of the water column of lakes and the sea with particular emphasis on the degradation of dissolved and colloid organic matter and other biogeochemical processes. The role of bacteria on suspended particles of the water column and the microbial biota of stratified water columns are also documented. Keywords Microbial functional diversity, mineralization, microbial loop, phototrophic bacteria, sources of organic matter, water column-sediment coupling, turbulence, marine snow, vertical particle flux, N and P cycling, anoxic water columns.  Insight into the role of water column bacteria has come through several different approaches from the 1960s onwards. First, it was observed that photosynthetically active phytoplankton excrete organic matter to the surrounding water as dissolved photosynthate and that this represents a large fraction of gross primary production (e.g., Fogg, 1983). Measurements of the turnover of radioactively labelled glucose and amino acids also showed a substantial heterotrophic activity that could only be assigned to bacteria (Hobbie etal., 1972; Wright, Hobbie, 1965), and O Another approach has been to measure bulk bacterial O It has also been discovered that unicellular cyanobacteria play a substantial role as primary producers, especially in oligotrophic oceanic waters (e.g., Itunga, Mitchell, 1986; Chisholm etal., 1992). Bacteria appeared to have generation times that can be measured in hours or a few days. It remained then to understand the fate of the bacterial production. Zooplankton are not, in general, able to exploit food particles of bacterial sizes, but protozoan grazing (in particular by tiny heterotrophic flagellates) could by and large account for bacterial production ( This new picture of energy and matter flow in the water column has been summarized conceptually of by the A microbial loop is not unique to the water column – rather it applies to many different ecosystems. For example, in terrestrial ecosystems a substantial part of the plant production and in particular lignified tissue is not utilized by herbivorous animals, but broken down by bacteria or fungi that then enter phagotrophic food chains. It is curious, that while the discovery of the microbial loop and the role of planktonic bacteria are considered to have taken place during the last 40 years, Large diatoms and dinoflagellates have traditionally been considered the most important primary producers in the water column. More Strains of the unicellular More recently it has been found that prochlorophytes occur in the marine plankton. Prochlorophytes comprise a group of oxygenic photosynthetic cyanobacteria known for their photosynthetic pigments. They lack phycobilins, but have unusual chlorophylls (divinyl chlorophylls Two different functional types of bacteria – both obligate heterotrophs – are capable of using light for energy conservation. The so called The other functional type consists of a variety of unrelated bacteria – both archaea and eubacteria – that possess bacteriorhodopsin or proteorhodopsins. These proteins act as proton pumps when exposed to light and the proton return-flux is coupled to ATP-generation. See also Béjà, Suzuki (2008). The bulk of planktonic bacteria have been correctly considered as heterotrophs that depend on aerobic respiration of organic matter, but the difficulty in isolating them in pure culture has long made it difficult to provide a picture of the diversity and niches of the individual species. The reasons why it has been so difficult to isolate the majority of marine bacterioplankton has not been entirely clear. Some specialized functional groups, for example ammonia-oxidizers and nitrifiers, and methane- and CO-oxidizers, do not grow well on nutrient agar plates, if they grow at all, but this is also the case for many less specialized heterotrophs. Lack of growth on agar plates has been attributed to the possibility that most bacterioplankton are oligotrophs and require very low substrate concentrations. An alternate possibility is that the high nutrient concentrations typical for many isolation media induce rapid growth, but this in turn induces lysis by viruses. Since many bacteria do not form colonies on agar plates, it is difficult to isolate individual cells or their progeny (this is in contrast to eukaryotic microbes that are large enough to allow sampling individual cells with a capillary pipette under the microscope). This has led to the term “unculturable bacteria”, but the term “not yet cultured” is more appropriate – especially since some “unculturable strains” can now be cultured using a dilution technique (Giovannoni, Stingl, 2007). During the last few decades large scale collection of environmental DNA and subsequent sequencing of rRNA-genes has facilitated an understanding of the diversity and phylogenetic composition of bacterioplankton Metagenomic approaches have added much to a functional understanding of bacterial diversity in the oceans, even though a large fraction of genes and gene fragments obtained from metagenomic analyses remain unidentified. In spite of this limitation, metagenomic data have revealed the importance of proteorhodopsin and bacterial phototrophy, archaeal ammonia monooxygenases and archaeal nitrification, and diverse pathways for dimethyl sulfide transformation. Metagenomic data have also revealed new insights about nitrogen fixation, carbohydrate metabolism, sulfur transformations, methylotrophy, and marine viruses (see The largest pool of organic matter in aquatic habitats is comprised of non-living particulate carbon and especially dissolved organic carbon. The water column of the oceans contains about 10 The distinction between dissolved and particulate organic matter (DOC and POC, respectively) is usually defined on the basis of what passes through filters with pore sizes of either 0.2 or 0.1 Non-living organic matter is poorly characterized chemically. Humic acids constitute 40–80% in freshwater and 5–25% in seawater. Combined carbohydrates and combined amino acids (peptides, proteins) constitute 10 and 1% of the organic matter, respectively. Monosaccharides (mainly glucose) and individual amino acids together occur in concentrations of 10–50 The most important source of dissolved organic matter is leakage from photosynthetic algae; they may lose 5–40% of their phosynthate in this way. Lysis caused by virus, mucus secretion by diatoms and other organisms, fecal pellets produced by zooplankton organisms, mucus and degrading tissue or thallus of aquatic plants and macroalgae, and terrestrial run-off are other important sources (see Turnover times of the different fractions range from<1 hour to 6000 years; very long turnover times can be estimated from It has long been noticed that when natural assemblages of bacteria degrade organic matter the rate of mineralization decreases over time reflecting the fact that easily degraded components are mineralized first. It is customary to distinguish between a very labile pool with turnover times<1 hour, a labile pool with turnover times measured in days, and a refractory pool with turn-over times measured in years. Studies in fresh and seawater show that the mineralization slows considerably after four to seven days of incubation. This quickly mineralized fraction – defined as the labile pool – normally constitutes about 10% of total DOC. There is considerable temporal variation in this pool, however: the labile fraction is higher during algal blooms and lowest during winter (Middelboe, Søndergaard, 1993, 1995). When only polymers are available, bacteria must produce exoenzymes in the form of proteases and glycanases. Exoenzymatic activity can conveniently be quantified by adding suitable “model” substrates that release a fluorescent or chromophoric dye when hydrolyzed. Most exoenzymatic activity is associated with the particulate fraction (bacterial cells). Some activity can also be detected in cell-free filtrates, but this is likely to be caused by lysed bacteria. It is also possible that bacteria, to a limited extent, excrete free hydrolytic exoenzymes into the water column, but this is unlikely to be an adaptive trait because it would also benefit other bacteria present in the surroundings. Exoenzymatic activity shows clear seasonality: thus in lakes, hydrolytic exoenzyme activity increases after algal blooms when monomers and other more labile organics are no longer available. Increases in hydrolytic exoenzyme activity correlate with an increasing fraction of the bacteria that are attached to suspended detrital matter (Middelboe, Søndergaard, 1995; Middelboe etal., 1995). The growth efficiency of heterotrophic bacteria in the water column varies, and values from around 10 to 60% have been recorded; the latter high value corresponds to the theoretical limit for aerobic heterotrophs (Del Giorgio, Cole, 1998). Lower values are likely due to nutrient (N, P) limitation. Not all degradation of dissolved organic matter is due to biological processes. Some of the most recalcitrant components, such as humic It stands to reason that polymers in general and very large molecules in particular, are degraded more slowly than monomers and small molecules. The reason for this is two-fold. The synthesis of hydrolytic exoenzymes requires energy, and polymer hydrolysis may in itself be a rate-limiting step. Also, since diffusion coefficients vary inversely with molecular size, diffusive transport of large molecules to the cell surfaces is slower for smaller molecules. However, larger colloidal particles can degrade relatively quickly (Amon, Benner, 1994). Over a certain size (<1–2 About 10% of the organic matter in the water column occurs as non-living particles. The distinction between dissolved and particulate matter is imprecise, as already mentioned. Traditional analytical methods likely also underestimate particulate matter, because some aggregates are transparent and some types disintegrate easily during sampling. Suspended particles are important because they create conditions for the mineralization of organic matter that differ from those characteristic of dissolved organics. Particles are also important because they tend to sink at rates that vary according to density and size. Particle formation is caused by biological and physical processes in the upper photic and frequently turbulent layer of the water column. As particles sink, their organic contents are then reduced in part by mineralization, with the remainder forming the basis for benthic food chains. The downward It is possible to quantify the vertical particle flux beneath the turbulent (mixed) zone of the water column using sediment traps. The flux of organic particulate matter decreases strongly with depth in oceanic water columns, reflecting microbial mineralization. Thus, it has been found that 75–80% of the initial particle flux is lost during passage from 100 to 2000 There are several sources of particulate matter. Growth and multiplication of bacteria and phytoplankton imply the production of particulate matter from dissolved substances and the resulting cells or their dead remains can become components of aggregates. Some organisms produce larger aggregate particles from smaller ones (fecal pellets and protozoan egesta). Individual particles are more or less “sticky”, because many living organisms secrete mucus or dead particles that adsorb dissolved colloids or mucous floc. When particles collide, they stick to each other with a certain probability, and so aggregates tend to grow. Colloidal particles may also flocculate and form mucous flakes with or without other forms of particles ( The mechanism of aggregate formation is described by coagulation theory. The probability that two particles will stick together depends on the probability of collision and on the probability of adhesion following a collision – the latter property is referred to as “stickiness”. Submicron particles depend exclusively on Brownian motion for collisions. Other mechanisms are more important and effective for larger particles. Turbulent shear is most important and episodic wind exposure of the water surface may therefore lead to rapid flocculation and subsequent sedimentation. Differential sinking velocities, which increase with the square of particle diameter, is another mechanism by which particles may collide. Thus, larger sinking particles may scavenge smaller ones on their way down through the water column. Aggregate growth tends to accelerate with aggregate size. As aggregates increase beyond a certain size, however, they also become more vulnerable to fragmentation by shear forces, so some steady-state size will be reached depending on turbulence and stickiness, Colloids tend to concentrate at air-water interfaces and this applies to calm water surfaces as well as to the surfaces of air bubbles. Colloids adhering to bursting air bubbles thus form a nucleus for further flocculation – this principle is used for stripping dissolved organic matter from seawater in aquaria. Sufficiently high densities of bacteria, which often secrete mucus, can also form flocs together with dissolved colloids. A thorough presentation of coagulation theory and formation of particulate matter in the marine water column is found in Marine snow particles do not consist only of non-living matter; they also host microbial communities including bacteria, various protozoa and algal cells. Bacteria undoubtedly grow and divide on suspended particles, but the initial colonization is a coagulation process much as described above. Bacteria adhere to objects such as microscopic slides submerged in natural water within minutes. It is believed that this initial adherence is based on van der Waal’s forces and the tendency to adhere among different bacteria depends on the hydrophobicity of the cell envelope. This type of adherence is reversible, but some bacteria may later cement themselves to surfaces with mucous secretions ( Bacterial concentrations are 10 The importance of flocculation for bacterial exploitation of macromolecules can easily be demonstrated experimentally. When seawater is vigorously bubbled, a pronounced increase in microbial respiration follows. The effect is due to the adsorption of macromolecules to the surface of the bubbles and subsequent nucleation for floc formation. Bacteria are also adsorbed to the resulting aggregates which are then subsequently degraded (Kepkay, Johnson, 1989). A somewhat comparable habitat is that offered by seawater ice in cold climates. The lower part of seawater ice is porous, that is, filled with canals that contain brine. It was early found that these brine channels host primary producers such as diatoms – but these again form the basis for heterotrophic activity, primarily bacteria, but also food chains of phagotrophic protozoa (see also Søgaard etal., 2010). We have so far only considered mineralization of organic carbon in the water column, but bacteria, of course, also mineralize nitrogen and phosphorus. However, N and P mineralization can be decoupled from C mineralization to the extent that the bacteria become net consumers of mineral N and P. Such a decoupling occurs if the C/N ratio and C/P ratios of the organic substrate exceed those of bacterial cells to a certain degree depending also on the growth yield (see Chapter 3.3). This effect is more pronounced in terrestrial habitats because the contents of N and P are much lower in vascular plants than in algal cells. In water samples it is, of course, easy to reproduce a situation with a net uptake of mineral This led to questions about the extent to which algae and bacteria compete for mineral nutrients. However, the issues were not stated very clearly: small bacteria may be more effective than larger algal cells at taking up nutrients, but at the same time bacterial activity is limited by algal production. The “net uptake versus net mineralization problem” has been reviewed by Kirchmann (1994). Extensive studies show that bacteria are typically responsible for>50% of the entire inorganic phosphate uptake in lakes and in seawater. In the sea, bacteria may be responsible for 10–75% of the NH Another type of decoupling between N and C has been observed for sinking particulate matter (Olesen, Lundsgaard, 1995). It has been shown that the C/N-ratio of such particles increases with age. The implication of this is that components with higher N-contents are mineralized more rapidly, and that this happens before the particles leave the photic zone. Consequently there is no simple stoichiometry between external supply of N and new production of reduced C. Organic C is therefore exported to the aphotic zone while the nitrogen is at least partly recycled for additional photosynthesis before it is finally exported to below the photic zone. The number of living bacterial cells in the water column falls within the range of 2×10 More recently it has been found that virus plays a significant role for bacterial mortality. Viral particles occur at concentrations of around 10 Early microscopy studies led to suggestions that most bacterioplankton are non-motile. However, the reason for this is that motile bacteria tend to attach rapidly to the glass surfaces of microscopic slides or cover slips, and so swimming bacteria in seawater were rarely observed. It has since been shown that, in fact, many or most bacteria in the water column are motile, and they respond to gradients of attractants such as different dissolved organic compounds (Blackburn, Fenchel, Mitchell, 1998; Small eukaryotic cells occur at densities of the magnitude of 10 Many bacteria tend to attach temporarily or permanently when they encounter solid surfaces, and this is the basis for bacterial colonization of suspended particles. An example of bacteria (and eventually protozoa) colonizing a two mm agar sphere suspended in natural seawater is shown in It has recently been shown based on atomic force microscopy that multiple species of planktonic bacteria form aggregates, which suggests that the functional significance involves some sort of mutualism. However, the nature of such associations has not yet been elucidated (Malfatti, Azam, 2009). Typically the marine water column is more or less efficiently mixed and in principle largely in equilibrium with the atmosphere with respect to dissolved gases, and this is also the case for many lakes. However, sufficiently deep water bodies are at least transiently stratified during the warm season: the upper water layers are heated by insulation and the resulting The pycnocline presents a barrier for the vertical transport of solutes such as the downwards flux of dissolved oxygen or the upwards flux of mineral nutrients while the sedimentation of particles is not affected. However, some turbulent mixing (“turbulent diffusion”) above and sometimes below the pycnocline secures some vertical transport across the pycnocline, and thus vertical mixing is still orders of magnitude higher than can be accomplished by molecular diffusion. A special case is the oxygen minimum layer (OML) in some parts of the oceans. At depths between 100 and 2000 In productive waters with a stratified water column, the deep layer can become anoxic. This happens because aerobic mineralization of particulate organic matter that sinks from the photic zone requires more oxygen than can be supplied by turbulent diffusion through the pycnocline. Anaerobic deep water occurs commonly in eutrophic lakes during the stratification period, and as a permanent feature in meromictic lakes. It also occurs in many fjords with a halocline and a sill at the entrance and in some marine basins with a permanent deep halocline. The largest such marine anaerobic basins are represented by the Black Sea, the Cariaco Trench in the Caribbean Sea and the Gotland Basin in the Baltic Sea. A deep basin in the Mariager Fjord, on the east coast of Jutland, Denmark, provides an example of a stratified water body with permanently anoxic deep water (Fenchel etal., 1995; The profiles of the different compounds in the Mariager Fjord are similar to those recorded from other such stratified systems including the Black Sea and the Baltic basins ( However, if the sulfide production intensity through sulfate reduction is less intensive, a zone may develop in which both oxygen and sulfide is In systems where light penetrates to the anoxic layer, sulfide oxidation is largely phototrophic during the day. This has been studied especially in meromictic, sulfate-rich lakes. In such systems a typically 0.5–1 In all these systems the chemocline harbours high densities of phagotrophic eukaryotes that depend on the production of phototrophic or chemolithotrophic bacteria for food. These consumers are typically various kinds of protozoa, but also include some zooplankton forms, such as rotifers and copepods.