Fractures that develop progressively around underground excavations can be simulated using a numerical code called RFPA (rock failure process analysis). This code incorporates the mesoscopic heterogeneity in Young’s modulus and rock strength characteristic of rock masses. In the numerical models of a rock mass, values of Young’s modulus and rock strength are realized according to a Weibull distribution in which the distribution parameters represent the level of heterogeneity of the medium. Another notable feature of this code is that no a priori assumptions need to be made about where and how fracture and failure will occur – cracking can occur spontaneously and can exhibit a variety of mechanisms when certain local stress conditions are met. These unique features have made RFPA capable of simulating the whole fracturing process of initiation, propagation and coalescence of fractures around excavations under a variety of loading conditions. RFPA is used herein to simulate progressive fracturing processes around three common shapes of underground excavations – circular, elliptical and inverted U-shaped. The results of the simulations show that the code can be used not only to produce fracturing patterns similar to those reported in previous studies, but also to predict fracturing patterns under a variety of loading conditions. Based on these fracturing patterns, failure mechanisms are identified for various loading conditions.In several fields of geotechnical engineering, different types of collapse due to excavation-induced progressive fracturing are observed around underground openings. For example, borehole breakouts are very common in petroleum engineering ( The classical analytical solutions of rock mechanics usually consider the failure modes of underground excavations for the ideal case of a homogeneous, isotropic, linear elastic medium. In reality, host rocks are much more complex, being usually characterized by the presence of microcracks. Such microcracks may grow when subjected to particular loading conditions. This issue was investigated both theoretically and experimentally by In order to reflect the effect of cracks on the mechanical properties of a rock mass, many theoretical models ( The collapse of an underground opening is a complex failure process characterised by the initiation, propagation and coalescence of many cracks around the opening. In this process, localization of strain and stress redistribution occur in particular zones, along with the initiation and propagation of cracks, due to the heterogeneity of a rock mass. From the in situ observations, the process zone around an opening is probably the most important feature controlling the progressive nature of the failure process ( In more recent developments, micromechanical models have been developed to simulate the instability or loss of integrity of a tunnel or borehole. These models have improved the understanding of the mechanisms and consequences of fracture initiation and propagation. For example, the non-linear rule-based model ( In the current study, RFPA (Rock Failure Process Analysis), a well-recognized numerical code, has been used to simulate the progressive fracturing processes in rocks around underground openings. The investigation has been conducted for common cross-sectional shapes of underground openings, including circular, elliptical and inverted U-shapes, under different loading conditions. RFPA has been used extensively to simulate the failure process of rocks in a number of engineering fields ( Briefly, the code RFPA In RFPA  In RFPA In elastic damage mechanics, the elastic modulus of an element degrades monotonically as damage evolves, and the elastic modulus of damaged material is expressed as follows: The sign convention used throughout this paper is that compressive stress and strain are positive. When the mesoscopic element is in a uniaxial stress state (both uniaxial compression and uniaxial tension), the constitutive relation of elements is as illustrated in The constitutive relation of mesoscopic element under uniaxial tension, as shown in the third quartile of Additionally, it is assumed that the damage of mesoscopic element in under multiaxial states of stress is also isotropic and elastic. Following the method of extending a one-dimensional constitutive law under uniaxial tension to a complex stress condition, as proposed by For an element subject to a multiaxial state of stress, the constitutive law can be easily obtained by substituting the strain In order to study the damage of an element when it is under compressive and shear stress, the Mohr–Coulomb criterion, expressed as follows, is chosen to define the second damage threshold, If an element is under a multiaxial stress state and its strength satisfies the Mohr–Coulomb criterion, damage occurs, and it is necessary to consider the effect of the other principal stress in the model during damage evolution. When the Mohr–Coulomb criterion is satisfied, the maximum principal (compressive) strain It is assumed that shear damage evolution is related only to the maximum compressive principal strain In RFPA Previous work with the code ( Some validation studies using some typical laboratory tests of rock and concrete have been conducted to test the formulation of fracture evolution and rock failure ( In RFPA In the following simulations, three simple shapes of underground openings, with circular, elliptical and inverted U cross-sections, are considered. The specific geometries and loading conditions for these three geometries are shown in In order to understand the failure mechanism of the host rock for the model excavations, the stress distribution is solved first. When the state of stress in rock around the opening is calculated based on the theory of elasticity, for the circular and elliptical openings subjected to uniaxial or biaxial stress states, the stress distributions in the host rock are provided by well-known analytical solutions. For the inverted U-shaped opening, the stress distribution is obtained though finite element analysis. The radial, tangential and shear stresses at the boundary of a circular opening subjected to biaxial stress conditions are given ( For an elliptical opening in a medium subjected to biaxial compression, the tangential stresses at the boundary of the opening are given ( For an ellipse with For the inverted U-shaped opening shown in The preceding elastic analysis is based on the assumption that the rock mass is a homogeneous medium, which is generally not the case for rock in situ. Further, conditions of high in situ stress usually induce damage to rock around the opening, and such damage inevitably changes the shape of opening, in turn leading to a different stress distribution around the opening. From field observations, it is apparent that collapse of an opening involves a progressive fracturing process. For some underground excavations, the stress path they experience involves increase in the applied stresses (due, for example, to the creation of adjacent excavations) and that is the one considered here. The situation is simulated by increasing the boundary stresses applied to the outer boundary of the model domain. At a particular stress level applied to the model domain, not all of the elements in the excavation boundary may be damaged and rock failure is arrested when the new geometry of the opening provides sufficient confinement to stabilize the opening. With an increase of external stress with a fixed lateral pressure coefficient, further damage is induced around the opening, meaning that existing cracks may propagate or new cracks may be initiated. Finally, there will be a maximum value of external pressures that will lead to the complete collapse of the openings. RFPA is applied to simulate this progressive fracturing process for the three shapes of openings, as shown in The mechanical properties of this rock are specified as Young’s modulus 52 GPa, Poisson’s ratio 0.25, uniaxial compressive strength 50 MPa, tensile strength 5.0 MPa, and internal angle of friction 30°. The numerical models of underground opening with the cross-sections shown in The rock is assumed to be heterogeneous with its mechanical properties defined by a Weibull distribution with the parameter values listed in It is important to note that for the particular parameters used in the Weibull distribution, if a numerical specimen of rock with a size of 100 mm From a series of numerical simulations of loading the various problem geometries, the conditions of vertical and the horizontal pressures at the initiation of the primary tensile crack, the formation of the shear crack, and collapse of the excavation are obtained as listed in The evolution of fractures around a circular opening under uniaxial compression or relatively low lateral stress has been studied extensively and had also been confirmed by in situ observations ( Model results of the AE distributions, fracturing patterns and the maximum shear stress distributions for the circular opening are presented in In order to examine the effects of the lateral pressure coefficient on the progressive fracturing process, a range of magnitudes of Results for loading of the model of the elliptical opening are illustrated in For a lateral pressure coefficient of 0.75, the failure processes are found to be similar to the circular opening subjected to hydrostatic pressure ( Under the lateral pressure coefficient of From above numerical results, it is observed that remote cracks are formed for lateral pressure coefficients It is concluded that remote cracks, accompanied by the primary tensile crack, occur when the lateral pressure coefficient is much smaller or much larger than the ellipse shape factor The results of modelling the inverted U-shaped opening are illustrated in For the elliptical and inverted U-shaped openings, a remote crack can also be observed when the confining pressure is relatively low. However, if the initiation of the primary tensile crack is restrained, formation of the remote tensile crack is arrested. This suggests that, under this ground stress condition, it is necessary to reinforce the roof and floor of opening. Some general observations are as follows. Confining pressure is most effective in suppressing a primary tensile fracture and least effective in the prevention of compression failure. The location of the initial remote crack changes with confining pressure. The point of nucleation moves closer to the opening with the increasing confining pressure. Under high confining pressure, more attention should be paid to the reinforcement of the high compression stress zone in order to maintain the integrity of the opening. Finally, because an inverted U-shaped opening is generally used in underground engineering, the preceding numerical simulation should be very useful in underground support and reinforcement design. In this study, the numerical code RFPA has been applied to simulate the failure process and the path to collapse of different shapes of underground openings under uniaxial or biaxial loading conditions. Based on the results from the simulations, the following conclusions are drawn: For a circular opening under uniaxial compression or a low lateral pressure coefficient, a primary tensile crack, a remote tensile crack and a shear crack develop. For lateral pressure coefficients are less than 0.25, the applied stresses required to form the primary tensile crack and for excavation collapse increase with increasing lateral pressure. When the lateral pressure coefficient is 0.75 or 1.0, no primary tensile cracks develop, and the state of stress at the initiation of shear damage increases with the lateral pressure. For an elliptical opening, remote cracks, accompanied by the primary tensile crack, are formed when the lateral pressure coefficient is much smaller or much larger than the ellipse shape factor For an inverted U-shaped opening, a remote crack is observed when the confining pressure is relatively low. For the hydrostatic case ( These numerical results on excavation failure patterns provide a useful way of detecting the field stress orientations, and to optimize the stable shape of the cross-section. The initiation, propagation and coalescence of cracks around openings with different cross-sections under a variety of loading conditions are clearly expressed in RFPA simulations, and the numerical results compare well with results reported for both physical models and observations of behaviour of underground excavations. As a generic study, the simulation results may have significant implications for underground engineering. For example, restraining the initiation of a primary tensile crack may be an effective way to arrest the formation of a remote tensile crack in the interior of the medium. This work presented in this paper was supported by the Liaoning Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. 20031019) and the National Natural Science Foundation (Grant Nos. 50134040 and 50204003) of PR China. The authors are grateful for this support. The following symbols are used in this paper: transverse and longitudinal axes of ellipse damaged and undamaged (initial) elastic moduli of element compressive and tensile strengths, respectively, of element residual compressive and tensile strengths, respectively, of element probability density function of Weibull distribution homogeneity index, shape parameter of Weibull distribution pressure (or normal stress) applied in vertical direction variable radius radius of circular opening parameter of elements that conforms to Weibull distribution, such as elastic modulus and strength scale parameter of Weibull distribution strain strain at peak stress principal strain strain at the peak compressive stress maximum compressive strain at the residual compressive strength strain at the peak tensile stress maximum tensile strain at the residual tensile strength ultimate tensile strain internal friction angle ultimate tensile strain coefficient lateral pressure coefficient residual strength coefficient Poisson’s ratio angle between horizontal axial and radius stress stresses applied in horizontal and vertical directions of specimen principal stress radial and tangential stresses shear stress damage variable