Bamboo plantations can help expanding biomass production to marginal lands, while requiring limited chemical and labour inputs. However, the development of a modern industrial bamboo energy chain requires an adequate level of mechanization. The study presents the preliminary test of a new single-pass cut-and-shred harvester, designed for application to a powerful farm tractor. The machine is especially suited to negotiating disorganized crops, which offer challenging conditions for the more efficient forager-based harvesters. The results show that productivity may exceed 6 fresh th−1, which is close to the assumed theoretical limit for this machine type. Fuel use is over 3l fresh t−1, while harvesting cost varies around 33 €t−1. Fuel use and harvesting cost are still relatively high, but they are likely to decrease as operators gain experience with the new system, and as the system itself is further improved. In any case, cost reduction is only one of the benefits accrued by mechanization, which also plays a major role in improving worker safety and overall supply chain efficiency.Bamboos are woody-stemmed perennial grasses that occur naturally in most tropical regions of the world. There are over 1200 species of bamboos, capable of occupying a large number of different habitats. Bamboos are frugal, adaptable and fast-growing, which makes them ideal for biomass production on marginal land ( Therefore, the goal of this study was to determine the performance of a tractor-based single-pass cut-and-shred harvester applied to industrial bamboo plantations. In particular, the study aimed at determining productivity, fuel consumption and harvesting cost, in order to assess the technical possibility and the financial benefit of replacing manual harvesting with mechanized harvesting. The test was conducted with a 276 The harvester was tested on a second rotation bamboo plantation regenerated from rootstocks after a fire. The plantation was located near Tatuì, in São Paulo State, at an altitude of 610 Plantation characteristics were sampled by conducting a typical forest survey on three 25 Harvesting performance was determined through detailed time-and-motion studies conducted at the cycle level ( The surface area covered with each cycle was determined by multiplying swathe width by total travel length, the latter recorded automatically on the tractor on-board computer. Resulting figures were double-checked with those obtained from a Garmin CSX GPS device. Biomass output was estimated by taking all loads to a certified weighbridge. Moisture content of comminuted bamboo biomass was determined with the gravimetric method, according to ASABE S358.2 Standard (2010), on five 500 Fuel inputs were taken from the on-board computer, whereas time inputs were recorded manually, with a conventional stopwatch. Productive work time was separated from delay time, but all delays were included in the study, and not just the delays below a set duration threshold, because such practice may misrepresent the incidence of downtime ( Machine cost was estimated with the method developed by the European COST Action FP0902 ( Unfortunately, the machine was available for a short time only, and it was tested on a relatively small field, measuring 0.24 Bamboo stools re-sprouted vigorously after the fire: three and half years later, the average number of stems per stool was 29, which offered abundant evidence to the capacity of bamboo stools to regenerate after cut, and supported the idea of coppice management ( Harvesting productivity was 4.6 fresh tonnes per scheduled hour, including all delays. This figure is heavily weighed by the preliminary character of the study and by the use of a single support truck. Lacking a second support vehicle, the harvester was forced to wait idle as the full truck drove to the landing to unload ( However, it is unlikely that experience alone will be able to push productivity much above these figures. Other studies of the same machine indicate productivity figures between 3 and 7 fresh t This figure is about 25 times higher than for manual harvesting, which we calculated at 0.27 fresh t Fuel consumption exceeded 3 Relatively low productivity and fuel efficiency impacted harvesting cost, which was in the range of 33 € fresh t On the other hand, harvesting SRC plantations with modified foragers includes comminution and loading, and still incurs a cost that is 25% lower than found for the cut-and-shred unit on test ( This study singles out capital investment as the largest cost component, representing 45% of the total, partly as a result of high import taxes ( Of course, this preliminary study cannot address all challenges - in fact, it cannot even detect all challenges in the first place. However, it may provide a general estimate for the potential of mechanized bamboo harvesting, and address future efforts. With all its limitations, our study is the only one that offers science-based data for the mechanized harvesting of bamboo plantations, while attempting a first comparison between manual and mechanical harvesting techniques. Industrial bamboo plantations can be effectively harvested with single-pass cut-and-shred equipment, applied to powerful farm tractors. Productivity is capped by a relatively crude machine design, but the peculiar characteristics of bamboo plantations prevent use of more efficient devices. In any case, the preliminary trials described in this study yielded very promising results, and the new mechanized system could become competitive, if minor organizational improvements are introduced. Of course, this is just a preliminary study, which is limited by its short duration. However, no other studies are available for the mechanized harvesting of bamboo plantations. In fact, very few studies are available for manual harvesting, as well. Therefore, the general figures provided in this paper represent a valuable science-based reference for managers and planners. The study indicates that the new technology can handle bamboo plantations, offering a viable alternative to manual harvesting. Even where manual harvesting techniques are still competitive due to cheap labour, there is a general objective to introduce mechanization in order to improve worker safety ( The authors would like to thank Mr. Guilherme Korte – President of the Brazilian Bamboo Producers Association - APROBAMBU, the tractor manufacturer AGCO and AWHI Brazilian Dealer (Penz-Saur) and the APTA farm management staff.