Ankle fractures are very common, and although algorithms are in place for osseous management, consensus has not been reached regarding treatment of associated ligamentous injuries. Although tibiofibular syndesmotic stabilization can be done using different forms of fixation, the biomedical literature has long emphasized the risk of long-term restriction of ankle mobility with the use of lagged transfixation. However, when reduction cannot be maintained with positional fixation, we found that lagging the syndesmotic screw helped to maintain the reduction without causing functional restriction. In this report, we describe our experience with patients who had undergone lagged tibiofibular transfixation and were available for short- to intermediate-term follow-up to assess ankle function. A total of 31 patients (32.63% of 95 consecutive patients) were available at a mean of 34.87 (range 18 to 52) months to complete the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle-hindfoot questionnaire. The mean score was 88.38 (range 42 to 100) points at a mean follow-up interval of 34.87 (range 18 to 52) months. Of 31 patients, 19 had an AOFAS score of 90 points, 9 an AOFAS score of 80 to 89 points, 2 an AOFAS score of 60 to 69 points, and 1 an AOFAS score of <60 points. Because all syndesmotic screws were placed using the lag technique, unrestricted motion compared with the uninjured limb was used as the endpoint. All subjects had unrestricted motion compared with the uninjured limb, refuting the assertion that lagged syndesmotic screw fixation confers more restriction in ankle kinematics than positional syndesmotic fixation.Crepitus during postoperative month 7 Osteochondral injury Occasional stiffness at 38 months postoperative Constant but moderate pain Moderate restriction Pain with prolonged activity Cannot run at same pace Postoperative ankle arthritis and joint effusion at 1 year postoperative resolved with injection Episodic pain at 32 months postoperative Noncompliance Good range of motion at 4 months postoperative Syndesmotic ossification at 13 months postoperative Moderate pain, edema, and stiffness with running Ambulates with brace Edema and episodic fatigue According to the U.S. National Trauma Center Database (2007 to 2011), ankle fractures accounted for 55.67% of all foot and ankle fractures, and 24.38% of these involved open fractures After receiving approval by the institutional review board, one co-author (T.S.), who was blinded to the results but took no part in patient care, performed a thorough medical record review of all consecutive ankle injuries requiring operative syndesmotic stabilization performed from January 2009 through December 2011 by the primary author (J.J.F.). These cases were identified using the Current Procedural Terminology (American Medical Association, Chicago, IL) code 27829, representing the open treatment of distal tibiofibular joint (syndesmosis). A total of 275 operations potentially eligible (for inclusion in our retrospective cohort) in 273 patients were initially identified using this search criterion. Our inclusion criteria were unstable syndesmotic injuries with or without operative fractures, syndesmotic stabilization only with screws placed using the lag technique, age ≥18 years, the ability to provide consent, closed injuries, and patient availability for evaluation using the AOFAS hindfoot questionnaire. Repair of the syndesmotic rupture was carried out in standard fashion. The surgical approach involved a lateral incision directly over the distal fibular and one over the medial malleolus when indicated ( For the purposes of this investigation, we contacted 31 (32.63%) patients to invite them to complete the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle-hindfoot questionnaire. We sought to evaluate the patients from a long-term functional perspective to determine the presence of any impairment that could be attributed to this technique. Of these 95 patients, 31 (32.63%) were available for evaluation using the AOFAS hindfoot clinical rating system and questionnaire. The remaining 64 patients (67.4%) had relocated and could not logistically participate in this portion of the evaluation. We prioritized the patient subjective reports, focusing on the uninjured contralateral limb as our control and previously described anatomic radiographic parameters Postoperative management consisted of immobilization in a well-padded posterior splint with the ankle in neutral alignment. Range of motion exercises were begun when the wounds had “sealed” and the sutures and/or staples had been removed. Serial radiographs were obtained at weeks 2, 6, 10, 16, and 20 postoperatively unless the patient had been discharged from the practice before this time and then bimonthly until discharge if the patient required additional follow-up examinations. Progressive protected weightbearing was initiated when both radiographic and clinical union were present, as demonstrated by the absence of pain, edema, or erythema at the fracture sites. The mean follow-up period for the 95 patients was 18 (range 10 to 46) months. Of the 95 patients, 55 were male, with a mean age of 49.58 (range 19 to 84) years, and 40 were female, with a mean age of 46.1 (range 19 to 81) years. Of our 95 patients, 39 (41%) had bimalleolar equivalent fractures, defined by the presence of an isolated fibular fracture with a medial clear space >5 mm, and 19 (20%) had trimalleolar equivalent fractures, defined by the presence of an isolated fibular and posterior malleolar fracture with a medial clear space >5 mm and without fracture of the medial malleolus. Twenty-six patients (27.4%) had trimalleolar fractures, 5 (5.3%) had bimalleolar fractures, and 3 (3.2%) had Maisonneuve fractures, 1 of whom also presented with an operative posterior plafond fracture and a deltoid injury resembling a trimalleolar equivalent. No patient had bilateral injuries. Of the 95 patients, 46 (48.4%) had right-sided injuries and 49 (51.6%) left-sided injuries. Of our 95 patients, 7 (7.4%) underwent open reduction and internal fixation of their posterior malleolar fracture, because it involved 25% of the plafond evaluated on the sagittal computed tomography (CT) reconstruction scan. All fractures with a posterior malleolar component underwent CT evaluation. Of the 5 patients with a bimalleolar fractures, 2 (6.5%) were available for the AOFAS questionnaire and reported a score of 90 and 100. The patient with an AOFAS score of 90 complained of episodic weather-related uneasiness but functioned without restrictions. All 5 bimalleolar fractures in this AOFAS group had resulted from a low-energy mechanical fall. At discharge for the 3 patients with a bimalleolar fracture who were not available for the AOFAS questionnaire, 2 had reported no complaints whatsoever. The third, however, had reported subjective and objective stiffness and had presented for intra-articular cortisone ankle injections at 8, 10, and 17 months postoperatively that ultimately resulted in symptomatic relief. Of the 39 patients with a bimalleolar equivalent fracture (41%), 11 (35.5%) were available for the AOFAS questionnaire. Their demographics are listed in the Of the initial 20 patients (21% of the 95 patients) with a trimalleolar equivalent fracture (19 true trimalleolar equivalent fractures by our definition and the third Maisonneuve with a mortise that presented as a trimalleolar equivalent), 8 (25.8%) were available for the AOFAS questionnaire. The mean follow-up period for these 8 patients was 39 (range 31 to 52) months. The mean AOFAS score for these 8 patients was 88.87 (range 64 to 100). Of these 8 patients, 3 had sustained a high-energy injury and 5 a low-energy rotational injury. Despite their scores, the subjective reports early in the postoperative course were less optimistic. Of the low-energy group, 1 patient (20%), who had undergone operative repair of a concurrent posterior malleolar fracture, developed stiffness and pain 6 months postoperatively that was unresponsive to an intra-articular cortisone injection. However, the patient experienced some symptomatic relief after hardware removal at 17 months postoperatively. Another who had concurrently sustained an operative posterior malleolar fracture complained of stiffness at 8 months, but it had resolved at their latest follow-up examination at 42 months. The remaining 3 patients (60%) who had sustained low-energy injuries and were available for the AOFAS questionnaire had had benign and good outcomes as defined by our criteria. In the high-energy group, 2 (66%) of the 3 patients were available for our AOFAS questionnaire. One recorded a score of 85 and complained of episodic weather-related stiffness that resolved with increased activity. The other recorded a score of 89 at the latest follow-up visit at 32 months after undergoing hardware removal and ankle arthroscopy at 7 months postoperatively ( Of the 31 patients available for the AOFAS hindfoot questionnaire evaluation,18 (58.1%) were male and 13 (41.9%) were female. Of the 31 fractures, 16 (51.6%) were right-sided and 15 (48.4%) left-sided. Additional demographic data for this group are listed in the Of the initial 26 patients with a trimalleolar fracture, 8 (25.8%) were available for the AOFAS questionnaire. The mean score was 90.5 (range 60 to 100) for these 8 patients, 6 (75%) of whom had a score of ≥90. These 8 patients had all sustained low-energy rotational injuries, none of whom had sustained an operative posterior malleolar fracture. One patient (12.5%), however, had had a concurrent osteochondral lesion that was visualized intraoperatively and complained of stiffness at 7 months postoperatively. However, at the 38-month follow-up visit, the patient complained of mild and episodic pain with no restrictions otherwise. The demographics of the remaining patients can be reviewed in the Of the initial 95 patients, 3 (3.1%) had had a Maisonneuve injury, 1 of whom was described in the trimalleolar equivalent group, because the patient had also had an operative posterior malleolar fracture. Of the remaining 2 patients, 1 was available for evaluation with the AOFAS questionnaire. He recorded a score of 80 at 23 months and had moderate restriction demonstrated clinically compared with that of the uninjured limb. At the latest follow-up visit at 20 months, the second of these 2 patients presented with no subjective complaints but had documented restriction in range of motion. Of the initial 95 patients, 3 patients (3.1%) had had an isolated syndesmotic injury, with only 1 (3.2%) represented in the entire AOFAS questionnaire group. This patient had sustained a rotational injury and at the latest follow-up visit had complained of incisional pain. Another physician had removed his hardware 13 months after the index procedure. Of the remaining 2 patients, 1 had had completely normal examination findings at 11 months postoperatively but had sustained a fall and began complaining of pain thereafter. That patient underwent complete hardware removal at 22 months postoperatively and at the latest follow-up visit at 24 months reported no complaints. The final patient underwent syndesmotic stabilization and at the last follow-up visit at 11 months had presented with no symptoms and normal physical examination findings, with clinical motion comparable to that of the uninjured contralateral limb. Two of the 95 patients (2.1%) required acute reoperation and were included in the present study. The first reoperation occurred on postoperative day 0 after the patient had fallen on ice, bending the syndesmotic screws. The second underwent reoperation on postoperative day 19 because of frank hardware failure due to gross ambulatory noncompliance. A total of 7 patients (7.4%) underwent hardware removal. One patient underwent hardware removal 6 weeks after the initial stabilization with 2 syndesmotic screws. Radiographs at 3 to 5 weeks postoperatively demonstrated a distal syndesmotic screw moving progressively retrograde, with the proximal syndesmotic screw remaining intact along an anatomic mortise. At the latest follow-up visit, this patient had an AOFAS score of 100. Another patient, not in the AOFAS group, underwent removal of a lateral plate 4 months after the index procedure. The remaining 5 patients required hardware removal well after the postoperative course at a mean of 14.2 (range 7 to 22) months. None of our patients developed complex regional pain syndrome or deep infections. One patient experienced a deep venous thrombotic episode. Also, 1 patient experienced delayed wound healing as a result of a superficial infection that had resolved completely with local care and oral antibiosis at 28 days. Many factors contribute to ankle stiffness and restricted motion following injury. Tornetta et al The presence of posterior malleolar fractures has been associated with poorer outcomes Fractures and syndesmotic injuries occur in closed chain. Under these circumstances, the plafond internally rotates and torques on the fully loaded trochlear of the talus. The incidence of cartilaginous injury, even if macroscopically invisible, is likely greater than reported ( Syndesmotic malreduction is another variable that can influence the outcome of these ankle injuries. Of their 68 patients, Sagi et al Darwish et al Our study had multiple weaknesses. We performed no null hypothesis, because we were unable to evaluate a significant percentage of our initial population. Furthermore, we included no control group to compare the effects of positional transfixation. We did not investigate the effects of stainless versus titanium. However, the published data elucidate no statistically significant difference in this regard No recent follow-up radiographs were available for our patient population who completed our AOFAS questionnaire to ascertain the fate of the ankle joint. Furthermore, the reliability of the objective components of the AOFAS scoring system itself is not been validated or standardized We were not unaware of the outcomes of the study, which could potentially lend significant bias. We performed no comparison or additional statistical analysis of the AOFAS scores regarding the use of lagged syndesmotic fixation, because it was not ultimately our attempt to necessarily coerce our readers into necessarily adopting this technique. A host of reasons can cause stiffness and confound the outcomes after these injuries. The deleterious effects of syndesmotic compression have been theorized but never truly been substantiated. In our cohort, we sought to demonstrate that because all our patients underwent lag syndesmotic compression, according to the historical premise, none should have had a good range of motion. These were certainly not our findings ( In conclusion, although we saw no specific association with the injury mechanism and outcome, we similarly noted no specific detrimental outcome associated with the lagged syndesmotic screw. Our study population was a mixture of patients with good and poor outcomes, despite the use of lagged syndesmotic fixation. The results of our observational investigations could help guide the development of additional randomized controlled trials and prospective studies on appropriate recommendations on tibiofibular syndesmotic stabilization when indicated.  Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at