This study aims to investigate the shear and tensile impact strength of solder ball attachments. Tests were conducted on Ni-doped and non-Ni-doped Sn–0.7wt.% Cu, Sn–37wt.% Pb and Sn–3.0wt.% Ag–0.7wt.% Cu solder ball grid arrays (BGAs) placed on Cu substrates, which were as-reflowed and aged, over a wide range of displacement rates from 10 to 4000mm/s in shear and from 1 to 400mm/s in tensile tests. Ni additions to the Sn–0.7wt.% Cu solders has slowed the growth of the interface intermetallic compounds (IMCs) and made the IMC layer morphology smooth. As-reflowed Ni-doped Sn–0.7wt.% Cu BGA joints show superior properties at high speed shear and tensile impacts compared to the non-Ni-doped Sn–0.7wt.% Cu and Sn–3.0wt.% Ag–0.7wt.% Cu BGAs. Sn–3.0wt.% Ag–0.7wt.% Cu BGAs exhibit the least resistance in both shear and tensile tests among the four compositions of solders, which may result from the cracks in the IMC layers introduced during the reflow processes.Rapid growth of microelectronics, photonics, biomedical, micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), and nano-electromechanical systems (NEMS) technologies have facilitated the development of new micro-interconnection materials, which play a significant role in reliability of these systems. Sn–Pb solder alloys have been widely used because of their low melting temperatures and good wetting behavior on several substrates such as Cu and Ni. However, the recent health and environmental concerns on lead toxicity in Sn–Pb solders lead to much effort for seeking lead-free solder alloys with suitable soldering characteristics and mechanical properties Ball grid array (BGA) technology has attracted a great deal of attention in high-volume package production for the last few years. BGA solder joints provide both mechanical strength and electrical conductivity, and consequently, play an important role in the connection of electronic components to printed circuit boards A number of analytical methods have been proposed so far on shear impact failure behavior of BGA solder joints The formation of intermetallic compounds (IMCs) at the solder–substrate interface is essential in the manufacturing of reliable solder joints. The IMCs formed at the interface are a prerequisite for good solder ability and wettability. However, the IMCs are generally brittle and easily fail. It is frequently observed that fracture occurs around the IMC layers between the solder joint and the bonding pads In the present study, the shear and tensile behavior of Ni-doped and non-Ni-doped Sn–Cu solder, Sn–Ag–Cu solder and conventional Sn–Pb solder alloy BGA joints were investigated using a high speed impact tester. A new ball impact failure model has been proposed which analyzes the shear and tensile fracture behavior of the BGA joints in terms of the failure-starting (crack initiating) points based on examination of the force–displacement curves and observation of fracture surfaces. The effect of heat treatments such as number of reflow cycles and aging time on the impact strength of the solder BGA joints was investigated with consideration of the IMC layer thickness and morphology. The effect of displacement rates on the impact behaviour was also investigated. The test samples were solder ball grid arrays (BGAs) reflowed on the organic solderability preservative (OSP)-finished 30 A microstructure observation was conducted using an SEM (JSM-6460LA, JEOL, Japan) with an acceleration voltage of 20 The shear and tensile impact tests were conducted on the solder balls using a high speed impact tester (Dage-4000HS Bond tester, Richardson Electronics Ltd.). The test speed (displacement rates) was controlled from 10 to 4000  Based on the SEM observations of all the samples, the thickness and morphology of the IMC layers were investigated. In this study, the thickness of the IMC layers indicates the sum of the thickness of both IMCs. An average thickness was calculated with the cross-section area of the IMC layers divided by the length along the Cu substrates. For the effect of Ni addition into solders, Laurila et al. It has been reported in some studies It is seen in The failure behavior of BGA joints subjected to shear impact loadings can be classified into three types in terms of the failure-starting (crack initiating) points. These failure-starting points determine the failure types. In the CS-failure ( A DD-failure occurs as a result of the large ductile shear deformation of solder alloys between shear impact tools and substrates as shown in   SAC BGAs show the most brittle fracture (CI-failure) among all the samples. Among as-reflowed samples only the SAC samples show a CI-(brittle) failure at high displacement rates. Also the aged SAC samples show the CI-failure at high displacement rates. The maximum force of both as-reflowed and aged SAC samples decreases with the increase of displacement rates at high displacement rates. This means that the resistance to the crack initiation and fracture toughness of the IMC layer in SAC decreases with increasing displacement rates in both as-reflowed and aged samples. It was seen from SEM observations that many cracks exist in the IMC (Cu Now attention is paid to the high speed deformation behavior (at 4000   For as-reflowed samples, with increasing reflow times, which leads to increasing thickness of IMC layers and increasing morphology parameter, For aged samples, the morphology of the IMC layers becomes smoother and the difference in morphology roughness among the samples of different solder compositions become smaller with increasing aging time. Even so, there is a large difference in both shear and tensile strength among the samples with different solder compositions. Therefore, it is a reasonable conclusion that the influence of morphology on the shear and tensile strength is small. The thickness of the IMC layers increases with increasing aging time. The thickness may affect the shear and tensile strength in aged samples. Shear strength at high displacement rates basically increases with increasing aging time, while tensile strength at high displacement rates basically decreases with increasing aging time as shown in Finally we discuss the analytical model for shear and tensile impact failure behavior of BGA joints. So far a number of analytical models have been proposed for high speed impact behavior of BGA solder joints The shear and tensile impact behavior of the SC, SCN, SAC and SP BGAs placed on Cu substrates subjected to different number of reflows and aging time was investigated. From this we conclude: The thickness of IMC layers in all the solder samples increases with increasing number of reflows and aging time. The thickness of IMC layers in SCN and SP BGA joints are thinner than those in SC and SAC BGA joints for almost all conditions. The morphology of the IMC layer in SCN solder joints was the smoothest among any of the compositions of BGA joints. The morphology generally become rougher with increasing number of reflows, while the morphology become smoother with increasing aging time. The impact failure behavior of the BGA joints was classified into three types in shear and two types in tensile loadings in terms of the crack initiating points. Three types of failure in shear loading include a crack initiating in the IMC layers (CI), a crack initiating in solder balls (CS), and a failure occurring as a result of large ductile deformation of solder balls (DD). Two types of failure in tensile loading include a crack initiating in the IMC layers (CI) and a ductile failure with necking in the solder balls (DD). The shear impact tests showed as-reflowed SCN BGAs show superior properties at high speed shear impacts compared to the BGAs with the other compositions. Among the four compositions of solder alloys tested, SAC BGAs exhibited the least resistance to the shear impact loadings. It was also found from the tensile impact tests that as-reflowed samples of SCN and SP show superior properties at all displacement rates. Both as–reflowed and aged SAC BGA samples show a CI-(brittle)failure at all displacement rates. Both loading conditions caused an altered behavior of all the solder samples with aging treatments. For as-reflowed samples, with increasing reflow times, which leads to increasing IMC layer thickness and rougher morphology, the shear and tensile strength basically become lower in the samples with all the compositions. For aged samples, it is considered that the formation of Cu3Sn layer and generation of Kirkendall voids had a larger influence on the impact strength rather than the thickness and morphology of IMC layers. Particularly the effect of Kirkendall voids on tensile impact strength is considered to be large. This research was conducted under an international cooperative research program between the University of Queensland, Australia and Nihon Superior Co. Ltd., Japan. The authors thank Mr. J. Read of The University of Queensland for useful discussions and sample preparations.