This paper answers two questions: “What impact have natural resources had on the spread of the HIV epidemic so far?” and “What role can natural resource rents play in order to finance the long-run response to HIV/AIDS?” Using a panel dataset covering 137 countries from 1990 until 2008, de Soysa and Gizelis (2013) provided evidence in Social Science & Medicine that oil-rich countries are more deeply affected by the HIV and TB epidemics. They concluded that government of resource-rich countries failed to implement effective public policies for dealing with the epidemics. In this paper, I show that their results are (1) not robust, (2) based on an inappropriate choice of dependent variable and (3) spurious because series are non-stationary. After correcting for these issues, I find no robust relationship between resource rents and the spread of HIV and TB. The paper concludes by emphasizing the potential of natural resources rents for financing the long-term liability brought about by the HIV/AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa.Since the 2008 financial turmoil, international HIV assistance stagnated and AIDS expenditures remain short of the global target of US$ 22–24 billion in annual financial resources ( In line with the analysis of DG, this paper aims to answer two intermingled questions: “Have natural resource rents had an impact on the spread of the HIV/AIDS and TB epidemics so far?” and “What role can natural resource rents play in order to finance the long-run response to HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa?” The analysis proceeds in three steps. First, I argue that the empirical analysis of DG suffers from problems which cast doubts on the existence of a resource curse on HIV/AIDS. I show that the positive association between oil rents and the spread of the HIV and TB epidemics is spurious because the dependent variables (HIV prevalence, death rate from AIDS and TB prevalence) and explanatory variables (oil rents per capita) are non-stationary. I argue that the expected impact of good public action on HIV prevalence is ambiguous in the short run, which makes the results of DG impossible to interpret. Death rates from AIDS and TB prevalence are affected by similar problems. In a second step, I use different empirical methods to correct these flaws and find no specific relationship between oil rents and the spread of HIV/AIDS. Finally, I discuss the potential of natural resource rents for financing the long-term liability brought about by the scaling-up of ART in sub-Saharan Africa. In particular, the analysis identifies countries where an efficient management of natural resource rents could provide the necessary fiscal space for scaling-up ART coverage in the future. The objective of DG was to assess the impact of resource abundance on the spread of epidemics. Their analysis considered three dependent variables: the logarithm of HIV prevalence, the logarithm of the death rate from AIDS, and the logarithm of TB prevalence. The main explanatory variable is the oil rents per capita in current US$ from the World Bank environmental accounting indicators. The control variables considered are the logarithm of income per capita taken from the World Development Indicators of 2010, and index of democracy, the incidence in the current year of an episode of civil war and the cumulative years of peace since the last episode of civil war or independence, and finally, the average prevalence of HIV in neighboring countries. The main results of DG are presented in Panel A of In order to assess the robustness of DG's results to outliers, I repeated their analysis by excluding each country of the sample in turn. Interestingly, only a few countries are responsible for the positive relationship between oil rents per capita and HIV prevalence, namely Sudan, Equatorial Guinea and South Africa. The coefficient associated with oil-rents per capita (log) is greatly reduced and becomes not statistically different from zero when Sudan or Equatorial Guinea is removed from the sample. If these three countries are jointly removed, the coefficient associated with oil rents per capita becomes negative and statistically different from zero (p-value = 0.035). Taken together, these figures suggest that the positive relationship between HIV prevalence and oil rents per capita may be spurious, driven by the non-stationarity of some of the series. Not taking into account the dynamical structure and the non-stationarity of the series may result in a problem of nonsense or spurious regression ( Several tests have been developed in order to assess the presence of unit roots in panel data. Here, we focus on the Im-Pesaran-Shin test, the Maddala–Wu test and the Hadri LM test because they allow for heterogeneous auto-regressive coefficients between cross-sectional observations ( Recently, stationarity and unit root tests have been extended to take into account structural breaks. However, these tests suffer from problems of size and low power when the time dimension is short, implying that their results have to be interpreted with caution. Applied to our data, the panel stationarity test of Even if series have unit roots, a long-term relationship can exist between them if series are cointegrated. Unfortunately, cointegration tests also suffer from serious problems of size and power when the time dimension of the data is limited (see e.g. In the presence of unit roots, a solution often used to avoid the measurement of a nonsense relationship consists in first-differentiating the data until the series are stationary ( Non-stationarity can also arise because of the presence of time trends. In order to test for the presence of time trends, I regressed each country series against a time variable and its square. Results are presented in Results from DG justify the presence of a resource curse on HIV by the fact that “rulers in resource-wealthy states are more likely to neglect public goods provision, such as health, and neglect effective public action”. In their main specification, the dependent variable is the logarithm of the prevalence. However, the choice of HIV prevalence as a dependent variable is misleading because the impact of good/bad policies on prevalence is ambiguous. The optimal response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic is a mix of prevention and ART. Prevention is expected to reduce HIV incidence and HIV prevalence. The impact of treatment is both to increase life expectancy and to reduce infectiousness. In the short and medium run, ART should increase prevalence through increased life expectancy. In the long run, however, prevalence should be reduced because of the reduced infectiousness of HIV-positive individuals on ART. The total impact of an effective public response to the HIV epidemic on HIV prevalence is therefore ambiguous in the short and medium run. A positive correlation between oil rents per capita and HIV prevalence can be interpreted as a neglect of public goods provision, but also as a consequence of increased access to HIV treatment. Furthermore, the fact that HIV prevalence is a stock while natural resource rents are a flow has implications on long-run dynamics. Even if a country implements sound public policies, its HIV prevalence can be high because of past negligence. HIV prevention is expected to have a long-run impact on HIV prevalence by affecting behavior in the long run and by reducing the pool of infected and infectious individuals. Regressing HIV prevalence, which is a stock, on a flow measure of oil production is therefore problematic as it will fail to control for these long-run dynamics. The expected impacts of sound public policies on death rates from AIDS and TB prevalence are less ambiguous than for HIV prevalence. Both prevention and treatment should reduce the death rate from AIDS. First-line treatment against TB is of shorter duration than long-life HIV treatments, implying that both prevention and treatment against TB should reduce TB prevalence. However, as for HIV prevalence, prevention is expected to have a long-run impact on death rates from AIDS and on TB prevalence. The median time from HIV infection to AIDS death without ART is about 11.2 years ( HIV incidence is less likely to be affected by these problems. Both prevention and ART treatment should reduce HIV incidence. The link between sound public policies and HIV incidence is expected to be measurable in the short-run. According to stationarity and unit root tests, HIV incidence needs to be differentiated twice to become stationary. Most country series are characterized by a quadratic trend. In panel D of 2, the regressions in first- and second-differences and the regressions with quadratic trends are replicated for HIV incidence. There is no robust evidence of a resource curse on HIV. Of course, past policies can also have a long-lasting impact on HIV incidence both because prevention can have long-run effects on behavior and because HIV incidence is highly correlated with HIV prevalence in accordance with epidemiological models ( The analysis of the previous section showed that a rigorous assessment of the relationship between natural resource abundance and the spread of the HIV epidemic should: (1) be based on indicators that are not ambiguous, (2) account for the epidemiology of the HIV epidemic and capture the long-run impact of prevention and treatment on its spread, and finally (3) be based on a rigorous method which is not subject to the problem of spurious regression and does not remove all the variation in HIV series. This section proposes an alternative specification which aims to solve these challenges in a single move. The method proposed is inspired from the work of In line with this, three different dependent variables will be used in this section: the total number of people ever infected by the HIV virus, the total number of people who died from AIDS and the total number of people who developed TB since 1990. These indicators are constructed as follows. First, the total number of individuals which were infected by the HIV virus is simply the sum of HIV incidence between 1990 and 2008, plus the prevalence in 1990. The second indicator is the sum of death rates from AIDS since 1990. The last indicator is the aggregated TB prevalence since 1990. Contrary to HIV prevalence, these new indicators are expected to be negatively affected by both prevention and treatment. Three “stock” measures of natural resource wealth will be used as independent variable. The first two series are the sum of natural resource rents per capita in constant $US over 1990–2008, using DG data and World Bank data on “Adjusted Net Saving” respectively. The third measure is based on oil wealth data from Two estimation strategies were implemented. First, I ran simple cross-sectional regressions with the full sample of countries. However, this estimation method is known to be sensitive to the omitted-variable bias as it compares countries that are different in many dimensions. The second method aims at minimizing this risk by imposing “tight fixed effect” ( It should be emphasized that these estimation strategies are not subject to the problem of non-stationarity and are expected to preserve some of the variability necessary to measure any significant effect. For these reasons, the proposed strategies seem more prudent than methods using the panel dimension of the data. The results of OLS estimates are presented in In Panel A, the dependent variable is aggregated measure of HIV incidence (log). The coefficients associated with oil wealth are negative and not significant. Overall, the results are consistent with the absence of a resource curse on HIV/AIDS. Similar results are obtained when the dependent variable is the total number of death from AIDS (panel B) or the aggregated TB prevalence (panel C). Among control variables, results show that the incidence of a civil conflict in 1990 seems to have a weakly significant negative impact on the spread of HIV. This may be explained by the fact that civil conflicts reduce overall the possibilities of engaging in risky sexual behavior, and this, despite too frequent abuses committed during conflict situations. In line with the literature, I find that poverty is an important driver of the spread of TB (e.g. These results are robust to alternative specifications. I included interaction variables between natural resource wealth per capita and indexes of democracy, control of corruption, law and order, GDP per capita, education spending or immigration rates. No robust results emerge when interaction terms are included in the regression. Considering only African countries or using the between-estimator with the panel data gives similar results. The latter method is not subject to the problem of non-stationarity. In the previous section, we have seen that natural resources have not yet had a significant impact on the spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Indeed, before the large scaling-up of antiretroviral therapies in developing countries, the spread of HIV/AIDS has mainly been driven by epidemiological and behavioral factors. This does not mean that natural resources will not have an important role to play in the future. Indeed, the fiscal space which may be potentially created via an efficient exploitation of natural resources offers a real opportunity for resource-rich countries to finance their long-term response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. This section discusses this opportunity in the context of sub-Saharan Africa, with a focus on the long-run cost of ART. In a context of increasing access to cheap antiretroviral drugs, more and more developing countries have committed to universal access to ART. Despite these good intentions, ART coverage in sub-Saharan Africa is mixed, ranging from 1% in Madagascar to more than 90% in Botswana, Cape Verde and Namibia according to 2012 UNAIDS estimates. Funds are of course necessary for financing universal access to ART treatment ( Given the recent flat trend characterizing international funding for HIV/AIDS, sub-Saharan African countries will have to increase their own contribution to fulfill the objective of universal ART coverage. Within this context, natural resource rents may be a credible solution for creating fiscal space. This possibility has not been considered in recent studies assessing how fiscal space could be created to increase domestic financing of HIV programs ( The first group of countries includes Central African Republic, Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Swaziland and Lesotho. In these countries, the prevalence of HIV is so high compared to their GDP that the cost of universal ART coverage represents more than 1% of their GDP and more than 20% of their natural resource rents. Given this high cost, natural resource rents are not expected to be sufficient for financing the response to HIV/AIDS in these countries. If ART is scaled-up, international aid will most likely have to cover a large part of cost. For a second group of countries comprising Guinea-Bissau, Togo, Uganda, Rwanda, Botswana and Kenya, the diagnosis is slightly more encouraging. The burden of the HIV/AIDS epidemic is relatively important in these countries, implying that the cost of universal ART coverage is non-negligible compared to size of their economy. These countries would typically have to dedicate between 0.5% and 1% of their GDP in order to finance alone the universal coverage of ART. For them, natural resource rents may provide a realistic but limited source of financing: more than 10% of their natural resource rents would have to be allocated to ART to cover the full cost of universal ART coverage. For the last group, accounting for more than half of sub-Saharan African countries, the diagnostic which can be established from Three qualifying remarks should be made to temper this conclusion. First, as the majority of high-prevalence countries are poor, and given the numerous needs brought about by poverty, rents from natural resources will most likely not be entirely affected to the response to HIV/AIDS. Tax collection in many of these countries remains challenging. Given these difficulties, international aid for HIV/AIDS will remain essential, at least in the medium run. Second, and in line with the paper of Using a panel dataset of countries between 1990 and 2008, This study is subject to a number of limitations which relate to data availability and quality. The short time dimension of the panel dataset (T = 19) implies that most stationarity, unit root and cointegration tests suffer from serious problems of size and power. This explains why different tests may reach conflicting conclusions. HIV and TB series are estimated on the basis of epidemiological models and are hence subject to measurement errors ( The main contributions of this paper are the following. First, it shows that the results of The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at