The Cunéo and Picot fracture-dislocation is an atypical trimalleolar fracture-dislocation of the ankle with unique anatomopathologic and radiographic features, which has not been reported in English literature. We report a case of a 42-year-old woman that was diagnosed with a trimalleolar fracture-dislocation and treated surgically with an open reduction and osteosynthesis of the lateral and medial malleolus. At one-month follow-up, X-rays showed secondary displacement of the medial malleolus requiring revision surgery. The patient complained of persisting pain, with X-rays showing no signs of apparent fracture displacement. A CT scan performed after hardware removal 10 months after trauma showed severe ankle arthritis and fracture malunion at the level of the syndesmosis. The patient was retrospectively diagnosed with a Cunéo and Picot fracture-dislocation.
                  The treatment of trimalleolar fractures is discussed, especially regarding the correct indication of synthesis of the posterior malleolus. Cunéo and Picot fractures are usually inherently unstable even if the posterior malleolar fragment may be small and can easily be recognized from standard X-rays. Whenever this type of fracture is not correctly recognized and managed by osteosynthesis of only the medial and lateral malleolus, clinical outcomes and radiographic follow-ups tend to be unsatisfactory. Fixation of the posterior malleolus is indicated in the management of Cunéo and Picot fractures.
                  
                     Level of clinical evidence: 4.Ankle fractures represent a rather common pathology, with an incidence of approximately 187 fractures per 100,000 people each year in the U.S. This manuscript presents the case of a patient with trimalleolar fracture dislocation of the ankle treated by osteosynthesis of the lateral and medial malleolus alone. The patient showed severe ankle arthritis after a ten-month follow-up. In a retrospective critical analysis of the patient and limited clinical outcomes after treatment, the patient was diagnosed with an atypical ankle fracture described in French literature as fracture-dislocation of Cunéo and Picot In 1923, the French surgeons Cunéo and Picot described a trimalleolar ankle fracture-dislocation with unique features. In this fracture, the posterior tibial margin extends from the medial malleolus to the sindesmosis laterally. The posterior tibial margin together with the postero-inferior tibio-fibular ligament (PITFL) and the fractured medial malleolus stay together as a whole and maintain regular contact with the talus that is dislocated posteriorly The diagnosis of this specific fracture can be easily made from standard antero-posterior X-rays looking for three distinct overlying osteochondral lines from distal to proximal: the anterior margin of the tibial pilon, the talar dome and the posterior marginal fragment as well as a doubled joint line of the medial malleolus Clinical outcomes can prove to be limiting, due to improper union at the syndesmosis or secondary displacement caused by the inherent instability of the fracture, leading to catastrophic failure of treatment. In order to provide a rigid osteosynthesis of the posterior mallelous in this kind of fracture, anatomic reduction at the syndesmotic joint as well as stability of fixation can prove to be the treatment of choice. A 42 At 1 month follow-up, X-rays showed secondary displacement of the medial malleolus ( Fractures of the posterior malleolus were first described by Cooper Indications for surgical fixation of the posterior malleolus in trimalleolar ankle fractures seem to be influenced by the degree of initial displacement, quality of fracture reduction and by the residual talar subluxation after lateral and medial malleolus fixation has been performed The ankle joint has osseous constraints (medial malleolus, lateral malleolus and posterior malleolus) and ligamentous constraints (sindesmotic complex composed of the antero-inferior tibio-fibular ligament (AITFL), PITFL and interosseous ligament). The Cuneo–Picot fracture-dislocation is a damage of the lateral, medial and posterior malleolus involving the syndesmotic complex. In order to achieve an anatomic reduction of the posterior malleolus at the level of the syndesmosis a posterior fixation is mandatory in order to re-establish a correct ankle biomechanics and fracture healing. The fracture-dislocation of Cunéo and Picot is typically associated with fracture of the lateral malleolus and rupture of the AITFL. This type of fracture is inherently unstable, even if the posterior malleolar fragment size is smaller than 25% of the articular surface. The study by Clare The Cuneo–Picot fracture-dislocation has distinct radiological features and whenever diagnosed on X-ray does not necessarily require further imaging. However, CT scans should be considered for a better analysis of the posterior malleolar fragment, by providing a precise definition of the size of fragment, fracture pattern, cartilage comminution and articular congruency at the syndesmotic joint. The study by Haraguchi et al. The Cunéo and Picot fracture-dislocation appears with a significant degree of initial displacement of the posterior malleolus together with the talus at the moment of trauma and a rupture of the AITFL with associated fracture of the fibula. In these cases, fixation of the medial malleolus alone does not guarantee reduction and stability of the posterior fragment that forms a continuum with the medial malleolus itself. This instability may lead to joint incongruence and subsequent talar subluxation at the syndesmotic joint, evolving in premature arthritis as demonstrated by this case report. An accurate understanding of the fracture pattern is imperative when dealing with ankle traumatology, especially with trimalleolar fracture types. The fracture-dislocation of Cunéo and Picot was masterfully described in 1923, however, has never been reported in current English literature. This type of fracture-dislocation can easily be recognizable from standard X-rays. Proper diagnosis is important to insure appropriate treatment. True surgical indications for these types of lesions involve fixation of the posterior malleolus. None reported. All authors do not have any conflict of interests or financial disclosures to declare.