Taconite (iron ore) pellets abrade during handling, forming large quantities of fine particulate matter that are easily carried by the air as dust. This dust must be controlled in order to meet air quality standards for particles finer than 10µm (PM10). It has been assumed that the most effective method for suppressing dust is to spray the pellets with surfactant solutions that maximize the wetting ability of the fine particulates. However, surfactants that provide the most rapid wetting of iron ore have not proven to be highly effective taconite dust suppressants. In order to determine what factors were actually important in controlling taconite dust, a novel dust tower apparatus was used. In these studies, improving the suppressants ability to engulf fine particles did not result in PM10 reductions. Furthermore, surface area coverage did not appear to be a significant factor in iron ore dust suppression. Using a hygroscopic reagent which retained moisture (and actually made the iron ore wet more slowly) reduced PM10 by as much as 85%.The inadvertent generation of airborne particulate matter (PM) at iron ore processing plants can be a significant problem. During handling and transportation, the taconite pellets produced at the plants are subjected to abrasion which results in the generation of large quantities of fine material ( Previous dust suppression studies have focused on materials like coal ( Various methods for evaluating the wetting ability of a material have been used to characterize suppressant effectiveness. These methods include contact angle measurements, fine particle engulfment rates, and suppressant penetration into particle beds (or soakability). It has been assumed that the important factors in dust suppression with water sprays are: (1) low contact angle, (2) rapid particle engulfment, and (3) effective suppressant penetration ( For a suppressant to be effective in reducing airborne particulate matter, it must weigh the particles down to prevent them from becoming airborne. This can be achieved in two ways. First, the suppressant itself coats the individual particles that it wets, increasing their weight. This increased weight means they will be less likely to become airborne. Secondly, individual particles agglomerate together through capillary adhesion forces. The agglomerates retain the fine particulates, which prevent them from becoming airborne. This particular aspect has been explored in literature for coal dust studies ( capillary adhesion force particle radius suppressant surface tension contact angle The purpose of this work was to conduct systematic studies to characterize both the wetting characteristics, particle adhesion forces, and dust suppressant behavior as they related to dust suppression. To achieve this, a novel dust tower apparatus was used which allowed the investigators to characterize a dust suppressants' ability to reduce airborne dust. Utilizing this novel method, the authors were able to identify which wetting characteristics and dust suppressant properties were critical in achieving effective dust control. Iron ore taconite pellets were obtained from a processing facility located in the Midwest United States, identified as “Plant D”. The sample, received in a 208 Iron ore tumble test fines were received from two processing facilities in the Midwest United States (Plant A and Plant D). Each sample (11 Contact angle analysis is a popular and simple method for evaluating the wetting behavior of a material. This method is outlined in It has been argued that effectiveness of dust control is maximized when the suppressant engulfs the particles very rapidly. This means that in the Walker Sink test, the material should sink very rapidly. Previous studies have examined materials like coal ( The Walker Sink test apparatus is outlined in The last set of wetting experiments involved a soakability test which measured how quickly a liquid droplet soaked into a bed of dry particles. This type of method has been previously used to determine how well a suppressant engulfed fine coal particles for enhanced coal dust control ( To examine how effective various reagents were in reducing respirable dust from iron ore, a novel dust tower was used. A diagram of this unique apparatus is given in An important aspect of these dust tower studies was that the actual wetting rate of the iron ore particles did not factor into the studies. These studies examined how the suppressant behaved under equilibrium conditions. The material was treated by placing the sample into an angled drum, and rotating it slowly to tumble the sample while spraying a measured quantity of the suppressant solution onto it. This continually exposed fresh surface to the suppressant spray, to ensure thorough coverage. The sample was then allowed to cure (equilibrate) and then tested in the drop tower. Thus how quickly the suppressant wetted the iron ore was not a factor, but, how effectively it wetted (surface coverage, ability to engulf fine particles) was still a possible factor in reducing particulate matter. Since particle adhesion theory indicates that reagents which lower the surface tension of the suppressant cause a decrease in the adhesive forces, it was possible that the wetting enhancement could be counteracted by a weakening in the adhesion forces holding the particles together. From these studies, the relevance of suppressant particle engulfment and particle adhesion was evaluated. Once the material was treated and cured, the material was dropped in the dust tower. Curing of the treated sample was accomplished by allowing the sprayed material to sit for a fixed period of time under ambient conditions. This was done to ensure the amount of time transpired from treatment to subsequent testing in the dust tower to be consistent and controlled. It is important to point out that following this procedure eliminated the effects of the wetting rate but left the impacts of the extent of wetting. This meant that how well the suppressant wetted the material (under equilibrium) was being tested on the overall impacts to dust suppression. The effects of the wetting rate (kinetics) on dust suppression were not examined in this study. As the material fell through the column, it struck several flat plates (simulates multiple impacts) and was passed through a counter current air stream which carried the airborne dust through the column, into a duct for analysis. A nozzle located inside the air duct of the tower extracted a sample of the airborne dust and transported it to a TSI Dust Trak® which determined the PM In distilled water, the contact angle of polished iron ore pellets was 18 The acetylenic glycol surfactant significantly reduced the wetting time of iron ore tumble test fines. This reagent was extremely effective even at low concentrations of 0.1 Calcium and magnesium chloride increased the wetting time of fine iron ore particles. This means that this reagent inhibited the ability of the suppressant in engulfing fine iron ore particles even though it was found to reduce the contact angle of iron ore (see Five different liquid solutions were examined to determine their ability soak into a bed of iron ore particles (distilled water, acetylenic glycol (2.4 Although each of the surfactants (acetylenic glycol, alkyl esters, and polypropylene glycol methyl ether), had previously been shown to enhance the wetting ability of the iron ore fines, they were not effective in reducing PM The decrease in the interparticle adhesion forces did not cause an increase in material dustiness. The hygroscopic reagents, calcium and magnesium chloride, were very effective in reducing PM Although surfactants did not show any benefit in suppression of moderate quantities of iron ore dust, it was still unknown if there was a benefit for covering high surface areas with small amounts of suppressants. One fundamental property of surfactants is they reduce the surface tension of the suppressant. This not only leads to improved wetting as theory indicates, it also allows a given quantity of suppressant to cover a larger area. The previous experiments were conducted with 10 Wetting enhancement, surface tension, and interparticle adhesion have been believed to be critical factors in effectively controlling airborne dust using water sprays. However, in each case, no clear correlation was observed with actual dust suppression in the dust tower. It was previously believed that lowering the contact angle would improve the suppressants effectiveness. However as shown in Reducing the suppressant surface tension was believed to aid not only in reducing contact angles and Walker Sink time; it would also allow a given quantity of water to cover a larger surface. If this was the case for iron ore, a downward trend in material dustiness should have been observed as the surface tension decreased. However, this trend was not observed. This result indicated that surface area coverage is also not a primary concern for iron ore dust control using water sprays. The relation of surface tension to the dustiness of iron ore is given in Lastly, interparticle adhesion was examined. It had been argued that one of the reasons surfactants were ineffective (for coal) was due to reductions in the interparticle adhesion forces holding the particles together ( The most obvious trend was that the hygroscopic reagents, as a class, were more effective PM Utilizing surfactants to lower the surface tension of dust suppressants reduced contact angles on iron oxide surfaces, and improved fine particle imbibition kinetics for iron ore. However, these effects did not lead to reductions in PM These results indicated that neither the ease of wetting from a standpoint of lower contact angles and fine particle engulfment, nor the ability of the suppressant to cover a large area was a primary concern in selecting dust suppressants for iron ore. Reagents such as calcium and magnesium chloride, which prevent moisture loss, were much more effective methods in reducing airborne particulate matter from iron ore. From this work, it was clear that the real issue for air quality at iron ore facilities was not a wetting rate issue. What really mattered was keeping the material wet and preventing moisture loss. Also, the effectiveness of a dust suppressant cannot be reliably predicted from measurements of parameters such as contact angle and particle engulfment. Any realistic measurements of dust suppressant performance must therefore be carried out using test methods that reproduce the phenomena that are actually responsible for dust generation. The subcontract from the Northshore Mining Co. to perform this work as part of their project for the Minnesota Iron Ore Cooperative Research Program is gratefully acknowledged, as are the contributions of John Engesser and Pete Clevenstine of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. This work was also supported by the