Ammoniacal leaching followed by solvent extraction is practiced for the production of copper sulfate from copper dross generated in lead refinery during the pyro metallurgical production of lead. Copper is leached from its dross as Tetra-amino-Copper (II)-carbonate complex in the solution. Copper leached solution is guided through the solvent extraction process, using LIX-54 as a solvent and sulphuric acids as stripping agent to generate copper sulfate solution of the desired grade. Due to limited availability of LIX-54, performances of other solvents having a base of cinnamate and β diketone groups are evaluated. Both the solvents and LIX-54 have been compared in fields of effective organic concentration, effective loading, extraction kinetics, extraction isotherms, stripping activity and the optimized values are 20% organic concentration, 20g/l Cu, 35s, one theoretical stage for extraction and stripper acidity of 120g/l respectively. Under these conditions, >98% of copper has been extracted.To extract copper from secondary materials, ammoniacal leaching route is being followed in some industries. During this process copper is leached as blue color copper – ammoniacal complex, which is separated out as CuSO During extraction, ammonia ligands are replaced and a new chelate complex with diketone base is formed in an organic phase. Copper (II) extraction from ammonia solution with diketone extractant is described as below ( In few industries, LIX 54-100 solvent is being used for solvent extraction of ammoniacal leached copper solution. The copper dross is generated during metal refining operations in lead pyrometallurgy. The limited availability of this solvent had not only restricted copper sulfate production via this route but also forced to swap for acidic treatment augmenting new capital expenditures. New solvents have been explored to serve as an alternate for LIX 54-100 to continue within existing flowsheet. The present paper emphasizes on performance evaluation for Cinnamate based mixture and β diketone based solvents in comparison to LIX 54-100. Solvents like LIX 84 are also widely used for copper extraction but certain constraints like loading of NH The paper comprises of results for extraction of copper (II) from ammonia pregnant leach solutions (PLS)/Aq, extraction kinetics, effective organic loading, extraction isotherm, stripping characteristics. The finally optimized parameters have been validated on a bench scale mixer-settler for both the solvents and implemented in the full-scale commercial plant. Complete Study has been done considering plant operating conditions and equipment availability. This work has generated productive results under which basing on cost economics, β diketone based solvent has been chosen for plant level operation from Dec 2014. The plant level operation is quite successful and till date, it is running smoothly. The changeover from LIX 54-100 to diketone based solvent has shown a 33% increase in production volumes of copper sulfate with an annual revenue savings of 37.5%. An aqueous feed solution used in solvent extraction studies is named as pregnant leach solutions (PLS)/Aq. The analysis of PLS/Aqueous is found to be (Cu 13.8 The aqueous solutions were analyzed for copper concentrations by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) Varian 240 FS. The concentration of copper in the organic phase was calculated from a difference between its initial metal concentrations in PLS and its concentration in aqueous at fixed organic to the aqueous (O/A) phase ratios. During the course of experiments, measurements of pH were carried out with Eutech pH Extraction of copper (II) was performed with the use of received solvents diluted in diluent Arol-light (FP 105 Extraction efficiency increased upon increasing the O/A ratio at a fixed organic concentration. Results in Trials were performed at constant organic concentration and phase ratios to determine the optimum time required for the maximum amount of copper extraction. Aqueous Samples were analyzed for cumulative time intervals and comparison of both solvents was mentioned with a plot. β diketone (20% O/A 1:1), cinnamate (20% O/A 1:1) and LIX-54 has shown the similar behavior for extraction kinetics. Maximum extraction equilibrium is observed during 30–35 Series of experimental trials were carried to determine the maximum copper loading capacity of the solvent with varied organic concentrations keeping O/A phase ratio constant. For a selected concentration same organic has been utilized for loading with fresh aqueous in each contact. The mixing time of 35 Although, in the case of β diketone with 20% organic concentration, maximum copper loading of 20.1 With 20% cinnamate organic concentration, maximum copper loading of 20.1 The extraction isotherm defines the maximum amount of copper which can be removed from the PLS for each organic to aqueous volumetric ratio (A/O) ratio). Extraction of copper (II) from aqueous was performed with the use of chosen solvents diluted in diluent Arol-light. The concentration of solvents in the organic phase was varied viz. 20% (v/v), and 25% (v/v). Extraction was performed at ambient temperature. Aqueous (A) and organic (O) phases were mixed for 35 The efficiency of examined systems was estimated considering few parameters, namely organic phase loading, the concentration of copper (II) in the aqueous and number of theoretical stages required to reach target extraction. In Cinnamate based solvent, two systems having 20% and 25% organic concentrations were observed. For 20% system, the maximum extraction efficiency of 99.9% was observed at A/O ratio of 1:1. With this ratio, one theoretical stage was obtained, as shown in For β diketone, two systems with organic concentrations 20% ( Both the plots above, verify that for each extraction stage, increase in metal concentration is equal to the product of a decrease in metal concentration in aqueous phase and slope of the operating line ( The effect of O/A ratio on copper extraction rate for both the organics with different concentrations has been plotted. O/A ratio has been varied from 1/10 to 10/1 at ambient temperature without any alteration in initial pH. A similar curve for copper extraction rate has been observed for both the solvents with different concentrations and the rate of extraction increases with increase in O/A ratio. The variation in O/A ratio, from 1/10 to 10/1, lead to increase in copper extraction from a minimum of 13.5% to a maximum of 99.9% in all combinations. For 20% and 25% Cinnamate, a minimum extraction of 16.4% and 22.8% were obtained at an O/A of 1/10, while a maximum extraction of 99.9% for both the concentrations was obtained at an O/A ratio of 10/1. For 20% and 25% of β diketone solvent, a minimum extraction of 13.4% and 14.4% were obtained at an O/A of 1/10, while a maximum extraction of 99.9% for both the concentrations was obtained at an O/A ratio of 10/1 ( From above trials, it is clearly evident that even if phase ratio is > A study has been done on both the solvents, regarding the impact of pH variation (8.5–10.3) of the initial solution on copper and ammonia extraction. The operating parameters are O/A ratio 1, the concentration of organic in the solvent mixture is 20% with a mixing time of 35 Stripping of loaded organic phases was tested for β diketone, cinnamate and LIX-54 individually. Initially, extraction was carried at 20% and 25% organic concentrations with O/A ratio 1:1, followed by stripping of loaded organic at different acidity viz., 50, 100 and 120 The results from trials indicate that stripping efficiencies are almost same at various acidities for both the organics. However, the effective stripping at 50 The strip isotherm defines the maximum amount of copper which can be removed from the organic for each O/A ratio. Organic (loaded with copper) is mixed with stripper solution at various O/A ratios. Stripper feed of 120  With optimized parameters, several loading and stripping cycles were performed by recycling of organic and stripper solution. The objective of this experimentation was to generate copper sulfate solution of Cu The performance of new solvents was tested at bench scale level in a mixer-settler with optimized lab scale parameters. Make-up acid was utilized to maintain stripper acidity nearly 60 Solvents cinnamate and mixture of β diketone can efficiently replace LIX 54. Series of loading –stripping tests confirm that the solvents are stable and do not degrade by continuous extraction cycles. Laboratory scale results were also validated in a bench scale mixer-settler. β diketone based solvent has been selected as a substitute for LIX 54-100. The changeover has shown a 33% increase in production volumes of copper sulfate with an annual revenue savings of 37.5%. The authors would like to acknowledge Hindustan Zinc Limited for providing a fostering environment for this research and permission to publish the data.