Periprosthetic elbow fractures are difficult conditions complicating an elbow arthroplasty. They may occur intraoperatively during primary or revision surgery or after high- or low-energy trauma or may represent an end-stage implant loosening and osteolytic periprosthetic disease. This wide spectrum of mechanisms of injury and underlying host conditions requires a specific evaluation sequence, a clear algorithm for treatment decision making, and often special surgical techniques for reconstruction. All these points are discussed in this present chapter. Fractures around the components of total elbow arthroplasties are uncommon injuries with an estimated prevalence of 5% in primary replacements. The main risk factor for periprosthetic elbow fractures is poor bone stock around components. be present before the replacement is performed, as in rheumatoid arthritis patients with advanced elbow disease or in old patients with severe osteoporosis with complex distal humeral fractures be due to surgical factors, such as implant design selection (some stem surface finishes are associated with osteolysis and loosening), inadequate tissue balance, component malalignment (leading to polyethylene wear, metallosis and particle disease, and finally loosening), or poor cementation technique develop after prosthetic implantation, as mechanical overload or infection, leading to progressive osteolysis and eventually bone fracture As mentioned already, periprosthetic elbow fractures are commonly the final stage of implant loosening and osteolysis. This is illustrated by many cases (45% and 57% of fractures around the humeral and ulnar stems, respectively) in which the moment at which the fracture occurred was not recalled, or it was described as happening during daily activities, such as during adjustment of the rear-view mirror of a car or getting up from a chair (up to 20%). Falls from standing height are the other main mechanism of production (25% to 45%). The Mayo classification of periprosthetic elbow fractures is similar to the Vancouver periprosthetic hip fracture classification Evaluation of patients with periprosthetic elbow injuries should always include review of the history and obtaining information about the previous conditions of the elbow and the nature of any prereplacement procedures. The reason for the index arthroplasty or any subsequent revision surgery must be documented, as must the design, year of manufacture/implantation (e.g., precoat ulnar implants used from 1990 to 2000 are associated with bone osteolysis Physical examination includes a complete neurovascular examination focusing on ulnar and radial nerve symptoms and function, assessing triceps integrity and strength, and determining a functional evaluation by the means of recording the range of motion and elbow stability, if the pain allows this. X-rays are usually enough to understand fracture location and comminution, implant fixation status, and bone stock ( Fracture location (see the earlier classification) and description (orientation of fracture lines, extension, and comminution). Fixation status of components, looking for radiolucent lines and assessing the quality of the cement mantle. A comparison between the ulnar and the humeral fixation in combination with the time from their implantation can help in understanding the mechanism of failure. Loosening and osteolysis affecting only one of the components is more probably related to a poor-quality cementing technique or problems with a specific component design, whereas a diffuse osteolysis affecting both components could be related to a chronic infection. Migration of a loose component far from the joint deeper in the bone canal should also be documented, as a longer stem than previously thought may be needed for revision if only the native component length was considered (see Bone stock, the assessment of which includes, apart from the fracture itself, documentation of additional cortical thinning areas representing sites of potential fracture in the future, cortical defects and their extension, increases in the medullar diameter (bone insufflation), and the length of the osteolytic bone that needs to be addressed. Infection should be actively investigated with a thorough clinical history looking for past signs or symptoms of infection, a blood test with leukocyte count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein level; fluid joint aspiration for Gram stain, culture, and an α-defensin test if available; and intraoperative tissue sampling, including membranes around components for intraoperative disease. If the findings of any of the tests mentioned are positive, or any suspicion of infection remains despite negative findings, a formal two-stage procedure should be considered. Additionally, intraoperative soft tissue sampling for culture and implant sonication is performed routinely. In the first surgical procedure, loose implants are removed and the intramedullary canal is identified with a 3.2-mm drill bit. Then cement is removed with osteotomes, curets, and reaming as needed. Cortical defects are exploited for cement removal. A longitudinal osteotomy of the ulna or a posterior cortical window in the humerus is developed to remove well-fixed components. If a well-fixed implant is found in the context of staging the revision procedure, keeping it in place until results of cultures are available can be considered when the findings for all previously mentioned markers are negative. All synovial membranes, debris, and intramedullary membranes are débrided, and specimens are obtained in every case for histologic analysis and culture. Implants are sent for ultrasonication to increase the sensitivity of periprosthetic tissue culture. Periprosthetic elbow fracture treatment is determined by the fracture location, the implant fixation status, and the remaining bone stock (Mayo classification). Humeral condyle fractures usually occur intraoperatively, although they can also happen later. Treatment depends on the prosthetic design that is going to be implanted during the surgery or the implant already in place. Integrity of collateral ligaments and humeral columns is mandatory for an unlinked design or a hemiarthroplasty stability of the distal end of the humerus; in such cases condylar fractures should be fixed, and consideration should be given to intraoperative conversion to a linked total implant. When a fracture of the humeral condyle complicates implantation of a linked prosthesis, larger fragments can be fixed with wires or a tension band technique, sutures, or even an anatomic plate, whereas smaller fragments may be subperiosteally resected. Current linked prosthetic designs do not need condyles for stability, as they rely on the cemented stem fixation and the anterior flange of the humeral component; therefore simple resection of a broken condyle is a suitable option ( The patient is positioned in the supine position with the forearm crossing the chest; a tourniquet is applied. The previous skin incision is used. The ulnar nerve is localized and protected if a previous transposition has not been performed. Fixation on the medial and lateral condyles/columns can be achieved by one working at both sides of the elbow, maintaining the triceps attached. Open reduction and internal fixation of condylar fractures with wires or a tension band includes passing two wires from distal to proximal through the center of the column, with the aim to engage the anterior and posterior cortex in the diaphysis avoiding the cement mantle, whenever possible. Plate fixation is a stronger fixation technique requiring less postoperative protection and is a better option if the condylar fragment is big enough to accept at least two or three locking screws. Lateral column fractures can be reliably fixed with a posterior anatomic plate and the use of bicortical locking screws when they do not interfere with the radial head. Medial column fractures will be fixed with an anatomic medial plate and locking screws ( Treatment of periprosthetic olecranon fractures depends on elbow extension strength as evaluated by clinical examination. If the patient is able to extend the elbow actively against gravity, conservative treatment should be considered. Otherwise surgical treatment should be recommended. Small fragments can be resected, and the triceps advanced and sutured to the proximal end of the ulna. Larger fragments can be fixed with cerclage wiring, Kirschner wires with a tension band, or a plate. In cases with severe associated disruption of the triceps tendon, the extensor mechanism can be reconstructed with soft tissue techniques, such as Achilles tendon allograft augmentation (see With the patient in the supine position and the forearm across the chest, a standard posterior skin incision is performed incorporating the previous incision. The ulnar nerve is identified, protected, and transposed anteriorly if this has not been done before. The fractured olecranon is reflected in continuity with the triceps and inspected for fixation suitability. If it is judged to be big and strong enough for fixation, both extremes of the fracture are cleaned and prepared for fixation. Olecranon fracture fixation with a tension band technique is performed with the ulnar component cemented in place. The presence of the stem and cement mantle makes it difficult sometimes to get good purchase of the wires in the distal fragment. Wires can be aimed posteriorly or anterolaterally and anteromedially to avoid the implant, and so the tip is introduced in the posterior or anterior cortex of the ulnar metaphysis. In selected cases a plate can be used for fixation in bigger fragments with adequate bone stock. Thin olecranon fracture fixation can be supplemented with local autograft between the ulnar component and the fracture and at the sides. Autograft is also used in the case of persistent gaps following reduction. When the olecranon fragment is so small or comminuted that it cannot be reliably fixed, it can be excised. The triceps tendon is then reinserted in the distal fragment fracture bed with use of a nonabsorbable strong suture grasping the triceps in a locking fashion (e.g., Krackow locking suture) and two ulnar bone tunnels from posterior to both sides of the ulnar component. The sutures are passed through the tunnels, and the medial strand of the suture can then be passed laterally through a transverse posterior ulnar bone tunnel, so the knot is tied laterally under the surface of the extensor carpi ulnaris. Olecranon fractures in the setting of a deficient ulnar metaphysis will be discussed in the following sections. Treatment of fractures located around the implant stem depends on the component fixation status and the remaining bone stock. In the rare cases in which components are well fixed in the presence of a fracture around the stem (usually near the tip of the stem), conservative treatment versus open reduction and internal fixation should be considered depending on fracture displacement and stability and patient-related factors. Humeral nondisplaced fractures can be conservatively treated with the arm in a long cast for 2 to 3 weeks followed by customized brace protection until consolidation is achieved. Ulnar nondisplaced fractures will be conservatively treated with the arm in a cast for 6 to 8 weeks, including 3 weeks of initial elbow immobilization depending on fracture stability ( When the fracture is displaced or judged to be unstable or in selected cases of nondisplaced fractures, open reduction and internal fixation is performed. In these cases, plate fixation and screws with or without cerclage wiring are preferred. With the patient in the supine position, the involved upper extremity is prepared and draped, and a tourniquet is applied to the arm. The humeral fixation surgical approach depends on fracture location. If the distal third of the humeral diaphysis is involved or needs hardware placement, as usual in cases with short stems, a posterior approach using the previous skin incision lengthened proximally as needed is used. The deep lateral paratricipital approach described by Gerwin et al. The patient is positioned supine with the forearm placed across the chest for ulnar fracture fixation. The previous posterior skin incision is used and lengthened distally as needed. The extensor carpi ulnaris is separated from the ulna, the fracture is reduced, and a strong 3.5-mm locking compression plate is placed laterally adjacent to the subcutaneous border of the ulna, so it can be covered with the extensor carpi ulnaris. From this lateral position of the plate, bicortical screws can be directed from lateral to medial, avoiding the ulnar stem with a more posterior location. A hybrid compression fixation technique can then be performed ( When the implant is loose, component revision is mandatory. Fractures with a loose implant and good bone stock can be treated in selected cases with implant revision and a longer stem, bypassing the fracture site by at least two host bone diameters, with or without wire fixation implementation, With the patient in the supine position, the involved upper extremity is prepared and draped, and a tourniquet is applied to the arm. The previous skin incision is used and enlarged as required; if there is more than one previous incision, the one closest to the midline is selected. The ulnar nerve is identified and protected and is transposed anteriorly if this was not done at the time of the previous arthroplasty. Previously transposed ulnar nerves are not surgically exposed. The extensor mechanism may be elevated in continuity and laterally reflected with use of the Bryan-Morrey approach, Humeral and ulnar fracture fixation with plates is performed as described above. Once the loose component and cement have been removed, the prosthetic trial component is introduced in the canal. Then monocortical, eccentric bicortical screws, or 18-gauge cerclage wires are used to achieve compression at the fracture site avoiding the stem, so an easy trial retrieval and correct definitive component implantation is allowed, including the cementing technique (there is no interference with the introduction of the cement delivery system). The definitive implant will be cemented once the fracture is completely fixed, again with the trial component in place. For strut fixation of humeral and ulnar fractures with good humeral stock, the fracture site is identified and the loose implant removed. A trial reduction of the fracture is performed with the trial components in place, and the necessary amount of bone graft is calculated. Oblique fractures may allow initial fixation with cerclage wires before application of the cortical struts. Attention is then turned to the bone allograft. Two strut grafts (anterior and posterior) are generally required for the humerus, and one or two strut grafts are generally required for the ulna. They must be long enough to span the fracture site by at least two diameters of the host bone both proximally and distally, allowing appropriate fixation to both the proximal fragment and the distal fragment. The placement of the grafts is made easier by tapering of the edges with a burr and allowing them to slide down the anterior and posterior aspects of the humerus. Depending on the nature of the case, the struts may be obtained off the shelf or fashioned from a whole humeral allograft, in which case cancellous bone from the allograft humeral head can be morcellized for later use (in humeral fractures) or can be obtained from a humeral, ulnar, or fibular allograft (in ulnar fractures). The fracture is then reduced anatomically, and the strut grafts are carefully placed on the anterior and posterior surfaces of the humerus ( When the implant is loose and poor bone stock is present, implant revision needs to be combined with bone augmentation reconstructive procedures, such as impaction grafting Fractures with severe bone loss can be treated either with implant revision and impaction grafting for contained bone defects (i.e., insufflated cortical bone) or implant revision, strut augmentation, and impaction grafting, when the amount of host cortical bone contacting the fracture site is not enough to ensure healing and additional structural stability is needed. APCs are indicated when there is insufficient bone stock to support a conventional implant. There are three configurations for APC–host bone fixation Type 1: This type of reconstruction is used when insufflation of the medullary canal of the host bone is present. The APC bony extreme is contoured with the aid of a burr, and then the circumferential allograft is telescoped into the expanded host bone. Type 2: Insertion of the distal aspect of the stem into the host canal with strut-like extension of the graft coapted externally to the cortex. This APC type is used when the host bone had a major cortical defect with bone loss at the implant insertion site. The defect allows a strut to coapt to the host cortex externally. The stem usually needs to be bent to allow both strut apposition and the introduction of the stem into the host bone. Type 3: The entire circumferential allograft is applied side to side to the host bone and secured with cerclage wires. This approach is used effectively when there is insufficient bone and implant balance was compromised by malalignment. The details regarding the surgical approach, nerve protection, extensor apparatus management, implant and cement removal, fracture fixation with struts, and final closure were described earlier. If impaction grafting is considered necessary to reconstruct the distal part of the humerus, two commercially available cement delivery tubes of different diameters are used (revision “tube with the tube” system from Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). The wider tube is inserted first to the level of the fracture, which usually coincides with the end of the insufflated bone. The smaller but longer tube, which is connected to the cement gun and system, is inserted inside the wider tube deeper in the humerus to at least two diameters of the canal width. The wider tube also serves as a mold around which the cancellous graft is impacted. Allograft or autograft that has been through a bone mill or morcellized bone with fragments measuring 2 to 4 mm are tamped or impacted tightly around the outer tube. Serial tamps have been designed to allow this to be done effectively and efficiently. Care should be taken so the outer tube extreme is visible after grafting impaction, so it can be grasped and pulled out later. The cement is then mixed in the cartridge, and the cartridge is screwed onto the adapter of the inner tube. Cement is delivered into the host bone in a retrograde manner so the inner tube is withdrawn for a distance to align with the outer tube, and the inner and outer tubes are both then withdrawn while cement is being delivered to the canal formed by the vacated and larger tube. The fracture site is cleaned of any cement that may have extruded, and cancellous bone allograft is applied to facilitate fracture union ( Impaction grafting is also used to restore insufficient cortical bone in expanded ulnae. The source of the allograft was usually a femoral or humeral head. The procedure is similar to that for the humerus. In elbows without additional strut allograft, the ulnar trial component is used to maintain provisional fixation during the impaction of bone graft, and fracture stability was obtained by the combination of a tightly packed graft and the cemented long-stem implant extending at least two ulnar diameters distal to the fracture site. Once the loose implant and the diseased bone have been resected, the length of the bone that is going to be substituted is measured. Attention is then turned to the back table for graft preparation. The graft is held from the part that is going to be discarded, and the graft is reamed, rasped, and completely prepared to receive the trial implant according to the surgical technique. Marks are drawn with a marking pen to make the cuts on the graft as precise as possible. The trial is removed. The cuts are performed transversely or in a step fashion depending on the APC configuration chosen. The trial is then placed back on the prepared allograft, and a good fit to the host bone is confirmed. The definitive implant is then cemented into the graft, and then the APC is cemented into the host bone if this has been planned. Final APC fixation to the host bone is performed with wires or plating as designed ( Such fractures can be treated, as in individuals without an elbow prosthesis, with conservative treatment or plate fixation, depending on the location and displacement. Treatment of these fractures is beyond the scope of this chapter, but the only consideration to make in the context of surgical treatment is the presence of the stems precluding the use of intramedullary nails and the need for alternative methods of fixation. These methods can include plates with cerclage wiring and/or monocortical locking screws, or the use of bone struts. A special situation is the occurrence of a fracture in the humerus between the stem of a shoulder replacement and the stem of an elbow replacement, Surgical reconstruction of periprosthetic fractures following the principles described in this chapter achieves adequate stability and allows immediate mobilization. The standard postoperative management includes 24 to 36 hours of elevation and immobilization in extension. Thereafter, sling protection for soft tissue healing is implemented, but allowing elbow motion active-assisted exercises in flexion and extension and pronation-supination from the beginning. The use of the affected extremity is encouraged for basic activities of daily living as soon as the pain allows this, usually within the first 2 weeks after the operation. The patient is advised to avoid lifting any weight until fracture healing occurs. Immobilization or formal physical therapy is not indicated. The results of elbow periprosthetic fractures have been sparsely communicated in specific articles dealing with such injuries. Marra et al. In a series of 11 periprosthetic humeral type II, subtype 2, fractures treated with component revision and anterior and posterior strut augmentation, 90% of radiographic healing was achieved, but there was a complication rate of 45%, including two additional periprosthetic fractures (olecranon and humerus), one component loosening after 7 years of fracture healing, one triceps insufficiency, and one ulnar neuropathy. Seven of the eight patients who did not undergo revision had a functional arc of motion (with a mean of 16 degrees, range 0 to 30 degrees, of extension and 131 degrees, range 110 to 140 degrees, of flexion) and no or slight pain. The most recent Mayo elbow performance score after a mean follow-up of 3 years was 79 (range 40 to 100). The results were rated as excellent in 36% or patients, good in 36% of patients, and poor in 28% of patients. Sixty-four percent of patients were satisfied with the result. In a series of eight periprosthetic ulnar type II, subtype 2, fractures treated with component revision and strut augmentation, radiographic consolidation was achieved in all cases, with a final Mayo elbow performance score of 86 and 106 degrees of flexion-extension arc; one deep infection occurred in this group. Twelve ulnar type II, subtype 3, fractures were treated with implant revision and impaction grafting (two cases), implant revision, strut augmentation, and impaction grafting (six cases), or APC (four cases). All achieved radiographic consolidation, with a mean Mayo elbow performance score of 78 and 117 degrees of flexion-extension arc; one deep infection, one case of aseptic loosening, and two additional late periprosthetic fractures occurred in this group. The mainstay of prevention of periprosthetic elbow fractures relies on identifying those patients at risk and performing a close radiologic follow-up of them: elbows with poor bone stock at the time of surgery (elderly and inflammatory disease) elbows with implants related to osteolysis and failure (precoat ulnar components used between 1990 and 2000) elbows with identified intraoperative technical issues such as poor cementing technique, malalignment, or poor soft tissue envelope patients performing unauthorized overuse despite our advice