Lead (Pb) ions are chronically detected in soil, underground and natural water, there is a need for low-cost in situ remediation techniques. A novel mineral based magnetic adsorbent, consisting of natural vanadium, titanium-bearing magnetite particles coated by humic acid (abbr. VTM-HA), was developed for removing Pb(II) from wastewater. In this study, adsorption-desorption characteristics and mechanisms of Pb (II) on the VTM-HA adsorbent were investigated. The regeneration and reuse feasibility of the VTM-HA adsorbent were also conducted. The adsorption tests further verified that Pb(II) was removed rapidly and efficiently by the VTM-HA adsorbent. Moreover, Pb (II) adsorbed on the VTM-HA adsorbent could be easily eluted using a small amount of acidic eluent, and the desorption of Pb (II) could reach 99.3 wt% in 0.1 M HNO3 (pH = 1). After five adsorption-desorption regeneration cycles, the magnetism and Pb(II) adsorption capacity of the regenerated VTM-HA adsorbent almost kept unchanged. The results indicated that the VTM-HA adsorbent had excellent adsorption capacity and regenerative ability, which could be used as ideal adsorbents for removing Pb (II) from acid wastewater in commercial application. The mechanisms of Pb (II) adsorption and desorption were explored by FTIR, XPS analysis and DFT calculation.The presence of heavy metal ions in various water resources has been a serious risk to human health due to the indiscriminate disposal of heavy metal ions [ Many literatures demonstrated that HA had an excellent adsorption capacity to heavy metals due to the skeleton of alkyl and aromatic units attached by carboxylic acid, phenolic hydroxyl, and quinone functional groups [ A novel magnetic adsorbent, namely vanadium, titanium-bearing magnetite coated by humic acid (VTM-HA), was tentatively used to deprive Pb(II) from wastewater in our previous research [ The VTM-HA adsorbent were prepared by adsorption method. To begin with, the naked VTM particles were put into the HA solution with a concentration of 300 mg/L, and the mass concentration of VTM particles was 10 g/L. The pH value of the suspension was adjusted to 3.0 by adding 0.1 M HCl and 0.1 M NaOH. Then, the suspension was oscillated for 24 h in a thermostatic oscillator at 298 K so that the HA was adsorbed onto the VTM particles as much as possible. Afterwards, the suspension was filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane filter. The residues on the membrane filter were dried at 70 °C for 24 h and used as the VTM-HA adsorbent. The Pb(II)-containing solution prepared from Pb(NO The adsorption tests for removing Pb(II) were carried out under isothermal conditions using batch techniques. First of all, the VTM-HA adsorbent and 50 mL Pb(II)-containing solution with different concentration were added into an Erlenmeyer flask. Then the Erlenmeyer flask was oscillated for 24 h at 298 K in a thermostatic oscillator to ensure the adsorption to achieve equilibrium. When the Pb(II) adsorption was finished, the suspension was filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane filter. The filtrate was sent for ICP-MS tests, and the results were considered as the equilibrium concentration of Pb(II) (C Where q The Pb(II) desorption tests were also conducted under isothermal conditions. The dried VTM-HA adsorbing Pb(II) (abbr. VTM-HA-Pb complex) were weighed and put into 50 mL eluent with pH value varying from 1 to 7, and the pH value was adjusted by adding 0.1 M HNO Where C The surface functional groups of VTM-HA adsorbent, VTM-HA-Pb and HA-Pb complexes of various pH values were characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) (USA Thermo Nicolet Nexus 670 FTIR spectrometer). 10 mg samples were mixed gently with 100 mg KBr powder and then analyzed. The KBr powder was used as the background and FTIR spectra were recorded in the range of 500–4000 cm XPS analyses were performed to evaluate the elemental composition and chemical oxidation states of surface and near-surface of the samples [ HA is a kind of complex macromolecular organic matters with uncertain molecular formula. The previous literatures indicated that the carboxyl and hydroxyl groups in HA were the main functional groups involved in adsorption between HA and heavy metal ions. So, the acetic acid and ethyl alcohol molecules were selected as base ligands which took place of HA molecular to conduct DFT calculation. DFT calculation was carried out with Gaussian 09 package using the density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP level. The calculations were done using 6–311 ++ G (d, p) basis set for acetic acid and ethyl alcohol, and LANL2DZ basis set for Pb(II) ions [ For an adsorption reaction, temperature of the solution was a very important factor which should be considered. The effect of temperature on Pb(II) adsorption onto the VTM-HA adsorbent at various initial Pb(II) concentration was plotted in To evaluate thermodynamic of the Pb(II) adsorption onto VTM-HA adsorbent, the batch adsorption experiments were performed at five different temperatures (298, 303, 308, 313, 318, and 323 K). The thermodynamic parameters were calculated with the following equations: Where C The enthalpy and entropy of Pb(II) adsorption on the VTM-HA were calculated by plotting ln K The Pb(II) adsorption kinetics was conducted by analyzing the adsorption amount of Pb(II) at various time. The data were analyzed by two models, pseudo-first-order equation and pseudo-second-order equations. Below are the linear equations representing the models: Where The related results are depicted in The equilibrium study on Pb(II) adsorption was conducted by isotherm adsorption method. The linear fitting curves were displayed in The Langmuir isotherm is calculated as the following equation: Where q Another adsorption isotherm model is Freundlich model, which is expressed as follows: Where q The Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were obtained by means of liner fitting and shown in The initial pH value of elution solution played an important role in Pb(II) desorption from VTM-HA-Pb complex. On the other hand, the leakage of metal ions from VTM-HA adsorbent in elution solution especially at low pH value should be concerned. The main metal elements of VTM-HA adsorbent are iron, titanium and vanadium. The desorption efficiency of Pb(II) and leakage of metal ions under various pH values were showed in  The solid-to-liquid (S/L) ratio, the ratio of VTM-HA-Pb complex amount (g) to the elution solution (L), has obvious effect on the desorption efficiency of Pb(II) from the VTM-HA-Pb complex. In all the tests, the VTM-HA-Pb complex were weighed and put into 50 mL of 0.1 M HNO The effect of S/L ratio on Pb(II) desorption was showed in The VTM-HA-Pb complex were desorbed using 0.1 M HNO  As a magnetic adsorbent, VTM-HA particles could be easily recycled by magnetism. Therefore, the magnetism of regenerated VTM-HA adsorbent after adsorption-desorption cycles is very important to determine whether the adsorbent could be recovered successfully. In this study, the magnetization hysteresis loops were used to characterize the magnetism of original and regenerated VTM-HA adsorbent [ As showed in The infrared spectroscopy was used for analyzing the structural properties of the VTM-HA adsorbent and VTM-HA-Pb(II) complex, and the FTIR spectra of VTM-HA adsorbent and VTM-HA-Pb(II) complex (pH = 5) were exhibited in For original VTM, the peaks at 574 and 664 cm The results shown in To clarify the changes of functional groups of HA in the desorption process directly, the HA-Pb complex were used for FTIR analyses instead of VTM-HA-Pb complex. The HA-Pb complex were prepared according to the following procedure: the Pb(II)-containing solution was mixed with HA solution, and then the pH value of the mixed solution was adjusted to a desired value by adding 1 M HNO As showed in XPS was used to investigate the chemical characterization of the surfaces of the VTM, VTM-HA adsorbent and VTM-HA-Pb complex, and the XPS spectra were displayed in As shown in Then, the XPS narrow band scans of Fe and Ti were conducted for obtaining the shifts of spectrum peaks. The XPS narrow band patterns and variations of binding energy of inner electron orbits of Fe and Ti were illustrated in The high resolution O1s and Pb4f spectra of VTM-HA adsorbent and VTM-HA-Pb complex were conducted and the results were illustrated in The O1s spectra showed in Next, the high resolution Pb4f spectrum was conducted for investigating the chemical state of Pb adsorbed on the VTM-HA and the result was given in Previous research reported that the mainly functional groups of HA involved in the adsorption of Pb(II) were carboxyl and hydroxyl groups [ According to the energy gap (ΔE) showed in Based on the above results, the adsorption and desorption processes of Pb(II) was described in Batch experiments showed that Pb(II) could be removed rapidly and effectively in faintly acid or neutral circumstance if using VTM-HA adsorbent. The adsorption of Pb(II) onto VTM-HA adsorbent belonged to endothermic reaction, and it was more consistent with Freundlich model. The desorption experiments showed that the desorption efficiency of Pb(II) could reach 99.3% in 0.1 M HNO FTIR and XPS analyses showed that the carboxyl and hydroxyl groups in the VTM-HA were the main functional groups involved in Pb(II) adsorption. DFT calculation showed that carboxyl and hydroxyl groups in VTM-HA adsorbent were more likely to be complexed with hydrogen ions compared to Pb(II). That's why the optimal adsorption pH range for Pb(II) was 6–8. When the pH value of the solution decreased, the hydrogen ions would preferentially combine with carboxyl and hydroxyl groups of VTM-HA, replacing the Pb(II) ions, so the VTM-HA adsorbent were regenerated and reused for depriving Pb(II) from wastewater. The authors would express their heartful thanks to