A new coal washability index, termed as ‘near gravity material index (NGMI)’, has been developed based on the sink-float data. This new index incorporates the effect of ash distribution in the near gravity material at various specific gravities of separation. The optimum specific gravity of separation of a particular coal may be determined by plotting NGMI as a function of various specific gravities of separation or the desired clean coal ash content. The concept and the method of calculation of this index have been discussed in detail. Using some published float-sink analytical data, a quick comparison of the washability characteristics of several different coals is demonstrated utilizing the NGMI curves for these coals.Gravity concentration is the most important unit operation in a coal washing circuit. Normally, sink-float analyses of the representative coal sample to be washed is carried out in a laboratory to predict the theoretical yield and ash contents of clean coal obtainable in an ideal gravity concentrator at different specific gravities. It is a common practice to plot a series of ‘washability curves’, from the sink-float data of a coal sample in order to generate many useful information relating to its amenability for producing clean coal of desired quality. The difficulty in washing a particular coal is generally determined qualitatively from the steepness of the ‘characteristic curve’. A number of numerical indices such as ‘washability index’ ( The specific gravity of separation of different coals necessary to produce clean coal of desired ash content varies from one coal to another and the NGM value of each coal also varies. Two coals could have the same index value but their individual NGM contents may differ; hence, the difficulty in washing these two coals will differ. Two coals with the same NGM contents may have differing ash distributions. The degree of difficulty of washing varies with the NGM distribution at different specific gravities; none of the other indices is able to indicate the most difficult specific gravity range. Keeping these aspects in view, a ‘near gravity material index (NGMI)’ has been developed to generate more useful information from the sink-float data of a typical coal. Further, a comparative analysis of the washability characteristics of different coals using both the NGMI and the IW is also described to demonstrate the value of the index.  In In terms of recovery curves of non-ash and ash-forming materials, the NGM distribution at 1.45 may be geometrically represented by the area under KLMN in The NGMI developed is defined as: It is evident from Eq.  From So, from Using Eqs. In general, Indian coals belong to the category of ‘difficult to wash’ because of high intrinsic NGM contents. Published sink-float data of some Indian coals, presented in The values of constants calculated from the recovery curves for all the above coals together with the corresponding IW values are tabulated in Using these constants and the methodologies described earlier the NGMI values for each of these coals at different specific gravities of separation have been calculated. The NGMI values calculated are plotted as a function of specific gravity of separation as shown in From the washability curves generated, the theoretical clean coal ash contents at those specific gravities were calculated and the NGMI values are then plotted as a function of clean coal ash contents as shown in  By using the NGMI curves ( For example, if only the IW values presented in  From A simple ‘near gravity material index (NGMI)’ has been developed from the sink-float data of coal samples for which the authors suggest the following advantages: The index provides much more detailed information on washability characteristics of coal than other washability quoted indices. NGMI varies from 0 to 1 for the ‘easy to wash’ to ‘difficult to wash’ coal respectively, thus facilitating rapid interpretation. The index varies with the specific gravity of separation or the clean coal ash content, thereby assisting in identifying the appropriate specific gravity of separation needed to better control the gravity concentration unit operation. When NGMI values calculated for different coals are plotted as a function of either specific gravity of separation or clean coal ash content, it is easier to compare the washability characteristics of those coals quantitatively. Decisions on blending different coals to maximize the yield of clean coal at desired ash contents are also possible from the proposed NGMI curves as presented in From NGMI curves it is possible to evaluate the coal washability characteristics with greater precision.