Discrete element simulations of agglomerates impacting other agglomerates and agglomerates impacting a wall have been carried out. The agglomerates consist of multiple, small primary particles. In the simulations, we have varied the adhesiveness of the primary particles, the agglomerate size, as well as the impact velocity of the impact. The quantitative trends in the results from the simulations have been captured by a dimensional analysis of the problem, and the resulting fit of a resolved, micro-scale modelling of the impacts has been used to construct a macro-scale discrete fragmentation model to describe agglomerate fragmentation using the framework of the discrete element model, but without the necessity of elucidating the behaviour of each individual primary particle. The working of the discrete fragmentation model has been validated with the results from the detailed micro-scale simulations.Agglomerates are found in many process engineering industries, such as in chemical, pharmaceutical and food industries. The application of agglomerates may include many different materials over wide scales of production, from speciality materials and pharmaceuticals, typically made on a small scale, to large-scale continuous processes for detergents and food products, typically made on a very large scale. Agglomeration is often used in the fabrication of a product, for instance, to produce free-flowing optimized agglomerates (or particles) and an optimal delivery of the product ( One important example in which agglomerates are applied, is in dry powder inhalers. Dry powder inhalers are filled with either carrier particles which are mixed with a cohesive micronized drug, or with agglomerates consisting of cohesive micronized drug and micronized excipient particles. In both cases, the challenge in the design of the inhalation device and process is to aim for a high re-dispersion of the primary drug particles from the carrier particle or from the agglomerates. In such applications, it is crucial to understand the breakage of the agglomerates, as they travel through the inhaler ( The number of primary particles in most applications is enormous - even in a small dose of 10 mg, the number of primary particles is Such a modelling framework has not yet been applied to applications with only primary particles. The assumption of applying such a framework to applications with only primary particles, is that these primary particles, at least initially, are adhered into large agglomerates, which could be considered as individual entities. As these agglomerates move, come into contact with air and collide with other agglomerates and the walls, they may break and release (some of their) primary particles. To understand how many primary particles are released, one must understand the strength of the agglomerate. Agglomerates have been studied experimentally, The current paper describes discrete element model (DEM) computer simulations of the impact of cohesive arrays of particles ( The particle–particle and particle–wall interactions are resolved using a discrete element (DEM) or soft-sphere model. This model was first proposed by The particle–particle and particle–wall interaction collisional forces arise from the deformation of the contacts of the particles, and in DEM the particles are allowed to slightly overlap at this points of contact. The amount of overlap is then directly proportional to the amount of deformation, and thus force, at the contact point of the two particles. The soft-sphere model allows for multiple as well as enduring contacts for each particle; the net contact force at any point in time is given by the sum of all the pair-wise interactions occurring at that time. Each interaction consists of a force in the normal direction and a force in the tangential direction of the unit contact vector. The contact vector is given by the vector perpendicular to the contact plane. Mathematically, the contact model can be interpreted as a non-linear spring-dashpot-slider framework to describe the particle behaviour during a collision. The soft sphere model takes into account the actual deformation of the particles and determines the resulting normal and tangential forces using the physical properties of the particles. These forces are determined by the actual material type and properties and can be, for instance, elastic, plastic, or visco-elastic ( For a collision with overlap The tangential forces, Particles may rotate during a collision, and it is necessary to remap the tangential force such that it lies in the plane defined by the collision normal, The correction is made in two steps: first the rotation from the old collision normal Assuming that the small angle approximation is valid, the tangential force vector can then be rotated such that it is perpendicular to Step two is to make a rotation parallel to Then the final remapped tangential force is given by a similar procedure to equation The application of the tangetial force requires that, from one time-step to the next, both the angle by which the collision has rotated, and the angle rotated by each particle, are small. This is not only because of the approximation used in expressions The total collisional force is determined at each time-step, by adding the normal and tangential components, Part of the particle–particle and particle–wall forces arises from the adhesive nature of the particles and walls. Adhesive forces between particles have been a subject of study since the initial investigations of ( The particles of interest in the present study are in the regime described by the DMT model. This model is formulated in terms of a so-called pull-off force. The pull-off force is defined as the maximum force required to pull two particles out of contact ( The Verlet scheme is used to integrate the equation of motion for a particle in order to obtain the position and velocity vectors after a collision ( The velocity vector of the particles is obtained via A similar integration scheme is adopted to update the rotational acceleration, as given by Equation The agglomerates are prepared from primary particles with a size of To investigate the role of colliding agglomerates, 5 different sizes of agglomerates from primary particles have been created and are shown in The number of contacts between the primary particles in each agglomerate is determined and shown in There is a common relation between the solids volume fraction, The total number of contact in the agglomerate can be defined from the co-ordination number Therefore, a simple relationship between the number of contacts exists, which can be expressed as Models which consider fragmentation caused by agglomerate impact rely on the fact that the work required to break the bonds between the primary particles in the agglomerate depends directly on the incident kinetic energy of the agglomerate collision. The Weber number is the dimensionless number which relates the incident kinetic energy to the adhesive strength between the primary particles. By performing two-dimensional DEM simulations, Thornton1996 proposed a modified Weber number, by defining a lower limit of the impact velocity, Although a reasonable prediction of the break-up was presented based on this modified Weber number ( DEM has been used in many applications describing particle breakage or comminution,  In In the current work, where the aim is to construct a DFM to describe the dynamic behaviour of agglomerates, we build on the DFM described in When an agglomerate collides, it may break up into fragments, and these fragments are referred to as child particles. In the DFM, the fragments are considered to be spherical as well. Because of the complexity of agglomerate fragmentation, no generally valid function can be found to describe the resulting child particle size distribution (PSD), and so-called ‘‘micro-scale'' simulations are carried out in this work to determine the progeny PSD of the child particles. By knowing the PSD of the child particles, discrete fragments of different diameters are generated, which replace the parent particle within its convex hull, of which one example is shown in During the breakup of the agglomerate, the kinetic energy of the parent particle is divided into two parts: one part to break-up of the bonds between the primary particles in the agglomerate and the other part to the subsequent motion of the released fragments or child particles. To describe this, we have introduced a so-called momentum factor, In the model, during fragmentation, the child particles, altogether with the same mass as the parent particle, are placed inside the convex hull of the parent particle to prevent a loss of mass and to prevent a significant overlap with neighbouring particles or walls, as is also shown in To determine the relation between agglomerate properties and the properties of the collision on the one hand, and the properties of the subsequent fragments on the other hand, micro-scale simulations are carried out. In this work, micro-scale simulations of agglomerates have been carried out for 5 differently sized agglomerates, each with 3 different surface energies (see In the micro-scale simulations, two agglomerates are directed towards each other with a given initial relative velocity. Before the collision, each of the primary particles of a single agglomerate has the same velocity. During the collision, the agglomerate is potentially fragmented into smaller agglomerates and/or primary particles, depending on the intensity of the collision. An example of subsequent time frames of two agglomerates colliding is shown in In this work, a total of 175 simulations of agglomerate-agglomerate collisions are carried out, varying the agglomerate size, the relative velocity between the agglomerates, and the interface energy, describing the cohesive strength between the primary particles. The results of each simulation are summarised in The results in The red curve in To study the interaction of the agglomerates with the wall, 175 micro-scale simulations of collisions of agglomerates with a wall have been carried out, varying the agglomerate size, the relative velocity between the agglomerate and the wall, and the interface energy of the primary particles. An example of such a micro-scale simulation is shown in When an agglomerate collides with the wall, the agglomerate may fragment and (parts of) the agglomerate may stick to the wall. The results of each micro-scale simulation on the fragmentation resulting from agglomerates colliding with a wall are shown in The red curve in The results of each micro-scale simulation on the attachment of (part of) the agglomerate to the wall is shown in The red curve in The results of the micro-scale simulations can be directly used in the probability density framework required by the macro-scale DFM. At the macro-scale, an agglomerate is modelled as a single parent particle. When this particle comes into collision with another agglomerate particle or with the wall, the number of existing contacts within the agglomerate-particle is estimated by evaluating Equation This volume is divided over 10 agglomerate class sizes based on their original volume, ranging from the original agglomerate size, A first test of the model is a simple collision between two agglomerate-particles, as shown in After the distribution of child particle sizes has been determined, the momentum and remaining kinetic energy is distributed over the child particles. This leads to a further movement of the child particles away from the point of impact, as can be seen in the third and fourth frames in At the macro-scale model, the larger fragments are assumed to be spherical, as can be seen in A second test of the model is carried out with colliding two agglomerates with a large relative velocity aimed towards each other. This results of this simulation in shown in A next test of the model is to simulate a simple collision between one agglomerate-particle and a wall, as is shown in Once the parent particle collides with the wall, a size distribution of child particles is determined, as can be seen in the second frames of The DFM model has been tested by colliding 100 agglomerates with sizes between 10 and 60 After determining the number of broken of fines due to the collision in the DFM, as discussed previously, the remaining mass is divided over the ‘‘largest'' possible discrete agglomerate sizes. Although this is mostly observed in the micro-scale simulations, there are cases in which the agglomerate break-up is more complicated. A comparison between the fragment size distribution between the micro-scale simulations and the DFM for various agglomerate sizes and impact velocities is shown in In this work, we have developed a discrete fragmentation model (DFM) to efficiently simulate the behaviour of agglomerate break-up after agglomerate-agglomerate and agglomerate-wall collisions. In the DFM, an agglomerate is approximated by a single spherical particle, with the properties ( The probability density framework used by the DFM is derived using fully-resolved micro-scale simulations of agglomerate break-up. In this framework, the agglomerates are modelled as consisting out of spherical primary particles, held together by the van der Waals attraction force between the primary particles. The behaviour of these agglomerates is studied in both agglomerate-agglomerate collisions as well as in agglomerate-wall collisions, studying the fragmentation behaviour in terms of the size distribution of the resulting fragments as well as the fraction of mass of the agglomerate which stays adhered onto the wall after a collision of the agglomerate with a wall. A new dimensionless parameter is proposed to capture the properties of the agglomerate ( The results from the DFM including the probability density framework based on the newly proposed dimensionless parameter are validated with the results from the micro-scale simulations and show a very good agreement with the results. The DFM is two orders of magnitude computationally more efficient than using a micro-scale model to resolve the agglomerates, and therefore it can be used in large-scale simulations where collisions of agglomerates and their subsequent fragmentation are important.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. To carry out this work, funding has been received from