Soil ingestion is an important pathway for exposure to metals for children. The objectives of this study were to: (1) Assess urban soil contamination by selected metals (As, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, and Zn) in 24 sites (127 soil samples) in Istanbul, Turkey, (2) Investigate relationships between soil contamination and site properties (type of site, equipment type, soil properties), (3) Characterize the risk for critically contaminated sites by taking oral metal bioaccessibility and two soil ingestion scenarios into account. Average metal concentrations were similar in the 17 playgrounds, 4 parks and 3 picnic areas sampled. Five out of 24 sites (all equipped with treated wood structures) had systematically higher contamination than background for As, Cu, Cr or Zn, and measured concentrations generally exceeded Turkish regulatory values. High Cu concentrations in these sites were attributed to the leaching from wood treated with Cu-containing preservatives other than chromated copper arsenate (CCA). Risk characterization for these sites showed that hazard index was below one in both involuntary soil ingestion and soil pica behaviour scenarios for all metals. However, probabilistic carcinogenic risk for As uptake exceeded 1×10−6 in both scenarios. A sensitivity analysis showed that soil ingestion rate was the most important parameter affecting risk estimation. Risk from As uptake for children from soils of parks, playgrounds and picnic areas may be serious, especially if soil pica behaviour is present.Soil metal pollution in parks and playgrounds has received wide interest and recent studies suggest that pollution and children's exposure to metals in these areas are of high concern When children play outdoors, they either unintentionally ingest soil by putting dirty hands and objects in their mouths, or deliberately eat soil Oral bioavailability is the fraction of an ingested contaminant that reaches the systemic circulation from the gastrointestinal tract; and bioaccessibility, in relation to human exposure via ingestion, is defined as the fraction of a toxicant in soil that becomes soluble in the gastrointestinal tract and is then available for absorption To assess the As, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn contamination in soil samples collected from parks, playgrounds and picnic areas, where children's exposure is especially of concern. To investigate relationships between contamination levels and site properties (type of site, type of recreational structure, main soil properties). To assess the exposure and characterize the risk to children who might be exposed to these urban soils. Soil samples were collected from 24 sites in the city of Istanbul, Turkey ( Sampling sites were evenly distributed throughout the city. The sites were selected such that children have a high possibility to come in contact with nearby soil. These areas were playgrounds, parks or picnic areas. Sampling sites with treated wood structures (determined by visual inspection of wood for greenish brown color), were selected due to the increased possibility of metal contamination from leaching, and playgrounds with metal or plastic structures were also included due to the possibility of contamination via other ways (high background concentrations or traffic-related metal deposition). Majority of the sampling sites (02, 03, 05, 07, 10, 13–17, and 19–23) were located within 10 Soil samples were placed in plastic zip-lock bags after sampling. Collected samples have been air dried at room temperature, sieved (<2 Total metals in soils (<2 On sites where metal concentrations were found systematically higher than criteria of the Turkish Soil Pollution Control Regulation Soil pH (Hanna HI 221 microprocessor pH meter) was measured according to the ASTM D 4972-01 Since relative oral bioavailability (RBA) data (estimated with bioaccessibility) can be used to provide a more accurate exposure assessment, adjustments to dose (chemical daily intake) values were performed using Eq. Chemical daily intake for each trace element was calculated with the equation provided by USEPA Carcinogenic risk was determined according to Eq. Descriptive statistics and correlations were performed by the computer statistical analysis package S-PLUS 8.0. All experiments have been performed in duplicates. Additionally, a certified reference material (CRM 025-50) has been analyzed ( The trace element concentrations (As, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn) in the 103 soil samples (fraction <2 Contamination on the 5 sites having critical metal pollution is discussed below to identify the possible sources of pollution. These sites were also further analyzed for metal content in the <250 As shown in Classification of soil pollution data ( Among the 11 sites with elevated soil concentrations compared to background, 9 of them were equipped with treated wood structures (including 5 critically contaminated sites), and the remaining 2 with plastic equipment. Cu contamination on 6 of these sites (sites 01, 02, 05, 10, 13, and 21) may be attributed to the leaching from wood treated with Cu-containing preservatives other than CCA. In one site (site 08) elevated As, Cr and Cu concentrations in soil may be attributed to leaching from CCA-treated wood. For the remaining sites with treated wood ( Highest and mean concentrations of As near treated wood structures were comparable to the values reported by Cookson Correlation analysis was performed for metal average concentrations (As, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn) and soil properties (pH, TOC, sand, silt and clay percentages) with data from the 17 sites equipped with treated wood structures. Pearson correlation values between As–Cr (0.337) and As–Cu (0.339) showed no indication that As, Cr and Cu were originating from a common source, namely CCA-treated wood. In general metal concentrations were negatively correlated with pH and sand content, and were positively correlated with TOC values, silt and clay percentages. An exposure assessment was performed prior to estimating the risk from ingesting contaminated soils by children. The average chemical daily intakes of metals were calculated by considering contaminant source as soil, release mechanism as adherence of contaminated soil to hands and exposure route as ingestion. Risk characterization has been done on chronic basis by calculating carcinogenic risk for As and hazard index values for As, Cr(III), Cu and Zn using respective slope factors and reference dose values from IRIS (Integrated Risk Information System) database Average chemical daily intakes of metals were calculated based on the equations presented in Section For the calculation of carcinogenic risk ( Calculations for average chemical daily intake values for As, Cr and Cu yielded similar findings for involuntary soil ingestion scenario to the previous studies on CCA-treated wood poles For the non-carcinogenic risk, hazard index values for As, Cr and Zn under both soil ingestion scenarios were less than 1 in the 5 critically contaminated sites. For Cu, exposure values were well below the daily background exposure and tolerable daily intake. Therefore, toxic risk for these metals appears below dangerous levels even for soil pica behaviour. However, keeping in mind that background exposure for As from other sources is already 0.3 Using the selected parameters stated above for back calculation, As concentrations in soil as low as 7.7 Exposure frequency had a limited effect on risk values. A reasonable maximum estimate of 250 Eleven out of the 24 study sites had at least 1 soil sample with metal content above regulatory limits, and 5 sites, all equipped with treated wood structures, systematically had metal concentrations (As, Cr, Cu, and Zn) higher than background values. Sites with treated wood structures, rather than sites with plastic or metal structures accounted for the majority of the contaminated sites. The elevated Cu concentrations in soil samples from these 5 critically contaminated sites could be linked to leaching from wood treated with copper containing wood preservatives other than CCA. Higher concentrations of As, Cr and Zn may be attributed to other contamination sources. Although average levels of metal concentrations were similar in playgrounds, parks and picnic areas, the latter is of less importance due to the lower possible exposure frequency to the soil. Probabilistic carcinogenic risk from As-contaminated soil via ingestion has been found high (>1 A sensitivity analysis of the parameters used to calculate the adjusted chemical daily intakes showed that soil ingestion rate was the factor with highest uncertainty and high values may increase the carcinogenic risk and HI values to unacceptable levels. Body weight was another important factor affecting risk due to its large variation in children. Effect of exposure duration and bioaccessibility of As on the risk values were lower compared to the effect of soil ingestion rate and body weight. Under this conservative approach it can be concluded that, for children 2–6 years old with soil pica behaviour there is a considerable risk in terms of As uptake when playing in soils from playgrounds, parks or picnic areas. The authors thank