Recent thermodynamic models for liquid–liquid equilibrium (LLE) involving electrolytes are reviewed. The applicability of various models to solvent extraction (SX) for metal ion recovery is emphasized, and areas where further research is needed are delineated.Separation of metal ions by solvent extraction (SX) is a well-established and familiar hydrometallurgical technology. Often operated as a near-equilibrium stage-wise process, metal SX is effectively based on thermodynamic principles. Nevertheless, the solution thermodynamics of metal SX systems is far from straightforward and exemplifies several longstanding and thorny problems. The purpose of this contribution is to critically survey relevant work on liquid–liquid equilibrium (LLE) of electrolytes. This review focuses primarily on developments in the last decade, but in a few cases direct precursors of recent work are included to provide additional context. In a metal SX process, a metal ion is distributed between two liquid phases of differing composition and properties. To be minimally useful for process design or optimization, a thermodynamic model must accurately describe LLE behavior of a single electrolyte–mixed solvent system, a three-component, two-phase model system. More realistically, complexing or associating extractants are needed to achieve high concentrations of the target ion in the second solvent phase; cosolvents or modifiers are added to control density, viscosity, and interfacial tension and to enhance extractant solubility; and selective removal of one ion (accompanied by a suitable counterion) from a mixed electrolyte solution is required. A typical system of practical interest in hydrometallurgy consists of water and an organic solvent, several organic solutes, and several salts. Solution chemistry introduces several further complications. In aqueous solutions, salts may be completely dissociated (strong electrolytes) or only partially so (weak electrolytes); numerous metal ion complexes may be present. It is often desirable to know the detailed solution speciation since the speciation is often the basis for proposing extraction mechanisms and, in some cases, can be used to rule out postulated schemes ( An electroneutrality constraint must be introduced in treating electrolyte solutions (or molten salts) ( Several practical difficulties and conceptual pitfalls have also been noted repeatedly and are summarized here for reference. Most mixed solvent–electrolyte data sets that are extensive and accurate enough to be used in model development or validation involve pressure data ( Reference and standard states have been the subject of considerable confusion, and in fact have not always been specified in a manner consistent with their definitions. Our inherent inability to determine absolute values of thermodynamic quantities lies behind both concepts. Reference states are traditionally introduced whenever thermochemical property data are used in First and Second Law calculations; their definition is unambiguous. For practical reasons, the reference state is almost always taken to be at 25 °C and 1 bar; enthalpy and Gibbs energy are set equal to zero for the simplest thermodynamically stable state of each element ( An infinite dilution standard state has been widely used for solutes despite an intrinsic conceptual problem. Several authors ( A distinction is sometimes made between so-called rational and practical activity coefficients ( A second objection to infinite dilution standard states applies specifically to electrolytes ( Virtually all of the models described below are built on several earlier works and combine terms selected from different sources; as a result, problems of consistency have frequently been mentioned in the research literature on mixed electrolytes in a single solvent, or a single electrolyte in a mixed solvent. (It should be noted that the fully generalized case of multiple electrolytes, molecular solutes, and a mixed solvent has never been treated.) To use much of the relevant published data, frequent conversions of concentration scale and standard state are needed. Terms originating in the so-called Lewis-Randall framework have ( It is well known that nonideality in a mixed solvent–electrolyte system can be handled using either excess Gibbs energy ( Many models of the Gibbs energy type are elaborations of the so-called electrolyte NRTL model originally proposed by Chen et al. ( The most recent NRTL-based electrolyte mean ionic activity coefficient model is that of de Loos and coworkers (2000). This model is intended for LLE of mixed solvent electrolyte systems and thus is potentially relevant to metal SX processes. However, only limited testing of the model has been reported. The primary solvents considered were water and small polar organics such as 1-propanol; salts were limited to NaCl, KCl, KBr, and ammonium sulfate. Mean ionic activity coefficients for four binary water–electrolyte systems were calculated during regression of LLE data and, in each case, van Bochove's model gave a better fit to experimental data than Chen's earlier model ( Noteworthy differences from related equations are that, first, the electrostatic term from Pitzer's extended Debye–Hückel equation has been generalized for mixed solvents through the use of a solvent composition-dependent dielectric constant. This leads to the long-range electrostatic term Second, a new form of expression was used for the Brønsted–Guggenheim term, based on a solvent composition-dependent interaction parameter A rather brute-force approach has also been used to extend the original electrolyte-NRTL model to concentrated, nonideal aqueous systems ( A somewhat similar approach was taken to extend the NRTL model to LLE for electrolytes in mixed solvents ( Another electrolyte NRTL model incorporates aspects of solution chemistry ( Other physical models in the Gibbs energy family include those of A recent mixed solvent–electrolyte model ( Regular solution theory was the basis for a LLE model for ternary water–organic–organic or water–organic–electrolyte systems proposed by Besides the work of Nearly 10 years after its publication, the treatment of system chemistry in the 1994 model due to Zerres and Prausnitz remains among the most detailed available and has the capability to handle the activities of individual cations and anions. The systems considered are ternary, containing water, an organic solvent, and an electrolyte; the salt is assumed to be completely dissociated. The standard state for all ions is the hypothetical ideal dilute solution at unit mole fraction of the ion in water. Standard states for water and for the organic solvent are the pure liquids at system Although the “full” LLE problem, with the system consisting of several electrolytes, water, and an organic solvent, has not been treated by  Recently developed models of this type have progressively generalized and elaborated the aqueous electrolyte equation of state (AEEOS) originally proposed by Prediction of LLE for mixed solvent–electrolyte systems is the objective of the most recent contribution ( A related model (but not including the Born term) has been applied to VLE data for a somewhat wider range of electrolytes and mixed solvents ( In the 1993 paper on which these more recent developments are based, Fürst and Renon used Eq. A large amount of data on mean ionic activity coefficients of salts in aqueous, nonaqueous, and mixed solvents at 298 K has recently been correlated using an empirical two-parameter equation ( Chemical speciation effects have not been considered in most of the electrolyte LLE models developed to date. The importance of doing so is illustrated by the observation that several existing models have given poor fits when complexes or ion pairs were likely to be present. To develop improved models of metal SX that could provide insight into extraction mechanisms and facilitate hydrometallurgical process development and design, thermodynamic rigor must be wedded to chemical intuition about solution speciation and complexation. Although this is a key goal for the future of hydrometallurgical separations, progress toward it almost certainly will be slow and fitful. Better models probably cannot be developed until a more extensive collection of high quality LLE data sets becomes available; to be of direct relevance to hydrometallurgical separations, data are needed on systems involving weak electrolytes, complex ions, ions that are difficult to separate (such as Co and Ni, and the rare earths), extremes of pH, chelating and non-chelating extractants, and highly surface-active compounds. Existing and future models need to be evaluated thoroughly, with direct comparison of the accuracy of their predictions over the full range of process conditions likely to be encountered in practice. This evaluation should include quantitative assessment of the inaccuracies resulting from framework inconsistencies, choice of standard state, and similar issues.