The present study demonstrates the use of soapnut, a naturally occurring surfactant for producing alumina ceramic foams. A range of slurry compositions with soapnut amounts ranging from 2 to 20wt% in water, alumina loading of 35–55vol% were studied. Though all slurry compositions foamed when subjected to mechanical agitation the formation of green ceramic foams free of macroscopic defects was found to be strongly dependent on conditions during drying of foamed slurries. Addition of guar gum to the slurries was shown to enhance foam stability and thus produce defect-free foams from compositions that otherwise either collapsed or resulted in other macroscopic defects during drying. Drying conditions also had a strong effect on microstructural parameters such as cell size and cell connectivity. Soapnut-based foams appear to have a greater connectivity between cells than foams produced by other comparable processes.Ceramic foams are known to possess high chemical inertness, high temperature and thermal shock resistance, high specific strength, low thermal mass and low thermal conductivity. Soapnut fruit belongs to the genus of Diluted soapnut solution (0.05 The functional groups present in the extract were characterized by Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Single beam spectra of aqueous soapnut extract in a KBr matrix were obtained in the frequency range (4000–500 The different alumina slurry compositions prepared using freshly extracted soapnut are shown in On the basis of preliminary observations, for all foaming experiments 60 The foamed slurries were cast into Vaseline-coated Perspex molds with dimensions of 93 All sintered ceramic foam samples were characterized for percent open, closed and total porosity by Archimedes principle using water as the immersing medium (ASTM C 693, C20-00). As sawed sections of the foam samples were characterized using stereomicroscope (SZ 1145 TR PT, Olympus Model, Japan) and scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM 5800, JEOL, Japan). The sawed surface of alumina foam was coated with ink to enhance the contrast when viewing under stereomicroscope. SEM micrographs of the ceramic foams were characterized using image analysis software (Image Tool, Version 3.0, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio). Consistency in concentration of soapnut solutions prepared from the fruit pericarp was checked by monitoring solutions from several batches at random. Results of UV–vis spectroscopy of the freshly prepared extracts confirmed that there was negligible measurable variation (±0.05 It is well documented in the research literature The presence of various functional groups forming hydrophobic and hydrophilic part of soapnut which contribute to it becoming an effective foam stabilizer The non-ionic nature of soapnut is an advantage as its presence does not result in changes in ionic strength thus may not affect stabilization of ceramic particles in slurries. The foamed slurries were cast into perspex molds and subjected to drying at different temperatures ( Drying the foams both at slow and fast rates resulted in macroscopic defects ( Raising the drying temperature to 50 Foams produced from (35, 15) and (35, 20) slurries containing higher percentage of soapnut extract were unstable and collapsed during drying at ambient temperature (30 Drying of foams made from 45 As discussed above the problems of defects such as cracks or delamination in foams prepared from several of the 35 and 45 Among the natural materials, guar gum a polysaccharide has been commonly used as a foam stabilizer and binder in foods and as a viscosity modifier in other applications. As per the expectations, the addition of guar gum enhanced the slurry viscosity significantly. In addition to the defects formed, most of the microstructural changes in the foam structure also took place during the stage of drying. Since the largest number of defect free foam samples were produced by drying at 40 It was seen that foam samples, made from some of the slurry compositions developed cell size gradients during drying, though the foamed slurries were nearly homogeneous prior to casting. The gradient in cell size in sintered foam was always such that the cells at the top face which was the only exposed surface during drying had the smallest cells while the bottom-unexposed surface had the largest cells. The gradient in cell size was largest for the composition that had the smallest percentage of soapnut 0.39 The most severe gradient in cell size was seen for the foam samples made from 55 Lack of soapnut amount in the slurry below a critical amount (example slurry no. 15, The soapnut-based foams had an exceptionally open structure with larger area of interconnection between the individual cells as The above differences in microstructure can possibly be understood in terms of the much higher strength of cell walls obtained from binders that undergo gelation as compared to strength of cell walls in soapnut-based foams. During water evaporation the cell walls lose the viscoelastic behaviour, The differences between the inherent strength of the cell walls in foams produced from different processes could also be interpreted in terms of the flexural strength of the dense green bodies prepared from different processes including gelcasting, protein coagulation casting and soapnut, respectively ( As mentioned earlier, addition of guar gum resulted in increase in the strength of the foam samples implying an increase in the strength of the cell walls. Thus, foams produced from soapnut–guar gum-based slurries showed lesser connectivity between cells as compared to that in foams prepared from soapnut-based slurries. The drying temperature had a significant effect on the extent of connectivity between cells as seen from the differences in microstructure of foams dried at 40 The number and area of interconnection between cells in foams was not uniform throughout the sample volume. The connectivity between cells appeared to be higher near the sample surface that was exposed during drying as compared to the bottom-unexposed surface ( Soapnut components showed decomposition in five stages as seen from the TG ( A comparison of the TG analysis of the green ceramic foam with that of pure soapnut revealed the reason for the above cracking. Association of the soapnut components with the ceramic powder particles possibly resulted in a single stage gradual weight loss at higher temperatures that started from around 380 The reproducibility of soapnut extract in terms of composition and concentration was checked using UV–vis spectroscopy and used successfully to make ceramic foams in varying range of porosities. Soapnut served multiple functions including that of foaming agent, binder and stabilizer. The setting of soapnut-based foams could be achieved simply by drying without requiring any gelation step. Removal of soapnut from the dried foamed body requires slow heating. The defects developed during consolidation of foamed slurry were addressed by controlling drying temperature and with partial replacement of soapnut amount with guar gum especially for the samples made from lower soapnut amount. Microstructural inhomogenities such as cell size gradient through out the thickness of foamed samples, were eliminated by using higher concentration of soapnut. The extent of cell connectivity was high and unique in comparison to other direct casting and foaming processes. The high cell connectivity was related to the poor strength of the cell wall, which ruptures during drying. Authors are thankful to CSIR, New Delhi under scheme no. 03 (0917)/00-EMR-II and 9/81 (492)/04-EMR-I for financial support and R.T. Vanderbilt for providing Darvan 821A sample for research purposes. We are also grateful to Dr. Santanu Dhara for providing data on protein coagulation-based ceramic foams.