To develop an effective process for titanium powder production, a new preform reduction process (PRP), based on the calciothermic reduction of preform containing titanium oxide (TiO2), was investigated. The feed preform was fabricated from slurry, which was made by mixing TiO2 powder, flux (e.g. CaCl2) and binder. Various types of preforms in the form of plates, spheres, or tubes were prepared using a conventional technique, and the fabricated preform was sintered at 1073 K before reduction in order to remove the binder and water. The sintered solid preform containing TiO2 was then placed in a stainless steel container, and reacted with calcium vapor at a constant temperature ranging between 1073 and 1273 K for 6 h. Titanium powder was recovered from the reduced preform by leaching it with acid. As a result, pure titanium powder with 99 mass% purity was obtained. This process was found to be suitable for producing a homogeneous fine powder when the composition of flux and the size of the preform are controlled.The application of titanium has been widening and the demand for titanium has also been increasing in recent years as it is a lightweight, extremely strong, and highly corrosion resistant metal. Titanium is currently produced by means of a metallothermic reduction process called the Kroll process To overcome the drawback of the current Kroll process, Fray et al. conducted extensive research on the direct electrochemical reduction of titanium dioxide (TiO The direct reduction processes of titanium oxide mentioned above have the potential to be the next generation titanium production processes. However, there are some drawbacks which have to be overcome before the process can be commercialized. Specifically, a large amount of molten salt is required, and the reduction process is slow. Furthermore, the process lacks the flexibility to be scaled up, as it is based on electrochemical reduction. With this background, a new reduction process for producing fine metal powder by means of the metallothermic reduction of preform containing feed material was investigated in this study. When producing titanium by means of the metallothermic reduction of titanium oxide, the feed (TiO To develop an effective process for the titanium powder production, a new reduction process using feed preform was investigated in this study. As schematically shown in  The feed preform was fabricated from slurry, which was made by mixing TiO  The titanium powder in the preform obtained after the reduction experiment was recovered by leaching the preform with acid. The reaction product (CaO), flux, and excess reductant in the sample were removed by dissolution in acetic acid solution. The obtained metal powder was rinsed in a hydrochloric acid at room temperature. It was then rinsed with distilled water, alcohol, and acetone, and then dried in a vacuum. A chemical analysis of the sample was carried out using an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; Seiko Instruments, SPS 4000). The metal powder was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Jeol, JSM-5600LV), and the composition of the sample was determined both by an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS, Jeol, JED-2200) and ICP-AES. Phases in the sample were identified using an X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, Rigaku, Rint 2000). Oxygen analysis was carried out by inert gas fusion–infrared absorption spectroscopy (LECO). By regulating the amount of binder, it was possible to control the viscosity of the slurry and obtain preform in different shapes. A preform plate, 3–6 mm thick could easily be produced by casting the slurry into the mold.  By increasing the amount of flux and using CaCl  As shown in  A new reduction process for producing fine titanium powder by the metallothermic reduction of preform containing feed material was developed. Various types of preforms in the form of plates, spheres, or tubes were prepared using a conventional technique and were supplied as feed material for metallothermic reduction. The slurry obtained by mixing TiO The authors are grateful to Professor Masafumi Maeda of the University of Tokyo and Dr. Masana Imagunbai of CBMM Asia for their support and useful input during this study. Thanks are due to Mr. S. Kosemura of Toho Titanium, for sample preparation and analysis, and Messers Itaru Maebashi, Shusuke Iwata and Naoto Sato for experimental assistance. A part of this research includes the results of the program, Development of Electrochemical Reduction Process for Oxide Nuclear Fuel, conducted by the Central Research Institute of the Electric Power Industry, which is financially supported by the MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology).