The mechanisms of energy dissipation during the dynamic fracture and fragmentation of granular materials play a significant role in controlling the evolution of geological structures, enhancing the efficiency of industrial comminution and blasting, and reducing the geoenvironmental hazards. In this research, impact tests on two-glass-bead chains accompanied by micro-CT of crushed fragments are performed. The results reveal that only a small portion of the input stress wave energy is dissipated through the fragmentation of the two-bead-chain system and that the energy dissipation efficiency increases with increasing input energy. It is found that generally the glass bead at the back of the chain always experiences more damage regardless of the input stress wave energy level. The micro-CT results show that the fracture energy only accounts for a small portion (0.3%–1.4%) of the chain system absorbed energy. Such a low conversion rate is attributed to the underestimated surface area of the micro-cracks, caused by the finite resolution of the micro-CT. By pursuing a fractal dimension analysis, designed to account for the undetected micro-crack surface area, it is estimated that the energy conversion rate could be increased to 0.7%–5.1%. It appears that friction dissipation appears to always be predominant, in particular during severe fragmentation.The study of stress waves travelling through crushable granular materials has been a fruitful field of research The failure pattern of a single particle has been investigated in terms of impact velocity, particle size and particle structure The focus of this study is on the energy dissipation mechanisms in a chain of brittle particles during high speed fracture. In such configuration the dissipative contribution from energy redistribution to nearby particles Motivated by the abovementioned discussion, this paper focuses on assessing accurately the energy dissipated through fracture during the impact of brittle particle. We will tackle this problem experimentally through the impact of a two-glass-bead chain system. In this study, the impact loading is provided by the split Hopkinson pressure bar device. A specially designed tube and a separator are used for separating the bead fragments during fragmentation. Micro-CT scanning of the bead fragments is carried out after the impact test. The fracture energy is then calculated by evaluating the newly created surface area, which provides the further quantitative analysis of the fracture mechanics. Finally a simple fractal dimension analysis based method is proposed for estimating the surface area of the undetected micro-fragments and micro-cracks in order to more accurately measure the dissipated energy through surface creation Dynamic compression experiments at high strain rate are conducted on a modified split Hopkinson bar (SHPB) device. A schematic diagram of the SHPB setup is shown in During the experiment, the striker bar launched by the gas gun impacts the incident bar to generate a compression wave (referred as incident wave), which travels along the incident bar to load the specimen (here, the bead chain). When the incident wave arrives at the interface between the specimen and the incident bar, the wave is partially reflected back into the incident bar (referred as reflected wave) and partially transmitted through the specimen into the transmitted bar (referred as transmitted wave). The strain histories are measured using two pairs of strain gauges attached to the middle of the incident and transmitted bars, and acquired by the digital oscilloscope, representing the incident, transmitted and reflected signals. The typical strain histories for the incident and transmitted bars are shown in According to the one-dimensional stress wave theory, when the stress wave propagates in the long rod, the mechanical energy of the stress wave takes the form of the elastic strain energy of the bar deformation and the kinetic energy through bar motion Thus, The kinetic energy (  Hence, the total input energy ( The reflected and transmitted energies, associated with the reflected wave and transmitted waves, respectively, can be similarly expressed. Detailed calculations can be found in Multiple impacts on the specimen might occur during each test if the incident bar is not immediately stopped after the first impact. Since we are only interested in the fragmentation of glass beads and the associated energy dissipation during the first impact, a special specimen holding tube is designed to prevent multiple impacts in each test. The specimen holding tube contains two parts, which can close and be fixed by four screws. Half of the tube and the separator are shown in Before the test, two glass beads of diameter 7 mm, namely the front bead (close to the incident bar), the back bead (close to the transmitted bar), and a separator are sandwiched by the incident and transmitted bars in the internal chamber. The separator contains a hollow-cylinder plastic frame ( The diameter of the internal chamber is 7.05 mm, with a 13.5 mm internal length. The whole glass bead chain system is 14.1 mm long (two 7 mm-diameter glass beads and 0.1 mm-thickness copper shim). As a result, a small part of the chain system is exposed outside the internal chamber thanks to the 0.6 mm gap between the internal chamber and incident bar. This design ensures a maximum 0.6 mm compressive deformation of the glass bead chain, as further impact load would be carried by the chamber wall instead of the glass beads. Based on our calculation, the 0.6 mm gap can guarantee the single impact condition and that sufficient strain will be applied for both beads to crush All the fragments are scanned at the Australian Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis (ACMM) at the University of Sydney using the SkyScan 1172 high-resolution micro-CT at a spatial resolution of 17.66 µm. During scanning, the fragments of each bead are put in a specimen container. The container is located on the platform and scanned by rotating the platform 360 The reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) CT images are analysed through a series of image-processing and analysis procedures to obtain a quantitative description of the fragments. The image processing is made while reducing the image noise and enhancing the contrast between the air and the solid, with the objective of identifying the individual fragment. The reconstruction software used in this study is the NRecon software (v 1.6.9.18). All the parameters are kept unchanged for all the scans in order to keep the analysis systematic. For the purpose of qualitative failure analysis of the impacted glass beads, three representative failure patterns are identified corresponding to increasing beads alteration upon impact, namely damage, splitting and crushing, as shown in In Test 1, the front bead is slightly damaged with a typical Hertzian ring cracks To summarise the findings, in general the back bead is more susceptible to crushing, and even when both beads crush, it always shows a more severe crushing than the front bead. The experimental results are in agreement with the results from Relationship between the experimental input energy ( As can be seen from The damaged specimens are scanned using the micro-CT, with the fragments being analysed using the corresponding 3D dataset, in term of their surface area and volume. The cumulative frequency distributions (based on the fragment number) for three tests corresponding to the representative failure patterns are plotted in As shown in For the two-bead chain system, the fragments of each test are grouped into eight bins based on their volumes. The data of each bin is then normalized over the total fragment number, total fragment surface area and total fragment volume to get the contribution percentages, as shown in It can be seen from The shape of the fragment makes another parameter that one can probe in order to study the particle fracture process. The sphericity is usually used to characterize the morphology of the fragment and describe the similarity between the fragment and a sphere. Since the fragment volume varies in several orders of magnitude, we add the volume weight term here to calculate the sphericity.  Fragmentation of particles shows a statistically scale-invariant topology concerning the fragment size distribution The fractal dimension of the fragment surface area can be defined by the relationship between the number of the particles and the surface area of the particles. Different from the previous definition between the fragment size and number, the definition here directly uses the full 3D dataset from the micro-CT scanning results. Previous studies usually convert an irregular shape particle into an equivalent sphere with the same volume. The equivalent sphere omits the irregular particle morphology and will not accurately reflect the real particle surface area. The surface area frequency distribution of the fragments is given by Another interesting phenomenon is that the micro-CT detects ‘voids’ inside the fragments of splitting and crushing cases. No ‘void’ is discovered in the damage cases, which likely means that these ‘voids’ do not initially exist in the beads and are newly formed during the impact. In fact, ‘voids’ should be part of the newly created internal cracks inside the fragments. A typical fragment containing the internal cracks is shown in Image analysis of these internal cracks needs segmentation, which involves converting the raw grey-scale images ( The scanned fragments and internal crack surface areas from all the tests are summarized in The standard fracture energy Γ (energy used to create a unit surface area) is introduced here to estimate the total fracture energy For glass, the standard fracture energy Γ is between 3.5 and 5.3 There are two main reasons for such a low conversion rate. The first reason is the existence of other energy dissipation mechanisms during the process of fragmentation. In addition to the particle fracture dissipation, frictional dissipation between the fragments should also be considered as a main dissipation mechanism during the high speed dynamic fracture. The relations between the input energy and fragment number as well as the conversion rate are plotted in The second possible reason is the underestimated fracture energy resulting from undetected surface areas of smaller fragments and cracks. Limited by the micro-CT scanning resolution, the minimum detected surface area is Since the surface area Then, the undetected surface area The estimated surface area for micro-fragments and micro-cracks are summarized in As can be seen from Energy dissipation from a two-glass-bead chain under impact is investigated experimentally using the split Hopkinson bar and micro-CT. In general, the back bead crushes more easily than the front bead and damages more severely. Under lower input energies, the energy dissipation efficiency of the chain system greatly increases when severe fragmentation occurs. Under higher input energies, the dissipation ratio increases slowly and tends to saturate at an upper limit of about 20% (whose exact value likely depends on the mechanical properties, geometry and boundary conditions of the investigated system). The generalized extreme value distribution is used to characterize the fragment size distribution. Fragmentation results highlight that the fine powder is the main product during the high speed fracture process. Considering the relatively small order of magnitude of the powder surface area and volume, the total powder surface area and volume are concluded to have a negligible effect; instead, the intermediate and large fragments are the main contributor of the newly created fragment surface area. Morphology analysis show that these fragments created during severe fragmentation are more irregular and angular than those in the slightly damaged cases. The chain sphericity values in the crushing-crushing cases are very similar due to the similar fracture mechanisms of the glass bead during the severe fragmentation process. Fragmentation of each glass bead satisfies a surface area fractal condition. Energy dissipation during the fragmentation is also examined. The fracture energy used to create new surface areas only occupies a small portion of the absorbed energy under current scanning resolution. Two reasons are discussed to explain this phenomenon. Firstly, the breakage efficiency becomes lower when the input energy increases. The increasing irregularity of the fragments created in the higher dynamic breakage process increases the chances for contacts, and thus elevates the role of frictional dissipation. The decreasing trend of the conversion rate indicates that the frictional dissipation component keeps rising with input energy. Secondly, the fracture energy is underestimated owing to the undetected micro-cracks. These micro-crack surface area, estimated from the fractal analysis, greatly increases the total fractured surface area. The new conversion rate is increased by about 3∼4 times after considering the contribution of undetected micro-cracks. Under current scanning resolution and image processing software, it is still very difficult to accurately calculate the micro-crack surface area, which warrants further research. However our study takes into account the contribution of fragments below the experimental resolution using fractal dimension, and therefore strongly suggests that the surface creation only accounts for a small portion of the dissipated energy during fragmentation under impact. The work is supported in part by the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 