With the deepening of underground resource exploitation, the application of cemented backfill pipeline transportation of mineral tailings has become the best option to reduce the risk of deep ground pressure and solid waste pollution. Research in this field is mainly centred on slurry fluidity experiments. However, the slurry transportation parameters, particle characteristics and complexity of the pipeline all cause uncertainty in the calculation of backfill pipeline transportation parameters. The conventional backfill loop test is expensive. Combining structural fluid tests with particle flow models, this paper presents a method to optimize backfill pipeline transportation parameters. The H-B model is employed to analyse the transportation resistance of backfill slurry along the line to establish the relation function between the resisting force and the parameters. Adoption of a custom function improves the accuracy of the inter-phase drag model and the erosion effect. This paper analyses the flow state of the high-concentration solid-liquid dense phase fluid in backfill gravity transportation to obtain optimized transportation parameters. The research results improve the accuracy of the calculation of the backfill pipeline transportation parameters, which can be effectively applied in the optimal design of high-concentration slurry backfill pipeline transportation.Tailings are industrial by-products generated during the exploitation of mineral resources. Partly used for backfill mining, a large amount of tailings are stored as solid waste in surface tailing ponds. Waste tailings are a source of pollution as well as accidents The significance of backfill research is that it fundamentally solves the problem of waste accumulation caused by mining, and achieves effective ground pressure control. The series of working procedures necessitate the flocculation and settling of tailings, the configuration of cement slurry, and the mixing of backfill slurry on the surface. Then, the proper backfill pipeline can be arranged according to the specific needs, transporting slurry to the underground goaf By comparing theoretical calculations and experimental measurements, the slurry performance was analysed to provide a basis for the selection of a reasonable delivery concentration and ideal flow rate The interaction between the performance of a structural fluid and the pipeline has a great influence on the transportation effect of backfill fluid. Scholars have studied the evolution law of rheological properties in the slurry transportation process through theoretical analysis, experimental design and engineering practice. Leighton and Acrivos In the light of these problems, this study carried out a simulation experiment of the cemented backfill gravity transportation of tailings based on analysis of the structural fluid characteristics of the backfill slurry and calculation of the particle flow. Combined with the Bingham model, the resistance equation of structural fluid transportation was established by comparing the fluidity state of slurry with different concentrations in a gravity transportation experiment, and the transportation resistance of backfill slurry under the condition of gravity transportation was calculated. At the same time, a nonlinear fractal theory model analysis was carried out based on the uncertain parameters in the self-flow test. The CFD dense phase-particle flow model was applied to build a real pipeline flow field model considering the inter-phase action and high concentration of backfill transportation. According to the model analysis of different transport parameters, the optimal transportation scheme was acquired. The method of combining laboratory tests with numerical simulations presented reliable results, offering an efficient optimization model of pipeline transportation parameters and providing a basis for the construction of cemented backfill pipeline transportation of mineral processing tailings. The mining method currently adopted by Gaofeng Mine is upward horizontal layered backfill mining. The cemented backfill system of tailings consists of a surface mortar preparation station and an underground pipeline transportation system. The height difference between the backfill station and the stope is large, so gravity flow is the current operational mode. The ground mortar preparation station was built down the hill near the exploration and production inclined shaft industrial site. It is equipped with a horizontal sand bunker, cement bunker and mixing system. After the transformation, the backfill system includes a tailings transport pump station and pipeline, high-efficiency deep cone thickener and flocculant addition, full tailings storage sand pool, slurry making and sand discharging, backfill slurry mixing, power distribution, automatic control and an underground backfill pipeline network. The tailings applied in this study were provided by Gaofeng Mine (Guangxi, China), and the physical and chemical properties of the tailings were analysed at Central South University (Hunan, China). In addition to the basic physical properties of the tailings obtained by indoor test ( The mineral composition of the tailings was determined using X-ray diffraction, as shown in The average particle size of the MPT was 110.597 μm ( In this study, Portland cement (No. 325) was used as a binder with water added. Please note that cement No. 325 meets the requirements of the Chinese national standard GB 175–2007. In this study, the L-type pipeline transportation simulation test was conducted and the resistance loss calculation was combined with the rheological characteristics of the slurry to analyse the on-site slurry transportation resistance and provide a reference for the design of the underground backfill slurry pipeline transportation system. To optimize the transporting performance indicators of Gaofeng Mine backfill slurry and provide a theoretical basis for the design of a backfill pipe network, a gravity transportation test of full tailings backfill slurry at concentrations of 80%, 78%, 76%, 74% and 72% was carried out in the laboratory of the Changsha Institute of Mining Research. The ratio of slurry to sand was 1:4. The test device is shown in The rheological parameter measuring device was employed in the gravity transportation experiment of the mixed backfill slurry to observe the flowing form of the slurry and its state after flowing out. The time of the gravity transportation was measured simultaneously. The specific steps were as follows: Before adding the slurry, measure the relevant dimensional parameters of the gravity flow experimental device. After the slurry transportation starts, observe the slurry outflow form, record the time from the beginning of flowing to the cut-off, and calculate the corresponding flow rate. After the slurry stops flowing, measure the height of the residual material column h0 in the device to prepare for the subsequent calculation. To improve the backfill mining transportation system, optimization of the transport parameters is realized through the mutual verification method of experimental and numerical simulation. The model starts from the 600 m level of the backfill industrial site, and the backfill borehole extends to the middle section of −59 m. Based on the results of the preliminary survey, the main backfill line of Gaofeng Mine was used for simulation modelling. The dense phase DPM model was coupled with the CFD method to solve the problem based on two-fluid analysis. According to kinetic theory of dense molecules, solid particles continuously collide with each other during motion, so particle impact wear should be fully considered in the flow field analysis The Euler-Granular flow field model was applied in the study to analyse the pipeline transportation characteristics. Therefore, the calculation equations of the continuous and discrete phases should be considered. The continuity equation is as follows: In the formula, Unlike the two-phase uniform flow, the solid–liquid dense phase fluid model involves the collision between particles. According to the KTGF theory The stress tensor of the solid phase is: In the formula, The Rosin-Rammler distribution is usually applied to describe the particle size parameters in multiphase particle flow calculations In the formula, In the commonly used drag model, the flow field calculated by the Syamlal-O’Brian model is vivid and real for simulating the phase-to-phase transmission state of solid–liquid dense phase fluid. In this calculation, the particle phase and the continuous phase are completely coupled, ignoring the heat exchange between the particle phase, the continuous phase, and the particle and the continuous phase. Consequently, the Syamlal-O’Brian drag model was adopted for the solid–liquid momentum transfer In the above two formulas, In the solid–liquid two-phase fluidization system, to define the phase-to-phase exchange coefficient and solid-phase shear stress, the exchange coefficient is calculated according to the following formula: To improve the calculation accuracy, the minimum fluidization condition must be controlled. According to the Syamml-O’Brian drag model, the ratio of the liquid–solid two-phase slip velocity and the particle terminal velocity is employed, and the correction coefficient of the solid phase terminal velocity is set. The formula is as follows: In the formula, The drag relationship obtained by the regression of the drag model on the experimental data of the fluidized flow can reflect the essence of the drag force of the non-uniform solid–liquid dense phase fluid. Equation Simulation experiments of the L-type pipeline gravity flow of different concentrations of slurry were conducted and the experimental results are shown in The transport characteristics of the backfill slurry vary with concentration. The flow states in different schemes show that the higher the concentration, the greater the resistance of pipeline transportation will be. The backfill slurry maintains a high flow rate and flows out in a spray pattern at lower concentration, and it splashes. As the concentration increases, the slurry flow state alters substantially. The flow rate decreases, and the state tends to be stable. As shown in The rheological properties of high-concentration full tailings slurry can be described by Bingham fluid In the formula, The force of Bingham fluid flowing along the pipeline under pressure is shown in Taking a cylinder with length That is, Substituting formula After integrating In the formula, Equation In the formula, Based on Bingham’s rheological equation It is generally believed that the high power of In the formula, D refers to the pipe diameter, m. The force state of the backfill slurry when flowing is shown in According to the law of energy conductance, the following formula can be derived:     In the above formulas, The following formula was obtained after substituting the above terms into equation The yield shear stress of the slurry can be calculated according to the following formula: The corresponding τ In this test device, The flowing velocity of the slurry  The flowing resistance per unit length of pipeline The concentrations of the testing slurry were 80%、78%、76%、74%、and 72%. The calculation results of the flow rates and resistance of different slurry concentrations are shown in In order to realize the rheological analysis of the backfilling slurry transportation under various influencing factors, the fractal theory was used to establish the rheological model. In fact, the fractal function reflects the motion of the object. Therefore, how to construct the “fractal calculus” by giving the speed of motion described by the fractal function, and the task of giving a mathematical tool to describe the rate of change of the fractal function are mentioned on the agenda Under the microgravity condition, one-dimensional flow can be expressed as Mass conservation Moment conservation Isentropic relationship In the analysis of structural flow, the time-varying effect of the flow field is not the cause of the change in the pipeline transportation resistance, so the fractal modeling has nothing to do with the time influencing factors. When the Bingham fluid flows in the pipeline, its flow velocity distribution is not parabolic as Newtonian fluid, but the flow velocity is the same in the range of Within the range of plunger flow or “structural flow”, the fluid particles neither generate relative motion nor exchange of particles, which can reduce the internal friction loss during the transportation process. The flow of fluid along the pipe is just a slip along the pipe wall. It is confirmed by mass production practice that when the slurry containing fine particles is transported along the pipeline, due to the pressure, the slurry material and fine particles are squeezed to the outer layer, thereby forming a lubricating layer on the pipe wall, and significantly reducing the pipeline transportation resistance. Due to the above-mentioned transport characteristics of Bingham fluid, especially due to its yield shear stress τ From The total flow value The influence of the flow velocity in the tube can be regarded as a linear influencing factor, and τ and η are determined by the slurry concentration. Therefore, if the slurry concentration with obvious non-linear characteristics is In the case of fixed concentration and flow rate, The parameters introduced into the flow test of the gravity flow structure are used to calculate the model, as shown in The fractal function in the form of Cross is applied to the drag loss model, which can realize the verification of i(r). Taking the flow rate of 40 m From the above test results and theoretical analysis calculations, we can see that the transport resistance i of the backfilling slurry is related to the rheological parameters τ, η and flow velocity V of the backfilling slurry itself. For certain mines, the composition of the filler used is generally more difficult to change. In order to realize the smooth transportation of the backfilling slurry, comprehensive analysis and research on the factors affecting the transportation resistance are required. By determining the appropriate backfilling slurry preparation parameters and installing the appropriate backfilling pipe network, the backfilling system can run smoothly under reasonable working conditions. For the cemented backfill of the full tailings of Gaofeng Mine, the factors that affect the transporting performance of the backfill slurry can be summarized as follows: The yield shear stress The slurry concentration reached 24.42607 Pa·S at 80% and 3.73863 Pa·S at 78%. When the concentration was 76%, The flowing velocity The yield stress and viscosity of the slurry are taken into consideration in tests of gravity transportation of structural fluid, and instruct in the calculation of the backfill transporting resistance. However, due to the limitation in the length of the experimental pipeline, the pipeline resistance was large in the condition of a high concentration because of local deposition. When the concentration of the full tailings mortar is high, especially when it contains many fine-grained particles, the relationship between the shear rate and the shear stress is nonlinear and it is in the form of a non-Newtonian fluid with a solid–liquid two-phase mixture. The common model exercises an averaging process on the multiphase mixed state of the flow field, and there is a deficiency in the analysis of the motion and effect of the discrete phases. Combined with the characteristics of the pipeline fluidization system, this study applies the two-phase particle flow dynamics theory and the Euler DDPM particle flow model of the Fluent platform to analyse the high volume fraction solid–liquid two-phase flow. As shown in The current flow rate of the mine is 60 m In the process of MPT slurry transportation, the longer the transportation distance is, the greater the loss of pipeline resistance will be. With increasing distance, the pressure tends to descend steadily. As the transportation continued, due to the interaction in the flow field, the flow rate of particles fluctuated, especially at the bends, which shows that the particle flow erosion friction in these areas is more obvious. From the cloud image at the exit, we can see that the velocity increases after flowing through the pipe. The maximum speed reached 3.24 m/s. The resistance data for the different concentrations were calculated for analysis. See Comparing these results, it can be concluded that the viscosity of the slurry and the shear stress of the pipe wall increase significantly with the increase of the transporting concentration and the pipeline transportation resistance also substantially increases. The maximum inlet and outlet pressures of 1.963 × 10  As a classic calculation basis of CFD, the wall collision theory proposed by Husser was applied here to calculate the erosion rate In the formula, Researchers have compared a variety of wall collision equations, and found that the impact-rebound recovery coefficient formula proposed by Forder has obvious advantages. Therefore, it was applied to define the elastic recovery coefficient to characterize the momentum change after solid particles collide with the wall  The erosion rate data on the baseline of the erosion concentration zone of the pipe wall at different concentrations were collected based on the maximum erosion rate, as shown in The most eroded area was the junction of the bend section and the straight section downstream. The secondary flow generated inside the bend section drives the solid particles to move more violently. They move from the outside to the inside and impact on the inside wall at the bent section. The closer to the erosion centre, the more significant the increase in the erosion rate. As the MPT slurry concentration increases, the erosion rate and its influence range also increase, with a minimum of 7.44 × 10 Unlike the state of continuous homogeneous flow, the movement of discrete phase particles exhibits a turbulent state in many places due to the interaction in the flow field and the difference between the particles. The particle flow is more stable in the straight pipe section, and the fine particles move more frequently in the upper part, even in the inclined straight pipe. When the particle flow reaches the elbow, the flow is accompanied by a secondary flow. To study the influence of turbulence and erosion on the particle distribution in MPT slurry, the particle size monitoring results were extracted at the end of the maximum erosion area at the elevation of 13 m, as shown in The mean particle size of the 76% concentration was 0.062 mm, closest to the median of the initial particle size of 0.058 mm. The uniformity of the slurry and the integrity of the flow field were maintained at the 76% concentration. A higher concentration is also beneficial to improve the backfill quality. To optimize the MPT pipeline transport flow rate, the slurry concentration was set as 76%, and the transport flow rate was set as 50, 60, 70, 80 and 90 m The resistance increases with the increase of the flow rate. The simulation calculation results in The cloud chart implies that the wall shear stress concentration area is mainly 250–500 pa and the maximum stress concentration occurs at 203 m, reaching 799 pa. The maximum shear stress at different flow rates were extracted and analysed. When the slurry flow rate declined, the pipeline resistance loss presented a near-linear trend. The monitoring results show that the maximum shear stress was 1243.58 pa at the flow rate of 90 m In addition to the effects of resistance and wall shear, the deposition caused by accumulation of the discrete phase in slurry transportation is also an important factor that may cause engineering problems. Therefore, the particle flow distribution results at different flow rates were analysed, as shown in The distribution of the discrete phases at different flow rates indicate that siltation most likely occurs at the middle section at 13 m where the pipeline is arranged according to the tunnel with small elbows in the horizon, which should be paid attention to in engineering. When the flow rate decreases, the mass fraction of the discrete phase increases; when the flow rate was lower than 60 m Through analysis of the mass fraction of the discrete phase, it can be concluded that the mass distribution of the particle phase was greatly concentrated at a flow rate of 50 m The gravity flow transportation experiment of the cemented backfill of full tailings was carried out based on the viscous shear properties of the structural fluid of the backfill slurry and the calculation equations of the particle flow. By comparing the fluidity state of slurry at different concentrations in the gravity flow transportation experiment and combining the results with the Bingham model, the resistance equation of structural fluid transportation was established and the transportation resistance of backfill slurry was calculated. Based on the CFD dense phase fluid theory, the flow field model of the pipeline was established and high-concentration backfill transportation was considered. According to the particle size distribution characteristics of the tailings, the shape size function was defined as the initial condition. The Eulerian Lagrangian method was employed to calculate the complex flow field of discrete phase and trace the particles, achieving accuracy with the method. The main conclusions are as follows: The test results and theoretical analysis and calculation show that the transportation resistance i of the backfill slurry along the pipeline is related to the rheological parameters To improve the backfill quality, the concentration should be increased as much as possible to reduce guttation. However, increasing the slurry concentration will accelerate the resistance loss of transportation, intensify the turbulence and erosion effect of the transportation platform at the elbow, and destroy the original particle size distribution characteristics of MPT slurry, which is not conducive to maintaining the integrity of the transportation and backfill. In the flow rate analysis, the resistance characteristic of the structural fluid and dense phase fluid simulation show nearly linear growth with the increase of the flow rate. Due to the significant wall shear caused by an excessive flow rate, which is not conducive to the service life of the pipeline, a lower flow rate should be selected to meet the production demand. Considering the actual conditions of the mine, the flow rate of 60 m In this study, secondary development of compiled language was adopted to improve the parameters of the inter-phase traction model and erosion model to strengthen the identification of fluidization calculation. The research results improve the conventional CFD optimization method of backfill transportation, which can be accurately applied in optimization of the design of backfill pipeline transportation with particle flow characteristics to reduce the dependence of mining enterprises on large-scale loop experiments and industrial verification. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of project (No. 51774323) supported by the Natural Sciences Foundation of China; and the