The main purpose of this study was to characterize and to extract bismuth and molybdenum from a low grade bismuth glance concentrate. Selective leaching of bismuth could be obtained at a temperature range 60 to 85 °C for a leaching duration of 2 h with hydrochloric acid concentration of 150 gpl, lignin calcium concentration of 0.02 gpl and using a solid–liquid ratio 1/4 g/cc. Treatment of leach liquor for the solvent extraction of bismuth with N235 showed that 8.0×10−2 M N235 in kerosene, a 3 min period of equilibration and a pH 0.2 were sufficient for the extraction of Bi(III). This bismuth-loaded organic phase was almost completely stripped using 0.5 M EDTA solution. Treatment of leached residue was dealt with by roasting in the presence of slaked lime, and followed by hydrometallurgical treatment of the roasted products. In the lime roasting process, molybdenum recoveries of around 99% were achieved when an excess of 50% lime over stoichiometric requirement was roasted at 700 °C for 2 h and the calcine was leached with 4 M HCl, at 70–80 °C for 2 h. Molybdenum then was effectively extracted from the leached residual solution with N235. An optimum pH of 0.5 was determined for molybdenum extraction. From loaded solvent, this metal was easily stripped with ammonia solutions to give a pregnant solution suitable for final recovery of metal by salt precipitation. Under the optimized conditions, the ultimate recovery rate of bismuth and molybdenum was more than 99% and 98% respectively.Very little bismuth and molybdenum come from the processing of minerals where bismuth and molybdenum are the main metals. Most bismuth and molybdenum are obtained as the sub-products in other metal metallurgical processes. During the processing of these minerals, leaching with H As for the molybdenum, it is produced mainly from its high grade sulfide ore, the commercial route for the extraction of molybdenum from its sulfide mineral molybdenite involves roasting of the concentrate, purification of the resultant calcine, either by distillation of MoO In the present study, a process for separation and recovery of bismuth and molybdenum from a low grade bismuth glance flotation concentrate by solvent extraction was studied. N235 (R The low grade bismuth glance flotation concentrate obtained from ShiZhuYuan Rare Metal Co., China, in the ground form was characterized physically, chemically and mineralogically. The dry screen analysis of this bismuth glance shows that almost all concentrate samples were around 100 mesh (147 µm) and all samples were leached in this form without further grinding. A representative sample of the bismuth glance was taken and ground before chemical analysis. Most of the chemical analysis of the bismuth glance was done by AAS except SiO The main purpose of this study was to characterize and to extract bismuth and molybdenum from a low grade bismuth glance concentrate. A procedure for separation and recovery of metals from this low grade bismuth glance flotation concentrate by solvent extraction was studied ( In the leaching experiments a hot plate with contact thermometer and a magnetic stirrer were used. The leaching was done in 250 cc glass balloons using Teflon coated magnets. A condenser attached to the balloon prevented the vaporization losses and with the aid of the contact thermometer, the temperature of the system was controlled within 2 °C. At the end of each leaching experiment, the insoluble leach residue was separated from the pregnant leach solution by passing it through a filter paper and the solids were washed with distilled water. In the leaching tests the procedure followed was as follows: A measured amount of distilled water and calculated amount of reagent grade hydrochloric acid were put into the glass balloon and heated to the desired temperature while magnetically stirring. Then, the weighted amount of bismuth glance floatation concentrate powder, sodium chlorate and lignin calcium was added to the dilute hydrochloric acid solution and the timing was initiated. The stirring speed (250 r/min) which gave sufficient mixing was kept constant in all the experiments. At the end of leaching duration, solid–liquid separation by filtration followed as explained above. The leach recovery of bismuth was calculated using the analysis of the bismuth glance flotation concentrate and the leach residue and its mass. Thereinto, sodium chlorate was used as oxidization agent and lignin calcium was used to selectively enwrap the other sulfide excepted bismuth sulfide. In the deoxidization tests the procedure followed was as follows: The measured leached residual solution was poured into a 250 cc glass balloons using Teflon coated magnets to stir it. Then, the weighted amount of bismuth powder was added to the solution and the timing was initiated. The stirring speed which gave sufficient mixing was kept constant in all the experiments (250 r/min). At the end of deoxidization duration, solid–liquid separation by filtration followed as explained above. The deoxidization degree was calculated using the analysis of the Fe In the solvent extraction tests the procedure followed was as follows: a measured amount of purified solution and extraction agents was put into the separatory funnel and shook rapidly. The shaking speed which gave sufficient mixing was kept constant in all the experiments (120 r/min). At the end of solvent extraction duration, organic–aqueous phases were separated by separatory funnel. The extraction rate of bismuth was calculated by measuring the volume of the purified solution and the extraction residual solution and metals concentration. In the stripping tests, bismuth or molybdenum was stripped by ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) or ammonia respectively to give an enriched aqueous phase: a measured amount of pregnant organic solution and EDTA or ammonia solution was put into the separatory funnel and shook rapidly. The shaking speed which gave sufficient mixing was kept constant in all the experiments. At the end of stripping duration, organic–aqueous phases separation by that separatory funnel. The stripping rate of bismuth or molybdenum was calculated using the measure the volume of the pregnant organic solution and the pregnant solution and metals concentration. ShiZhuYuan bismuth glance floatation concentrate samples were leached with hydrochloric acid solution. The samples used in the leaching experiments were previously ground to − The optimum leaching conditions of bismuth were obtained at a temperature range 60 to 85 °C for a leaching duration of 2 h with hydrochloric acid concentration of 150 gpl, lignin calcium concentration of 0.02 gpl and using a solid–liquid ratio 1/4 g/cc. Under these optimized conditions, the leaching experiment results showed in As given in The extraction characteristics of individual metal ions were examined by conducting a series of shake-out tests with equal volumes of organic solvent of 8.0 The major aim of this study was production of pre-solvent extraction solution in pure form as possible. In the deoxidization tests the procedure was followed as follows: The measured leached residual solution was poured into a 250 cc glass balloon using Teflon coated magnets to stir it. Then, the weighted amount of bismuth powder was added to the solution and the timing was initiated. The stirring speed which gave sufficient mixing was kept constant in all the experiments. At the end of deoxidization duration, solid–liquid separation by filtration followed as explained above. The deoxidization degree was calculated using the analysis of the Fe The experimental durations were varied between 10 min and 60 min. As shown in Experiments of the this group were made to examine the effect of mass of bismuth powder addition on the Fe In order to optimize the conditions for extraction of Bi(III), kerosene solutions of N235 with varying molar concentrations were employed and TBP (1% v/v) was added as phase modifier. It was found that 8.0 Bi(III) was extracted with 8.0 The solutions were shaken for a varying period ranging from 1.0 to 15.0 min. The extraction was quantitative over the entire period range after 3 min. Therefore a 3 min period of equilibration was used for the extraction of Bi(III). The solutions were shaken for a varying pH values for 3 min, using hydrochloric acid and ammonia solution to adjust the pH value. It was determined that the extraction was highly efficient around pH 0.2. Therefore pH 0.2 was used for the extraction of Bi(III) ( Bi(III) was stripped with different strengths of ligands after their extraction. The stripping of Bi(III) was quantitative with 0.1 M to 1.0 M EDTA, DTPA, EGTA, DCTA. It is found that only 0.5 M EDTA showed the maximal stripping ratio of Bi(III). Hence, for all further investigations, 0.5 M EDTA was used as stripping agent for Bi(III) ( Based on the above mentioned investigation, it is clear that from this purified solution, bismuth could be extracted with N235, and it was determined that the extraction was highly efficient around pH 0.2 and no co-extraction of other metals was observed at the pH of bismuth recovery. This metal was stripped by ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) to give an enriched aqueous phase containing 9.93 gpl, and this pregnant solution was suitable for final recovery of bismuth by electrolysis, replacement or salt precipitation. The commercial route for the extraction of molybdenum from its sulfide mineral molybdenite involves roasting of the concentrate, purification of the resultant calcine, either by distillation of MoO Processing of low grade molybdenite concentrates for the extraction of molybdenum without entailing SO In this study, the bismuth-leached residue was treated with by roasting in the presence of slaked lime, and followed by hydrometallurgical treatment of the roasted products. The calcine was leached with HCl and molybdenum can then be extracted from the leached residual solution with N235. From loaded solvent, this metal was stripped with ammonia solutions to give a pregnant solution suitable for final recovery of molybdenum by salt precipitation. The roasting of bismuth-leached residue, molybdenite, in the presence of lime/slaked lime (Ca(OH) The results of the influence of the temperature of roasting on the recovery of molybdenum were presented in Investigations on the leaching of the calcine with HCl indicated that a leaching with 4 M HCl at 80–90 °C for 3 h with constant stirring was necessary to extract the maximum amount of molybdenum from the calcined mass. The results of leaching studies were given in The residual solution generated in the acid leaching step contains variable but significant amounts of molybdenum (VI) and iron (III) as shown in In order to optimize the conditions for extraction of Mo(IV) and Fe(III), kerosene solutions of N235 with varying molar concentrations were employed. It was found that 15 The solutions were shaken for varying pH values for 3 min, using hydrochloric acid and ammonia solution to adjust the pH value. It was determined that the extraction is highly efficient around pH 0.4, Therefore pH 0.4 was used for the extraction of Mo(IV) and Fe(III) ( From It was expected that molybdenum (VI) can be stripped by contacting the pregnant organic phase with an alkaline solution such as ammonia or ammonium carbonate. The strip tests were carried out with a variety of concentrations of ammonia solutions to examine the stripping efficiency for molybdenum (VI) in this work. The results were presented in  A comprehensive procedure was introduced to separation and collective extraction of bismuth and molybdenum from low grade bismuth glance concentrate. All detailed processes, include: the hydrochloric acid leaching, purification and deoxidization, solvent extraction of bismuth, lime roasting process, leaching and solvent extraction of molybdenum, were then optimized for selective and collective recovery and the optimum conditions for bismuth and molybdenum were determined. Solvent extraction of bismuth and molybdenum by N235 from leach liquors mentioned in the processing of ShiZhuYuan bismuth glance flotation concentrate was studied. Under the optimized conditions, the ultimate recovery ratios of bismuth and molybdenum were more than 99% and 98% respectively. The authors would like to express their gratitude to the Department of Science and Technology of China for supplying financial support, and ShiZhuYuan Rare Metal Co., China for supplying the material as well as the experiment equipments for this study.