This study aimed to investigate the combined effect of storage at 4 °C (10-days) and in vitro gastrointestinal digestion on the phytochemical profile of red beet (Beta vulgaris) and amaranth (Amaranthus sp.) microgreens. The untargeted profiling based on UHPLC-QTOF metabolomics allowed annotating 316 compounds, comprising mainly polyphenols and lipids. An impact of storage on the total phenolic content (TPC) was observed, with a maximum increase at 10-days of storage for both red beet (+1.3-fold) and amaranth (+1.1-fold). On the other hand, in vitro digestion of both red beet and amaranth microgreens produced a significant increase in TPC (36–88%), CUPRAC (27–40%), DPPH (6–43%), and BC (41–57%) to reach the maximum at 10 days of storage. Tyrosinase inhibitory potential also decreased following digestion. The combination of biochemical changes occurring in microgreen immature plants (likely in response to the harvest stress) with changes during digestion, determined the actual functional value of microgreens.The natural bioactive compounds present in fruits and vegetables, including polyphenols and betalains, have been consistently identified in epidemiological studies as key components to provide substantial benefits to human health ( Red beet and amaranth are among the most popular varieties of microgreens owing to not only their nutrient-dense properties, which contain betalains and polyphenols but also their intense aromatic flavor. Betalains are classified in betacyanins (responsible for red pigmentation) and betaxanthins (related to yellow colour). On the other hand, the industrial exploitation of microgreens is limited due to the short shelf life, not exceeding 10–14 days ( To the best of our knowledge, the combined effect of cold storage and In this study, two microgreen species were evaluated, namely red beet ( Microgreens were extracted according to a previously reported method ( Total phenolic content (TPC) was measured by using Folin-Ciocalteu reagent, as described previously by The total antioxidant capacities (TAC) were evaluated using two different assays: CUPRAC (Copper (II) reducing antioxidant capacity) and DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) method, as previously described by The quantification of betalains (as sum of betacyanins and betaxanthins) was carried out according to Betacyanins (Betaxanthins) content (mg/L) = where A = A e = 60,000 (molar extinction coefficient in L × mol For the tyrosinase inhibition activity, The protocol detailed by The screening of phenolic compounds and betalains in different samples was done using ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography (UHPLC) coupled to a quadrupole-time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer. The experimental conditions for the analysis of bioactive compounds by UHPLC-QTOF were optimized in previous works ( The metabolomic dataset was then used for multivariate statistics and chemometrics. Regarding polyphenols, the compounds annotated were classified and then cumulative intensities values were converted into semi-quantitative data using methanolic standard solutions of pure standard compounds (Extrasynthese, Lyon, France) analysed under the same conditions. In particular, ferulic acid (phenolic acids), quercetin (flavonols), sesamin (lignans), cyanidin (anthocyanins), catechin (flavan-3-ols), luteolin (flavones and other remaining flavonoids), resveratrol (stilbenes), and tyrosol (tyrosols and other remaining phenolics) were used as representatives of their respective phenolic classes. A linear fitting (R Spectrophotometric analyses were performed using three biological and three technical replicates. The results were expressed as means ± standard deviations (SD). One-way ANOVA followed by Duncan’s posthoc test was performed using Xlstat 2017 software. Differences were declared statistically significant at p < 0.05. Metabolomics-based analyses were performed using two biological and two technical replicates. Raw data were elaborated using the software Agilent Mass Profiler Professional B.12.06. Compounds normalization was done according to the method reported in our previous work ( In this work, TPC, TAC, and BC characterizing red beet and amaranth microgreen samples were determined The effect of Tyrosinase inhibition ability was determined by dopachrome method, and the results are given in In this work, untargeted profiling based on UHPLC-QTOF mass spectrometry was used to depict the changes of phytochemicals (with a focus on phenolic compounds and betalains) as affected by the storage conditions. Besides, a comprehensive metabolomic analysis (based on the comprehensive database FoodDB) was performed in order to shed light on the fate of different classes of compounds during the Thereafter, a semi-quantitative analysis based on representative standard compounds was carried out to monitor the impact of storage (i.e., at 1, 4, 7, and 10 days) on the main phenolic sub-classes for both undigested microgreens. The results of this analysis are reported in Afterwards, supervised modelling based on multivariate statistics, such as OPLS-DA, was used to shed light on the discriminant compounds determining the changes of the phytochemical profile during storage. The score-plots for both red beet and amaranth microgreens during the storage period are presented in Finally, the untargeted metabolomics-based approach was further applied to investigate the changes of the leading chemical classes during the Shelf life is unequivocally one of the most critical factors influencing the nutritional composition of microgreens ( Regarding the functional properties of microgreens, few studies have been carried out to date, with polyphenols described as the major contributors to the health-promoting effects. Looking at the changes observed during the simulated The current study has shown that red beet and amaranth microgreens are good sources of polyphenols during storage that can potentially contribute to human health. However, the phytochemical profile undergoes significant changes during storage, likely because of the profound biochemical changes these immature plants experience in response to storage factors and growth stages. Moreover, responses were genotype-dependent, with fresh amaranth microgreens showing a different trend among the storage period as compared to the fresh red beet microgreens. Although phenolic profiles varied significantly during storage, the phenolic content values were found to be significantly higher after 10 days of storage. Therefore, the combined effect of storage time, storage conditions, and changes occurring during digestion determines the actual functional value of microgreens.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors wish to thank the “Enrica e Romeo Invernizzi” Foundation for kindly supporting the metabolomic platform. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  