Background
                  We present the surgical technique of separate vertical wiring for displaced inferior pole fractures of the patella combined with Krachow suture and report the surgical outcomes.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Between September 2007 to May 2012, 11 consecutive patients (mean age, 54.6 years) with inferior pole fractures of the patella (AO/OTA 34-A1) were retrospectively enrolled in this study. Through longitudinal incision, all patients underwent open reduction and internal fixation by separate vertical wiring combined with Krackow suture. The range of motion, loss of fixation, and Bostman score were primary outcome measures.
               
                  Results
                  The union time was 10 weeks after surgery on average (range: 8–12). No patient had nonunion, loss of reduction and wire breakage. There was no case of wound problem and irritation from the implant. At final follow-up, the average range of motion arc was 129.4° (range: 120–140). The mean Bostman score at last follow-up was 29.6 points (range: 28–30) and graded excellent in all cases.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Separate vertical wiring combined with Krackow suture for inferior pole fractures of the patella is a useful technique that is easy to perform and can provide stable fixation with excellent results in knee function.The surgical goal of reconstruction of patella fractures is to reestablish the extensor mechanism while simultaneously restoring articular congruency. Tension-band wiring has been the most commonly used surgical technique for displaced transverse patellar fractures We present the surgical technique of separate vertical wiring for displaced inferior pole fractures of the patella combined with Krachow suture and report our surgical outcomes. Between September 2007 to May 2012, 17 patients were treated with separate vertical wiring combined Krackow suture for displaced inferior pole fracture of patella. Among them, 4 patients who had concomitant ipsilateral femur or tibia fractures that could affect functional outcomes of knee joint and 2 patients treated separate vertical wiring only were excluded. All the patients gave informed consent prior to study inclusion. The study was authorized by the local ethics committee (IB-1411-048) and performed in accordance with the Ethical standards of the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki (revised in 2000). This retrospective study reviewed radiological and functional outcomes of 11 patients. There were five men and six women with an average age of 54.6 years (range: 23–74). All fractures occurred from simple falls to the ground. There were no open fractures in this study group. The time from injury to surgery averaged 6.4 days (range: 3–11). Patient co-morbidities included just hypertension in two patients. All patients were ambulatory with no functional limitations before injury. All distal pole fractures occurred in extra-articular portion of distal pole and could be classified to 34-A1 according to AO/OTA classification. Average length of distal fragment was 11.2 Surveillance radiographs were taken monthly in the first 3 postoperative months. We evaluated the bony union through serial radiographs. Clinical outcomes were assessed by recording post-procedure complications, knee range of motion, and Bostman score Patients were placed in the supine position on a radiolucent table and a pneumatic tourniquet was used in all cases. We performed a standard midline longitudinal incision extending from the upper end of patella to tibial tuberosity. Full thickness skin flaps were raised medially and laterally to expose the transversely ruptured retinaculum, fracture, and the patellar tendon ( The mean postoperative follow-up period was 13 months (range: 10–23). Fracture union defined as the loss of the fracture line and presence of bony trabecular continuity was achieved an average of 10 weeks after surgery (range: 8–12). No patient had nonunion, loss of reduction or wire breakage. There were no cases of wound complications or irritation from the implants. There were four cases of implant removal at 16th postoperative month (range: 10–23). The reason of implant removal was that they did not want to retain any metalic device in their body. At final follow-up, the average range of motion was 129.4° (range: 120–140). All patients regained full range of motion compared to contralateral knee. The mean Bostman score at last follow-up was 29.6 points (range: 28–30) and graded excellent in all cases. Open reduction and internal fixation is the preferred treatment for displaced patellar fractures to restore articular congruency and to maintain the extensor mechanism function. Among the various surgical techniques, tension-band wiring is the most commonly used method for transverse patellar fracture. This technique converts the anterior tension forces produced by the extensor mechanism and knee flexion into compression forces at the articular surface Inferior pole fractures of the patella account for 9.3–22.4% of all the patellar fractures Partial patellectomy and tendon reattachment via suture and transosseous tunnel For the preservation of patellar bone, some new methods have been described. Matejcic et al. Separate vertical wiring technique for comminuted fractures of the distal patella introduced by Yang and Byun We modified separate vertical wiring technique by adding Krackow suture for patellar tendon to improve immediate stability of fixation. We believe that three separate wires might not be sufficient to allow early ROM and to maintain the reduction in case of comminuted distal fragments. The Krackow suture technique has been widely used for tendon repair and relatively familiar technique to orthopaedic surgeon The limitations of this study are retrospective design and small total case numbers. We believe that separate vertical wiring combined with Krackow suture for inferior pole fractures of the patella is a useful technique that is easy to perform and can provide stable fixation with excellent functional results in distal pole patella fractures. No conflict of interest.