Blades narrower than the surface will form a slot or groove. A ball bearing rolling over the hard surface of its races forms a minute elastic groove that recovers after the ball passes by. The much larger deformations when one walks or rolls around on a mattress, water bed, or air-filled “bouncy castle” also recover. Above some limiting contact stress, but still within the elastic range, various types of crack appear to the side, and below, the track on the surface of brittle bodies. Unless the cracks intersect there is no material removal but, even so, the surface is deemed to be “damaged” by formation of regular patterns of cracks in the wake of the slider. Instead of multiple cracks, a permanent groove may be produced when scratching with a pointed tool, as relied on by the glazier when marking the line along which glass is snapped to size by bending. The formation of permanent grooves by pointed tools takes place by two distinct modes of deformation, depending on the geometry and attack angle of the tool. In the upper illustration, material displaced by the tool forms a prow above the original surface, through which material flows up from the groove to form ridges alongside the groove. In the other, the tool cuts away the material in the form of a chip that may be continuous or discontinuous. Instead of multiple cracks, a permanent groove may be produced when scratching with a pointed tool, as relied on by the glazier when marking the line along which glass is snapped to size by bending; similarly in the scoring of silicon discs preparatory to snapping (dicing) into chips. A diamond ring can be used to produce graffiti on glass by scratching. Rough coatings of plaster are scratched before being quite dry to aid mechanical adherence of the next coat. Permanent grooves involve elastoplastic deformation, to which the scaling laws of Production of a V-shaped groove involves cutting with In The geometry of the chip when cutting with more than one edge is complicated because of the connected three-dimensional flow arising from two edges and a nose ( A scratch is the same as a groove, but ‘scratch’ often has the implication of ‘unwanted’ and ‘damaged’. Scratches are not wanted when the appearance of the surface is marred (furniture; car paintwork; grooves left across wooden floors when heavy furniture on castors is moved) or when damage results (non-stick coatings on frying pans gouged by too-hard kitchen utensils). Yet tampering with cricket balls relies on scratching with the fingernails or scratching with dirt in the pocket. By what mechanism do grooves form over time in the runners of drawers in wooden furniture; are they cut or rubbed? In contrast, making permanent grooves and other shapes is the aim when machining threads, carving wood, sculpting stone, decorating pottery, engraving, pargetting (exterior Under static axisymmetric Hertzian contact (ball indentation), a small zone of tension develops in the form of an annulus on the surface and, at sufficiently large loads, induces a characteristic ring crack that may subsequently develop into the frustum of a cone ( Indentations and grooves may be made by pointed indenters in brittle solids that would shatter under tension, owing to the significant compressive hydrostatic stresses set up beneath the indenter, which suppress crack formation ( Whatever the shape of a tool, if indentations and scratches are made too close to the edge of a brittle workpiece, chips of material are spalled away, since the induced crack system propagates to the edge when it is sufficiently close. Scratching experiments, using pointed tools at various inclinations on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) at different controlled depths of cut, replicate the different types of elastoplastic chip, and transitions between them, that were seen for orthogonal cutting in To perform controlled cutting of low (ER/k There has long been interest in the turning of optical glass (e.g. The formation of permanent grooves by pointed tools takes place by two distinct modes of deformation shown in Other things being equal, the transition is controlled by a critical attack angle λ  Transitions occur with spherical-ended tools, but depend on the depth of cut as it determines the effective angle of attack ( Castors, even under very heavy pianos, do not indent floors too far, and hence have small attack angles and do not cut. The radius of cylindrical or ball-ended castors should be designed to suit the ‘terrain’ – similarly for the size of all wheeled vehicles where the ground is deformable. Big wheels enable soft ground to be traversed; a child’s buggy with small wheels is difficult to push over gravel, but an old-fashioned pram is easy. Ruts along farmtracks are formed by tractor wheels partially cutting and partially displacing material out of the groove (noting that the rolling wheels act downwards into the ruts, not upwards). A body moving along a sinusoidal surface experiences vertical accelerations proportional to the height of the wave above its mean ( Explanations for the existence of a transition between rubbing and cutting have been given by a number of workers, using the idea that the mode of deformation that requires the smaller force will prevail. For continuous chip formation, i.e. and where Z = R/kt as in orthogonal cutting, and where the Coulomb friction correction factor Q  Predictions for the ridge heights h normalized by the depth of the groove below the original surface t are higher the broader the tool point (   Therefore the offset p is given by (2Rt/Q Mechanical properties may be estimated from scratch tests using The problem of determining ‘valid’ fracture toughness, from specimens too small to satisfy the minimum size requirements of national and international standards, is well known and is part of the wider problem of scaling in fracture mechanics. It is a problem not only in structural integrity but in other fields also. One such is archaeometallurgy, where only very small samples are usually available. Such samples are usually mounted and metallurgical micrographs taken to identify the microstructure. Although small, the samples are often big enough to enable microhardness measurements to be taken from which the strength may be estimated. In investigations relating to the performance of ancient weapons, armour and tools, microstructure and hardness alone are incapable of telling the whole picture, since it is really desirable to have knowledge of the fracture toughness as well ( Sedriks and Mulhearn’s 1960s' experiments were performed under constant deadweight load. At the largest angles of attack, the pyramidal tool ‘digs in’ and eventually seizure occurs. Seizure is peculiar to deadweight loading: under constant groove depth, the rubbing/cutting transition still takes place, but there is no seizure. The equilibrium vertical load on the indenter during cutting is given by In the grinding of corn, grains of cereals are crushed to powder to make flour. Grinding in this sense is The different sense in which grinding is employed in manufacturing is removal of material in very small amounts from the surface of a larger piece by simultaneous multiple scratching. Grinding is employed in a number of different ways in the workshop, such as a finishing operation when parts require particular dimensional accuracy. It is used for sharpening tools and for shaping very hard materials that would otherwise fracture were attempts made to remove material at normal depths of cut (owing to the fracture mechanics scale effect). In contrast to corn grinding, rotational speeds are far higher. For a depth of scratch of 5 Grinding wheels are described in  This is a very early reference to the formation of a built-up edge in grinding, and to prow/ridge formation rather than cutting (see also Abrasive papers and belts have similar grits bonded to their surface and, like grinding wheels, come in different grades reflecting the size range of the abrasive particles. Emery boards for finger nails and corns are similar. Finer grits produce shallower and narrower scratches than coarser. Finer yet are polished surfaces over which there are closely spaced shallow grooves differing only in degree from the grooves produced by sanding, grinding and abrasion. The fuzzy ends of fibres on cloth, leather or other materials, drawn up by ‘napping’, are employed on polishing pads and dusters that are used with polishing compounds of various sorts. Buffalo hide was used not only as body armour ( Abrasive papers, like grinding wheels and indeed files, clog up and lose their ability to remove material. Hand-held abrasive papers and belts operate under load control; when a cutting tool is shaped and sharpened by hand on a grinding wheel, there is no proper control over depth, unless special fixtures are employed. On grinding machines where the workpiece is clamped to a feed table, however, the depth of cut is closely controlled. The two different modes of deformation, in the scratching of solids where ER/k Workers interested in grinding often perform experiments where a single grit is attached to a rotating wheel (fly cutter) or at the end of the arm of a pendulum (e.g. In these sorts of experiments a single tool may displace material by prows/ridges or cuts, or a sequence of both, since not only does the depth of cut alter through a groove or along an arc but also the attack angle changes continuously to more positive rakes. The behaviour is then a composite of what is observed from experiments where the grit is slid parallel to the surface. (Swinging a tipped pendulum into an already cut arc results in almost constant depths of cut.)  Their data can be interpreted in terms of the scratching analysis given above, which includes toughness. The force to cut an arbitrary-shaped groove of depth t will have the same form as The prism employed by Vingsbo and Hogmark, having a 90° triangular face and truncated with a 1 i.e. e should plot approximately linearly against (1/√M), with the slope relating to the toughness R and an intercept relating to the plastic work/volume kγ. Reports of experiments with flycutters often calculate the ‘specific cutting pressure’ (‘specific energy of cutting’ or ‘unit power’) for grinding, given by (F The mechanics of scratching are important in the production of diffraction gratings. While small gratings can nowadays be made by photo-resist methods, large gratings rely on scratching. A diffraction grating consists of a band of equidistant parallel lines about 1 It is an interesting question why the stylus of a gramophone does not cut away the grooves. Certainly if there is fluff on the needle and one foolishly tries to blow it away while a record is playing, the arm will move radially inwards across the grooves and form a scratch even under the low contact load of a few grams. Of course, when a scratch is made across the grooves, the stylus is going over hills and valleys, and it is easy to see how parts of crests could be removed. Along a groove there are sideways undulations and the stylus oscillates according to these modulations and transmits the mechanical motions to the transducers in the pickup arm; in a stereo record the groove has a 90° V-shape with the left track undulating on the left flank, the right track on the right. The needle then transmits its two separate oscillations to two separate piezo crystals. The wiggles are thus both side-to-side and up-and-down and there are two of them. The tip of a diamond stylus must be rounded otherwise the softer vinyl would be cut away. In the days of 12-inch shellac records, it was known that steel needles did wear out the record grooves. Fibre (bamboo) needles did not, but performed better if sharpened after every playing. Polished steel needles have a higher coefficient of friction than a polished diamond, and this must play a part. Steel needles wore and left steel particles in the record grooves. The next playing then allowed friction between steel and steel particles embedded in the shellac, which would have an even higher friction coefficient, and lead to more wear (  The departure of harder materials from the Krushschov–Babichev relation was qualitatively explained in terms of ‘material brittleness’ by  Scratch hardness is thought of in two different ways: Standardize a series of materials of graded relative hardness and use them to try and scratch an unknown material. The hardness of the unknown solid will be located in the interval between the two standard materials that just do, and just do not, result in a scratch being formed. The Use a very hard scratching tool, indent the unknown material with a fixed load W, and then produce a scratch. In the first quarter of the twentieth century, it was appreciated that Brinell hardnesses above 600 were suspect because of elastic flattening of the indenter. It was thought that scratch hardness of some sort might be a substitute and there are many correlations between scratch hardnesses and Brinell hardnesses in the literature of the time. However, as explained earlier, since the depth of a groove during sliding is not the same as the depth of the initial indentation, scratch hardness is The Many people know about Mohs hardness, but how many have actually performed the test? There are problems to do with the geometry of the scratching corner; the inclination of the corner when scratching by hand; the direction of scratching; the fact that some minerals on the scale are difficult to find with corners; and so on. (Files are discussed in  There does not appear to have been any systematic study of mutual scratching of metals of comparable hardness having different geometries of contact. It would be interesting to see the modes of deformation induced; the work would be relevant to how hard and tough a tool has to be to cut something else without itself being deformed, as discussed in Scratching with a hard indenter is like Mohs but there is no deformation of the indenter. Unlike Mohs, the geometry and inclination of the leading face of the scratching tool is well defined and, unlike Mohs, the force F A definition that depends only on load W or F In the same way that H = cY (  Whether the indenting is done first followed by sliding, or whether the depth of penetration is kept constant, or whether sliding takes place under increasing load, makes a difference in scratching. It is a question of whether sliding takes place under load control (as in all deadweight loaded and hand-held) devices, or whether the depth of cut is maintained constant. The latter is only possible when using a stiff machine. Under deadweight loading, the depth of scratch is usually different from the depth of the initial indentation. Surface properties of monolithic bodies may be modified by thermomechanical treatments such as shot peening or case hardening that improve wear and corrosion resistance. The subsurface microstructure is affected and residual stresses set up. Alternatively, separate films are deposited whose microstructures gradually meld into that of the surface. In both cases there will be a gradation of properties from the outside to the inside. In yet other cases the coating remains a separate entity adhered to the surface with an obvious interface. Various combinations of properties of coating and substrate – stiff/compliant, weak/strong, tough/brittle – are found, with one or more layers of different thicknesses ranging from millimetres to micrometres. The general patterns of surface and subsurface cracking, discontinuous and continuous chip formation, prow/ridging, etc., found when scratching monolithic bodies, are also found when scratching materials with modified surfaces and coatings, except that the presence of close-by layers of different properties modifies the patterns. Thus a brittle coating on a ductile substrate will show partial ring cracks on the surface under sliding spherical contact, but the partial cone cracks may stop at the interface if the substrate is much tougher ( The mechanical properties of thin films (and indeed of near-surface layers of monolithic solids) may be determined by indentation hardness and scratching, using instrumented Scratch testing is often employed to determine the adhesive strength of coatings, using fracture mechanics models having cracks at the interfaces ( Chen and co-workers have investigated the scratch resistance of hard, brittle thin films on compliant substrates with applications to sol-gel protective coatings on plastic optical lenses, safety windows, and flexible electronic devices and displays. The quality control test used by industry is the ‘pencil hardness test’ (ISO 15184, 1998), originally introduced for the assessment of paint and varnish coatings. Pencils leads of different hardness grades (9B to 9H) The ISO standard applies a vertical load of 7.5 ± 0.1N at the tip of the pencil that is inclined at 45° in a holder that is pushed forward over the surface to be tested. The end of every pencil lead is flattened to a circular cross-section before commencing a run, so that locally the surface is subjected, as it were, to a forward-moving disc having an attack angle of 45° (−45° rake angle).  What is curious about the results is that scratch damage occurs when the pencil lead is generally much softer than the coating. As some sort of mutual scratching test, it might be expected that at pencil hardness grades softer than critical, the surface would deform all pencil points; and at pencil hardness grades harder than critical, the pencil points would always deform the surface. Under constant load, the tips of softer pencil grades deform so that the contact stress is reduced (and graphite crumb is release in the track of the scratch); in contrast, Erosion occurs when material is worn away by impact of abrasive particles in a fluid stream. Sometimes erosion is a source of trouble (e.g. ingestion of dust into engines), but at other times it is employed intentionally to remove material (grit blasting) ( Finnie’s analysis for the resistance presented to a grit impacting the surface at a glancing angle was a two-dimensional Ernst–Merchant ductile cutting treatment in which certain assumptions were made to simplify the complicated cutting action of a tumbling particle. Erosive particles alter their orientation along the trajectory and may even roll over in some circumstances ( Scale effects of the sort discussed in The erosion and deformation of polyethylene by solid-particle impact is described and analysed by It is easy to visualize a hard sphere that forms its own ductile track by rolling. As with sliding spherical indenters, under light loads the attack angle is low and prow/ridging should occur; under heavy loads the attack angle is increased and material may be removed by cutting. Herbert invented a machine where a sphere was indented and then oscillated about the original contact point, elongating the indentation. The device was an inverted pendulum and has no connexion with the sort of pendulum used in Charpy testing and described above in connexion with grinding. With his pendulum, Herbert found that already hard metals could be workhardened further, and this led him to the idea of superficially workhardening material surfaces by putting them into ‘an atmosphere of hard steel balls flying about at high velo-city bombarding the workpiece’. His first experiments had steels balls running down an old speaking tube from his office into a biscuit tin in the workshop below ( In erosion it is often assumed that the impacting particles remain undamaged and that only the target surface is affected. But mutual damage can occur in, for example, ice (hail) impact. Laboratory experiments with ice are inconvenient and Friction between unlubricated surfaces arises from two main factors: (i) junction shearing (adhesion) and (ii) (when one surface is harder than the other) so-called ploughing (Bowden & Tabor, 1950). The attack angles of surface asperities in practice are quite small, so that ploughing is most likely to be prow formation rather than cutting. The manner in which toughness contributes to the separation of locally welded surface asperities to give friction has been discussed by Atkins (2003). Many papers have modelled contact between surface asperities of different geometries in order to predict the coefficient of friction between surfaces (e.g. In models of scratching in this chapter (and indeed in other types of cutting), friction at the tool/workpiece interface is modelled as in metalforming. Where material flows over the surfaces of tooling, resistance to interfacial sliding is conventionally represented by Coulomb friction, or a frictional stress τ = mk that is some fraction m of the shear yield stress k (sticking friction when m = 1), or some mix of the two as discussed in In scratching, it is clear that a coefficient of friction defined as μ = F Rather like the excruciating screeches sometimes produced by chalk on a blackboard, noise can be produced when scratching the surfaces of superhard nanocomposite materials. The difference between groove formation by prow/ridging and by cutting is central to the various processes of There are different techniques for forming engraved lines which give different results ( When the tool is pulled towards the engraver, the technique is called Sometimes a small metal wheel with protruding knobs (a Instead of forming lines directly, the plate may first be covered in wax or resin, and the required image cut into the wax deeply enough to expose the metal below. The exposed metal is then etched away by acid, thus forming lines. The depth of lines in an To print both engraved and etched plates, the plate is inked with a roller, the excess wiped off and the surface wiped clean, thus leaving ink only in the grooves. The plate is then run through a press with a sheet of paper in contact. What results is a series of inked lines on a ground colour of the paper (so-called Instead of the colour of the paper, the background of an intaglio print can be the colour of the ink, with the picture appearing as lines the colour of the paper. The result is called a Complete removal of the texture, by burnishing or scraping away down to virgin metal, gives a line that will not retain ink. However, different ink-retaining abilities, and hence graded colours and the ‘velvety tones’ characteristic of mezzotints, are achieved by leaving different depths of burr and pit after burnishing. The main use, though, of burnishing and scraping in intaglio printmaking is to correct mistakes. The existence of the resulting hollow regions in the plate is accommodated by placing a soft, compressible, layer ( Instead of metal, blocks of wood or pieces of linoleum backed by wood may be used for the printing ‘plate’. Although the technique and tools are different, woodcuts and linocuts are like mezzotints, i.e. they print in ‘relief’ with ink retained on the surface and the incised lines appearing as the colour of the paper. There is no ‘overflow’ (meaning the fuzzy edge associated with burr) since all lines are cut. Tools employed are essentially wood chisels and gouges but, like wood carving tools, some have curved shanks to reach into awkward recesses. An important characteristic of wood for engraving, carving and sculpting is closeness of grain; box and lime are often used. When an engraved plate, woodcut or linocut can no longer print a satisfactory image, the plate is discarded. What constitutes ‘satisfactory’ is subjective. Drypoint plates wear out quickly because the raised burr breaks down under the pressure of printing. However, worn-out plates can be reworked or recut. This gives rise to different editions of a print, and these may have different market values. The plates of engraved postage stamps also wore and philatelists make great play of different stamps printed from original and reworked plates, as inspection of stamp dealers' catalogues will show. There also you will find detailed differences between different plates made by different engravers of nominally the same stamp. Engraved banknotes are often the work of more than one engraver in an attempt to thwart forgery. Scratched decoration in wet pottery, wet plaster and so on comes under the general heading of Tools similar to those employed by engravers are used in finishing work by sculptors, stonemasons and wood carvers ( Statuary has all aspects of cutting and polishing found in general manufacturing: flat regions, ledges, curves in two dimensions and in three, re-entrant regions, protruding regions and so on. Michelangelo is said to have broken off Christ’s left leg, left arm and the Madonna’s elbow in his Designs in gems and jewellery are made in a similar fashion to carving and sculpting. Designs incised below the starting surface are called Polished surfaces differ only in degree from scratched surfaces. Something to be polished, whether a metallurgical sample or gemstone, is first sawn and ground to the desired shape before being subjected to ever-finer abrasive papers that remove rough marks left by coarser grits. Metallurgical samples need to be ground to one flat surface and are usually held within a mount; gemstones are attached with adhesive wax or glue on the end of a metal When polishing to optical requirements at even finer scales, the trick for finishing is to use fine grit embedded in pitch, the role of which is to even out the overall load among active abrasive particles. Highly polished flat, cylindrical and spherical surfaces of glass are made in this way. The grits rotate and ‘find their own level’ so as not to gouge the surface. In electronics, silicon wafers are polished by grits held in an elastomer backing for the same reason ( In addition to reflexion of light from a polished face, transparent gems refract light through the stone. So-called 