The dissolution of screened samples of pure malachite in dilute (0.033 to 0.15 M) sulfuric acid solutions has been shown to be rapid and the kinetics of dissolution are consistent with rate-determining chemical reaction on the surface of the shrinking particles. There is no evidence of mass transport controlled dissolution even at the highest rates. The rate is inversely proportional to the particle size and increases with increasing acidity. However, the relationship between the rate and the acid concentration is not linear but is directly proportional to the proton activity as obtained from pH measurements. The effect of the addition of chloride ions on the rate is relatively small and it appears to involve a specific effect of chloride at low concentrations and the effect of chloride on the proton activity at high concentrations. The rate increases with increasing temperature and the activation energy of 53.6 kJ mol−1 is in the range expected for a rate-determining chemical reaction.
                  A simple fundamental rate equation has been developed that will allow prediction of the dissolution curves for any particle size at any acid concentration and temperature within the range studied.
                  From a practical perspective, these results suggest that heap leaching of malachite in dilute acid should present no chemical problems and that there is little advantage to be gained from the addition of chloride ions to increase the rate of leaching.Malachite is a basic copper carbonate mineral with the nominal formula Cu Dissolution in acid occurs by the following reaction. The literature on the leaching of malachite is sparse particularly in relation to the kinetics using pure or relatively pure sized particles. Thus, in the only systematic study ( In practice, malachite is leached primarily during heap leaching of oxide or secondary sulfide copper ores and it is important to establish the rate-determining step in order to fully characterize and model the dissolution kinetics. Given the uncertainty in the rate determining step, the following is a summary of a study of the kinetics of the dissolution of pure malachite under conditions similar to those encountered during heap leaching of copper ores. The species distribution as calculated using HSC Chemistry (V8) for the dissolution of malachite in acidic sulfate solutions at various pH values is shown in It can be seen that malachite is completely soluble at pH values below 3 and completely insoluble at pH values above about 4. Thus, there are no thermodynamic restrictions on the dissolution of malachite under acidic conditions. Small lumps of The lumps were hand-crushed in a pestle and mortar and several size fractions obtained by dry screening the crushed material. The leach tests were conducted in a stirred, temperature-controlled baffled reactor similar to that described previously ( The solution samples were added to 5 mL of 2 M ammonium chloride/ammonium hydroxide at pH 10 and the volume made up to 10 mL. The absorbance of the blue copper ammine solution at 615 nm was measured in a 20 mm quartz cell using a Shimadzu UVmini-1240 spectrophotometer. A standard solution of copper was used for calibration. This method is more rapid and accurate than AA or ICP analysis. As will be demonstrated below, the rate of the dissolution of malachite particles can be very well described in terms of a shrinking particle at the surface of which the rate is controlled by the rate of the chemical reaction The shrinking particle model for the dissolution of a particle in which the rate-determining step is the rate of the chemical reaction on the surface results in the following expression for the extent of dissolution (X) as a function of time (t). The time τ (s) to completely consume a particle of initial radius R (cm) and density ρ (mole cm Thus, a plot of 1 − (1 − X)  The slopes (1/τ) of these lines are plotted in It is apparent that the data does conform with Eq. Similar data showing the effect of the acid concentration on the rate of dissolution of the +355–500 μm size fraction at 25 °C is summarized in It can be seen that, as could be expected, the rate increases with increasing acidity but, as shown by the plot of the slopes of the dotted lines as a function of acid concentration in The pH of the solutions was measured at 25 °C and the corresponding plot of the rate as a function of the proton activity (calculated from the pH) is also given in Given the recent interest (  The slopes of the linear plots at the various temperatures are shown as an Arrhenius relationship in From the slope of this plot, an activation energy can be estimated of 53.6 kJ mol Eqs. Thus, using all the data shown in The dissolution of screened samples of pure malachite in dilute (0.033 to 0.15 M) sulfuric acid solutions has been shown to be rapid and the kinetics of dissolution are consistent with rate-determining chemical reaction on the surface of the shrinking particles. There is no evidence of mass transport controlled dissolution even at the highest rates. The rate is inversely proportional to the particle size and increases with increasing acidity. However, the relationship between the rate and the acid concentration is not linear but is directly proportional to the proton activity as obtained from pH measurements. The effect of the addition of chloride ions on the rate is relatively small and it appears to involve a specific effect of chloride at low concentrations and the effect of chloride on the proton activity at high concentrations. The rate increases with increasing temperature and the activation energy is in the range expected for a rate-determining chemical reaction. A simple fundamental rate equation has been developed that will allow prediction of the dissolution curves for any particle size at any acid concentration and temperature within the range studied. These results suggest that heap leaching of malachite in dilute acid should present no chemical problems and that there is little advantage to be gained from the addition of chloride ions.