Objectives
                  The purpose of this prospective study was to examine the relationship between plasma lipoprotein–associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) activity and the progression rate of aortic stenosis (AS).
               
                  Background
                  We recently reported that Lp-PLA2 is highly expressed in stenotic aortic valves where it may contribute to the mineralization of valvular interstitial cells.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients with AS were prospectively recruited in the PROGRESSA (Metabolic Determinants of the Progression of Aortic Stenosis) study. AS progression rate was assessed by annualized increase in peak aortic jet velocity (Vpeak), mean gradient (MG), and aortic valve area index (AVAi). Circulating Lp-PLA2 activity was measured and dichotomized based on the median value.
               
                  Results
                  Of 183 patients included in this subanalysis of the PROGRESSA study, 70% were men and the mean age was 66 ± 13 years. Over the 2.5 ± 1.4 years of follow up, the AS progression rate tended to be higher in patients with high versus low Lp-PLA2 activity (annualized Vpeak = 0.17 ± 0.23 m/s vs. 0.12 ± 0.18 m/s; p = 0.14). There was a significant interaction (p < 0.05) between baseline AS severity and Lp-PLA2 activity with respect to impact on AS progression rate. In patients with mild AS (i.e., Vpeak <3 m/s; n = 123), increased Lp-PLA2 activity was associated with a significantly faster AS progression rate (Vpeak 0.16 ± 0.18 m/s vs. 0.09 ± 0.14 m/s; p = 0.01) but not in patients with moderate or severe AS (p = 0.99). After adjustment for other risk factors, increased Lp-PLA2 activity remained independently associated with faster AS progression rate (p = 0.005) in the former subset.
               
                  Conclusions
                  There was no significant association between plasma Lp-PLA2 activity or mass and stenosis progression in the whole cohort. However, increased Lp-PLA2 activity was associated with a faster stenosis progression rate in the subset of patients with mild AS. These findings provide an impetus for the elaboration of a randomized trial targeting Lp-PLA2 activity in patients with early stages of calcific aortic valve disease.Calcific aortic stenosis (AS) is a chronic and multifactorial disorder characterized by an abnormal mineralization of aortic valve (AV) cusps Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) uses oxidized LDL as substrate and produces free fatty acids and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), a powerful proinflammatory and procalcifying factor These findings support the hypothesis that Lp-PLA2 may play a role in AV mineralization. The objective of this prospective study was thus to examine the relationship between circulating Lp-PLA2 activity and the progression rate of AS. Patients with AS recruited in the PROGRESSA (Metabolic Determinants of the Progression of Aortic Stenosis) study underwent Doppler echocardiography annually. Inclusion criteria were 21 years of age and older and peak aortic jet velocity (V Clinical data included age, sex, height, weight, body surface area (BSA), body mass index, systolic and diastolic blood pressures, documented diagnoses of hypertension (patients taking antihypertensive medications or having known but untreated hypertension [blood pressure ≥140/90 mm Hg]), diabetes (patients taking antidiabetic medication or, in the absence of such medication, having a fasting glucose ≥7 mmol/l), dyslipidemia (patients taking cholesterol-lowering medication or, in the absence of such medication, having a total plasma cholesterol level >6.2 mmol/l), and coronary artery disease (history of myocardial infarction or coronary artery stenosis on coronary angiography). Fasting plasma samples were collected to measure levels of glucose and creatinine as well as a complete lipid profile, which included total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and triglycerides using automated techniques standardized with the Canadian reference laboratory. After centrifugation, plasma samples were stored at −80°C for future measurements of Lp-PLA2 activity and mass. Briefly, circulating Lp-PLA2 activity was measured by a commercial colorimetric activity method (Alanine Transaminase Colorimetric Activity Assay Kit, Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, Michigan). We also measured the Lp-PLA2 mass using a commercial ELISA kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota). Results were expressed as nanomole per minute per milliliter for Lp-PLA2 activity and nanogram per milliliter for Lp-PLA2 mass. All Doppler echocardiographic examinations were performed and analyzed in the same laboratory by the same team of sonographers and cardiologists. The investigators who did the acquisition and analysis of the Doppler echocardiographic images were blinded to the results of all blood analyses including those of Lp-PLA2. The AV phenotype (i.e., bicuspid vs. tricuspid AV) was recorded. The Doppler echocardiographic indexes of AS severity included V As a measure of global left ventricular hemodynamic load, we calculated the valvuloarterial impedance: Z The primary endpoint for this study was the progression rate of valve stenosis measured by Doppler echocardiography. To account for different follow-up lengths, annualized changes in V Continuous data were expressed as mean ± SD and compared with the Student  The baseline Lp-PLA2 activity was 11.9 ± 2.9 nmol/min/ml, and the plasma Lp-PLA2 mass was 122 ± 43 ng/ml ( During the mean follow-up of 2.5 ± 1.4 years, patients with increased Lp-PLA2 activity had a nonsignificant trend for faster AS progression rate (annualized V There was a significant interaction between Lp-PLA2 activity and baseline AS severity on AS progression rate (i.e., all interaction p values <0.05 for V Lp-PLA2 activity or mass expressed in continuous variables was not associated with AS progression in the whole cohort (all p > 0.20) ( During follow-up, 46 patients with mild AS progressed from mild to moderate or severe AS. Increased Lp-PLA2 activity was associated with a higher incidence of progression to more severe AS severity class (p = 0.005) ( Lp-PLA2 activity was associated with male sex (p = 0.04), larger BSA (p = 0.006), higher LDL cholesterol and triglycerides (both p < 0.001), as well as lower HDL cholesterol (p = 0.001) and fasting glucose (p = 0.04) ( The main finding of this study is that increased plasma Lp-PLA2 activity is associated with a faster progression rate of AS in earlier stages of the disease. Lp-PLA2 mass was not associated with AS progression. This finding could be explained by the fact that there is an important interindividual variation in the Lp-PLA2 activity for a given Lp-PLA2 mass, and a previous study reported that Lp-PLA2 activity is, at least in part, genetically determined We recently reported that Lp-PLA2 is highly expressed in AS valves and promotes ectopic valve mineralization In the present work, we found that higher levels of LDL cholesterol as well as lower levels of HDL cholesterol were independently associated with higher activity of circulating Lp-PLA2. These metabolic features have previously been associated with enhanced production, accumulation, and oxidation of lipids within the AV We previously reported that the proportion of circulating small, dense LDLs was associated with the accumulation of oxidized LDL within the AV Statins failed to slow the progression of AS, even in early stages of the disease Our results, combined with those of recent studies lend support to the hypothesis that reducing Lp-PLA2 activity may reduce the lipid-mediated mineralization of AVs and thereby contribute to slowing the stenosis progression rate, particularly in patients with mild AS. Lifestyle modification aimed at increased physical activity and dietary changes may help to reduce visceral obesity and associated metabolic abnormalities including Lp-PLA2 activation This study is subject to the inherent limitation of a prospective observational study. In particular, this design does not allow us to establish a causal relationship between Lp-PLA2 and pathogenesis of AS. In this study, there was no significant association between plasma Lp-PLA2 activity or mass and stenosis progression in the whole cohort. However, increased Lp-PLA2 activity was a powerful independent predictor of a faster AS progression rate in patients with mild AS. These findings suggest that inhibiting Lp-PLA2 activity may be a valuable approach to slow AS progression and provide an impetus for the elaboration of a randomized trial to assess the effect of such intervention in patients with early stages of calcific AV disease. The authors thank Isabelle Fortin, Jocelyn Beauchemin, Martine Poulin, and Martine Parent for their help in data collection and management.  For a supplemental table and figure, please see the online version of this article.