The microwave is a clean and environmentally acceptable energy and various microwave-assisted metal extraction processes have been developed. The novel application of microwave irradiation for sulphation of the nickel laterite ore prior to pressure sulphuric acid leaching has been investigated. Under optimum conditions, about 92% of nickel can be extracted from the ore and above 90% of the iron precipitates as hematite with the residual acid content in the leachate lower than 31 g/L. The microwave sulphation proceeds rapidly and a relatively low leaching temperature and low mass ratio of sulphuric acid to ore can be used in the subsequent pressure leaching to achieve a satisfactory nickel extraction. This may potentially reduce the subsequent heavy capital and operation cost of the pressure acid leaching process.Nickel laterite ores have become the major nickel reserves due to declining global reserves of nickel sulphides. However, the nickel production from laterites only accounted for about 42% of the world nickel production ( Atmospheric leaching processes can proceed at a lower temperature and thus may avoid the need for expensive HPAL autoclaves. However, two big challenges associated with the process, namely, the low kinetics of nickel extraction and potentially the significant amount of impurities such as iron and aluminum in the leach liquor hampered their wide application ( Microwaves can be potentially used as an alternative energy source in the field of processing mineral and extractive metallurgy ( A limonitic laterite ore from the Philippines ( Suphation of the ore sample was conducted in a modified home microwave oven (800 W, 2450 MHz) under air atmosphere. The ore sample was slurried with the addition of concentrated H The thermal analysis for the as-received sample was performed on a SDT Q600 DTA (Differential Thermal Analysis) with simultaneous TG (Thermogravimetry) and DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimetry). The ore sample weighing of a few hundred milligrams was placed in an alumina crucible and the heating rate was 10 °C/min with the introduction of N The TGA data and the corresponding derivative DTGA curves for the laterite ore sample are shown in Subsequently, the water evolution continued at a very slow rate. The result is in accordance with the literatures that the dehydroxylation of goethite can occur over a wide temperature range from about 250 to 400 °C, depending on factors like particle size, structural defects, aluminum substitution and excess or non-stoichiometric hydroxyl ions ( The influence of microwave power on nickel extraction from the ore was examined. The ore sample was slurried with H The effect of the pressure acid leaching time on nickel extraction and iron removal was examined. The experimental conditions are as follows: sulphation: acid/ore mass ratio, 0.5; microwave power, 800 W, microwave time, 6 min; pressure acid leaching: pulp density, 10% wt; temperature, 220 °C. The extraction results are shown in The effect of acid/ore mass ratio on the pressure leaching process under different leaching temperature was examined. The extraction tests were conducted under the following conditions: sulphation: microwave power of 800 W and microwave time of 6 min; pressure leaching: pulp density, 16% wt; leaching time, 1.5 h. The extraction results are summarized in As discussed in During high-temperature sulphuric acid leaching, the goethite mineral will further dissolve. The Fe(II) that substitutes Mg in serpentine will also dissolve, following the dissolution of Mg, and then will be oxidized to Fe(III). Nickel and cobalt will be released into the solution followed the dissolution of these minerals. Since most of the nickel in limonitic laterites is found in solid solution, nickel dissolution from goethite can be described by the following equation ( Once dissolved, trivalent iron precipitates in the form of basic ferric sulphate FeOHSO The overall reaction is: Whether hematite precipitates directly according to Reaction It is believed that microwave-assisted sulphation process increases the amount of hematite in the system which will favor the secondary nucleation of hematite and consequently their precipitation. In practice, the pressure acid leaching of the limonitic laterite ores is usually conducted under conditions of 250–280 °C and acid/ore mass ratio is 0.5. However, by pre-treatment with the microwave sulphation, above 99% of the nickel in this ore can be extracted under 220 °C with a relatively low acid consumption (acid/ore mass ratio is 0.5). Comparatively, the direct pressure acid leaching of the ore sample resulted in about 92% nickel extraction at the same acid/ore mass ratio under this temperature ( The novel application of microwave-assisted sulphation — pressure leaching of the limonitic laterite ore has been investigated. Under the optimum conditions: sulphation: microwave power, 800 W; microwave time, 6 min; mass ratio of sulphuric acid to ore, 0.5; pressure leaching: temperature, 220 °C; pulp density, 16% wt; leaching time, 1.5 h, more than 92% of the nickel can be extracted from the ore and 90% of the iron precipitates as hematite and the residual acid content in the leachate is lower than 31 g/L. The microwave sulphation proceeds rapidly and a relative low leaching temperature and low mass ratio of sulphuric acid to ore can be used in the subsequent pressure leaching to achieve a satisfied nickel extraction. This may potentially reduce the subsequent heavy capital and operation cost of the pressure acid leaching process. Moreover, the microwave is a clean energy and the process is environmentally acceptable. The project was sponsored by the