A simple, sensitive and fast hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) method using ultraviolet diode-array detector (UV-DAD)/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry was developed for the automated high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) determination of sodium risedronate (SR) and its degradation products in new pharmaceuticals. The chromatographic separations were performed on Ascentis Express HILIC 2.7μm (150mm×2.1mm, i.d.) stainless steel column (fused core). The mobile phase consisted of formate buffer solution (pH 3.4; 0.03M)/acetonitrile 42:58 and 45:55 (v/v) for granules for oral solution and effervescent tablet analysis, respectively, at a flow-rate of 0.2mL/min, setting the wavelength at 262nm. Stability characteristics of SR were evaluated by performing stress test studies. The main degradation product formed under oxidation conditions corresponding to sodium hydrogen (1-hydroxy-2-(1-oxidopyridin-3-yl)-1-phosphonoethyl)phosphonate was characterized by high performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-mass tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS). The validation parameters such as linearity, sensitivity, accuracy, precision and selectivity were found to be highly satisfactory. Linear responses were observed in standard and in fortified placebo solutions. Intra-day precision (relative standard deviation, RSD) was ≤1.1% for peak area and ≤0.2% for retention times (t
                     R) without significant differences between intra- and inter-day data. Recovery studies showed good results for all the examined compounds (from 98.7 to 101.0%) with RSD ranging from 0.6 to 0.7%. The limits of detection (LOD) and quantitation (LOQ) were 1 and 3ng/mL, respectively. The high stability of standard and sample solutions at room temperature means an undoubted advantage of the method allowing the simultaneous preparation of many samples and consecutive chromatographic analyses by using an autosampler. The developed stability indicating method is suitable for the quality control of SR in new and commercial pharmaceutical formulations.Bisphosphonates are a class of pharmacological active chemical compounds that inhibit osteoclast action and bone resorption. These compounds were originally used as water softeners Currently, the pharmaceutical industry is particularly interested in developing rapid procedures to cope with a large number of samples and reduce the time required for the delivery of results. For this purpose, various chromatographic strategies have been recently developed in reversed phase-liquid chromatography (RP-LC) and have also become available in the hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) mode To ensure the quality and safety of SR commercial formulations and the necessity to analyze daily a high number of samples, the current work focuses on the study of a novel, fast, selective and sensitive automated HPLC method with ultraviolet diode-array detector (UV-DAD)/tandem electrospray ionization mass spectrometer evaluating a fused core column (Ascentis Express HILIC). In this way SR and low levels of its degradation products were quickly determined in new dosage forms. The stability of the drug has been evaluated after stress test on granules for oral solution, effervescent tablets and placebos. The main degradation product of SR corresponding to N-oxide derivative was obtained after oxidation with H SR (87.3% equivalent 100.3% calculated on the dried substance) was purchased from Polpharma (Warsaw, Poland). SR USP (99.9%) was provided from Nova Chimica (Milan, Italy). Ammonium formiate was purchased from Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy). Formic acid was provided from Panreac (Barcelona, Spain). Sodium hydrogen carbonate was provided from Unichimica (Roma, Italy). Citric acid and sodium carbonate were purchased from Brenntag (Milan, Italy). Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt dehydrate (EDTA) was obtained from Fluka (Milan, Italy). Acetonitrile Chromasolv Routine SR standard solutions (0.2 The liquid chromatography equipment consisted of an Agilent series 1260 gradient unit, an Agilent series 1260 pumping system, an Agilent series 1260 Infinity thermostatted column compartment and an Agilent series 1260 UV-DAD detector (Agilent, Germany). Automatic injections of 10 HPLC separations were performed at 25 The column was directly interfaced with the mass spectrometer without flow splitting. The operative conditions of the ESI system are the following: 3.5 SR raw material, finished products (granules for oral solution and effervescent tablets) and appropriate placebo were stressed under conditions that usually cause degradation, included the following: dry heat (70 The main degradation product corresponding to SR N-oxide was obtained after oxidation. Both SR and the degradation product were characterized as follows: SR: MW 283, ESI-MS (positive mode): Standard and placebo solutions, fortified appropriately with SR (concentration ranges as in Twenty dosage units were finely ground and an amount of powder of each formulation equivalent to about 20 Each amount of powder was dissolved with about 30 In order to obtain an adequate separation of the peak of SR from those of its known degradation products and from those of the formulation excipients, different RP-HPLC columns and mobile phases were considered focusing on C18 columns. RP-HPLC stationary phases that contain polar groups often succeed in retaining and resolving compounds that C18 phases do not because they can interact with analytes in different ways from those of C18 alkyl chains. Unsatisfactory separations were observed in the analysis of effervescent tablets, owing to the interference of excipients with SR peak. So a stationary phase with enhanced polar retention and selectivity without ion-pairing was evaluated. The new type of stationary phase, Ascentis Express HILIC, is based on the recent fused core technology. Its particles are superficially porous and consist of a 1.7 In this study the chromatographic conditions were optimized and a mixture of formate buffer (pH 3.4; 0.03 The method was validated to show compliance with international requirements for analytical methods in the quality control of pharmaceuticals. For validation of the analytical method, the guide-lines of the International Conference on Harmonization of Technical Requirements for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use were followed Having optimized the efficiency of the developed chromatographic conditions the quality of the chromatography was monitored not only for SR analysis The method selectivity was demonstrated overlapping standard solution and blank (solvent) ( Injections of standard and sample solutions were performed at different times after their preparation. The solutions ( Stress test studies were carried out (Section In basic conditions, an unidentified degradation product was observed in both formulations as reported in According to the peak purity values obtained for SR peak in all stressed samples, the presence of peaks co-eluted with SR is excluded and the peak of SR is considered spectrally pure. The mass balance was verified in all the stress conditions. The results obtained with the solid thermal stress test (at 70 The linearity was determined as linear regression with the least-square method both on five standard solution and five placebo solutions spiked with SR having the following concentration levels: 50, 75, 100, 115 and 130% of the claimed SR content in the sample. Each level was prepared one time and each solution was injected five times. As an explicative example, the validating parameters of calibration curve of granules for oral solution (slope, intercept, determination coefficient, standard deviation of the slope and standard deviation of the intercept) are shown in LOD and LOQ have been established by the determination of the signal to noise ratio of 3:1 and 10:1, respectively. Good data were obtained corresponding to about 1 (LOD) and 3 (LOQ) ng/mL ( The method precision was expressed as repeatability and intermediate precision. The repeatability and intermediate precision of the method were calculated on sample solutions to verify its applicability. To this end, twenty effervescent tablets and the content of twenty sachets were finely ground, separately. The repeatability was calculated employing six test sample solutions, each one prepared according to the analytical method starting from a homogeneous sample of finished product. The intermediate precision was determined with twelve sample solutions prepared changing the parameters time-analyst: six solutions were prepared by the analyst A in the day 1 and other six solutions were prepared by the analyst B in the day 2. The results expressed as RSD ≤0.7% (area) and 0.1% ( The accuracy was based on the recovery of known amounts of analyte, spiking SR in placebo of both analyzed formulations. Fortified samples were prepared in triplicate at tree levels over a range 75–125% of the target concentration. Quantitative recoveries were obtained in each instance (recovery The ruggedness of the method was evaluated varying some operating conditions, including different operators in the laboratory, changing the source of reagents and solvents, and changing the HILIC column (of the same type and manufacturer). The method proved to be rugged enough to allow routine laboratory use. Solution stability, intermediate precision, stress test and ruggedness can give an indication of the method robustness. The analytical method was developed and validated for the quantitative determination of SR in new pharmaceutical formulations: granules for oral (excipients: sucrose, maltodextrin, sodium hydrogen carbonate, flavor, acesulfame potassium) and effervescent tablets (excipients: sodium hydrogen carbonate, sodium carbonate, citric acid, sorbitol, flavor, acesulfame potassium). The method was applied for the analysis of some batches of these medicinal products and the results were found within the acceptance limits for both the content of SR (95–105% of the claimed content) and each degradation product (not more than the 0.2% with respect to the SR content), thus demonstrating that the products comply with the requirements of the European quality criteria. This point out the capability of the method to provide reliable quali-quantitative data in comparison with others The new type of stationary phase Ascentis Express HILIC (fused core particle technology) has shown real advantages in terms of retention and selectivity providing a good separation of SR and its degradation products in shorter time (less than 4