In contrast to most nanostructured materials, outstanding mechanical property has been demonstrated in a nanostructured metastable austenitic steel, owing to the new characteristics of deformation-induced martensitic transformation. In this paper, by employing an in situ high-energy X-ray diffraction technique, we explore these characteristics by examining factors from the load partitioning, Lüders banding, to texture development. It was found that the martensitic transformation was mainly driven through Lüders band propagation. Marked load transfer takes place from austenite to martensite as Lüders band propagates, and continues into the homogeneous deformation regime. The texture development is mostly contributed by martensitic transformation, but dislocation-based plasticity also plays a role. The effective load partitioning along with the deformability of martensite promotes sample ductility.Grain-size refinement has historically been applied in metals and alloys to improve their strength, as known from the Hall–Petch relation. In traditional materials, tensile fracture toughness is sometimes enhanced through grain-size refinement as well Metastable nanostructured austenitic steel with a nominal composition (wt.%) of 10%Cr, 5%Ni, 8%Mn, and the balance Fe (with 0.1%C) was produced by a repetitive strain-induced martensitic transformation and reverse transformation (SIMART) technique In our in situ X-ray diffraction experiment, miniature flat dog-bone tensile specimens were machined from as-received material with the length direction along the rolling direction (RD) and the thickness direction being the normal direction (ND). The gage dimensions of the samples are 5 In loading scheme I, we focus incident X-ray beam constantly at the center of sample gage section during deformation, while loading the sample to different strain levels till sample failure. The purpose of this scheme is to study the load-partitioning between the austenite and martensite phases. Due to a significant involvement of Lüders band during sample deformation, in loading scheme II, we scan the entire gage section at each strain level by moving the whole load-frame up stepwise with the translation sample stage, such that the incident X-ray beam can shine on different locations along sample gage. We use a displacement step of 200 The purpose of the loading scheme III is to study the texture evolution during the tensile deformation. To measure full pole figures, we rotate the specimen with an interval of 10° from 0° (ND) to 90° (TD) with respect to the incident X-ray beam at all strain levels, and collect the diffraction patterns at each of the orientations. Samples used for the three loading schemes were made from the same as-received plate. The data analysis is conducted by following the standard method used by Young et al. The volume fraction of martensite,  The in situ tensile stress–strain curve is displayed in For austenite, a strain-free Even though the martensitic transformation was initiated at the LYP, the first martensite peak In addition to the lattice strain evolution, the peak profile related to martensitic transformation was also explored. Lüders deformation accounts for ∼10% in strain, approximately one third the total deformation. By performing gage section scan, we have elaborately investigated the Lüders band development during the tensile loading. As shown in The texture development during the in situ tensile loading was illustrated at several representative strain levels.  Unlike the CG sample, there is little  In current nanostructured steel, the yield strength was increased by an order of magnitude compared to its CG counterpart as a result of the grain-size refinement, with a maximum tensile ductility of 30% Load partitioning has been previously observed in multi-phase steels or other composite materials In commercial coarse-grained TRIP steels, where no Lüders propagation has been observed, the load normally transfers from austenite to martensite gradually, which is a result of gradual increase of martensite volume The orientation distribution function (ODF) was calculated from the experimentally measured pole figures. In summary, we have conducted an in situ HEXRD experiment to investigate the factors that contribute to the mechanical property of a nanostructured steel. The conclusions are summarized as follows: The martensitic transformation was mainly propelled through Lüders band propagation, which was verified by the evident change of peak intensity, peak width and lattice strains. The outstanding mechanical property of the nanostructured steel is contributed by the effective loading partitioning between austenite and martensite, and the load transfer from austenite to martensite is promoted by the increasing volume fraction of deformable martensite. The {1 The texture development was mainly contributed by the martensitic transformation, but dislocation-based plasticity also played a role. The ODF analysis indicates that {1 This work is supported by the When As the lattice strain is given by The errors (ESD) of peak intensity are directly given by GSAS fitting, but the errors of the peak width are calculated through error propagation. In GSAS, the peak width (FWHM) is given through 2 parameters – sigma-square ( The parameters Following the error propagation law, the errors for FWHM are calculated through: The volume fraction of martensite is given: Following the general law of error propagation (Eq. As shown in the paper, the stress on austenite and martensite is calculated: Thus, the error for Propagating from the errors of the lattice strains, the errors of the stress on austenite can be calculated. For the martensite, since the stress is related to the volume fraction (Eq.