The uranium isotope composition (234U and 238U) of detrital matter has become an essential tool for evaluating the response of erosion and catchment dynamics to climate variability on geological time scales. Relative variability of the (234U/238U) activity ratio can be used as an estimate of the time that has elapsed since physical and chemical weathering has formed grains <63μm, termed comminution age, as a result of ongoing depletion of 234U in detrital matter. However, as non-detrital (authigenic, endogenic) components are commonly enriched in 234U, sequential extraction methods are required to carefully remove any non-detrital matter from the sediments. Herein, we tested different methods, which use similar chemical reactants but differ in terms of applied heat and time. Based on the results, it can be inferred that an ultrasound-assisted approach enables the removal of non-detrital matter from the sediments without alternating the isotope ratio of the detrital grain, and provides a high reproducibility of the (234U/238U) activity ratios. Moreover, it is the fastest, and thus, most cost effective method tested. Fast and cost-effective treatment methods are a prerequisite for high-resolution studies on long paleoenvironmental records, and thus, these results are fundamental for the further development of U isotope analyses as a tool for the reconstruction of past erosion and catchment dynamics in response to climate variability.
                  Combined U isotopes and gas adsorption surface area analyses on two sediment samples from the Mediterranean Sea yield comminution ages up to 5 times older after sample treatment, which highlights the importance of a comprehensive removal of non-detrital matter from the bulk sediment composition. Moreover, gas sorption analysis allowed determining whether a fractal correction for calculation of the recoil fraction should be applied. Precise estimates of the recoil fraction are crucial for calculating the comminution ages, as it governs the loss of 234U from detrital matter. Samples analyzed in this study display Type II isotherms suggesting a non-porous or macroporous surface. Micro- and mesopores, which increase the surface area during gas adsorption analyses but do not contribute to the loss of 234U are absent. Thus, a fractal correction to account for micro- and mesopores is not required.Our ability to reconstruct paleoclimatic conditions by using various proxy data sets have immensely increased over the past decades (e.g. One of the challenges for obtaining useful information from the ( Extensive studies have been carried out in order to estimate the impact of sequential extraction procedures to remove any non-detrital matter from bulk sediment compositions, such as water soluble and exchangeable fractions, non-detrital calcite, iron/manganese-oxides (Fe/Mn-oxides), and organic matter (e.g. Herein, we evaluate the applicability of the purposed sequential extraction procedure by Sequential extraction methods can have a considerable impact on the surface area of a sediment sample as (1) it removes low-surface-area material such as organic matter ( The conceptual model of U isotopes for estimating the comminution age, i.e. the time that has elapsed since physical and chemical weathering has formed grains < Because the recoil distance of In order to obtain meaningful information about erosion processes and about comminution ages, any Domain 3 components must be removed from the bulk sediment composition. As Domain 3 material is increasingly removed, the ( Sediment material from Lake Ohrid, located at the border between FYROM and Albania, has been recovered during a deep drilling campaign in 2013 at the so-called DEEP site (41°02.9′N, 020°42.9′E) in the central part of the lake (see Sediment material from the Mediterranean Sea originates from piston core ESSK08-CS13 (43°14.9′N 7°47.8′E), which was recovered during the 2008 ESSDIV cruise of the research vessel (R.V.) Sediment material from the Tasman Sea offshore New Zealand originates from piston core TAN0513-14 (42°18′S, 169°53′E), recovered in October 2005 during the TAN0513 cruise of the R.V. The following chemicals were used within the sequential extraction experiments, sample dissolution, and during column chromatography. The supplier and grade are shown in brackets: 48% HF (hydrofluoric acid, Merck, Ultrapure grade), 30% HCl (hydrochloric acid, Merck, Suprapure grade), 65% HNO Samples from the Mediterranean and Tasman Sea with sand-sized material were sieved to 63 The tested sequential extraction methods are explained in detail below. Between each step, samples were rinsed two times with 18.2 Surface area and roughness measurements were carried out by gas adsorption analysis on a Quantachrome Autosorb iQ. Prior to analysis, the samples were degassed for 7.5 A Phenom XL scanning electron microscope (SEM, PhenomWord Co, The Netherlands) equipped with a backscatter electron detector (BSD) and an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) was used for elemental mapping of treated and untreated sediment material on a microstructural level under high vacuum. Prior to analyses, the samples were carbon coated with a Quorum Q15R E Carbon Evaporator. In the ‘hotplate’ experiments, sequential extraction was carried out following the procedure described by The ‘oven’ experiments were carried out on the sediments from all three sites and follow the same procedure as used in the ‘hotplate’ experiments. In this case, steps requiring heating of the samples were carried out using an oven instead of a hotplate ( Sequential extraction using a sonication-assisted procedure follows a modified description of Biogenic silica can be abundant in lacustrine and marine sediments due to the deposition of diatom frustules and/or sponge needles ( In the ‘hotplate’ experiment, ( After 4 In the ‘oven’ experiment, both Lake Ohrid samples show decreasing ( In the ‘oven’ experiment, samples from core ESSK08-CS13 (Mediterranean Sea) show the lowest ( Sample T14-170 from the Tasman Sea shows decreasing ( Overall, these observations suggest that except for sample 1B-26H-cc during the ‘hotplate’ experiment, the oxidisable extraction step is not selective and also attack the outer rim of detrital grains (Domain 2), where the For the samples from Lake Ohrid, sonication-assisted sequential extraction yields decreasing ( Further treatment with sodium peroxide to remove biogenic silica results in an increase in ( Marine sediments from the Mediterranean and the Tasman Seas show decreasing ( The two aliquots of sample CS13-14 (Mediterranean Sea) show some significant scatter at each step, although they both show similar minimum values following the oxidisable extraction step ( The impact of the ‘ultrasonication’ extraction method on the surface properties was assessed by measuring the surface area (S) and the fractal dimension (D) on treated and untreated material of samples CS13-11 and CS13-14 (Mediterranean Sea, Assuming a recoil length for As explained above, it has been proposed by Because removal of authigenic phases results in a decrease of the ( Sequential extraction experiments were conducted on lacustrine and marine sediments from Lake Ohrid, the Mediterranean and Tasman Seas. The aim of these experiments was to detect the impact of the chemical treatment steps on the ( Experiments following the procedure from While We tested the rapid sequential extraction procedure developed by For the sediments of the Mediterranean Sea, gas adsorption analyses yield no significant modification of the surface properties (surface area and fractal dimension) after sample treatment with the ‘ultrasonication’ method. Thus, comminution ages calculated on the basis of ( In summary, the sonication-assisted sequential extraction presented in This study was funded by the