Characteristics of thin-film negative temperature coefficient of resistance (NTC) thermal sensors fabricated by micromachining technology were studied as a function of the thickness of membrane. The overall-structure of sensor has a form of Au/Ti/NTC/silicon oxide layer (SiO
                        x
                     )/(1|0|0)Si. NTC film of Mn1.5CoNi0.5O4 with 0.5μm in thickness was deposited on SiO
                        x
                      layer (1.2μm) by pulsed laser-deposition (PLD) and annealed at 600–800°C in air for 1h. Au (200nm)/Ti (100nm) electrode was coated on NTC film by dc sputtering. By the results of microstructure, X-ray and NTC analysis, NTC films, post-annealed at 700°C for 1h, showed the best characteristics as NTC thermal sensing film. In order to reduce the thermal mass and thermal time constant of sensor, the sensing element was built-up on a thin membrane with the thickness of 20–65μm. Sensors with thin sensing membrane show the good detecting characteristics.Thermal sensors can detect the temperature, infra-red source and its size, moving direction and speed, emissivity, and wavelength Absorption of radiation raises the temperature of sensor, which in turn, changes some temperature-dependent parameter of sensing materials, such as electrical resistivity, contact potential, spontaneous polarization, and so on Among the thermistor materials, composite oxides composed of transition metals, such as manganese, cobalt and nickel, are widely used for negative temperature coefficients (NTC) thermistor, because the electrical resistance decreases greatly with increasing temperature. And, these materials have a spinel-type crystal structure. The properties, used to characterize NTC materials, are the material constant ( Micromachined NTC detectors have the advantages of thermopile detectors with higher sensitivities and faster response times. Unlike pyroelectric detectors, they do not require chopped radiation. Micromachined NTC thin-film detectors bridge an important gap in thermal detection between thermopile and pyroelectric detectors, and also permit new applications not possible with other detector technologies In this study, thin-film NTC thermal sensors were fabricated by micromachining technique, whose overall-structure had a form of Au/Ti/NTC/silicon oxide layer (SiO  The overall-structure of thermal sensor has a form of Au/Ti/NTC/SiO By Si-processing, NTC and electrode layers were patterned, and thin membranes with 20–65 NTC behavior of Mn  NTC behaviors of NTC thin-films are shown in The output resistances of sensors using post-annealed films showed 2–3 In general, thermal sensors show the unwanted outputs (noises) due to the environmental effects such as temperature fluctuation, mechanical vibration, electromagnetic interference, and sudden relief of stress caused by the differences in the thermal expansion of packaging components  From the data shown in  In sensor applications, one of the most important things is the noise equivalent temperature difference (NETD) or noise equivalent power (NEP). However, NETD and NEP could not be monitored with this measuring equipment using He–Ne laser. So, signal-to-noise ( Conclusively, in order to obtain the good thermal sensor with excellent detectivity, i.e. short response time, high output voltage, high By post-annealing, the PLD film at 700 The authors express sincere appreciation for the financial support of KISTEP(contract No. 00-G-06-03-A-01) in the performance of this work.