An experimental investigation on drilled cylindrical concrete specimens in compression over a large scale range (1:19) has been carried out to evaluate the variation of some mechanical parameters by varying specimen size. The peculiarity of the present investigation consists in exploring very small specimen dimensions. The experimental results show scale effects on dissipated energy density rather than on uniaxial compressive strength. A theoretical explanation for such a phenomenon, based on fractal hypothesis, is presented and a comparison between experimental and theoretical values is discussed.displacements strain strain at the peak stress specimen diameter specimen height chosen as the characteristic specimen size mean deformation compression strength smallest specimen set with specimen set with specimen set with specimen set with largest specimen set with third specimen of the set with number of fragments in fragmentation process characteristic linear dimension of fragments constant of proportionality fractal dimension of the fragmentation process total volume (mass) of fragments characteristic linear dimension of the largest fragment characteristic linear dimension of the smallest fragment constant of proportionality volume of the un-fragmented specimen total surface area of the fragments geometrical factor depending upon the average shape of the fragments energy dissipated to produce a new free surface in the fragmentation process specific energy absorbing capacity elastic energy release rate or specific energy necessary to generate the unit area of fracture fractal dimension of the fragmented set measure of the fractal set representing the fragmented configuration dissipated energy density fractal dissipated energy density parameter renormalized fractal strain renormalized fractal elastic modulus The advent of computers has considerably changed the capabilities in design and analysis of concrete structures. The extensive use of powerful computers and finite element codes in structural analysis is meaningful only if suitable and reliable constitutive laws for the material are available. In design, however, concrete is generally classified on the basis of its compressive strength. A correct evaluation is therefore fundamental. In general, the constitutive relations and the mechanical parameters for concrete are obtained from standard specimens. The sizes and shapes of compressive strength test specimens of concrete vary from one country to another. Commonly used standard sizes are 150 The choice of the standard size is affected by the variation of the compressive strength with size and height/diameter (or slenderness) ratio. This variation is high when the rigid test machine platens are in direct contact with the concrete specimen,the lateral deformation of concrete being restrained at the specimen ends. A wide investigation has been carried out by Carpinteri et al. Very interesting results have been obtained in a round robin test organized by the RILEM Committee 148 SSC “Strain-Softening of Concrete” The effect of size on the mechanical properties of concrete is also important when small scale models are used to predict the behavior of real structures. Early work on the size effect in compression dates back to the 1920s. Gonnermann Many other authors fronted the problem of size effects on nominal strength for concrete in compression. Blanks and McNamara The nominal compressive strength is obtained by dividing the peak force by the initial specimen cross-section area. This operation has the meaning of estimating a global material property, ignoring at the same time the material structure as well as the material failure behavior during the test. Momber An extensive experimental investigation on geometrically similar cylindrical concrete specimens in compression obtained by a unique concrete block is herein presented to evaluate the variation of some mechanical parameters by varying specimen size on a very large scale range (1:19) and by avoiding frictional restraint between the loading platens and the specimen. The peculiarity of the present investigation consists in exploring very small specimen dimensions. One of the main goals of the present paper is the measure of the energy dissipated in destroying or fragmenting a volume of concrete. From a phenomenological point of view, the softening branch of the load–displacement curve is governed by macrocracking, after the coalescence of the initial microcracks. As shown by the experimental results, the ultimate compressive strength of concrete depends on the type of testing machine, the specimen size and the nature of the contact between the machine platens and the specimen. In this paper, it is shown how, avoiding friction, the strength is almost independent of specimen dimension, whereas strong variations are observed for dissipated energy density in compression. A theoretical explanation, recently proposed by Carpinteri and Pugno The ambition of testing concrete specimens in compression in a very wide size range strongly impacts with the laboratory set-ups, which opposes physical limits. The fundamental idea was to use a very simple standard testing apparatus composed only of a closed-loop servo-hydraulic system and strain gauges glued on the specimen to record the longitudinal as well as the transverse deformation in the pre-peak part of the force versus displacement curve. As the specimens were very different in size, two different set-ups have been adopted, even if this could cause some inconveniences due to different stiffnesses of the frames. The first problem was that of defining the size and the slenderness of the test specimens. The size is limited by the dimension of the aggregates (lower limit) and by the potentialities of the available equipment (upper limit). All the cylinders were obtained by drilling from a unique concrete block with sizes 800 Five different diameters were considered in relation to the disposable drilling core-bits in a scale range of 1:19. The specimens were cylinders with a height/diameter ratio For the three smallest sizes, the tests were carried out on a uniaxial compression machine with a capacity of 100 For the two remaining specimen sizes, In uniaxial compression tests it is well-known how the boundary conditions play an important role. When a concrete specimen is loaded between rigid loading platens (steel), the lateral deformation of concrete is confined to the specimen ends ( An opposite trend comes out when loading platens with a low stiffness and a high Poisson’s ratio are used (rubber or brushes) ( Kotsovos The system adopted in the present compression tests comes from the analysis of the RILEM Technical Committee 148 SSC results Only one representative curve for each of the five sizes has been selected, for graphical reasons. The summary of the experimental results for peak-load, stress at peak load and specific compressive energy is reported in The nominal stress versus nominal deformation curves are plotted in After this initial part, the stress–strain path is nearly linear and this linear part is as more pronounced as the specimen is larger ( The values of the peak stresses, which are commonly called The dissipated energy density can be evaluated by considering the area under the In this section the full stress–strain curves for the smallest cylindrical specimens ( The complete curve for specimen C13 is plotted in Physically, the valley zone BCD of the nominal stress versus average strain for the specimen C12 ( The knowledge of the full load versus displacement (or nominal stress versus average strain) diagram can be very useful in a load-controlled experimental test. In this case, after the peak load (point B) a snap-through instability is evidenced, and a horizontal jump up to point D occurs. The energy under the curve BCD is released suddenly in a blasting way. Of course, point D corresponds to a new equilibrium configuration, which is usually not achievable, as the instantaneous release of energy is transformed into kinetic energy with expulsion of fragments. The curve, therefore, can be used to determine the specific energy released in the case of load-controlled test. In concrete diamond drilling it can be observed how the snap-trough phenomenon just described can be very useful to simulate numerically the necessary energy (elastic and kinetic) to break concrete and to determine the chip size. For crushing phenomena (in concrete recycling, for example) it is very interesting to observe that the energy required to fragment a specimen (or in general a concrete element) is much larger than the elastic energy or the energy under the softening curve. This is due to the fact that the fragmentation and the formation of smaller chips is related to the surface area of the chips and this strongly increases by decreasing the size of the chips. Finally, the last part of the curve can be influenced by the confinement due to the interaction of the aggregates with the machine platens. The interaction can be compared with the confinement effect due to the steel reinforcement in building columns which undergo earthquakes. In this case, if the confinement is well designed, the evaluation of re-ascending curve for concrete can be very useful. The performed compression tests have shown an evident decrease of dissipated energy density with increasing specimen dimension ( Let us consider a concrete specimen which undergoes a compression test. As is shown in In order to describe the mechanical meaning of the fractal exponent In In The same value for The fractal dimensions for the discrete set and for the cumulative statistics are nearly equal. In The total volume (mass) of fragments is given by If we consider The same results can be obtained in a different way, by considering a sequence of scales of observation The values of dissipated energy density for the three smallest sizes are plotted in As may be seen from The experimental curves In this section, a renormalization procedure is proposed to obtain a unique constitutive relationship for softening in compression. By assuming damage occurring in a fractal sub-domain inside the specimen, energy dissipation becomes scale-dependent. Hence it should be substituted by a fractal quantity, which is the true material constant. The assumption that the energy dissipation occurs in a sub-domain characterized by a fractal dimension, imposes the definition of fractal strain (or dilatation). Let us consider the external work By considering the fractal strain, a scale-invariant constitutive relationship can be obtained. In other words, the experimental diagrams related to the different sizes can be rescaled by considering the strain renormalization, and a clear superposition of the curves is evidenced. In Lastly, form The renormalization previously presented is in good agreement with the methodology proposed by van Mier Uniaxial compression tests were performed under displacement control on drilled cylindrical specimens obtained from a single concrete block over a very large scale range (1:19), the largest range available in the literature. The friction between specimen ends and testing machine platens was reduced by using two layers of teflon with oil in between. The experimental results show how, reducing the friction at the ends, the nominal compressive strength is not clearly affected by scale effects as is evident in tension. The tests performed on very small specimen sizes (10 In addition, the full stress–strain curve in compression has been determined, and from those results it can be evidenced a snap-through instability allowing to quantify the energy required for fragmentation. The determination of the full curve is also important in concrete recycling industry to quantify the energy necessary for destroying concrete structures, even in blasting. Finally, a theoretical explanation for the size effect on the dissipated energy density has been proposed, from which it appears how the dissipation occurs in a fractal sub-space of dimension comprised between a surface and a volume. A renormalization procedure for determining a constant dissipated energy density is also proposed and it comes out that, in the range of the tested specimens, the energy dissipation occurs in a fractal space very close to a two-dimensional surface. This is in a good agreement with the hypothesis proposed by van Mier The present research was carried out with the financial support of the Ministry of University and Scientific Research (MIUR) under the grant PRIN 2003 “Damage mechanics and durability of ordinary and high performance concrete”. The author is thankful to Mr. Vincenzo Angilletta for his technical support in performing the experimental tests.