In the ongoing effort to develop a tumbling mill total steel media wear model, a decoupled abrasive, corrosive and impact wear model is used in conjunction with a mill DEM charge motion model. In order to determine the contribution of abrasive wear to total steel media wear in mills as a function of charge motion, it is necessary to determine abrasive wear as a function of applied force and slippage speed. To this end, a modified abrasion wheel testing apparatus was developed and used under dry conditions to determine the relationship between abrasive wear, applied force and friction. Four different ores from North American mines were examined where the test specimens used with each abrasive were cut from grinding media supplied by the corresponding mines. The results showed an initial expected increase in wear, as measured by the volume (mass) loss, with increasing applied force. The mass loss however became constant beyond a certain applied force. The friction remained relatively constant for each ore/media combination over the test range. Further abrasion wear research will include testing of ore under wet conditions.Charge media wear prediction is estimated using the Bond abrasion test, which dates back to 1963 ( This is a purely an empirical test based on the mill ore. A comparison of results of the Bond abrasion test with actual mill data for five ores and 11 mills showed an average error of −73%, with a standard deviation of 192.5% ( The total media wear model is defined by assuming that the effect of each of the three wear modes, abrasion, corrosion and impact, can be independently determined, and their respective wear effects summed according to Eq. Taking the observation made by The abrasive and impact wear will also be considered proportional to the energy dissipated in abrasion and impact respectively, measured using charge motion simulation. The corrosive wear is considered to be a proportional to the media surface area. A comparison of the total media wear model with the same mill data used for Bond comparison yielded an error and standard deviation of 0% and 66.1% respectively. Further modification of the model reduced the standard deviation to 56% ( Abrasive wear is associated with the energy dissipated in the grinding zone where ball layers slide over one another. Several laboratory apparatus have over the years been used to measure the abrasive wear. Of these, the rubber wheel abrasion tester, RWAT is the most commonly used, and easily adapted to suit grinding media wear tests. Abrasive wear in the RWAT is measured as a function of the applied force,  The RWAT has a lot of shortcoming the major one of which is that it is used as a low stress three-body abrasion tester. These stresses are nowhere near the stress levels that are experienced by the grinding media in operation, hence the need to alter the conditions of the test in this regard. To this end, a new tester was developed and tested ( The set-up and procedure for the SWAT remains basically the same as that for the RWAT ( Only the modifications made to some of the parameters in the standard test will be outlined below: The rotational speed of the wheel was changed from the 200 A test time of 120 The maximum applied force was also increased from 130 Ore, ground to grain size range of –686 to +254 After initial tests were completed using an Ottawa foundry sand to determine test repeatability and range of usefulness ( The wear initially increases with increasing applied force, before becoming constant and seeming independent of the applied force. This transition occurs within the same force range, 625–700 It should be noted that other researchers concluded, based on the RWAT, that the wear is proportional to the applied force. The resulting models of abrasive wear all predict a linear relationship between wear rate and applied load ( Further, the friction coefficient was determined for the tests using the results for torque with the Eq. The results are shown in Despite the need to further investigate the causes for the variation of friction as a function of applied force, the possibility to determine friction as a function of applied force provides the possibility to feed the further development DEM charge motion simulation. Returning back to the abrasion model in Eq. The use of an abrasion wheel test to determine wear and friction properties a number of ores has lead to three observations of interest: The wear initially increases with increasing applied force, before becoming constant and seeming independent of the applied force. The possibility to determine friction as a function of applied force provides the possibility to feed the further development DEM charge motion simulation. With increasing applied force, the abrasive angle decreases at the same time as a greater intensity of breaking noise is heard during a test. These observations motivate yet further work to tie these evolving results with DEM charge motion modelling and simulation as well as investigate wear and friction under wet conditions.