Cyanex 572 has been first studied for the extraction of scandium from trivalent rare earths (REs). The extraction mechanism of Cyanex 572 for Sc(III) was proposed to be cation-exchange, and the stoichiometry of Cyanex 572 with Sc(III) was indicated to be close to 3:1. The extractabilities of Sc(III) from leaching solution of tungsten residue with Cyanex 572, P507, Cyanex 923 and TBP were compared at different concentrations, which indicated that Cyanex 572 was the best among them to extract scandium under the same conditions. The loading capacity of Cyanex 572 toward Sc(III) and stripping of loaded Sc(III) from the organic phase were also studied. By simple washing and stripping steps, the composition of scandium was increased more than eight hundred times.Because of the excellent physical and chemical properties, scandium (Sc) has been one of the most important strategic materials ( Scandium could be recovered via a number of processes, including solvent extraction, ion exchange, liquid membrane extraction, etc. ( Very recently, a novel extractant, CYANEX® 572 (a mixture of phosphonic and phosphinic acids), has been released by the Cytec Industries ( Cyanex 572 (C572) and Cyanex 923 (C923) were supplied by Cytec Industries Inc., which were used without further purification or saponification. P507 and TBP were obtained from Luoyang Aoda Chemical Co., Ltd. (China), which were purified as described elsewhere ( Cyanex 572 used in this study was characterized by NMR. The common extraction experiments were performed by shaking equal volumes (4 The effect of aqueous pH on REs extraction was investigated when Cyanex 572 was used as the extractant. As shown in As shown in As mentioned above, Cyanex 572 performed well for the extraction of Sc(III). Herein, further experiments were conducted to study the extraction mechanism of Sc(III) with Cyanex 572. To make a comparison, the extraction behaviors of Cyanex 572 for Lu(III) and Yb(III) were also studied. By changing initial RE concentration, the relationship between the increase of H Infrared spectra analysis was performed to compare Cyanex 572 before and after the loading of Sc(III). As be seen from In consideration of the fact that extraction capacity is important to evaluate an extractant, the extraction capacity of 0.083 Because of the stronger coordination interaction between Sc(III) and extractant, the Sc(III)-loaded organic phase was always difficult to be stripped. As reported in some recent literatures, thorium and heavy REs were prone to be stripped from Cyanex 572 ( To optimize the stripping conditions, 0.0325 Tungsten is an important resource for many high-tech products. With the booming utilization of tungsten resources, tungsten residue has become a kind of pollutant that cannot be ignored. The tungsten residue contained some critical elements such as scandium and some other REs, which can be fully utilized as a secondary resource. As can be seen in As revealed in To obtain a suitable extractant concentration for the scandium recovery, a series of experiments by adjusting the Cyanex 572 concentration from 0.04 For studying the recovery of scandium, the purities of different elements in the leaching solution before extraction and after stripping were compared. As shown in Cyanex 572 was first studied for the extraction of scandium from REs, the recovery of scandium by Cyanex 572 from the leaching solution of tungsten residue was also investigated. The extraction sequence of Cyanex 572 for lanthanides followed the positive sequence, and the separation factors of Sc(III) toward other RE ions were larger under the lower pH values. By specific extraction experiments and IR spectra analysis, a cation exchange mechanism was proposed and the stoichiometry of Cyanex 572 to Sc(III) was indicated to be 3:1. Moreover, the extraction capacity of Cyanex 572 for Sc(III) was determined to be 1.25 This work was supported by the “Hundreds Talents Program” from the