Although combining Versatic 10 with LIX®63 oxime (‘oxime’) results in desirable synergistic solvent extraction properties, it can also promote oxime degradation, resulting in products which could potentially have an adverse effect on physical properties. Degradation of eight organic solutions under different operating conditions typically in excess of those expected at the proposed El Boleo operation, resulted in the generation of 5,8-diethyl-6,7-dodecanedione monooxime (keto-oxime), 5,8-diethyl-6,7-dodecanedione (diketone) and 5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxydodecan-6-one (acyloin) to varying degrees in the different samples. None of the degradation products were found to have an adverse effect on metal selectivity or phase disengagement. A previously mooted possibility of 5,8-diethyl-6,7-dodecanedione monooxime having a beneficial effect by acting as a synergist was found to be unsustained.
                  A chromatographic (HPLC) method was developed to enable the observation of discrete syn and anti isomers of LIX®63 oxime and to investigate possible isomer inter-conversion in this synergistic system. Conversion of ‘inactive’ syn oxime to the ‘active’ anti form occurred readily under extract conditions at 30 °C. Subsequent conversion of some anti oxime back to syn under strip conditions was also observed.Recent work has raised interest in the use of a synergistic solvent extraction system containing LIX The current paper is the second of several to be published which focus on understanding, controlling and thereby minimising reagent degradation under Boleo operating conditions, in addition to assessing the impact of degradation products on the solvent extraction process. The overall success of this work has, after independent verification at piloting, resulted in Baja Mining incorporating this synergistic system as a main process plant component at the Boleo operation ( The active component in LIX An initial investigation into LIX oxime degradation under extract conditions resulted in a product with synergistic capabilities, or oxime isomer inter-conversion from the inactive Regarding the first possibility, investigation of LIX Despite the appealing prospect of an oxime degradation product acting as a synergist, previous work on nickel and cobalt extraction with non-chelating oximes in the presence of a carboxylic acid found aldoximes gave rise to a synergistic effect, but not ketoximes ( Although not directly relevant to the current synergistic system, it is worth noting that some investigation into the effects of keto-oxime in other systems has been undertaken. One study found the presence of keto-oxime had no effect on copper extraction kinetics by an aromatic hydroxyoxime in toluene, with keto-oxime behaving as an ideal (non-associating) solute ( Regarding the second possibility, this oxime can exist in either the The earlier work ( A bulk organic solution (7.0 L) containing 0.29 M oxime (1150 mL LIX Assay results for the sulphate-based synthetic aqueous extract solution used for the degradation experiments, which contained approximately twice the metal content expected in Boleo extract solution, are presented in A synthetic aqueous strip solution of 15 g/L sulfuric acid in deionised water was prepared for the degradation experiments. A synthetic aqueous strip solution containing 5 g/L cobalt and 10 g/L zinc as their sulphate salts in 10 g/L sulfuric acid was prepared for the strip stage PDT tests. Eight degradation experiments were performed ( Experiments were performed in square glass vessels (10 cm width Organic (400 mL) was loaded at pH 4.50 and mixed with aqueous extract solution for seven days (except peroxide system – see below) at temperature, after which each resulting organic solution was isolated and diluent added as needed to compensate for evaporation. The organic solutions were then mixed under ‘strip’ conditions (15 g/L H For the sulfite experiment, the aqueous extract solution was initially pre-treated by addition of 6 g/L sodium sulfite. For the peroxide system, hydrogen peroxide (2 g/L H At the completion of the degradation experiments, each 400 mL organic sample was stripped (100 g/L H The eight degraded organic samples were each divided into two sub-samples. For each sample, LIX Gas chromatography (GC) was performed using a Varian 3800 gas chromatograph with a flame ionisation detector (FID). The chromatograph was fitted with an SGE forte-BP1 fused silica capillary column (30 m To enable the detection of the oxime extractant, samples (90 µL) were derivatised by dissolution in 1:1 DMF:toluene (400 µL), adding BSTFA containing 1% TMCS (200 µL) and heating (80 °C) for 1 h. HPLC analysis of oxime was performed using a Shimadzu LC10 instrument equipped with a SPD M10A photodiode array (PDA) detector and Alltech 800 evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) arranged in series. A 250 mm Alltima C18 reverse-phase column (film thickness 5 µm, internal diameter 4.6 mm) and C18 guard cartridge were used. Isocratic elution was performed at 2.2 mL/min using an 80:20 mixture of HPLC grade acetonitrile and 1.0% v/v acetic acid in milliQ water. Oxime was monitored at 200 nm on the PDA. The ELSD detector program was set to a drift tube temperature of 30 °C with a nitrogen gas flow 1.3 L/min. Data were analysed using Shimadzu Class LC10 software version 1.41. Phase disengagement time (PDT) tests were performed on fresh and LIX For metal selectivity, organic (75 mL) and synthetic aqueous extract solutions (150 mL) were mixed at 30 For the pH isotherms, organic (200 mL) and synthetic feed solution (400 mL) were mixed and sampled at 30 °C as described previously ( Samples were analysed using both the PDA and ELSD detectors which were set up in series and yielded essentially equivalent retention times for a given species. PDA detection at 200 nm was chosen as this wavelength was found to best highlight the peaks attributable to oxime whilst minimising interfering peaks attributable to diluent and other impurities. ELSD and PDA traces obtained for fresh organic are shown in Only semi-volatile and non-volatile species are able to be detected by the ELSD instrument. Diluent was not seen using the ELSD instrument, and only a very small peak attributable to Versatic 10 was observed, and then only at low drift tube temperatures (< The The ➢ For each of the three pairs of degradation experiments that differed only in strip temperature, samples that were stripped at 60 °C had a similar percentage of residual ➢ For most degraded organic solutions, the percentage of residual ➢ Levels of These results demonstrate that Although the results indicate Interestingly, sulfite pre-reduction of the aqueous in the 2E30S30S system inhibited not only oxime loss, but isomer inter-conversion also, suggesting it possibly led to reduced metal complexation. However, as metal loading analyses during organic degradation were not performed, this cannot be confirmed. The appearance of the As stated previously ( LIX If, as suspected, the As only the In order to assess the impact of oxime degradation products on phase separation and metal selectivity, it was first necessary to add LIX The amount of LIX The reconstituted solutions were also analysed by GC for oxime, keto-oxime, diketone and acyloin content to enable assessment of the effect (if any) of these degradation products on metal selectivity and phase disengagement. Samples of oxime, keto-oxime and diketone used as standard solutions were all assumed to be 100% pure ( Calculation of the amount of diketone, keto-oxime and acyloin formed as a percentage of total oxime loss supported preferential keto-oxime formation under high extract stage temperatures and also with peroxide addition. It also revealed that the current degradation products collectively account for less than 50% of the oxime consumed in all experiments, an issue worthy of further investigation. Degradation resulted in the organic darkening from its initial yellow colour in all samples ( Operation at higher temperature under extract conditions resulted in the organic becoming more red/orange. Operation at higher temperature under strip conditions resulted in a more yellow colour becoming apparent. The presence of diketone would contribute to the yellow colour ( Metal selectivity tests were performed on fresh organic, all degraded solutions, and reconstituted organic (being degraded solutions post-LIX Metal distribution coefficients and metal separation factors determined at pH 4.50 for the fresh and degraded/reconstituted organic solutions are summarised in Relative to fresh organic, degraded samples containing < The Co and Zn distribution coefficients and separation factors for the ‘synthetic degraded’ solutions (which contained less of the degradation products) were typically comparable to or worse than those observed in the corresponding degraded samples. This result also suggests that the lower oxime levels is the cause of the inferior performance in the degraded samples and not the presence of excess degradation products. In addition, the reconstituted samples all had Co and Zn distributions and separation factors comparable to or higher than the original fresh organic, further suggesting the presence of the degradation products have no major adverse effect. On the basis of these results it is concluded that over 30% of (inter-converted) oxime in the current organic could be lost before an adverse effect on metal selectivity in the current system would become apparent. In addition, the oxime degradation products which are formed, including keto-oxime, diketone and acyloin, do not appear to have any adverse effect on metal selectivity. Keto-oxime does not act as a synergist. In addition to the results from 2E60S60 to assess the impact of both keto-oxime (16.4 g/L) and diketone (9.2 g/L). 4E60S30 to primarily assess the impact of keto-oxime (14.3 g/L cf. diketone 5.1 g/L-large keto-oxime/diketone ratio). 4E30S60 to assess impact of diketone (4.9 g/L cf. keto-oxime 3.4 g/L-large diketone/keto-oxime ratio). In addition, a fresh organic solution and ‘synthetic degraded’ organic solutions containing the corresponding level of oxime but lacking the degradation products generated in the degraded samples were also prepared and analysed to see whether the impurities affected the pH isotherms at the reduced oxime concentration. Plots of pH isotherms comparing fresh, degraded, reconstituted and ‘synthetic degraded’ organic solutions of samples 2E60S60, 4E60S30 and 4E30S60 are shown in Notwithstanding observed differences associated with different oxime levels in the degraded samples, comparable results were seen in the 4E60S30 and 4E30S60 systems, further supporting the negligible effect of oxime degradation products on metal selectivity. These results support the conclusion obtained from analysis of the metal selectivity results, namely that keto-oxime does not act as a synergist and that the presence of keto-oxime, diketone and acyloin do not appear to have any adverse effect on metal selectivity. Phase disengagement results of the reconstituted organic solutions after mixing under aqueous continuous extract and strip conditions are shown in The present work was undertaken primarily to address three issues: Investigate the effect of oxime degradation products on metal selectivity and phase disengagement time under conditions relevant to Boleo's proposed commercial operation, Assess the possibility of keto-oxime acting as a synergist, and Develop a method to investigate possible oxime isomer inter-conversion in this synergistic system. Operating conditions designed specifically to accelerate reagent degradation were used. Considerable oxime loss (up to 74%) was found to be associated with operation at high extract stage temperatures, a condition which also favoured keto-oxime formation. No evidence was found to suggest the presence of degradation products (including keto-oxime up to 16.4 g/L, diketone up to 9.2 g/L and acyloin up to 3.3 g/L) had any adverse effect on metal selectivity and phase disengagement. The present work found keto-oxime does not act as a synergist. A chromatographic (HPLC) method enabling the separation and observation of discrete Oxime inter-conversion was observed in these systems. Conversion of ‘Activation’ of LIX While the known oxime degradation products collectively accounted for less than 50% of the oxime consumed in all experiments, limited evidence suggested some irreversible metal complexation and/or polymerisation occurred, an issue requiring further investigation. Whilst the operating conditions used in the present work were deliberately chosen to accelerate reagent degradation, the opposite is required in any operating system. Work undertaken to understand and minimise oxime degradation under Boleo extract conditions will be presented in a forthcoming paper. Dr. David Dreisinger (Vice President-Metallurgy, Baja Mining Corporation) is thanked for the permission to publish this work. Dr Michael Virnig and Mr. John Mahlberg from Cognis Corporation are thanked for their advice regarding GC analysis of LIX