The dry friction and sliding wear of ethylene/propylene/diene rubbers (EPDM) were studied against steel as a function of the carbon black (CB) content using various testing configurations, such as pin(steel)-on-plate(rubber) (POP) and ring(steel)-on-plate(rubber) (ROP). The EPDM rubbers were characterized using tensile, compression tests and dynamic-mechanical thermal analysis (DMTA). The coefficient of frictions (COF) and specific wear rates of the EPDMs were determined. It was found that with increasing CB content the specific wear rate was reduced. A similar tendency was found for the COF in ROP tests. Both COF and wear rates of the EPDM mixes strongly depended on the test configurations. The wear mechanisms were concluded by inspecting the worn surfaces in scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and discussed. Albeit several rubber characteristics follow the same trend as the COF and wear rate, at least for this EPDM formulation, further investigations are needed to deduce eventual correlations between them.Rubber parts are widely used in different application fields such as automotive (sealing, bushing), construction (roofing, dilatation joints) and electric/electronic (insulators). It has been early recognized that the wear and abrasion behaviors of rubbers can be tailored upon request. To highlight this issue one may compare the abrasion performance of a tire with that of an eraser. The use of rubber products is inevitable in numerous applications when they fulfill sealing functions under dry and lubricated sliding conditions. Although wear is considered as a system characteristic (i.e. wear behavior depends on the configuration of the tribotesting rig, loading conditions, surface characteristics of the counterpart, etc.), efforts were always devoted to trace those material parameters, which control the wear. As a consequence some rules of thumb were deduced on how the wear characteristics of metals, ceramics and even polymers depend on selected material variables (e.g. The friction and wear of rubbers differ, however, substantially from those of other solids (e.g. The rubber stocks were prepared in a laboratory internal mixer and the curatives were introduced on a laboratory open mill. The recipe used was as follows—EPDM (Keltan DMTA spectra were recorded on rectangular specimens (length The Shore A hardness of the rubbers was determined according to the ISO 868 standard. For the density determination the Archimedes principle (buoyancy method) was adopted using methanol. Tensile tests were carried out on 2 Friction and wear characteristics were determined in pin (steel)-on-plate (rubber) (POP) configuration using two different devices. In the Wazau device (Berlin, Germany) a steel pin (316L; arithmetical roughness, Measuring simultaneously both the normal and the friction force components during the tests the COF values were computed and registered on-line. The specific wear rate was calculated by: To study the sliding wear a further test, termed ring (steel)-on-plate (rubber) (referred to ROP), was also used. A rotating steel ring (100Cr6, diameter: 60 The worn surfaces of the specimens were inspected in a scanning electron microscope (SEM; JSM5400 of Jeol, Tokyo, Japan). Prior to SEM investigation the specimens were sputtered with an Au/Pd alloy using a device of Balzers (Lichtenstein). The wear development in the TRW rubber was also followed by white light profilometry (MicroProf from the Fries Research & Technology, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany).   It has to be underlined that both The mechanical properties, along with further characteristics, are listed in Attempt was made to determine both initial (within the first minute in the running-in phase) and steady-state coefficients of friction (COF) (mean value in the second half of the test) during the tests in the different test rigs. The scenario is different for the ROP tests.  The fact that the specific wear rate in ROP (cf. SEM pictures taken from the worn track of EPDM-0 show a less characteristic failure mode for rubbers, which is due to the missing CB reinforcement (cf. The wear mechanism of EPDM-0 differs considerably from POP under ROP condition—cf. With increasing CB content the wear mechanisms changed basically. In EPDM-30 cratering (pitting) with fragmentation could be resolved (cf. We have got a further experimental support for tribochemical effects by inspecting the wear track as a function of time exactly at the same place during POP-C for the TRW rubber. The mechanisms described above are in line with the experimental findings. Albeit several characteristics of the EPDM rubber may correlate with the measured sliding wear data, further tests are needed to check whether or not such correlations exist, and if yes, in what form. Note that correlations between the specific wear and fracture mechanical parameters (and via the latter with network parameters) ( Based on this work devoted to determine the dry friction and sliding wear behavior of EPDM rubbers with various carbon black (CB) content against steel counterpart using different test rigs (POP and ROP), the following conclusions can be drawn: increasing CB content results in reduced specific wear rate irrespective to the testing configurations; the coefficient of friction (COF) depends on the rubber composition, test duration and type of the testing rig. The latter affects the COF mostly via the contact pressure, flash temperature and transport of the debris from the contact area. Nevertheless, the steady-state COF seems to be unaffected or decrease with the CB content; the observed change in the friction and wear behaviors may correlate with rubbers characteristics, at least for a given rubber composition with a single variable in the recipe (CB in case of this EPDM formulation). Mapping of the wear mechanisms for different test configurations and parameters as a function of time should contribute to a deeper understanding of the friction and wear behaviors of rubbers. The authors are thankful to Mr. J. Hamann (German Rubber Institute, Hannover, Germany), Ms. R. Kovács (PCC, Leoben, Austria), Mr. M. Herrera Bugeiro and Dr. B. Andersen (IVW, Kaiserlautern, Germany) for their involvement in the experimental and art works. This work was performed in the framework of an integrated project of the EU (KRISTAL; Contract Nr.: NMP3-CT-2005-515837;