The failure of underground structures depends on the magnitude of the in-situ stress, the strength of the intact rock, and the structure and strength of discontinuities including joints and faults. For shallow structures, failure is often structurally controlled, whereas at greater depth failure occurs predominantly through the intact rock. Consequently, underground structures constructed at great depth may experience brittle failure, including spalling and slabbing due to an amplified field stresses at the excavation boundary Recent field measurement during mine-by experiments at the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Limited) Underground Research Laboratory (URL) observed severe brittle failure occurred in the roof and floor of a circular tunnel due to high horizontal stresses Methods to evaluate the anticipated brittle failure characteristics of underground structures include full-scale field experiments, physical model experiments and a numerical simulation. Full-scale field tests are usually not feasible due to time and cost limitations. Consequently, laboratory experimentation, numerical modelling and physical modelling are carried out to assess the potential for brittle failure. In the following we explore the use of physical model experiments to determine brittle failure characteristics under conditions of polyaxial stress. These experiments are conducted on scale models of tunnels (60 In this study, brittle failure characteristics are classified according to the severity of failure around the model opening, the failure initiation stress and the angular extent and depth of failure. We analyze the relationship between brittle failure characteristics and polyaxial stress conditions using visual inspection, acoustic emission counts and locations and X-ray CT. These measurements are made to improve our understanding of failure modes and to estimate the likely response to prototype tunnels. We use cement mortar as a model material to simulate the brittle rock. The ratio of the uniaxial compressive strength to the tensile strength is a widely used brittleness index; the value for rocks is typically between 10 and 30 with the upper portion of this range denoting progressively more brittle materials (>10). This ratio for mortar is approximately 13, which is lower than comparable intact rock but considered sufficient for these experiments. The model specimen was manufactured for homogeneity with high-strength cement, Jumunjin standard sand and water—no aggregate was added. The samples were formed in cubes of the desire size and cured for 28 days or longer at room temperature. The physical and mechanical characteristics of the specimen are shown in The physical model experiments were performed using a polyaxial experiment system, which consists of a polyaxial pressure chamber, a loading system and a data acquisition system The biaxial apparatus allows the application of independent normal stresses to the model cross section. These loads are applied by an Interlaken rock testing machine. Stresses are transmitted to the model specimen via orthogonal pistons that penetrate the load chamber. The third independent stress is applied in the axial direction of the tunnel by hydraulic fluid pressures acting inside the pressure chamber via membrane sheathing on the model specimen. All three polyaxial stresses applied to the rectangular prismatic specimens are servo-controlled with maximum magnitudes in the cross section of Steel spacers between the pistons and the specimen ensure that loads are uniformly applied. All spacers were slightly shorter than the specimen width to allow for compression. In the A Physical Acoustic Corporation (PAC) PCI/Disp system was used to measure acoustic emissions from the model experiments. The acoustic emission sensors are Hagisonic’s AE-SC model with a resonant frequency of 150 The experimental specimens were scanned by X-ray CT post-experiment using a medical scanner—Siemens SOMATOM Sensation 16. The SOMATOM Sensation 16 uses the multi-slice method and can perform a volume scan with a slice thickness of 0.5 Physical model experiments were conducted to investigate the relationship between brittle failure characteristics and polyaxial stress conditions. In these model experiments, the maximum and intermediate applied stresses are applied to the model cross section with the minimum principal stress applied in the direction of the tunnel axis. Acoustic emissions were measured during the model experiments, and the generated acoustic emission parameters were analyzed the post-experiment.  The experimental sequence is as follows: The prepared specimens are located within the polyaxial pressure chamber; the chamber is loaded into the Interlaken test frame and stresses On completion of the model experiments, the samples are removed and sectioned into pieces approximately 120 The CT images define areas of contrasting density, denoting failed zones as areas of reduced density—high density zones are designated as white and low density zones as black. Brittle failure observed in the model experiments is depicted in  We investigated the severity of failure and failure initiation stress under polyaxial stress conditions through the measurement of cumulative AE counts, their distribution within the sample and through post-experiment visual inspection. The severity of ultimate failure and the stress at which this initiates are two independent parameters defining the response of the samples This study identified three grades of failure severity ( The relationship between failure initiation stress and polyaixal stress conditions is also investigated. Visual inspection and AE measurements are used to determine the failure initiation stress. In visual inspection the failure initiation stress was set to the peak stress achieved before any failure is observed i.e. at the transition from failure grade A. Using the AE measurements, the method proposed in Ref. The failure initiation stress, determined by visual inspection and AE measurements for the application of From The following shows the normalized linear regressions determined from a variety of model experiments Although there is a scale effect for the initiation of borehole failure As mentioned above, the increments of We also investigated the relationship between the stress at which heavy spalling occurs and the polyaxial stress conditions. In a similar manner as before, visual inspection and AE measurements are moreover used to determine the onset of heavy spalling. In visual inspections the heavy spalling stress is triggered at Grade B and indicated in AE measurements by rapidly increasing rates of AE counts and locations. After the crack damage stress, AE counts rapidly increase and indicate the onset of heavy spalling. From The angular extent (   We analyze the relationship between the depth of failure and stress conditions.  We also analyze the relationship between the angular extent of failure and stress conditions, although as apparent in This study investigates mechanisms of brittle failure that can occur in deep underground structures in rock. Physical experiments are used, which incorporate model tunnels loaded polyaxially in a load frame. Observations of brittle failure characteristics are classified by the severity of failure. The differing grades of severity include the initiation of failure through the development of severe spalling. These grades of failure are evaluated using indices related to the initiation stress, the angular extent of failure and the ultimate depth of failure. These modes and grades of failure are linked to the applied stress conditions. The results obtained from this are summarized below. The physical model experiments with a cement mortar to simulate rocks generated spalling on the tunnel wall parallel to the maximum stress, which showed a V-shape notch. V-shaped spalling was clearly detected by CT, and the damaged and failed areas could be distinguished through density measurements apparent in the CT image. Almost no failure occurred near the tunnel face due to the three-dimensional influence of the arch. Further removed from the constraint of the tunnel face wide and deep failure is apparent. Brittle failure can be classified into three grades through visual inspection and acoustic emission. An analysis of failure grade and polyaxial stress conditions found that as maximum deviatoric stress decreases, the failure grades decrease from ‘heavy spalling grade’ to the ‘no failure grade’. Like failure grade, failure initiation stress is affected by all polyaxial stresses and has a positive linear relation to their magnitudes. Therefore, the investigation of failure grade and failure initiation stress should be conducted under true conditions of polyaxial stress. Through a multi-regression analysis for failure initiation stress and stress conditions, we derive a quantitative relationship between each of these parameters. The minimum stress, although its direction is perpendicular to tunnel cross section, has a greater influence on failure initiation stress than the intermediate stress. The average angular extent of failure observed in the model experiments was between 28° and 42°, and the maximum was 55°. The depth was 1.009–1.143 times the tunnel radius. Unlike failure grade and failure initiation stress, the stress parallel to the tunnel axis had almost no influence on the angular extent and depth of failure. Failure depth is linearly proportional to the differential stress applied to the tunnel section. However, the angular extent of failure is not strongly affected by stress conditions. This study was supported by the KIGAM’s Basic R&D Project “Development of Underground Energy Storage System in Lined Rock Cavern”. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Derek Elsworth for his valuable comments.