Cadmium (Cd) is a toxic heavy metal which can be found in trace quantities (<100ppm) in phosphate rocks, and “wet process phosphoric acid” (WPA). In the experimental studies described in this paper, Cd was removed from WPA by solvent extraction, using amine extractants, notably “Alamine 336” as a tertiary amine extractant. In batch tests, Cd extraction from WPA under optimal conditions was calculated as 74±2.54% (95% confidence limit).
                  It is concluded that the organic phase, containing 1% (vol) Alamine 336+1.5% (vol) iso-dodecanol in B-65 kerosene, has good stability and a high efficiency for Cd removal from WPA. The average Cd extraction, with 20 recyclings of organic phase to the solvent extraction circuit was calculated as 68.57%.Cd as a contaminating element affects a wide variety of living organisms and is accumulated in the human body. During the production of industrial wet process phosphoric acid (WPA), Cd directly enters the WPA. Since WPA is used in phosphate fertilizers, and in the food and detergent industries, it can enter the environmental cycle as well. Cd is an unwanted and extremely toxic element so its removal from WPA is essential. Human exposure to Cd can affect pulmonary, kidney, gut and liver functions. Cd exposure can also cause common diseases, such as prostate cancer, gastro-intestinal poisoning and bone damage ( There are various remedial processes, such as precipitation ( This research focuses mainly on the separation of Cd from WPA by solvent extraction, using amine extractants, preferably “Alamine 336” as the tertiary amine extractant. The effect of several parameters on Cd extraction have been investigated and optimized in the laboratory. Applying the McCabe–Thiele diagram, the number of theoretical extraction stages at different phase ratios have been calculated. Finally the stability and efficiency of the organic phase in consequent recycling of the organic phase to the extraction circuit has been investigated. A Perkin-Elmer 5000 atomic absorption spectrophotometric analyzer was used to measure Cd concentrations in the aqueous phase. Alamine 336, a mixture of tri- Some analytical data for industrial phosphoric acid (Razi Petrochemical Plant of Iran), are given in Extraction of cadmium was carried out using volumes of the two phases under mixing conditions. Primarily mixing was performed in 100 The concentration of Cd in the organic phase was calculated from the mass balance. The Cd extraction percentage ( The effect of mixing time was investigated by varying the mixing periods between the two contacted phases. In this study, WPA of 51% P Since fine suspended particles and organics decreased the solvent extraction efficiency, some experiments were performed using organic phases containing different diluents, various diluents with refined and non-refined WPA being tested. Refined WPA was achieved by using 5% (w/v) of +250  The effect of Alamine 336 concentration in B-65 kerosene (without modifier) was investigated. The extraction of cadmium is shown in By contacting different concentrations of Alamine 336 in the organic phase with WPA Among the above methods, adding a modifier (a long chain alcohol) to the organic phase is the most common method of preventing third phase formation. In our research, “iso-dodecanol” was selected as modifier. Tests were carried out to determine the volume of iso-dodecanol in the organic phase. Titration (a known volume of iso-dodecanol added to the organic phase, and a good phase separation occurred) optimized the volume of iso-dodecanol as the modifier. The results are presented in Alamine 336 has base properties. In order to achieve extraction, it must initially be converted to an appropriate amine salt in the organic phase ( During contact of an amine salt with an aqueous solution containing an anionic metal species To study this effect, an analytical grad acid, such as phosphoric, nitric, sulfuric or hydrochloric, at a concentration of 1 As shown in The effect of WPA Extraction tests were conducted at various temperatures. The results showed that temperature has no significant effect on Cd extraction, which is an advantage in solvent extraction. The process can be performed at ambient temperature, which is an economically sound option. As organic solvents are expensive, stability of extractants in solvent extraction cycles is important. Therefore some preliminary tests were carried out to evaluate the stability and efficiency of Alamine 336 for Cd extraction from WPA Extraction experiments were carried out at optimized conditions, increased Cd concentration in the organic phase resulting in organic phase saturation. The maximum Cd loading capacity of the organic phase containing 1% (vol) Alamine 336 The extraction isotherm of Cd from WPA Cd concentrations in the aqueous phase (less than 0.06 Similarly, for O/A  Cd extraction from WPA has shown that a mixture of 1 % (vol) Alamine 336 and 1.5 % (vol) iso-dodecanol in B-65 kerosene as organic phase, WPA At optimum conditions, the average Cd extraction from WPA B-65 kerosene as a diluent was selected due to its low cost, safety and higher process efficiency. Adsorption of Cd with activated charcoal showed that the Cd values in the WPA decreased, the results indicating that the treatment of WPA with activated charcoal improved Cd extractability significantly. Despite improving Cd extraction by per-equilibration of organic phase with 1 According to the theory of tertiary amine extractants, formation of anionic chloride complexes of Cd is predicted. Applying the McCabe–Thiele diagram, the number of theoretical counter-current extraction stages in phase ratios of O/A Organic solvent comprising 1% (vol) Alamine 336 As the phosphate concentrates (apatite) contain high uranium and Cd contents, production of phosphoric acid from a lower price source is proposed. For detailed feasibility studies and cost estimations, more technical and engineering information is needed which will hopefully be provided in future work. The authors would like to express their thanks to the Ore Processing Centre and Jaber-Ibn-Hayan Research Laboratory of AOEI, Razi Petrochemical Plant of Iran, Research Institute of Petroleum Industry of Iran and Analytical Laboratory of Ore Processing Centre.