Herein, a novel enzyme bioreactor based upon polymer–inorganic hybrid microcapsules was prepared through combining biomimetic adhesion and bioinspired mineralization. Briefly, polydopamine (PDA) as the adhesive layer was formed on the surface of CaCO3 particles through self-polymerization of dopamine. Then, polyethyleneimine (PEI) was anchored on the adhesive layer through Michael addition reaction or Schiff base reaction. Subsequently, titania (Ti) as the mineral layer was generated and deposited on the surface of PDA/PEI-coated particles through the bioinspired mineralization process induced by the free amine groups of PEI. Finally, PDA/PEI/Ti hybrid microcapsules were obtained after removing the CaCO3 templates via EDTA treatment. Notably, during the preparation process, PEI could be considered as a “bridge” molecule to connect the adhesive layer and the mineral layer. The chemical/topological structure of the hybrid microcapsules could be facilely tuned by manipulating the molecular weight of PEI. Once utilized for constructing an enzyme bioreactor, the structural evolution of the hybrid microcapsules caused a varied enzyme catalytic activity (42–73Umg−1). This structure–performance relationship might be due to the alterable diffusion resistance resulting from the mineral layer. Besides, the enzymes encapsulated in PDA/PEI/Ti hybrid microcapsules also exhibited desirable thermal, pH, storage and recycling stabilities.During the past decades, biocatalysis, especially enzyme catalysis, has evolved as a promising protocol for the fabrication of commodity chemicals and pharmaceutical intermediates mainly owing to its green and sustainable merits Recently, bioinspired/biomimetic approaches (such as bioinspired mineralization In this study, polydopamine/polyethyleneimine/titania (PDA/PEI/Ti) hybrid microcapsules were constructed as an enzyme bioreactor through the combination of biomimetic adhesion and bioinspired mineralization. Firstly, an adhesive layer (PDA) was formed on the surface of CaCO Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), catalase from bovine liver (CAT, 2–5 PSS-doped CaCO Subsequently, the CaCO Scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nanosem 430) was conducted to characterize the morphologies of PDA/PEI/Ti and PDA microcapsules. Energy dispersive spectroscope (EDS) attached to SEM was utilized to analyze the elements of PDA/PEI/Ti and PDA microcapsules. The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrum was obtained by using the Nicolet-6700 spectrometer. Thermogravimetric (TGA) experiments were conducted by using Perkin-Elmer Pyris analyzer. The location and distribution of CAT in the capsule lumen were recorded by using Confocal Microscope (LSM 710). The catalytic activity and immobilization efficiency of enzyme were determined by using UV–vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi U-3010). CAT was entrapped into CaCO Enzyme immobilization efficiency in microcapsules was determined by Eq. The enzyme catalytic activity was calculated by measuring the decrease in the absorbance of H Thermal and pH stability: the catalytic activity of the free and immobilized CAT were measured after 2   In order to obtain kinetic parameters, the initial reaction rate of the free or immobilized CAT was measured at 25 As described in To clarify the preparation process and chemical/topological structure of the as-acquired hybrid microcapsules, several characterizations, including SEM, FTIR, TGA, etc., were conducted. As an example, PDA/PEI(1800)/Ti hybrid microcapsules, which were synthesized by using PEI with a molecular weight of 1800 As illustrated in the preparation process section, PEI was considered as a “bridge” molecule to connect PDA layer and titania layer, which played a crucial role during the synthesis process. Therefore, it can be conjectured that the structure of hybrid microcapsules may be tailored by manipulating the parameters on PEI, especially the molecular weight. As shown in To demonstrate the relationship between chemical/topological structure of the microcapsules and the exhibited performance in some specific applications, a series of PDA/PEI/Ti and PDA/cysteamine/Ti hybrid microcapsules were exploited as the bioreactors for enzyme catalysis. The specific activity of enzyme encapsulated in different hybrid microcapsules was assayed. Specifically, catalase (CAT) was utilized as a model enzyme and immobilized in the capsule lumen through  Besides, the effect of pH values (4–9), temperature (20–70 In summary, PDA/PEI/Ti hybrid microcapsules were prepared through the combination of biomimetic adhesion and bioinspired mineralization. During the preparation process, PEI was incorporated into the hybrid microcapsules as a “bridge” molecule to connect the adhesive layer and the mineral layer. The chemical/topological structure of mineral layer and capsule wall could be tailored by manipulating the molecular weight of PEI. Once utilized as the enzyme bioreactor, the specific activity of the immobilized enzymes was altered with the evolution of chemical/topological structure of the microcapsules. This may be arisen from the different diffusion resistance from the capsule wall. Besides, after further evaluation, the enzymes immobilized in the structure-optimized microcapsules exhibited desirable catalytic activity and showed excellent pH, thermal, storage and recycling stability. Hopefully, this microcapsule can be exploited to immobilize a variety of enzymes and further extended to other application areas. The authors thank the financial support from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: