In wet milling, the presence of a pool of slurry is generally the result of mill overfill. The effects of overfilling on milling kinetics have been examined. Assessment of milling efficiency has also been made.
                  To this end, batch grinding tests were carried out at 75% of critical speed. A laboratory mill, filled with 20mm balls, was used for the tests. Two levels of ball volumetric filling were considered: J
                     =20 and 30%. Slurry filling U was varied from 1.5 to 3.0 with reference to 20% ball filling. Equal masses of slurry were also used for a 30% ball filling which made slurry filling U change accordingly. Net power draw was measured throughout the experimentation.
                  It was found that product size distribution is a definite function of slurry filling U. Graphical analysis of the results suggests that the voids within the media charge should be completely filled with slurry without allowing the formation of the pool. This way, optimal output shall be expected. Moreover, mill power drop due to slurry pooling did not result in a proportional decrease in the production of fines.The volume of grinding balls available inside a mill generally determines its capability to process a large volume of ore. However, overfilling the mill is not advisable because the ability of the mill to hold up more material depends on the volume of voids between media balls. Indeed, if the mill is supplied with more slurry feed than the media interstices can take, the extra material will form a pool of slurry around the toe of the media charge. Tangsathitkulchai Following this study, Tangsathitkulchai The present article is intended to find out the extent to which the pool affects milling efficiency. It is indeed believed that pool volume affects the impact energy distribution, product grind and therefore milling efficiency. To this end, a series of batch grinding tests was carried out on slurries of constant density but different filling volumes. It was then possible to create pools of different volumes. In doing so, milling kinetics was studied as a function of slurry volume. And from there, the effects that the pool volume has on milling efficiency were measured. This set of tests was carried out in a laboratory grinding mill. Finally, in order to analyse the data, two industrial descriptions of milling were employed: the size reduction curves and the grinding index. They basically consist of a quantification of the degree of size reduction and are discussed in the next section. Three techniques used for the characterisation of milling as a size reduction process are presented. The significance of the associated outputs is also succinctly discussed. Bazin and Hodouin Basically, the technique is a spatial transformation of milling from the space used to plot cumulative passing curves into what is called a “size reduction space”, i.e. a space in which product undersize is expressed as a function of feed undersize. To grasp the essence of this graphical technique, consider In order to construct the size reduction curves, several cut-off sizes are defined from the finest to the coarsest particle size. Next, fractions passing the predefined cut-off sizes are determined for different grinding times. Hence, plots of product size passing against feed size passing and the corresponding size reduction curves are generated. As seen in This idea prompted the definition of a single point estimate for the size reduction process. That is why, Bazin and Hodouin Important to remember is that the size reduction curve and the size reduction index ( There exist many ways of describing mill performance, they may be just different ways of expressing the same thing  Take note: Klimpel An efficient milling operation is the result of good distribution of slurry within the load. Moys It shall be noted that grinding is more efficient when the specific energy consumption, as defined above, is low. Less energy is utilised for breakage and at the same time more material of specified fineness is being produced. As a result, the ability of the mill to process more feed is enhanced and its capacity increased accordingly. The laboratory test work comprising feed preparation, batch testing, and particle size analysis is presented below. The laboratory mill is also briefly described. The laboratory mill used for batch grinding is shown in The facility used to measure mill power is shown in All in all, the batch mill could supply enough information pertaining to milling and power draw for different slurry fillings; and thereby different pool volumes. The batch milling conditions used in this work are listed in For a level of ball filling In addition to steel balls, slurry (which is a mixture of ore particles and water in some proportion) is also loaded into the mill. Depending on the volume loaded, slurry occupies first the interstices between grinding balls before immersing the bed of balls at rest. The ratio between the volume of slurry It should also be understood that in this work the same masses of slurry were used while changing ball filling  The feed that was chosen for the pilot programme is a South African Platinum-bearing ore known as UG2 ore. It is one of the platinum-rich layers in an intrusion named the Bushveld Igneous Complex. About 60% of the Platinum in the Bushveld Complex is in the UG2 reef. Consequently, a lot of research and development has been concentrated on milling. That is why the availability of the UG2 ore has made it our preferred choice. The feed material used for this work was a Platinum ore from the Western Bushveld Igneous Complex (Republic of South Africa) which had been subjected to primary milling. Internal references from a South African concentrator reported that the specific density on the UG2 used as established in routine inspection is 3.47 Sample preparation involved cone and quartering of a heap of material to homogenise it. 60 The long preparation process explains why equal masses of slurry were used for different ball fillings Sampling of slurry is generally a challenge as it is known to be an inconsistent process. This is also true when dry powder is involved. A sampling method using slurried silica sand was tested. First, approximately 1 Though the method was tested on silica sand, it is believed that particles actually used were small enough (− Once the necessary feed samples were prepared, the batch grinding tests were started. In this regard, powder and water were stirred and mixed in a container. The slurry was poured into the mill initially loaded with 17.8 The slurry and media were loaded back into the mill and further milled for 1 Per batch test, 6 samples stored in small bottles were obtained and recordings of power data collected. The series of batch tests continued, this time for a 30% ball filling (i.e. 26.7 The last step was to dry the 48 samples at 50 The implications of slurry pooling on the size reduction process are discussed below. Three evaluation indices have been used; namely, the specific energy consumption, the Size Reduction index ( Upon constitution of data of measured mass per sieve size, particle size distributions were plotted. Similar graphs were obtained for other grinding conditions and their data have been reported elsewhere Before attempting to optimise milling with slurry volume as the optimisation variable, the variation of mill power with slurry filling has been considered. To this end, the mill was run under the conditions listed in What came out of the initiative is The last observation was that net power draw with water as the fluid is lower compared to what was recorded with slurry. This can be attributed to the difference in density between the two solutions. But the gap almost disappears at higher slurry filling owing to the much higher weight that the pool of UG2 slurry exerts to counterbalance the load. There is apparently no clear and unanimous definition of the specific energy efficiency. Depending on the ore and the industry the meaning of the specific energy efficiency will differ. The energy in kWh required to produce a ton of fine material less than 75 Having said this, It should be noted that the results relative to the specific energy consumption reported in the present article are based on batch grinding tests. As such, they are in principle limited in their applicability. That is why a link needs to be established between batch milling and full-scale continuous milling. This will enable to use the batch grinding findings in order to better understand full-scale operations. To this end, a programme of work is underway with the aim of addressing this limitation. Suffice it to say that plans have been put in place to extend the work to continuous milling. At the moment, an industrial survey has been undertaken and industrial data collected. Parts of the results have been already reported elsewhere A similar analysis as previously performed is presented here; the difference is that the Size Reduction index (see Eq. As shown in Lastly, the grinding index ( It is understood that high To sum up, it appears that it is desirable to consider a high level of ball filling and a reasonably low slurry filling in order to expect fast production of fines. The latter statement is motivated by the fact that under the following conditions,  The aim of the research work was to assess the implications of slurry pooling on milling efficiency. Firstly, it was observed that high ball and slurry fillings tend to produce a finer material except for This is further confirmed by Secondly, three metrics have been utilised; namely, the Size Reduction ratio (  By contrast, besides supporting a highly loaded mill with grinding media, the Finally, the specific energy consumption indicates high volumes of slurry and low volumes of grinding balls. Though surprising at first, one has to understand that the adopted definition of the specific energy consumption is all about energy necessary for the production of fines. It is known that power drawn – and therefore energy consumed – decreases with slurry filling for The problem arises with the fact that the specific energy consumption should be seen as a ratio between energy consumed and mass of fines produced. So, in order to expect efficient milling, either the energy consumed is to be low or a large amount of fines is to be produced. Now based on the fracture mechanics of rocks, it is accepted that more energy is needed for more breakage. It is therefore possible that the drop in energy consumption due to the pool does not translate into a proportionate reduction of fine material produced; thus, the seemingly contradictory findings. That is why one can use either a combination of low ball filling and high slurry filling to expect a more efficient usage of the input energy (that is a high production of fines for a given amount of energy) or a combination of high ball filling and low slurry filling for more rapid grinding regardless of the amount of energy used. In the first case a pool of slurry will be present with less grinding but good usage of energy available. In the second case, however, there will be no pool of slurry, but conversely more grinding will be recorded for a poor usage of energy. The optimisation of the milling process should be seen as a trade-off that needs to be made between throughput and energy utilisation. To be more precise, the best combination of milling conditions should enable a fast production of fine materials (less than 75 It then becomes evident that the solution is to look for high   The specific energy consumption advocates a high slurry filling With all the above, it appears that a high volume of balls with just enough slurry to fill the interstices (that is, There has been a difficulty in reconciling results found with the three indicators, i.e. Firstly, the point to make is that the specific energy consumption should rather be seen as an indicator of the performance of milling and not as a criterion for optimisation. In this regard, orientations given by Secondly, it was generally noted that as the slurry pool was increased, the net production of fines increased steadily. This was achieved despite the net power declining; this significant effect will be further investigated. Thirdly, only one ore has been used in the batch grinding testing. In future, the present work will be extended to at least two different ores for confirmatory purposes. Afterwards, a more complete analysis will be made with the aim of guiding full scale operation when a slurry pool is involved. Lastly, the effects demonstrated in this article were based on batch grinding tests on a laboratory scale. Plans have been put in place to collect data from a continuous overflow mill in order to ascertain the effects of slurry pooling on milling. The analysis is ongoing while partial results have already been published. The authors appreciate the financial support from the The University of South Africa (UNISA) is acknowledged for providing an environment conducive for research and for encouraging the publication of this work.