Heap leaching is being increasingly explored as a lower cost metallurgical technology to extract copper from sulfide ores of low grade and quality. Heap temperature is a critical factor in achieving economic copper extraction. The determination and control of heap temperature is challenging due to the intrinsic complexity of the intertwined fundamental processes occurring simultaneously inside a heap. In this study, we applied the HeapSim-2D model, calibrated using data provided by the Quebrada Blanca Mine, to study the response of heap temperature to variations of four key design parameters: raffinate flow rate, raffinate temperature, the extent of pyrite oxidation, and the application of a thermal cover. Note that the reported results have not been validated against experimental data and other possible rate-limiting factors are presently ignored. The modelling results showed that at a fixed raffinate temperature, the average heap temperature approached the raffinate temperature faster at a high flow rate than at a low flow rate. The heat generated by the oxidation of pyrite led to an increase in the heap temperature, but the magnitude of the increase was negligible at high raffinate flow rates, which would remove the generated heat via convection by the bulk movement of the leaching solution. The model predicted that the application of a thermal cover had a positive effect on maintaining the heap temperature, but the effect also depended on the raffinate flow rate. Understanding the effects of these design parameters on heap temperature is critical for achieving optimum copper extraction in heap leaching.Temperature is among the key factors that control the kinetics of copper leaching from different copper-bearing sulfide minerals, such as chalcocite and chalcopyrite. Extraction of copper from chalcocite using bacterially-assisted heap leaching has been successfully practiced on a commercial scale ( Chalcocite leaching is reported to occur in two stages, with the second stage that converts secondary covellite to copper sulfate and elemental sulfur being the rate-limiting step ( The application of heap leaching to treat chalcopyrite ore can potentially result in reduced cost and attractive environmental benefits in copper production ( Even though in most cases the total sulfides in the ore possess enough energy to allow for high heap temperatures, poor heat management and lack of temperature control techniques are among the reasons for heap temperature failing to rise to the desired level ( In this study, a two-dimensional model, referred to as the “HeapSim-2D” to differentiate the two versions of the HeapSim model, was applied to simulate the heap temperature distribution in both the vertical and the radial directions under various operating conditions. Prior to its application, the model was calibrated using the historical heap leach monitoring data from the Quebrada Blanca Mine. An overview of the HeapSim-2D model was given elsewhere ( A brief overview of the HeapSim-2D model is given here. The HeapSim-2D model comprises five components that simulate the five types of fundamental processes occurring in heap leaching: fluid flow, solute and gas species transport, chemical reaction kinetics, microbial activities, and heat transfer. The model divides a leach pad into multiple 2D-axisymmetric cylindrical leach units, the radius of which is equivalent to half drip emitter spacing and the height equivalent to the heap height. As with the heat transfer component, the general assumption is that the solid phase (ore particles), liquid phase (leaching solution), and gas phase (air) involved are in thermal equilibrium. The governing equation that describes the two-dimensional heat balance of a heap under leach is developed based on the conservation of energy (enthalpy) (Eq. Even though the radiative heat transfer is combined into the general heat transfer coefficient ( The HeapSim-2D was calibrated using the historical monitoring data at the Quebrada Blanca (QB) Mine. QB is a copper mine located in the Chilean Andes, about 240 The operation uses heap and dump leaching, solvent extraction (SX), and electrowinning (EW), to produce copper cathodes. The heap studied had a total copper grade of 1.48%, of which 8% was soluble copper (oxides), 74% was cyanide soluble copper (chalcocite), and 18% was insoluble copper (chalcopyrite). The crushed ore, whose particle size distribution is shown in Prior to the model calibration, the ambient temperature ( The HeapSim-2D model was then calibrated by fitting multiple model outputs with the corresponding monitoring data. The model outputs include heap temperature, PLS copper concentration, PLS acid concentration, and PLS redox potential ( As with the heat transfer component (  The calibrated model was used for the sensitivity study that assessed the response of the heap temperature distribution to the variations of the critical design factors. In the sensitivity studies, all empirical parameters were fixed and only controllable design parameters were varied. The design parameters under investigation are raffinate temperature, raffinate flow rate (irrigation rate), the extent of pyrite oxidation, and the application of a thermal cover. The heap initial temperature was set at 6  Another key factor simulated is the extent of pyrite oxidation. Note that the pyrite here refers to the hypothetical blending of finely ground pyrite concentrate from flotation with the agglomerated ore. The percentage of pyrite blended in the agglomerated ore was set at 2% by weight. Due to its fine particle size and large surface area, the blended pyrite concentrate was expected to react to a much greater extent than the pyrite associated with the copper ore resulting from its coarse grain size and low degree of liberation (  Not only the heap average temperature but also the heap temperature distribution was vastly different at different flow rates. In the case of the high flow rate (  The simulation results show that the decrease in the heat transfer coefficient due to the application of a thermal cover led to an increase in the heap temperature, reflecting the reduced heat loss across the warmer heap top by convection to the cooler ambient. However, the impact of the heat transfer coefficient depended on the raffinate flow rate. In the case of a higher heat transfer coefficient (without thermal cover) and a lower raffinate flow rate ( The findings of this work have implications on the current chalcocite leaching operation at the Quebrada Blanca Mine. Since blending pyrite with the agglomerated ore was not a feasible option, three what-if scenarios were tested to improve the current operation: the first scenario maintained the aeration for the entire leach cycle as opposed to terminating it on day 250; the second scenario increased the raffinate temperature by 10 The HeapSim-2D model, calibrated using the historical data of the Quebrada Blanca Mine, was applied to assess the effect of four temperature control techniques on the heap temperature distribution: raffinate temperature, raffinate flow rate, the extent of pyrite oxidation, and the application of a thermal cover. The simulations were done under the assumption that other factors, such as acid supply, air permeability and aeration were not rate-limiting. It is understood that these factor could become rate-limiting at elevated temperatures ( Using the knowledge gained from the modelling study, three hypothetical scenarios were tested to assess the response of the QB operation to three temperature control techniques. Maintaining aeration for the entire leach cycle in combination with increasing raffinate temperature by 10 The authors would like to thank Teck Metals Applied Research and Technology for providing the heap leach data at the Quebrada Blanca Mine.