Organised and sponsored by the Metal Powder Industries Federation and APMI International, in cooperation with the Refractory Metals Association, and held concurrently with the PM World Congress, the 2008 International Conference on Tungsten, Refractory & Hard Materials attracted participants from over 40 countries. And for this installment of MPR's coverage, Ken Brookes (FIMMM, MPR Consultant Editor) chose a very practical contribution to the industry's knowledge base.Readers of my modest contributions to hardmetal literature will know how I distrust static tests for measuring dynamic properties. This is particularly the case with so-called ‘fracture toughness,’ an excellent measure of crack propagation under controlled static stress, but too often employed — or misemployed — to predict resistance to breakage under a random combination of impact and abrasion. Somewhat similar considerations apply to standard tests for abrasive wear. I, therefore, more than welcome the employment of a new test by Sara Kiani and her colleague Jonathan Bitler of Kennametal, Inc, Latrobe, USA, in their Some important hardmetal applications require both high toughness and high wear resistance — for example, oil and gas drilling, where geological strata vary significantly. Others include mining, earth-moving, mineral processing and metal cutting. For this investigation, the wear resistance of 10 WC/Co carbide grades was measured using three procedures: the NETL test and ASTM standards B611 and G65. In such wear-resistance applications, carbide grain size, as well as the content and composition of the metal binder (generally Co), strongly influence physical and mechanical properties. Wear resistance of a material depends on its resistance to penetration by abrasive particles or protruding asperities of mating material, and the difficulty of material removal by fracture and plastic flow. If the abrasive is softer than the hardmetal, wear starts with removal of the binder phase, followed by fragmentation of the carbide grains and gradual removal of these fragments until the whole grain is removed. Kiani, the presenter of this paper, explained that, in such ‘soft’ abrasion, wear rate was directly related to binder mean free path. In general, minimising the mean free path in the binder phase by decreasing the carbide grain size and/or binder content increased the resistance to plastic deformation in the binder phase. There was good correlation between wear resistance and mean free path and between the compressive strength of the sintered composite and the normal force applied to the wear surface. In abrasion of conventional cemented carbides, surface shearing and grooving displaced the carbide grains, leading to extrusion of the cobalt binder at the surface. The carbide grains thus lost binder-phase support and slipped, fractured or fell from the surface. Plastic deformation and micro-cutting happened to a much greater extent than with ceramics. Put simply, abrasive wear could be produced both by plastic deformation and by brittle fracture. Plastic deformation could be seen as having cutting and ploughing modes, the main difference being that cutting mode required a high attack angle, while ploughing needed a low angle. When the abrasive particles were in contact with the surface, scratches produced grooves and subsequent plastic deformation. Brittle fracture, on the other hand, involved the presence of cracks in the surface and subsurface. Brittle fracture included pull-out of carbide grains, Palmqvist cracking and spalling. Wear in rock drilling involved four mechanisms: surface impact spalling; surface impact fatigue spalling; thermal fatigue; and abrasion. Spalling mechanisms were dominant when drilling hard and abrasive rocks such as quartzite and granite. Thermal fatigue prevailed when drilling in soft non-abrasive formations such as calcite and magnetite, and abrasion dominated wear when drilling in soft but abrasive rocks, such as sandstone. Abrasive wear had itself been divided into two main categories: high-stress grinding abrasion (the abrasive particle being crushed during wear interaction), and low-stress scratching abrasion, where the abrasive particle remained intact as it moved freely across the wear surface. ASTM B611 and ASTM G65, respectively, covered these two wear regimes. Abrasion often accelerated when impact was involved, the two factors contributing to faster material degradation and loss. For the purpose of this study, a laboratory impact-abrasion test was developed using information published by NETL-Albany Research Center. Older hardmetal enthusiasts will remember it as the long-established (but no more) U.S. Bureau of Mines' innovative Albany Research Center, which eventually became (in 2005) the newest branch of the U.S. National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL). The original concept was to use an apparatus to predict the wear, and hence the energy consumption, that occurred during crushing and grinding of ore. Albany modified an impact pulveriser to make a more practical wear-testing device instead of a machine used solely to determine the abrasive index of rocks. The major change was to incorporate a three-paddle impeller hub assembly. Overall, it bridged the gap between purely abrasive wear tests and high-stress tests of gouging wear. In general, ASTM wear test methods had problems in predicting the wear behaviour of cemented carbides in the field. For example, alumina sand used for the ASTM B611 test was not always as abrasive as the rocks encountered in mining applications, and the silica used in ASTM G65 was definitely less abrasive than most drilled formations. This motivated the authors to study the wear behaviour of various carbide grades under both impact and abrasion of rocks like quartzite. This provided more realistic simulation, as field testing was time-consuming and uneconomical. Data obtained were expected to help in grade selection, especially among high toughness grades. The NETL test apparatus consisted of a rotating impeller in a drum ( Both impeller and drum rotated clockwise at 620 and 45 rev/min, respectively. The large drum was rubber-lined to reduce noise and provide some friction between the ore and the drum. Ore was lifted when the drum rotated to the point where it overcame the frictional forces of the lining and then fell into the path of the rotating paddles. The test equipment can accommodate any type of rock, including quartzite, calcite and limestone. Pink quartzite rock (98% SiO Results included average cumulative volume loss and volume loss per hour as functions of hardness. Each test was carried out three times for each grade of carbide to investigate repeatability. For this study, ten grades of cemented tungsten carbide ranging from 6 to 16% cobalt ( A multi-hour test method was employed for the investigation. One side of each sample was impacted by ore and each test was run for a total of 4 hours. After every hour, the test pieces were removed, cleaned and weighed, and every 15 minutes the used ore was replaced with a fresh supply. The toughest (high binder content and/or large grain size) hardmetal grades are resistant to impact but have poor abrasion resistance. The opposite is true for harder grades. Correlation of hardness to impact and abrasion resistance is schematically shown in Volume loss occurred throughout the hardness range. The loss was greater with tougher hardmetals, due to their low resistance to abrasion, but decreased with harder and more brittle grades. For grades with hardness 90 HRA and above, volume loss again increased by chipping, as a result of poor impact resistance. Point A of Brittle grades suffered chipping in the first or second hour of testing, resulting in high volume loss, indicated with arrows in As mentioned earlier, abrasive wear can be produced by either plastic deformation or brittle fracture. SEM photos featured plastic deformation, grain pull-out and binder extrusion at the surface. Brittle grades showed little evidence of surface damage to WC grains and no sign of binder pull-out or grain deformation. High abrasion resistance helped to maintain an intact surface, whilst corners and edges were chipped due to poor impact resistance. By contrast, tough grades were severely damaged, binder pull-out causing grains to dislodge. Microcracking, indicated with arrows in In addition, a carbide button taken from a rock-drilling button-bit was examined. These drill bits use cylindrical hardmetal buttons inserted into a steel body to enhance wear resistance. Similar wear was seen on parts subjected to the impact abrasion wear test and buttons recovered from a used bit after drilling.  In addition, for comparison of these results with those from ASTM B611 and G65 procedures, the same buttons were cut in half and the new surface tested. Grades listed in ASTM B611 showed linear correlation between wear resistance and hardness. It was the most abrasive test among the three procedures and historically had been used to characterise the wear behaviour of cemented carbides. However, because it only revealed resistance to abrasion, it was unable to simulate the effect of impact forces as found in drilling, mining, construction and similar applications. ASTM G65 was the least abrasive test. Differences in volume loss across the hardness range (from tough to brittle grades) were not significant compared to those shown in the impact abrasion ( Typical wear scars on a brittle grade after B611 and G65 testing are illustrated in Summarising, the author claimed that the new wear test would reliably predict the accelerated wear of tough cemented carbide as well as the potential chipping behaviour of brittle grades, when both abrasion and impact factors were involved. In general, wear resistance increased with hardness but, when testing bars, chipping occurred at the edges, leading to higher volume loss. SEM analysis indicated that brittle hardmetal surfaces were undamaged, while tough grades showed binder pull-out, grain cracking, dislodging and micro-abrasion. Dislocation steps causing plastic deformation were seen on large grains throughout the microstructure. Similar wear morphology was seen on a button taken from a rock-drilling bit. It was also concluded that this test method could help in grade selection, especially for sintered carbides with 84 HRA hardness, or used in oil and gas drilling, coal mining, road construction and similar applications. ASTM B611 and G65 do not show distinctive volume losses for tough grades, and hence lack predictability for actual wear resistance of these grades. In addition, these two standard methods were not capable of showing the chipping behaviour of very brittle grades, due to their poor impact resistance. Instead, they revealed only resistance to abrasion and/or scratching. Whilst true field testing was time-consuming and non-economical, the new NETL method could simulate both impact and abrasion effects in down-hole drilling and was thus a more realistic laboratory method for predicting impact abrasion behaviour. Though first test results showed good correlation between resistance to impact abrasion wear and hardness, rectangular bars may not be the ideal shape for this test. Most WC/Co parts used in oil and gas drilling, coal mining and road construction do not have sharply angular corners. The authors, therefore, suggested that geometries closer to industrial practice should also be considered. In order to expand test capabilities for various geometries, impeller design had been modified to check button inserts for drill-bits. These could be conical, chisel or any other commonly used design.