A control strategy is proposed for distributed process systems in which the whole measured temperature profile through the system is held as close as possible to a desired steady state profile defined externally via some global optimisation (not considered here). To do this the concept of a minimum error profile (MEP) is introduced which represents the closest feasible approach to the desired profile. The MEP then becomes the set-point or target for regulation. The implementation involves both state and parameter estimation, via extended Kalman filtering, and dynamic optimal control via LQR. Performance of the approach is illustrated with an example based upon a cascade of heated stirred tanks.Distributed process plant items are often instrumented with an array of measurement sensors. For example an array of temperature probes is often installed to measure bed temperatures along a fixed bed catalytic reactor or tray temperatures along a distillation column. However, control in many such situations is based upon use of only one or two sensors selected from the complete set, the remaining sensors being used to provide monitoring information for the operator. Here we propose a strategy for control of the whole measured profile with the objective of holding it (i.e. the measured profile) as close as possible to a desired profile (defined externally to meet some global optimum). Temperature profile control is mentioned by  An extended Kalman filter (EKF), driven with on-line measurements of the temperature profile, provides state and parameter estimates as input to the MEP control strategy. These estimates also feed the supervisory global steady state optimization, which delivers, on a slow intermittant timescale, the desired steady state temperature profile, Δx  where Δx is the corresponding perturbation in system steady state temperature profile. The dynamic behaviour of the temperature profile can be represented, as for example by  where Δx(k) is the actual current profile,  where  which will take the system to steady state at the minimum error temperature profile To demonstrate the performance and application of the approach we present a simple distributed process case study involving a single liquid stream flowing through a long cascade of mixed stages each with an unknown, independently varying heat input, as shown in Two test disturbances are considered to demonstrate the system response. First, the temperature in the middle vessel is perturbed by 10°C, see the noise-free response in Second, the heat input, Both process and measurement noise are included when considering closed loop control. Process noise, Δw implemented as in  To demonstrate the response of the MEP to an extreme disturbance, the peak heat input is shifted from the middle to the first vessel in the cascade. The overall heat input is kept constant so that the same system outlet temperature is reached, see the steady state open loop response in   The concept of the minimum error profile (MEP) is presented for control of whole temperature profile in distributed parameter systems faced with parameter drift. The approach minimizes in a least squares sense the error from a predefined desired profile and forms the target for application of the linear quadratic regulater (LQR). Application of the proposed contol scheme to a simple example, a cascade of heated stirred tanks, has demonstrated the feasibility and performance relative to a conventional LQR implementation. The approach has the potential for quite direct application to control of fixed-bed catalytic reactors and counter-current mass transfer processes.