A new discretization for simultaneous aggregation, breakage, growth and nucleation is presented. The new discretization is an extension of the cell average technique developed by the authors [J. Kumar, M. Peglow, G. Warnecke, S. Heinrich, and L. Mörl. Improved accuracy and convergence of discretized population balance for aggregation: The cell average technique. Chemical Engineering Science 61 (2006) 3327–3342.]. It is shown that the cell average scheme enjoys the major advantage of simplicity for solving combined problems over other existing schemes. This is done by a special coupling of the different processes that treats all processes in a similar fashion as it handles the individual process. It is demonstrated that the new coupling makes the technique more useful by being not only more accurate but also computationally less expensive. At first, the coupling is performed for combined aggregation and breakage problems. Furthermore, a new idea that considers the growth process as aggregation of existing particle with new small nuclei is presented. In that way the resulting discretization of the growth process becomes very simple and consistent with first two moments. Additionally, it becomes easy to combine the growth discretization with other processes. The new discretization of pure growth is a little diffusive but it predicts the first two moments exactly without any computational difficulties like appearance of negative values or instability etc. The numerical scheme proposed in this work is consistent only with the first two moments but it can easily be extended to the consistency with any two or more than two moments. Finally, the discretization of pure and coupled problems is tasted on several analytically solvable problems.In particle technologies population balance equations are widely used, e.g. in processes such as crystallization, comminution and fluidized bed granulation. They appear also in mathematical biology as well as in aerosol science. These are partial integro-differential equations of hyperbolic or parabolic type. Included are conservation laws with integral fluxes. Independent variables are particle properties, especially particle size, over which a particle number distribution is considered for which the population balance is formulated. Analytical solutions are available only for a limited number of simplified problems and therefore numerical solutions are frequently needed to solve a population balance system. Several numerical techniques including the method of successive approximations There are several sectional methods in the literature which predict the particle property distribution accurately while using a linear grid, see for example Sutugin and Fuchs The first general formulation consistent with the first two moments has been proposed as the so called fixed pivot technique by Kumar and Ramkrishna Some of the existing methods overestimate the numerical results while others are inconsistent with moments. Moreover, of the existing sectional methods none can be implemented for solving combined processes effectively. We wish to have a general, accurate, easy to use, computationally less expensive and simple scheme. By these standards, none of the previous schemes we know of are completely satisfactory, although some are much better than others. This leads to a clear motivation for the development of the new scheme. Thereby the objective of this work is to develop a general and simple scheme which preserves all advantages of the existing schemes and can be used to solve all processes simultaneously. A general one-dimensional PBE for a well mixed system is given as in Here the aggregation and breakage terms are given as follows The nature of the process is governed by the coagulation kernel The Eq. It is convenient to define moments of the particle size distribution at this time. The The first two moments represent some important properties of the distribution. The zeroth ( The cell average technique has already been formulated for pure aggregation PBE in J. Kumar We wish to transform the general continuous population balance equation into a set of The particulate events that may change the number concentration of particles include breakage, aggregation, growth and nucleation. The abbreviation CA stands for cell average. Note that this general formulation is not similar to the traditional sectional formulation where birth terms corresponding to the each process are summed up to contribute the total birth. Here all particulate events will be considered in a similar fashion as we treat individual processes. The concept of combining the processes will be further elaborated in next sections. The first step is to compute particle birth and death in each cell. Consideration of all possible events that lead to the formation of new particles in a cell provides the birth term. Similarly all possible events that lead to the loss of a particle from a cell give the death rate of particles. The new particles in the cell may either appear at some discrete positions or they may be distributed continuously in accordance with the distribution function. For example, in a binary aggregation process particles appear at discrete points in the cell whereas in breakage process they are often distributed everywhere according to a continuous breakage function. Due to non-uniform grids, it is then possible that the size of a newborn particle in a cell does not match exactly with the representative size of that cell. The newborn particles whose sizes do not match with any of the representative sizes cause an inconsistency of moments in the formulation. Therefore the aim is to remedy the inconsistency in an efficient manner. Suppose that we just substitute the total birth and death of particles, for example, in Eq. Let us demonstrate the common concepts of the cell average technique by the following example shown in Since we know the positions of the newborn particles inside the cell, it is easy to calculate the average volume of newborn particles, Now we may assume that Here It is convenient for further simplifications to define a function The fractions can be expressed in terms of There are 4 possible birth fractions that may add a birth contribution at the node The Before we summarize the cell average technique it should be mentioned here that the continuous number density function It is due to the fact that all particles in a cell are assumed to be concentrated at the representative size of the cell. This representation of the number density is useful to calculate the discrete birth and death rates in a cell. We now summarize the main steps of the cell average technique discussed above as follows:     A general procedure of the cell average technique has been explained above. Further details and implementation of the cell average technique for particular and combined processes will be presented later. At this point it is important to comment on the conceptual difference between the fixed pivot and the cell average techniques. The basic difference between the two techniques is the averaging of the volume. The cell average technique first collects the total birth of particles in a cell and then distributes it once to the neighboring nodes depending upon the position of the volume average in the cell according to the strategy discussed above. On the other hand each birth which takes place in a cell is assigned immediately to the neighboring nodes with the same strategy by the fixed pivot technique. The another substantial difference as a consequence of the averaging arises from the domain of particles which contributes to birth at a node. The particle domain which may contribute a birth at the node Up to now we have presented the foundation of the cell average technique and illustrated the difference between the two techniques. We shall now deliberate about the advantages of the cell average technique over the fixed pivot technique in general. In order to demonstrate the idea of the cell average and its improvements over the fixed pivot technique let us consider a simple example shown in the According to the cell average mechanism the total number of particles assigned to It is easy to verify that From the preceding discussion it is now evident that the cell average technique retains more information of the cell, i.e. original particles that belong to the cell, during the assignment process. The fixed pivot technique tends to spread particles, i.e. has more numerical dissipation. In a special case when the average of the particles is equal to the representative size no distribution to neighboring cells takes place by the cell average technique. Assignment of particles to neighboring cells for the consistency with moments causes numerical diffusion. Since the cell average technique maintains consistency with less particle distribution to neighboring cells, we expect the technique to be more accurate and less diffusive. We shall now turn our attention to a suitable ODE solver to solve the resulting set of ODEs. When integrating the resultant system Next we present the derivation of the discrete equations of the cell average technique for several individual and combined processes. Numerical results will be obtained for many analytically solvable problems using the cell average technique and comparisons will be made with numerical results obtained by the fixed pivot technique. Now we derive the cell average formulation for the pure breakage. The birth and death terms of the pure breakage equation have already been presented in Eq. Substituting the Dirac-delta mass representation Here the limit The derivation of the discrete birth and death rates is given in Similar to the discrete birth rate we obtain the discrete volume flux as We now compute the volume average of all newborn particles. Dividing the total volume birth Now the birth rate for the cell average technique can easily be obtained by substituting the discrete birth rate The set of Eq. In this section we derive the cell average technique for pure aggregation problems. Following J. Kumar Thus, Consequently, the average volume of all newborn particles in the Furthermore, the death term is given as Now the final set of discrete equations can be written as As we have mentioned in the previous section that most of the methods for solving growth PBEs suffer from numerical diffusion. The finite volume schemes are good alternatives to solve growth PBEs, but they are usually consistent only with a single moment. Moreover, the extension of the existing finite volume schemes to arbitrary grids is extremely complicated. The moving mesh techniques are exceptionally good but they are difficult to combine with other processes. We have derived a two-moment consistent discrete formulation for the pure aggregation and pure breakage PBEs and we do expect the same here. Therefore the aim is to derive a scheme which is consistent at least with the first two moments, easy to combine with other processes and can be applied on general grids. In order to accomplish the goal stated above, a completely new perspective to treat the growth process has been introduced. The growth of a particle can be treated as adherence of small nuclei on the particle surface. Traditionally, growth process is described as continuous transfer of mass from the continuous phase to the disperse phase, see Thus, the process can be modeled as aggregation of existing particles with the imaginary nuclei. The aggregation rate will of course be directly proportional to the growth rate of particles. Like the aggregation population balance equation, the mathematical model of the growth process then takes the following form Here Unlike the conventional aggregation population balance equation, Eq. If we compare this equation directly with the classical PBE for growth, we get the following relationship between the aggregation kernel Now the cell average formulation can easily be derived for Eq. The cell average formulation is easy to derive for the new growth PBE. First we calculate the total birth and death rates in the cell We make the assumption that The discrete birth and death rate terms are the same in this case. Since we assume that the particles are concentrated only at the pivots, the mass of the particles in the cell will increase and the total number of particles will remain the same. Similarly the volume flux into the In order to apply the cell average technique, the volume average will simply be computed by Now the birth has to be modified according to the cell average strategy as Since The final formulation of rate of change of number after substituting the expressions of The aggregation kernel is given by the relationship given in Eq. In the section of numerical results we will see that formula Various methods for the numerical solutions of pure growth PBE can be obtained from different choices of the approximation of To conclude, the new form of PBE It should be noted that the objective of this work is not to provide a numerical scheme for pure growth problems but to propose a rather simple and general scheme which can be used to solve combined processes effectively. Several finite volume and finite element schemes can be found in the literature which may be used to solve the growth PBEs but all of them either have problems with consistency of moments or they are not easy to combine with other particulate processes. In the next section we will show that the coupling of the growth process with other particulate processes using the cell average technique becomes trivial and considerably better results for combined processes can be obtained without much extra computational effort. This subsection is devoted to the numerical treatment of combined aggregation and breakage processes. When both aggregation and breakage processes take place together, the discrete birth and death rates for combined processes in most of the numerical schemes are generally considered by algebraically summing the individual birth and death rates. In other words, conventionally the easiest way to couple the two processes is to just add the corresponding discretizations in the following way. This formulation is of course consistent with the first two moments if this holds for breakage and aggregation separately. In order to couple the two discretizations more efficiently we take advantage of the cell average technique. The accuracy can further be improved by using the idea of cell average for the combined problem simply by considering the total birth and death rates from combined processes. Thereby, we shall treat both processes together in a similar way as we have treated the individual processes. First we collect all the newborn particles in a cell independently of the events that make them appear in the cell. In our case here the events are aggregation and breakage processes. Then we take the volume average of all newborn particles in the cell. The remaining steps are the same we used for the individual processes of aggregation or breakage. Mathematically, we construct the discrete formulation for the coupled problem as Here the terms Now the birth rate The truly new ingredient is that the average value The terms As in the previous section we have just considered that the particles are appearing in cells independently of the event that make them appear and presented a cell average formulation for combined aggregation and breakage processes. A similar approach has to be applied here for the case of simultaneous aggregation and nucleation. The process of nucleation may be introduced into the modeling in two ways. A common approach is via a boundary condition at particle size 0 if the nucleation is mono-disperse. Here we want to consider the alternative of a source located near particle size 0. In a continuum theory both are valid approaches. Before we proceed to the final form of the cell average technique, we want to comment on the conventional coupling of these processes. Let us discuss the case of discretization of Kumar and Ramkrishna Note that in the above formulation we may gain or loose mass if the nucleation does not take place exactly at the representative sizes Since nucleation is the birth of the particles, there is no nucleation term to be considered in the death term. An analogous contribution to the death term would come if we considered harvesting of certain particle sizes. The numerical treatment would be analogous. Now the birth by nucleation and aggregation can be described as follows The average values are computed as All other notations appearing in the formulation are already defined in previous sections. So treating nucleation and aggregation as particle birth in cells in a similar fashion we have gained the consistency with the first two moments. It should be noted that if the nucleation is mono-disperse, usually the appearance of smallest particle, and the smallest representative is chosen such that it matches exactly with the size of the mono-disperse particles, then the above formulation can be rewritten as The formulation This section is devoted to the numerical treatment of the simultaneous growth and aggregation processes. As we have seen that the cell average technique can be applied to solve a pure growth problem by the application of a different form of growth PBE. Similar to other combined processes, in this case we like to have the following form of the cell average formulation Here the birth and death terms in above equation are given as The volume average of particles appearing due to growth and aggregation in the cell The discrete Eq. For comparison we describe an alternative by which the two processes can be coupled in a different manner which is more accurate but more expensive. For the simultaneous aggregation and growth, one may use cell average technique for the aggregation and a Lagrangian approach for the growth to obtain a better accuracy of the numerical results. Finally, we solve the following set of ordinary differential equations for the simultaneous growth and aggregation The first equation is for the rate of change of particle due to aggregation while the last two equations describe the motion of the representatives and boundaries respectively. A similar approach can be used to couple growth process with other processes like breakage or simultaneous breakage and aggregation. In this work we only presented numerical results for the cell average technique where analytical solutions are easily available but it can be formulated in a similar fashion for other combinations of processes. Similar to the case of simultaneous aggregation and nucleation, see Now the birth by nucleation and growth can be described as follows The average values are computed as To conclude, we have presented the cell average formulation for some cases of coupling the two selected processes. But the idea remains the same to couple any number of arbitrary processes. In the next section we proceed to compare the numerical results with the analytical solutions in different cases considered before. In this section, the performance of the cell average technique is evaluated by a direct comparison of the PSD and its moments calculated by the fixed pivot technique as well as with the analytical solutions. Several pure and combined processes that can be solved analytically have been considered in our comparisons. The analytical solutions in each case together with initial condition have been provided in The comparison between numerical and analytical results is carried out by means of average number density. Since the total number of particles in each cell is obtained from the numerical techniques, it is fair to compare the average number density. It can be calculated in the following way These densities have been plotted at grid points. This criterion of comparison is used in the entire work. The integration appearing in the analytical average density is computed either analytically if possible otherwise numerically by a low order integration routine. It should be mentioned that in all following computations, the volume domain is discretized geometrically into small cells by the rule Let us first assess the accuracy of the scheme for pure breakage. Here we have considered only two test cases of binary breakage with linear and quadratic selection functions, see Based on the above results, one can conclude that the numerically calculated PSDs by the two methods deviate from each other significantly. The numerical results calculated from the cell average technique on a coarse geometric grid are very accurate. On the other hand, an over-prediction in the PSD at lower volumes has been observed in the fixed pivot technique. The computation time taken by the cell average technique is slightly more than for the fixed pivot technique. The performance of the scheme for pure aggregation problems has already been published in J. Kumar et al. The analytical and numerical results for the mono-disperse initial condition with the sum kernel have been shown in We have considered two test cases to access the ability of the scheme to handle pure growth problems. In the first test case we take exponentially distributed particle size distribution  The numerical results for the second test case have been presented in As we have seen the numerical results of the particle size distribution for pure growth problems by the cell average technique as well as by the upwind discretization are not very accurate. A better accuracy in this case can be obtained by making the formulation consistent with the first three moments, see for details J. Kumar We compared the fixed pivot technique Note that next to conservation of mass these problems have the special properties that the processes of aggregation and breakage balance to conserve total number also. Data We have discretized the volume domain geometrically using the rule Let us now consider the steady state data We shall now demonstrate the difference between conventional coupling To summarize, the cell average technique provides highly accurate results already on a very coarse grid. The accuracy can of course be further increased by making the grid finer. The cell average technique with the new coupling makes the technique even more useful for combined aggregation and breakage by being not only more accurate but also computationally less expensive. We have tested the formulation for simultaneous nucleation and aggregation. A simple case of zero initial population with constant aggregation kernel and mono-disperse nucleation is considered. Such systems with zero initial population usually lead to oscillations in the particle size distribution. But we will see by numerical results that the cell average technique is completely free of oscillations. Analytical solutions for the first two moments of this problem reported by Alexopoulos and Kiparissides In In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the cell average technique we have applied it to two test problems with a linear growth rate Numerical results for the first test problems have been plotted in A similar computation has been performed for the second test case of size-dependent aggregation kernel. Once more the numerical solution of the first two moments overlaps the analytical solutions excellently, see We can conclude that the cell average technique can be used for coupled processes effectively. The coupling of growth processes with aggregation and breakage has been a big issue in areas related to particulate systems. Different authors proposed different coupling techniques but all of them either are complicated As mentioned before growth processes can be coupled with other processes by computing growth using Lagrangian approach and aggregation or breakage using the cell average technique. In this way numerical diffusion by the growth can significantly be reduced and considerably better results can be obtained. In order to illustrate this coupling we have considered the same test cases as before. Since the prediction of the first two moments in this case is similar to the previous case, we omitted them to present here. Only the particle size distributions corresponding to Nucleation with no particles initially present is difficult to simulate. The analytical solution together with the initial condition is included in As we have seen in previous sections the coupling of growth with other processes using a Lagrangian approach produces excellent results. An attempt in this direction has been made by Kumar and Ramkrishna Now we shall divert our attention to the concept of choosing representative sizes and find out some similarities of the fixed pivot and cell average schemes. In practice, the representative size of a cell may be chosen arbitrarily. The center of the cell, an easy choice, is a common choice for the representative size. On the basis of the position of the representative sizes we have the following lemma which tells us about the similarity of two techniques.  Consider some particles According to the cell average technique, the fraction is given by Clearly substitution of the average This work presents the extension of a numerical scheme, the cell average technique that we introduced in J. Kumar The cell average technique proposed in this work allows the convenience of using regular (linear, geometric or equal size) and irregular meshes. Furthermore, the cell average scheme is consistent with the zeroth and first moments, the same procedure can be used to provide consistency with any two or more than two moments. Consistency with more than two moments can be achieved by distributing particles to more grid points. The numerical results have shown the ability of the cell average technique to predict very well the time evolution of the second moment as well as the complete particle size distribution. An important attribute of a numerical scheme, the computational time, has been investigated for numerous problems. It has been found that the computation time taken by the cell average technique is comparable to that taken by the fixed pivot technique. Moreover, for several aggregation problems it was even less than the computation time taken by the fixed pivot technique. A new approach for solving growth population balance equations is presented. The growth process has been treated as aggregation of existing particles in the disperse phase with some imaginary nuclei appearing from the continuous phase. Thus, the growth population balance equation is converted to the aggregation population balance equation. The aggregation rate is expressed in terms of the growth rate. Consequently, it becomes a trivial task to apply the cell average technique to the transformed aggregation population balance equation. However, numerical results of the particle size distribution turn out to be very diffusive. Nonetheless, the cell average formulation predicts the first two moments extremely accurately without any computational difficulties. Furthermore, a new concept for the coupling of different processes has been introduced. All processes including growth and nucleation have been solved using the cell average technique by treating them uniformly. It has been demonstrated that the new approach of coupling is not only more accurate but also computationally less expensive. This is achieved by collecting all newborn particles in a cell independently of the events (aggregation, breakage, growth and nucleation processes) that make them appear in the cell. Then a similar treatment like the cell average technique provides to individual processes is given. A substantial success of this coupling is observed for combined processes where growth is present because the coupling of growth with other processes has been a challenging task. The new approach of coupling makes the numerical discretization very simple and more accurate.  Greek symbols  Aggregation Breakage Index Inlet Nucleation Outlet Constant values Mean or average values Numerical approximations Analytical Modified Numerical Cell average Discretized population balance equation Fixed pivot Generalized approximation Granule size distribution Method of line Ordinary differential equation Population balance equation Particle property distribution Particle size distribution This work was supported by the Graduiertenkolleg-828, ‘Micro–Macro-Interactions in Structured Media and Particles Systems’, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg. The authors gratefully thank for funding through this PhD program. Ziff and McGrady The analytical solution for the case For the case Here the function The analytical solution for mono-disperse initial condition can be found in Aldous Here the function     Patil et al. Kernels are Analytical solutions are obtained for the following two initial conditions Now, Eq. By the simple use of Laplace and inverse Laplace transform, they obtained the following equilibrium solution for the initial condition If the initial condition is Here Obtaining the root of the above polynomial is difficult, therefore the roots will be obtained numerically. They also mentioned that after enforcing constraints on the number and volume of the floc size distribution, there are only two significant real roots of the polynomial. Lage The roots of the polynomial can easily be obtained In this case, analytical solutions are given for moments by considering the zero initial population with a constant aggregation kernel and a constant nucleation rate. In this case the analytical solutions for the first two moments are given by There are various combinations of growth rates and aggregation kernels where analytical solutions are available. These solutions can be found in Ramabhadran et al. Assuming that the initial condition follows an exponential dependence with respect to particle volume, Let us define some more dimensionless quantities Now we will consider two particular cases.   For large values of For this case, continuous population balance takes the following form  We want to show that We substitute It gives  In this case we have proved that  Interchanging the order of integration the above term can be rewritten as Substituting the number density We can also combine the above two terms into one as follows 