Chitosan was used in the flotation of pyrite–galena mixtures. The results indicated that chitosan preferentially adsorbed on pyrite and galena was floated from the pyrite–galena mixtures. Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses were performed to study the interaction mechanism of chitosan on the pyrite and galena minerals at pH 4 and 6. ToF-SIMS showed that chitosan adsorbed heavily on pyrite but barely on galena when a mixture of pyrite and galena was treated by chitosan. The high resolution XPS spectra indicated that both the amine and the hydroxyl groups from chitosan reacted with pyrite surface, whereas no significant binding energy shifts were observed on galena. Combined with the authors’ previous studies of chitosan in other sulfide flotation systems, it was observed that chitosan could depress pyrite, galena, sphalerite and chalcopyrite to different extent when the minerals were floated alone. However, in the flotation of mineral mixtures, chitosan selectively adsorbed on one mineral which depressed its flotation, allowing the other mineral to be floated from the mixture. The competitive adsorption was attributed to the differences in the electron affinity value of the lattice metal ions. Chitosan strongly binds with metal ions with a high electron affinity.Pyrite (FeS The rejection of pyrite requires a suitable depressant during flotation. To reject pyrite during the flotation of lead sulfide (galena), sodium cyanide together with lime is commonly used as selective depressants for pyrite while xanthate is used as a collector to float galena ( Chitosan and its derivatives have been used as adsorbents to remove heavy metal ions and dyes from industrial wastewater. The outstanding properties of chitosan were principally due to the amine and the hydroxyl groups in the polymer structure ( The complimentary surface analysis techniques, time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were applied to investigate the mineral surfaces after treatment with chitosan. Through the collection of the ToF-SIMS ion mass spectra, the chitosan distribution was mapped on the pyrite–galena mixtures, directly showing the adsorption of chitosan on pyrite or galena surfaces. Furthermore, the fragmentation pattern was derived from the spectral data which revealed the characteristic peaks corresponding to reaction species between minerals and chitosan. On the other hand, XPS measurements can identify the chemical states individual element. The combination of XPS and ToF-SIMS would shed light on the interaction mechanisms between chitosan and the studied sulfide minerals. Pyrite (FeS Chitosan was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Canada. The vendor’s data showed that the molecular weight of the chitosan ranged from 100,000 to 300,000 Dalton and the degree of deacetylation was 75–85%. It was used without further purification. Solution pH was modified by HCl and NaOH (Fisher Scientific Canada). Potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX), supplied by Prospec Chemicals Ltd., Canada, was added as a collector. It was purified by recrystallization with ethyl ether anhydrous and acetone (Fisher Scientific, Canada) following the protocol of Small-scale flotation tests were performed to examine the selective depressant function of chitosan in the flotation of pyrite–galena mixtures using a glass flotation tube made in-house. Details of the flotation tube were described elsewhere ( A ToF-SIMS IV spectrometer (ION-TOF GmbH) was utilized for the ToF-SIMS measurements by using 25 To prepare mineral samples for ToF-SIMS analysis, 1 As a complementary method to detect the type of mineral surface species after chitosan adsorption, XPS analysis was applied to acquire spectra from surface by an AXIS 165 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos Analytical, USA) equipped with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (h The mineral samples for XPS measurements were prepared in a similar way as the samples for ToF-SIMS analysis, except that only single mineral was used. To prepare the sample, 1 The adsorption of single and binary metal species on chitosan was measured after shaking the slurry in an incubator at 250 Single mineral flotation tests of pyrite with and without chitosan as a depressant were carried out, and the results are shown in Flotation tests were carried out on pyrite–galena mixtures (weight ratio 1:1) and the metal grade and recovery of pyrite and galena in the flotation concentrate were shown in The flotation results showed that pyrite was selectively depressed in the pyrite–galena mixture due to the addition of chitosan as a depressant. In order to verify the possible selective adsorption of chitosan on pyrite but not on galena, ToF-SIMS positive-ion mass spectra were obtained from the surface of pyrite–galena mixtures after chitosan treatment at pH 4 and 6.  XPS spectra were collected from the pyrite mineral surface before and after chitosan treatment at pH 4 and 6. The XPS analyses of galena after chitosan adsorption were reported earlier ( In addition to the N 1s binding energy spectra, high resolution binding energy spectra of O 1s were collected from pyrite treated with chitosan at pH 4 and 6. The obtained O 1s spectra for pyrite at pH 4 and pH 6 ( The single mineral flotation tests show that both pyrite and galena were depressed by chitosan in acidic solutions to some degree. However, in the mineral mixture flotation, galena was floated with a recovery of 68% at pH 4 and pyrite was depressed with a recovery of 23%. The flotation results indicated that competitive adsorption of chitosan occurred in the pyrite–galena mixtures. Similar flotation results were also observed in the flotation of chalcopyrite–galena mixtures and sphalerite–galena mixtures using chitosan ( Chitosan, as one of the widely used adsorbents with nitrogen-based functional groups, has been examined for its selective adsorption behaviors in binary metal species systems ( Even though literature shows an increasing interest in the research on the selective adsorption behaviors of chitosan towards different metal ionic species, the adsorption mechanisms were still not elucidated clearly at present. Pearson’s hard-soft acids-bases (HSAB) principle is widely used to explain reaction mechanism of transition metals and coordination ligands ( It is worth noting that the tested selective adsorption of chitosan on the different minerals follows the table of electron affinity ( To test the possible dependence of chitosan’s interaction with metal ions on the electron affinities of the metal ions, adsorption tests were done in the binary system of Cu In this study, the application of chitosan as a selective depressant in the differential flotation of galena and pyrite was tested. The single mineral flotation results showed that pyrite was depressed as well as galena by chitosan using potassium ethyl xanthate as a collector. However, in the flotation of pyrite–galena mixtures, due to the competitive adsorption of chitosan on pyrite surfaces, galena was floated from the mixture with a recovery of 68% at pH 4 while pyrite was depressed with a recovery of 23%. ToF-SIMS and XPS analyses showed that the amine groups and the hydroxyl groups in chitosan were involved in its reaction with pyrite, possibly through a chemisorption mechanism. But the adsorption of chitosan on galena was probably physisorption in nature, as shown previously in the chalcopyrite–galena and sphalerite–galena systems. The preferential adsorption of chitosan on sulfide minerals such as chalcopyrite, sphalerite and pyrite, over galena, probably stems from the different affinities of the constituent metal ions in the minerals towards chitosan. It was hypothesized that the affinity of a metal ion towards chitosan is dependent on its electron affinity. The metal ion with a higher electron affinity has a stronger tendency to interact with the amine groups in chitosan, leading to its preferential adsorption on chitosan over other metal ions. The minerals containing such metal ion would adsorb chitosan more strongly than other minerals. The authors thank the financial support to the project from both the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through a Discovery Grant and the Alberta Innovates through funding to the Canadian Centre for Clean Coal/Carbon and Mineral Processing Technologies (C