The aim of the study was to evaluate the osseointegration of Al2O3 coated with a bioactive glass ceramic (Bioverit®I), in a load-bearing implant model in sheep in comparison to uncoated Al2O3 and to a minimally loaded situation. Both types of implants were inserted into the proximal tibia (load-bearing model) and in a drill hole defect into the tibia diaphysis (minimally loaded model). Under load-bearing conditions, the coating resulted in significantly higher interfacial shear strength and a high amount of mineralized bone in direct contact to the implant surface. In contrast, the uncoated Al2O3 was surrounded by a thick connective tissue layer corresponding to low interfacial shear strength. In the minimally loaded model, however, there was rather a tendency of lower interfacial shear strength in the case of the coated implants. This finding corresponds to the histological results, which showed mineralized bone in the interface of uncoated Al2O3, whereas in the case of the coated implants a thin layer of osteoid was observed. It was suggested that the osseointegration of Al2O3 could be improved by the coating under load-bearing conditions, under which uncoated Al2O3 ceramics cannot directly bind to bone.Alumina (Al Coating of Al The successful osseointegration of implants depends not only on the properties of the biomaterial and on biological factors at the implantation site but also on the mechanical conditions at the interface. It is accepted that the minimization of mechanical stresses and micromotions at the interface promotes osseointegration, whereas increasing stresses and micromotions delay or even prevent bony incorporation The objective of the present study was to evaluate the osseointegration of Al Two kinds of implants, uncoated and surface-modified alumina were tested. All surgical-grade dense Al The implants had the shape of a right-angled triangle (24 The animal experiment was conducted following national regulations for the care and use of laboratory animals and was approved by the German Government (Regierungspräsidium Tübingen, no. 692). The devices were implanted under load-bearing and minimally loaded conditions into the right tibia of 16 adult female merino sheep with an average weight of 104 To determine the shear strength of the material–bone interface, push-out tests were performed. The tibiae were removed post-mortem, dissected of all soft tissue and morphologically analysed. The callus covering the implants on the medial side of the tibia was carefully removed. Using special sawing instruments, standardized bone specimens, with the implants in situ were created from the tibia plateau and diaphysis. The specimens were positioned onto a metal block slotted underneath the implant to allow push-out ( To evaluate the intactness of the coating, the pushed-out implant specimens were electron beam evaporated with a thin layer (10 Bone specimens with the triangular implants in situ and cortical bone specimens after removing the cylindrical implants were used for undecalcified bone histology. After embedding in methacrylate, 70 To determine significant differences between the coated and uncoated implants regarding the biomechanical and histomorphometrical data Wilcoxon test was used. The level of significance was set at No post-operative complications were observed. After about 3 days the sheep regained a normal walking pattern. The morphological investigation of the tibiae after explantation revealed intact joint surfaces over the implantation area. In most cases a thin layer of bone covered the implant surface on the medial side of the tibia with no distinguishing features between the implant materials. In the case of the load-bearing implantation model below the medial tibia plateau the push-out test showed significantly higher shear strength between bone and the Al Electron microscopically, the brand-new coating appeared dense and even without any cracks. No defects could be observed in the coating also after the push-out test ( Histologically, all implants, which were implanted in the load-bearing situation, were surrounded by a bony lamella (BL) ( The implants in the minimally loaded drill hole defect model were pushed out of the bone in the biomechanical test. Therefore, the interface was disrupted and could not be quantitatively evaluated by histomorphometry. Qualitatively, there were no signs of inflammation neither in the case of the coated nor in the uncoated implants ( The bioactive glass ceramic coating (Bioverit This study confirms that the mechanical conditions are a very important factor for osseointegration. In a previous study of our group, the micromovements and the stress distribution at the interface of the load-bearing model, which was used in the present investigation, were calculated by finite element analysis The glass ceramic Bioverit The coating was intact after the implantation period and the mechanical push-out test. Large plaques of mineralized tissue were seen on the coated surface indicating that the bonding between bone and glass ceramic was stronger than in-between bone. As the surface roughness of the coated implants was somewhat higher compared to uncoated implants, the high interfacial shear strength might be due not only to chemical bone bonding but also to mechanical interlocking. Interestingly, the advantage of the coating with respect to the improved osseointegration seems to be of lower importance in the minimally loaded diaphyseal drill hole model. There was rather a tendency of lower shear strength in the case of the coated Al It is concluded that the osseointegration of Al The authors wish to thank the German Ministry of Education and Research (bmb+f) for supporting the study and the CeramTec AG, Plochingen, Germany, for providing the implants. The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical assistance of Mrs. Patrizia Horny, Mrs. Marion Tomo and Mrs. Ursula Maile.