Backgound
                  Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) transdifferentiated ectopically trigger vascular calcifications, contributing to clinical cardiovascular disease in the aging population. AnxA5 and TNAP play a crucial role in (patho)physiological mineralization.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed affinity studies between DPPC and 9:1 DPPC:DPPS-proteoliposomes carrying AnxA5 and/or TNAP and different types of collagen matrix: type I, II, I + III and native collagenous extracellular matrix (ECM) produced from VSMCs with or without differentiation, to simulate ectopic calcification conditions.
               
                  Results
                  AnxA5-proteoliposomes had the highest affinity for collagens, specially for type II. TNAP-proteoliposomes bound poorly and the simultaneous presence of TNAP in the AnxA5-proteoliposomes disturbed interactions between AnxA5 and collagen. DPPC AnxA5-proteoliposomes affinities for ECM from transdifferentiating cells went up 2-fold compared to that from native VSMCs. The affinities of DPPC:DPPS-proteoliposomes were high for ECM from VSMCs with or without differentiation, underscoring a synergistic effect between AnxA5 and DPPS. Co-localization studies uncovered binding of proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5 or TNAP+AnxA5 to various regions of the ECM, not limited to type II collagen.
               
                  Conclusion
                  AnxA5-proteoliposomes showed the highest affinities for type II collagen, deposited during chondrocyte mineralization in joint cartilage. TNAP in the lipid/protein microenvironment disturbs interactions between AnxA5 and collagen. These findings support the hypothesis that TNAP is cleaved from the MVs membrane just before ECM binding, such facilitating MV anchoring to ECM via AnxA5 interaction.
               
                  General significance
                  Proteoliposomes as MV biomimetics are useful in the understanding of mechanisms that regulate the mineralization process and may be essential for the development of novel therapeutic strategies to prevent or inhibit ectopic mineralization.Biomineralization is a complex, multifactorial process, which results in the deposition of mineral crystals along collagen fibrils in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of various tissues, such as bones, teeth, and certain areas of cartilage [ Ectopic mineralization occurs in many soft tissues, including articular cartilage, and smooth muscle cells of various tissues, most prominently in the kidney, ligaments, and tendons, leading to vascular stiffening and hypertension, risk factors of cardiovascular mortality [ HA generation and its deposition are accomplished by several proteins, involved in Ca AnxA5 interacts with collagen and this interaction regulates the mineralization of growth plate chondrocytes. Increased secretion of type II and X collagen by the chondrocyte in the presence of ascorbate promotes enhanced interactions between these collagen fibers and AnxA5, stimulating Ca Here, proteoliposomes were used with only AnxA5, TNAP or both combined, as key components on their surface, as a simplified MV mimetic system. Two different lipids have been used to compound the proteoliposomes, dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) as a neutral lipid and dipalmitoylphosphatidylserine (DPPS) anionic lipid. Such proteoliposomes were used in previously studies [ All the aqueous solutions were prepared with Millipore DirectQ ultra pure apyrogenic water. Bovine serum albumin (BSA), trichloroacetic acid (TCA), tris-hydroxymethyl-amino-methane (Tris), N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), 2-amino-2-methyl-propan-1-ol (AMPOL), sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), AnxA5 was expressed in The lipids DPPC and DPPS were used in the preparation of the DPPC-liposomes and 9:1 DPPC:DPPS-liposomes (molar ratio) as previously described [ TNAP (0.02 mg/mL) and AnxA5 (0.2 mg/mL) were incorporated into DPPC-liposomes and 9:1 DPPC:DPPS-liposomes (molar ratio) by direct insertion in the stock buffer, resulting in a 1:15,000 and 1:100 (protein:lipid ratio) respectively. The mixture was incubated overnight at 25 °C to avoid possible thermal inactivation. Then, the mixture was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 ×g during 1 h, at 4 °C. The pellet containing proteoliposomes was resuspended in an appropriate volume of the same buffer. Protein concentrations were estimated in the presence of 2% ( Different sources of collagen (type I, type II, and types I + III) were used in order to produce the collagen matrix coating. First, the collagen was dissolved in 50 mM acetic acid at 1.0 mg/mL and placed under stirring for at least 1 h. After that, the collagen solution was diluted to a final concentration of 125 μg/mL in 50 mM acetic acid. 50 μL of collagen solution and 200 μL of stock buffer were then added to a 96 well plate, per each well, corresponding to 6.25 μg collagen per well. To achieve maximal refolding during coating, these pepsin-solubilized collagens were renatured in a neutral buffer during the coating process. The plate was kept covered, overnight at 4 °C. The next day, the plate was emptied and blocked with stock buffer containing 1% BSA for blocking non-occupied sites (250 μL/well) for 1 h at room temperature. The plate was washed 3 times with stock buffer without BSA and used as such to perform binding assays between proteoliposomes and collagens. Several proteoliposome compositions were selected to investigate the interaction with collagen fibers, making use of vesicles, fluorescently labeled with Rhodamine 6G. Plates treated with collagen matrix coating were used in the assay. Proteoliposomes (0.6 mg/mL total lipid) with different lipid and protein composition were incubated with the plate (from 0 to 600 μg/mL total lipid) under gentile stirring, in the dark, for 2 h at 25 °C. The sample was removed, the plate was washed with stock buffer and the binding measurements were performed in an “IN Cell 2000” Analyzer (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). VSMCs were isolated from human umbilical cords, via two different methodologies. First, umbilical cords were washed in PBS to remove excess blood and the parts damaged by clamping were cut off. Blood clots were pushed out and 5 mm was cut off from each end. A cannula was placed inside the vein/arteries, attached to the cord with thread and rinsed with PBS. Another cannula was placed on the other end, which was then injected with 0.2% collagenase via a syringe. The cannulas were closed and collagenase was left inside the vein for 10 min. at 37 °C. The umbilical cord was massaged, the cannula was opened and rinsed with culture medium in order to remove the cells. The medium was centrifuged at 1000 In a second approach, umbilical veins/arteries were cut in very small slices, directly cultured in the same conditions, with medium in 6 well plates previously coated with 1% gelatin, and outgrowth cells were selected. For both methodologies, cells were cultured using DMEM, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin [ Native collagen fibers were produced in 96 well plates during culturing VSMCs. The cells were cultured (in quintuplicate) at a density of 1 × 10 Once the culture of VSMCs produces mainly fibrillar type I and III collagens [ Co-localization between proteoliposomes and native collagen matrix were studied by fluorescence microscopy (Pendragon AxioVert 200 M Microscope and/or IN Cell 2000 Analyzer GE Healthcare Life Sciences). To this end, proteoliposomes (0.6 mg/mL) were labeled with 0.2 mol% Rhodamine 6G and empty liposomes (equally labeled and without proteins) composed of DPPC or 9:1 DPPC:DPPS (molar ratio) were used as negative vesicle controls. Binding was analyzed in plates containing an ECM-coating comprising native collagen from VSMCs differentiated into an osteoblasts-like phenotype. Proteoliposomes (150 μL) were incubated (450 μg/mL lipid concentration) under gentile stirring for 2 h at 25 °C in the dark. The supernatant was removed and bound proteoliposomes were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS (200 uL per well) for 10 min. The plate was then washed twice with stock buffer and incubated with a specific antibody against type II collagen for 30 min., at 37 °C, in the dark under gentile stirring (2 μg/mL collagen II monoclonal antibody 2B1.5, MA5–12789, Invitrogen, Massachusetts, USA) for detection of areas specifically containing native collagen fibers type II. The plate was washed twice with stock buffer and treated with secondary antibody (10 μg/mL, Goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (A11001), Invitrogen, Massachusetts, USA) for 30 min., at 37 °C, in the dark under gentile stirring. The plate was washed again twice with stock buffer and analysis of binding were performed via image analysis in the IN Cell 2000 Analyzer. The overlap of red rhodamine fluorescence (proteoliposomes) bound to native collagen fibers type II (green fluorescence) was analyzed as yellow staining, reflecting co-localization. Because proteoliposomes binding interfered with subsequent collagen II detection, collagen II staining was also done via separate fluoresecence microscopy (Pendragon AxioVert 200 M Microscope). Specific areas, rich in collagen II were detected via incubation of the wells containing transdifferentiated matrix with the type II collagen antibody for 30 min., at 37 °C, in the dark under gentile stirring (2 μg/mL, followed by treatment with the secondary antibody (10 μg/mL, Goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (A11001). Total RNA was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and cDNA was synthetized following the manufacturer's instructions (Promega Corporation). Gene expression for All quantitative measurements were carried out 5 times and values are reported as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Groups were compared with the one-way ANOVA or a two-tailed Student's The lipid microenvironment affects insertion and activity of the proteins reconstituted into model vesicles [ Treatment with phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PIPLC), which cleaves and releases TNAP from the proteoliposomes, and protein quantification revealed that in those proteoliposomes that contained both proteins, TNAP and AnxA5 represented 25% and 75%, respectively of the total protein incorporated into the proteoliposomes, regardless of the presence of DPPS [ Collagen is the major structural protein in animals, comprising up to 30% of total protein weight [ Fluorescence microscopic images illustrate that the AnxA5-proteoliposome interaction on the collagen fibers is dose-dependent for both lipid compositions DPPC ( Fluorescence microscopic images illustrate that the AnxA5-proteoliposome interaction on the collagen fibers is dose-dependent for both lipid compositions DPPC (Fig. S1) and 9:1 DPPC:DPPS (Fig. S2). Figs. S1-A and S2-A show absent fluorescence for the collagen II, whereas Fig. S1-E illustrates the DPPC-proteoliposomes binding to the collagen fibers in detail. Proteoliposomes binding occurred to collagen fibers specifically, i.e. proteoliposome fluorescence was only found on the collagen II fibers, as confirmed via visible light microscopy (not shown). DPPC-proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5 showed a maximum of 32% binding to type II collagen after 2 h of incubation, at 0.9 μg of AnxA5 (protein content per well in deposited proteoliposomes) with apparently decreasing affinity at higher concentrations ( When conditioned in DPPC:DPPS-proteoliposomes, the affinity of AnxA5 for coated collagen II appeared to be comparable at low concentrations of proteoliposomes, but binding only saturated at 2 μg of AnxA5, in agreement with the importance of negative charges in the interaction between vesicles and collagen matrix, thus reaching 74% binding for 1.8 μg of AnxA5 (protein content into proteoliposomes) ( It is known, indeed, that AnxA5 interacts better with DPPC:DPPS than with DPPC liposomes [ Considering the average molecular mass of fibrillary collagen of 300 kDa [ This indicates that the lipid composition affects the affinity of AnxA5 for collagen. DPPS both improves AnxA5 incorporation into MV's biomimetics and favors binding of proteoliposomes to collagen, helping to concentrate other useful proteins present in MV's to participate in the calcification process. Irrespective of its conditioning in DPPC or 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes, TNAP interacted more weakly with coated collagen II ( For proteoliposomes simultaneously harboring TNAP+AnxA5, up to 30% total protein binding was found for 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes, for incubations with 3.5 μg of proteoliposome protein ( With both proteins co-localized in the same DPPC proteoliposome, the affinity overall was weak and binding never exceeded 12% (for 3.6 μg of proteins in proteoliposomes) ( These findings illustrate that AnxA5 has a higher affinity for type II collagen fibers than TNAP. Surprisingly, the simultaneous presence of both proteins in the same vesicle, strongly reduced the binding strength of AnxA5. Even for 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes harboring both proteins, binding is fairly weak ( The principal structural elements of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are collagens, which play a predominant role in maintaining the biological and structural integrity of various tissues and organs, including bone, skin, muscle, tendon, blood vessels, and cartilage [ Individual collagen molecules are composed of three left-handed helical polypeptide chains forming a right-handed triple-helical structure that is stabilized by hydrogen bonds, showing to be approximately 300 nm long and 1.5 nm in diameter [ To study the impact of the collagen structure and function, we have analyzed different types of collagen (I, II and I + III types) in the binding assays, using collagen matrixes coated with the concentration (6.25 μg/well), similar to the amount used in Vascular calcification can lead to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Recent evidence has shown that the pathogenesis of vascular calcification is complex and involves transformation of VSMCs to osteoblast/chondrocyte-like cells that express RUNX2, produce matrix vesicles and apoptotic bodies that increase nanocrystal deposition and can trigger ectopic manifestations of bone mineralization, among other phenomena [ The majority of arterial collagen produced is type I and III [ The majority of arterial collagen produced is type I and III [ Correspondingly, analysis by qRT-PCR measuring the relative expression of the smooth muscle marker Correspondingly, analysis by qRT-PCR measuring the relative expression of the smooth muscle marker Since immunofluorescent staining had identified the presence of collagen II in the native ECM deposited by transdifferentiating VSMCs ( Since immunofluorescent staining had identified the presence of collagen II in the native ECM deposited by transdifferentiating VSMCs (Fig. S3- F, G, H), we performed co-localization experiments, using 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5, which show the highest affinity for type II collagen as shown in Additional co-localization studies (data not shown) with DPPC proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5, DPPC and 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes harboring TNAP+AnxA5 (red fluorescence) to native collagen were performed. These show that proteoliposomes binding occurs both to collagen II and other parts of the native matrix ( Additional co-localization studies (data not shown) with DPPC proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5, DPPC and 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes harboring TNAP+AnxA5 (red fluorescence) to native collagen were performed. These show that proteoliposomes binding occurs both to collagen II and other parts of the native matrix (Fig. S3- I and J), but exclusively to the collagen matrix, in agreement with the presence also of collagen I and III in such matrices, deposited early (and later) during the transdifferentiation process, over an interval of 14 days. To estimate the contribution of different collagens to matrix binding we, therefore, compared proteoliposomes binding to the collagen matrix of native VSMCs and that of the 14-day-old transdifferentiated cells. The affinity of DPPC-proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5 or TNAP+AnxA5 for native collagen produced from native VSMC cultures was very low (less than 10% binding, The affinities of 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5 for native collagen from VSMCs with or without differentiation were very high ( In a physiological context, it seems that TNAP is not a positive catalyst of the binding processes studies here, and that is rather involved in the nucleation and propagation of the minerals of apatite, whereas AnxA5 with its considerable higher affinity for collagen, would target MVs to specific collagen-rich areas in the ECM. This process depends on the collagen density and the type of collagen. It's worth to note that the role of TNAP in controlling the PPi/Pi ratio and thus controlling the mineralization is well stablished. However, whether TNAP performs its function solely bound to the MVs membrane or also after being cleaved is still not clear and this issue deserves attention. In conclusion, this work focused on the relation between AnxA5, collagens and TNAP in liposomes and investigated how lipid and protein compositions regulate the interactions between vesicles and matrix collagens. AnxA5 in proteoliposomes targets them to collagen fibers with high affinity and proteoliposomes harboring TNAP alone binding poorly to collagen matrices. The highest affinities were found for collagen matrices containing type II collagen, supportive of a role for AnxA5 during chondrocyte mineralization in joint cartilage. The proteoliposomes harboring AnxA5 interact considerably better with collagen in liposomes containing DPPS, compared to vesicles composed of DPPC exclusively. Thus, the lipid DPPS plays a very important role both for improving AnxA5 incorporation into liposomes and for favoring binding of proteoliposomes to collagens. Native collagen coatings were produced by culturing VSMCs in native and transdifferentiating conditions, in an effort to gradually mimic ectopic calcification conditions in cell culture conditions. Co-localization studies uncovered the binding of proteoliposomes to various regions in a deposited native collagen-rich matrix, including binding to deposited type II collagen. Binding affinities of DPPC proteoliposomes for native matrix from osteo/chondrocyte cells went up two-fold compared to matrix produced by VSMCs. The affinities of 9:1 DPPC:DPPS proteoliposomes were high for native matrix from VSMCs with or without differentiation, these numbers bringing out the synergic effect of AnxA5 function with the negative charges of the DPPS lipid. In all, TNAP in the lipid/protein microenvironment disturbs interactions between AnxA5 and collagen, probably as a consequence of steric effects, modifying the negative charge density of the proteoliposomes surface, thus diminishing binding to collagen. From these findings, the possibility arises that TNAP might be cleaved from the MVs membrane just before ECM binding, thus allowing MVs anchoring to ECM via AnxA5 interaction to collagen, during the physiological mineralization process. This hypothesis will be further tested in future work. Taken together, understanding those factors and mechanisms that regulate the mineralization process are essential for the development of novel therapeutic strategies to prevent or inhibit ectopic mineralization, especially of vascular smooth muscle cells.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at MB performed the research. BI contributed to the PCR studies. SvK contributed to the cell cultures studies. MB, MB, APR, JLM, MFH and PC analyzed and interpreted the data. MB, JLM, MFH and PC designed the research study and wrote the paper. All authors report no conflicts of interest. We thank