Through the use of oscillating microcantilevers, a micromechanical mass detection with a resolution of a Hz per picogram regime is reported. Through MEMS processes, piezoelectric microcantilevers that are simultaneously capable of self-actuation and the electrical measurement of resonant frequencies were fabricated. Mass detection in the Hz per picogram regime is demonstrated with a deposition of an Au thin-layer, of which the thickness is precisely controlled. In addition, it is shown that a scaling down of the microcantilevers enhances the sensitivity during the micromechanical mass detection.Microcantilevers have played an important role in both MEMS and bio-MEMS. In particular, recent studies suggest that microcantilevers have a great potential as biosensors for the label-free detection of biomolecules related to specific diseases The principle for a label-free detection with microcantilevers is that the molecular adsorption on the microcantilever surface generates a flexural rigidity change and also affects the mass of a microcantilever so as to alter the deflection and/or the resonant frequency. Static-mode microcantilevers are capable of a label-free detection by measuring static deflection, while oscillating microcantilevers utilize the resonant frequency shift for a label-free detection. For static-mode microcantilevers Recently, several cases of biomolecule detections using a piezoelectric cantilever have been reported. Biomolecule detection was accomplished by monitoring the resonant frequency shift of a piezoelectric cantilever over time. In a biomolecular interaction, the resonant frequency shift was mainly affected by the induced surface stress due to the electrostatic interaction between biomolecules. Herein, the mass contribution to the resonant frequency shift was minimized, as the mass of the reacted biomolecule monolayer on the cantilever surface was negligible. Another possible application of the piezoelectric cantilever is as a mass sensor that is similar to quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), for instance, a cantilever sensor to monitor thin film deposition. Lee et al. In this article, a mass detection with a sensitivity rating of an order of 1 The dynamic response of a microcantilever is well characterized by the following equation of motion. In a case in which a molecular mono-layer is adsorbed on the microcantilever surface, it is assumed that molecular adsorption onto the microcantilever surface does not induce intermolecular interactions that alter the dynamic response of the microcantilevers, and that the molecular adsorption does not change the flexural rigidity of the microcantilever. The resonant frequency after the molecular adsorption is For the adsorption of a minute molecular layer on a surface, i.e. Δ The resonant frequency shift with respect to the loaded mass is We fabricated the piezoelectric microcantilevers, consisting of multi-layers of Ta/Pt/PZT/Pt/SiO In order to measure the resonant frequency of the microcantilevers, we used an impedance analyzer (4292A, Agilent technologies, USA), which enabled the monitoring of the phase angle as a function of the sweeping frequency. Specifically, while the phase angle of the impedance for a microcantilever that functions as a capacitor is approximately −90° in the off-resonance, the phase angle in the resonant frequency exhibits the peak value that is responsible for the microcantilever motion. The resonant frequency shift induced by the mass of the Au was measured using an impedance analyzer. The resonant frequencies of the microcantilever were measured before and after the deposition of the Au layer, and the resonant frequency shift was then calculated. The Au thin-layer was deposited on the microcantilever with thicknesses of 6, 12, 32, and 50 As stated earlier, the impedance analyzer enables the measurement of the resonant frequency of microcantilevers. In For the study of the role of the size effect on the sensitivity of microcantilevers for the mass detection of an Au layer, the dynamic response change of microcantilevers is considered, using several sizes (20 As suggested in the theory, the mass sensitivity Δ In this article, microcantilevers that can detect the induced mass of an Au thin film layer in the order of 1 The authors are very grateful for the financial support from the Intelligent Microsystem Center sponsored by the Korea Ministry of Science and Technology as a part of the Twenty-first Century Frontiers R&D Project (Grant MS-01-133-01), and from the National Core Research Center for Nanomedical Technology sponsored by KOSEF (Grant R15-2004-024-00000-0). D.W.C. would like to appreciate Dr. Jongin Hong (Korea Institute of Science and Technology) and WooYoung Shim and DoHun Kim (Yonsei University) for helpful discussions.