Antimony doped tin oxide nanoparticles (Sb–SnO2) were uniformly coated on the surfaces of rod-/flake-like kaolinites (Kaol) to synthesize kaolinite-based conductive powders (Sb–SnO2)Kaol, which was then added into polypropylene (PP) matrix to produce conductive (Sb–SnO2)Kaol–PP nanocomposites. The effects of (Sb–SnO2)Kaol characteristics on the volume resistivity and mechanical properties of (Sb–SnO2)Kaol–PP were in detail investigated. The results indicated that surface-modified (Sb–SnO2)Kaol could improve the dispersion in PP matrix, and the as-synthesized nanocomposites showed better electrical property than that without surface modification. The volume resistivity of (Sb–SnO2)Kaol–PP reached 7.3×108
                     Ω·cm at the (Sb–SnO2)Kaol concentration of 40%, 6–7 order of magnitude lower than that of pure PP. The as-synthesized (Sb–SnO2)Kaol–PP nanocomposites could show potential applications in the conductive fields.Most polymer materials are electrically insulating for their low values of dielectric constants. Nevertheless, some level of electrical conductivity is required for antistatic or semiconductive applications. Although some intrinsically conductive polymers such as polyaniline ( Polypropylene (PP) is a commonly used plastic with multifunctional characteristics. During the last twenty years, clay–PP nanocomposites have attracted significant interest not only in the academic research but also in the industrial applications. The application of clay minerals in the preparation of polymer nanocomposites has been favorable in matrix reinforcement, such as montmorillonite–PP ( In this work, conductive powders (Sb–SnO PP pellets (EPC30R, MFR A typical surface modification was performed as following: 15.8  Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a Nicolet Nexus 670 spectrometer. The wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) examinations were performed on the specimens cut from the mechanical testing specimens, conducted with a DX-2700 powder X-ray diffractometer with Cu K The measurement of lipophilic degree (LD) for (Sb–SnO The morphologies in A broader band at 3409 XRD patterns of PP and (Sb–SnO To ensure the increase of conductivity of CPN by adding (Sb–SnO There are two fracture modes in polymer composites: ductile fracture and brittle fracture. In the ductile fracture, the matrix dissipated the impact energy via shear yielding and crazes expansion, while in the brittle fracture, the matrix could absorb the impact energy through cracks caused by defects and voids of composites. The morphologies of impact fracture section in R–(Sb–SnO The resistivity of the (Sb–SnO Janzen examined the effect of the filler structure on the percolation threshold with emphasis on the number of contacts that a particle makes with its neighbors ( Ti–R–(Sb–SnO The variation of mechanical properties of R–(Sb–SnO Polypropylene filled with kaolinite-based conductive (Sb–SnO This work was supported by the