Subchondral and metaphyseal bone defects pose a great challenge for the Orthopaedic surgeon not only because the support for the articular surface has been lost but also because the mechanism for the nourishment of articular cartilage through the subchondral plate is distorted. A number of options are available to the surgeons, none of them perfect. Autografting has an appreciable high rate of harvest site morbidity, allograft is associated with infection transmission and host immunologic response. These realities have stimulated interest in supplying bone replacement materials (demineralised bone matrix, synthetic bone substitutes, bone morphogenic proteins). This paper presents the indications and applications of bone substitutes for metaphyseal defects and subchondral support in orthopaedic trauma.Subchondral and metaphyseal bone defects pose a great challenge for the Orthopaedic Surgeon because the support for the articular surface and the mechanisms for cartilage maintenance have been lost. There are a number of materials currently available to fill in such defects and provide the support needed however none are considered ideal. World wide, an estimated 2.2 million grafting procedures are performed each year, The epidemiology of comminuted metaphyseal injuries with subarticular voids is difficult to establish and will vary considerably depending on the study population and geography. Cortico-cancellous autografts are an established method for supporting the articular surface after reduction of a depressed lateral tibia plateau fracture. Other fillers have been tried over the past few decades. ‘Interpore’ is chemically transformed sea coral with a porosity similar to bone. Although it becomes vascularised, it does not support physiological loads. Wholly synthetic substances like injectable calcium phosphates cements can be placed in defects but the deployment of the material is uncontrolled. The use of an inflatable bladder to create a cavity into which bone substitute can be placed under a reduced joint space may provide a consistent model for articular reconstruction. There are six characteristics that an ideal bone graft material should exhibit: osteointegration, the ability to adhere to the surface of bone without an intervening layer of fibrous tissue; osteoconduction, the ability to support the growth of bone over its surface; osteoinduction, the ability to induce new bone formation; osteogenesis, the presence of osteoblasts able to produce formation of new bone and finally structural integrity and an adequate degradation rate. Only autograft fulfils all these properties. Synthetic bone graft substitutes possess only osteointegration, osteoconductive, biodegradability and possibly structural properties. Combining a BMP or other osteoinductive growth factors to a synthetic bone substitute may add osteoinduction to the product. From a mechanical point of view and especially for the role they play in metaphyseal comminution and subchondral bone support, grafts should exhibit similar strength to that of the cortical/cancellous bone being replaced. The matching of modulus of elasticity between the synthetic graft and the host bone is important in order prevent stress shielding if the graft is too stiff or fatigue fracture under cyclical loading if its toughness is too low. Numerous products containing Hydroxyapatite, tricalcium phosphate, dicalcium phosphate, calcium sulphate (plaster of Paris) or bioactive glass are currently available for use in trauma and orthopaedics, however an evidence based guideline to assist surgeons in selecting the best product for specific clinical indication is not currently available. We aim to explore which of the bone substitutes are most suitable for subarticular support. The mechanical properties required to support a deficient subchondral layer are compressive strength, Young's modulus, tensile strength and shear strength. For the bone graft form most commonly used in metaphyseal fractures with bone voids, morcelised cancellous bone, laboratory data on mechanical properties are scarce. Brodt et al. In a recent paper by Van der Stok et al. When using bone substitute it is important to be familiar with the pore size, porosity and degradation potential of the material used as this will affect the osteoconductive characteristics. The optimal pore size for bone ingrowth is a range between 150 and 500 One of the concerns when using synthetic bone substitutes would be in relation to the possible qualitative changes of the cartilage overlying it. In the paper by Welch The systematic review recently written by Van der Sok et al. It seems that the use of bone substitutes for metaphyseal comminution and subchondral support is in expansion. Currently, most bone substitutes have little biological activity. They act as fillers and have osteointegrtive and conductive properties. Ideally bone substitutes of the future will have mechanical properties closer to bone, will be able to fully integrate themselves with bone and be reabsorbed over time and act as a delivery system for factors important in regulating bone response. When an osteoconductive scaffold is seeded with bone marrow aspirate or BMP, the composite graft may become both osteogenic and osteoinductive providing a competitive alternative to autograft. Such potential composite grafts are: bone marrow/synthetic composites, ultraporous beta TCP/BMA composites, osteoinductive growth factors and synthetic composites, BMP/polyglycolic acid polymer composites, and BMA/BMP, polyglycolic acid polymer composites. The use of bone graft has increased significantly in the last decade with an exponentially growing ratio of synthetic bone substitutes to allograft and autograft. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.