This paper discusses the results of a series of tests developed to examine the link between substrate strength and surface roughness on the adhesion strength of thin spray-on liners (TSLs). Laboratory adhesion tests were conducted using grout substrates with different uniaxial compression strength (UCS) and surface roughness. Two different TSL materials were used for the tests. Steel dollies were glued onto the surface of the TSL with a strong epoxy and then pulled in tension to measure the adhesion strength. The results of the experiment suggest that both rock strength and surface roughness play a significant role in determining the adhesion strength of TSLs. As the rock strength increases, the adhesion strength also increases significantly for the lower strength substrates tested and then levelled out as the substrate strength further increased. Both TSLs exhibited large increases in adhesion strength when the substrate was changed from a flat to a rough surface. As the surface roughness for rough profile substrates increased, there was also slight increase in adhesion strength of TSLs.Thin spray-on liners (TSLs) are a relatively new form of rock support technique that has been gaining increasing interest as a supplement to traditional support methods such as mesh or shotcrete. A TSL is defined as a thin chemical coating or layer that is applied to a mining excavation at a thickness of between 3 and 5 One of the critical parameters that affect the capacity of a TSL to provide effective rock support is its ability to achieve a strong adhesion bond with the rock surface to which it is applied. The adhesion properties prevent loosening of the rock, which aids the self-supporting capacity of the rock mass. The adhesion properties are also crucial for transferring applied loads from failed areas to intact areas of the rock mass. The purpose of this study was to quantify the effects of substrate strength and surface roughness on adhesion strength of TSLs. Laboratory adhesion tests were conducted on artificial rock substrates made of grout. Substrates with different UCS and surface roughness were prepared for the adhesion tests. Two types of TSL materials were used for the tests. The test method selected was a modified glued dolly test method which is an adaption of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard test method for pull-off strength of coatings. Epirez class A superstrength grout The substrates were prepared by vigorously mixing the grout with the pre-determined water ratio using a handheld electric mixer. The mixed grout was poured into the moulds (inner dimensions: 300 Surface contamination such as oil and dust could greatly reduce the adhesion strength of TSLs. After the substrates cured, TSLs were then applied to their surfaces. In a field application, TSLs are sprayed onto the rock surface under high pressure; this method of application is not practical for laboratory-based samples. Instead, the TSLs were hand poured onto the substrate surface. Hand pouring allowed for greater control of substrate thickness compared with field application. However, hand application does have the potential to slightly alter the characteristics of the TSL. It was noted by Yilmaz It is possible that results in the laboratory experiments may differ slightly from those achieved under in-situ conditions. However, as all specimens were prepared using the same method, the trends observed during testing can be translated to TSL applied in field. Two different polymer-based TSL materials were used for the testing. Due to the confidentiality agreement with the TSL producers, the product names are not disclosed in this paper. Instead, they are named as TSL-1 and TSL-2. TSL-1 consists of a single polymer powder product which was mixed with water using a ratio of 1.1 The TSL mixtures were prepared using a small variable speed handheld mixer. It was discovered that using the mixer on low speeds was better, as faster speeds resulted in the formation of a vortex that drew air into the mixture creating bubbles. Slow speeds produced a uniform, well-mixed, sticky material. The TSL was immediately applied to the pre-prepared substrate, as the TSL became more difficult to handle with prolonged exposure to air. Ozturk and Tannant A wooden mould was used on the substrate surface to control the thickness of the TSLs. A 5 The adhesion strength of TSLs is dependent on the curing time allowed. With an increase of the curing time, the adhesion strength for both TSL-1 and TSL-2 firstly increased and then levelled out after four weeks. Ozturk and Tannant The adhesion tests were conducted using a PAT GM01 Elcometer testing machine, which is a manual hydraulic tensile adhesion testing apparatus. After the TSL had cured for seven days, the steel dollies were glued to the surface of the TSL using PC-7 adhesive. The testing head was connected to the supplied dollies as seen in Four different failure locations are possible during the adhesion testing, and they are described as follows. (1) Epoxy failure: Failure takes place at the interface between TSL/epoxy or epoxy/steel dolly. A strong epoxy should be used to eliminate this problem. (2) Liner tensile failure: Failure occurs within the TSL materials, which means the tensile strength of the TSL is lower than its adhesion strength. (3) Substrate tensile failure: Failure occurs within the substrate due to the tensile failure of the substrate, this failure is common for rock substrates with low tensile strength. (4) Adhesion failure: Failure occurs at the interface of rock substrate and TSL. This failure mode is ideal when measuring the adhesion strength. Yilmaz The most common failure mode observed was a combination of adhesion failure and substrate tensile failure. Li et al. Examples of the failure modes encountered during testing are shown in The percentage of substrate left on the liner was estimated for each adhesion test. The average percentage was used to determine the failure mode. It is important to note that in the case of substrate failure, the adhesion strength of the TSL has exceeded the cohesion strength of the substrate. This means that the value recorded is indicative of the lower bound value for the TSL materials’ adhesion strength. However, this research concerns the adhesion ability of TSL on different strength substrates. For the purpose of this experiment, the substrate failure is included in the calculation of adhesion strength. In order to determine the effect of substrate strength upon TSL adhesion strength, a variety of grout substrates were prepared with varying UCS values. Substrates were prepared using ratios of 3, 3.5, 4 and 5 Cores of 42 For TSL-1, total of forty-two adhesion tests were conducted using seven different strength grout substrates. Epoxy failure occurred for two of the tests, resulting in a total of forty valid adhesion results. The average adhesion strength results of TSL-1 on different substrates are shown in The adhesion strength results for each test, as well as the average results, can be seen in Forty-two adhesion tests were conducted using TSL-2 on grout substrates prepared to the same specifications as those used for TSL-1. Of these tests, only one adhesion test resulted in epoxy failure. The results for TSL-2 can be seen in The test results indicate that the substrate strength can affect the adhesion strength of TSLs. A bilinear relationship exhibited between the adhesion strength and the substrate strength for both TSLs. The adhesion strength increased for lower strength substrate. However, the adhesion strength is not sensitive when the substrate strength further increased. These results correspond with the failure modes. For lower substrate strength, the failure mode was found to be the substrate failure; as the increase of the substrate strength, the failure mode changed from combination failure to adhesion failure. For substrate failure and combination failure, the adhesion strength increases with the substrate strength. Whilst for adhesion failure, the substrate strength has little influence on the adhesion strength. For both TSL materials, the standard deviation during adhesion testing was observed to be greater in the samples that exhibited substrate failure and combination failure. This is likely due to the random nature of the substrate failure mode. The size and distribution of the chunks of substrate left on the liner after testing varied greatly from sample to sample. The experimental procedure used to measure the effect of surface roughness on adhesion strength of TSL is similar to the procedure used when evaluating the influence of substrate strength on adhesion. The major differences in methodology involved the preparation of the substrates and the application of the TSLs. A series of substrates were prepared with different surface roughness using Epirez class A superstrength grout. In order to reduce the effect of substrate failure during the adhesion testing, a strong grout substrate was prepared. The water to grout ratio used was 3 A series of substrates with different surface roughness were created using stainless steel joint roughness coefficient ( All five of the substrates were prepared using the same batch of grout. This ensured that substrate strength was controlled throughout the experiment. The prepared substrates were cored, and UCS tests were conducted on the same day as the adhesion tests. The UCS results for the substrates prepared for TSL-1 and TSL-2 are listed in Both TSL-1 and TSL-2 were applied to the substrates with different JRC profiles. Due to the irregular surface of the JRC profiles, the wooden mould used in the substrate strength experiment could not be used to control surface thickness. Instead, the amount of liner applied to each substrate was controlled by weight. A 10 A total of thirty adhesion tests for TSL-1 were conducted on substrates with different JRC profiles. Epoxy failure occurred during two adhesion tests, and these results were discarded. The average adhesion, standard deviation and failure classification for the valid results are seen in A large increase in adhesion strength occurred for the rough substrate in comparison to the smooth substrates. Further increasing the substrate JRC showed a small increase in adhesion strength overall; however, there was a small decrease between JRC 8–10 and JRC 10–12 as well as between JRC 12–14 and JRC 14–16. This is likely due to scatter in the adhesion results, due to uneven liner thickness and random combination failure. The standard deviation observed during adhesion testing was higher for the rough substrates. Thirty adhesion tests were conducted after applying TSL-2 to substrates with differing JRC profiles. The average adhesion, standard deviation and failure classification for the valid results are listed in The results obtained exhibited the same trend as observed during testing of TSL-1. There was a large increase in adhesion strength when comparing the flat with the rough substrates. The results also indicated a slight increase in adhesion strength as the JRC profile of the substrate increased. The standard deviation observed during adhesion testing was higher for the rough substrates; this is likely due to the uneven nature of the JRC profiles and the random nature of combination failure. The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of substrate strength and surface roughness on adhesion strength of thin spray-on liners. A number of different adhesion testing methods were investigated, and their strengths and weaknesses evaluated. The glued dolly test was selected as the most appropriate adhesion testing method. To test the effect of substrate strength on adhesion of TSL, seven substrates with varying strengths were prepared. Two different TSLs were applied to these substrates using a wooden mould to control the TSL thickness. After curing for seven days, eighty-four adhesion tests on the two liners were conducted using a PAT GM01- Elcometer testing apparatus. It was found that the strength of the substrate had a significant effect on the ability of the two TSLs to adhere to its surfaces. A bilinear relationship was observed between the adhesion strength and the substrate strength. The adhesion strength increased significantly for the lower strength substrate and then levelled out as the substrate strength further increased. Inspection of the failed liner after each test indicated that tensile failure of the grout was the dominant failure mode on the lower strength substrates, which accounts for the lower adhesion strength. The dominant failure mechanism on the higher strength substrates was found to be adhesion failure between the liner and the grout surface. It was found that the range and standard deviation of the adhesion results was greatest for the lower strength samples; this is due to the variable nature of the substrate failure mode. The effect of surface roughness on adhesion strength was examined through the use of grout substrates of varying JRC profiles. The substrates were prepared using high strength grout mix and stainless steel moulds of known JRC profiles. The same weight of grout was applied to each sample to ensure an average thickness of 5 Test results indicated that surface roughness has a significant impact on the ability of TSLs to adhere to the surface of a substrate. Both TSL-1 and TSL-2 exhibited large increases in adhesion strength between the flat and the rough profile substrates. The higher JRC 12–16 profiles also showed a slight increase in adhesion strength compared to the lower JRC profiles 8–12. Combination failure was exhibited on the rough profiles, with adhesion failure being the dominate mode on the flat substrates. The range and standard deviation of adhesion strength was greatest for the rough samples; this is likely due to the uneven nature of the JRC profiles, which resulted in an uneven TSL thickness. The random nature of the combination failure may also have played a part in increase the variation in results. The results of the JRC profile tests indicate that the adhesion strength of TSLs is dependent on its ability to permeate into the cracks and crevices on the surface upon which it is applied. Increasing the roughness profile increases the surface area on which the TSL is able to bond, which helps to increase the adhesion strength of the liner. The results obtained from the research conducted in this study adds to the data provided by prior studies conducted on TSL adhesion; however, in comparison to more traditional rock support mechanisms (for example, shotcrete), very little data are available on the material properties of TSLs. Several areas of potential research were identified whilst undertaking this study, including studying the effect of longer curing time. For this work, the curing time for all applied TSLs was maintained at a constant seven days. This was due to the volume of tests required and the limited time frame in which to achieve results. It has been established from various previous studies, including Yilmaz The correlation between laboratory results with the field test results should be examined. It is recommended that field testing be conducted to determine the correlation between in situ results and those found during this research. One particular area of interest is the effect of lab mixing and hand application of TSL in comparison with in field application. Yilmaz Adhesion testing is recommended to be carried out using more varied JRC profiles. The results of the adhesion testing on different roughness profiles indicated that higher JRC profiles exhibited increased adhesion strength. However, the testing was restricted to the 4 stainless steel JRC profiles available at UNSW laboratory (JRC 8–10, JRC 10–12, JRC 12–14 and JRC 14–16). The JRC profile developed by Barton and Choubey Whilst the results obtained in this study provide some data regarding the effect of substrate strength and surface roughness on the adhesion strength of TSL-1 and TSL-2, it is important to note that TSL properties vary widely between products. The results and trends encountered may not hold true for other TSL products. The paper should not be used as a basis for any decisions regarding in field TSL application. The authors would like to thank Kanchana Gamage from the School of Mining Engineering, UNSW Australia for providing expert advice on experiment design and contributing many hours of his time to help conduct the experiments. Constructive suggestions from anonymous reviewers are acknowledged.