Aqueous solution was simulated by ammonium perrhenate and sodium sulfate as impurties in sulphuric acid system. Molalities of perrhenate after extraction were measured at impurity ionic strength from 0.2 to 2.0mol×kg−1 in aqueous phase at 278.15K, 283.15K, 288.15K, 293.15K, 298.15K, and 303.15K using N235. The best extraction condition was determined in this sulphuric acid medium. Standard extraction constants K
                     0 at various temperatures were obtained by polynomial approximation method. Some microcosmic phenomena were investigated in the extraction process.Rhenium is one kind of scattered metals without solo mine. The best sources of rhenium are molybdenite concentrate and flue dust from molybdenite roasters. Most rhenium occurs with molybdenum in porphyry copper minerals. Typically 50–100 The hydrometallurgy of rhenium is usually in sulphuric acid medium. So the separation of perrhenate from these systems became the focus of recent research. Solvent extraction method is used especially for separation of rhenium from other components. The low-cost industrial material trialkylamine with a commercial name N235 (tertiary amine with 8–12 sub chain carbons which is abbreviated as R This study investigates the recovery of rhenium(VII) from sulphuric acid medium which simulated waste aqueous solution from molybdenum metallurgy, and the microcosmic phenomena in the extraction process. The Aqueous solution was simulated with sulphuric acid, ammonium perrhenate, and sodium sulfate as impurities remained in residual, according to the residual concentrates of industry. The organic phase was prepared by dissolving N235 in A volume (10 Acidity of the extraction system decreased with the increasing of ionic strength, which indicated the more impurity, the more acid needed, shown from The extraction efficiency is almost above 99%, which indicated the extraction progress performed completely. Furthermore, molalities of remained In the presence of excessive N235, abbreviated as NR In the aqueous phase, the equilibrium molalities ( There were six ionic species (H The effective ionic strength  The temperature dependence of According to Pitzer’s theory, the activity coefficients In estimating activity coefficient, (14) Then Eq. In Eqs. Substitution of Eq. The values of log The standard molar thermodynamic quantities Δ The negative experimental association Gibbs free energy Δ This project was financially supported by the