The ore fines' pelletizing is an important part of iron mining, which ensures better use of natural resources and increases the blast furnace efficiency. However, this process consumes high amounts of non-renewable energy, such as natural gas (NG) and coke. Due to fossil fuel scarcity and global warming issues, at least partial substitution for renewable energy is desirable. Biomass gasification projects are being successfully developed in Northern Europe and large-scale circulating fluidized bed (CFB) biomass gasifiers have been commissioned. This work compares different technologies, such as CFB air and oxygen gasification, dual fluidized bed (DFB) steam gasification, and bio-synthetic natural gas (bio-SNG) production, focusing on the use of the product gas in an iron ore pelletizing process located in the Southeast of Brazil. The main parameters evaluated were flame temperature and gaseous flow rates. Economical evaluation was also performed. Air gasification provided a product gas with the lowest energy content but it was the most attractive investment. Oxygen gasification is apparently the best option as it provides a product gas with higher heating value at almost the same cost as air gasification. In both cases changes to the burners would be required. Bio-SNG could be utilized without any adaption in the indurating machine; however, it is still more expensive than NG.annuity factor bubbling fluidized bed bio-synthetic natural gas circulating fluidized bed dry ash free basis dual fluidized bed fluidized bed high heating value interest return rate low heating value natural gas total direct costs Total direct and indirect costs Total indirect costs carbon conversion [%] equivalence ratio [–] standard enthalpy of formation [J mol equilibrium constant [–] plant's economic lifecycle [years] mass flow [kg s molar mass [kg kmol number of moles [kmol] pressure [Pa] ideal gas constant [J kmol standard entropy [J mol steam biomass ratio [–] steam oxygen ratio [–] absolute temperature [K] shomate parameter T/1000 [K] mass fraction on a dry basis [–] molar fraction in wet basis [–] sensible heat [J mol standard enthalpy of reaction [J mol Gibbs free energy change of reaction [J mol standard entropy change of reaction [J mol temperature [°C] stoichiometric number [–] equilibrium flue gases gasifier input product gas reference solid fuel added to the green pellets stoichiometric Iron and its derivative products are present, to some extent, in the production chain of various contemporary goods. In 2011, the Brazilian iron ore production was 2.8 billion tons, which corresponds to 14.2% of the global production In particular, the iron ore pelletizing process consumes considerable amounts of electricity, NG and solid fossil fuels, such as coal and coke breeze. Apart from electricity, which is mainly produced from renewable sources in Brazil, large amounts of non-renewable energy are utilized in the firing stage. However, fossil fuel reserves are finite, and their scarcity might lead to high prices and uncertain supply in the future. In addition, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and consequences to global warming are a matter of great concern In the specific case of NG, increasing prices and security of supply are major concerns in Brazil. According to the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), 51% of the NG consumed in the country in 2013 was imported, from which 68% came from Bolivia Regarding NG substitution, one of the most promising technologies is biomass gasification followed (or not) by methanation reaction. In this process, charcoal and other suitable biomasses can be thermally converted into product gas, which mainly contains H Therefore, the objective of this study was to evaluate the use of product gas and bio-SNG in the iron ore pelletizing process under the technical and economical points of view. Gasification technologies such as air CFB, oxygen CFB, steam DFB and subsequent bio-SNG production were compared in order to assess the most suitable for this purpose. The methodology created can be applied to other NG consuming processes, such as electricity production, pig-iron, cement and lime manufacturing, contributing to increase the share of renewables, reduce energy costs and carbon dioxide emissions. The iron ore pelletizing process is comprised of three main stages: (1) raw material preparation, (2) green pellets production and (3) thermal treatment of green pellets. Pelletizing plants usually receive concentrated ore sludge from the mining site. This sludge contains about 70%-w of solids, and once it arrives at the plant it is further concentrated by a gravimetric tower, thickeners and filters. After concentration, the moisture content in the pellet feed is about 10%. Further comminution is performed by a roller press in order to increase specific surface area and consequently improve pelletizing properties. The pellet feed is then blended with additives and coal. The aim of additives is to improve green pellets' cold agglomeration properties. Mainly limestone and bentonite are utilized for this purpose, although organic binders might also be used. Green pellets are sent to the indurating machine by a conveyor belt. In the traveling grate furnace ( In biomass gasification, renewable carbon resources, such as charcoal, wood chips, energy crops, forestry residues, agricultural wastes, and other wastes (municipal solid waste, sawdust, etc.) are transformed into combustible gases. In general, the carbon source (often called fuel) reacts with a gasifying medium, which can be air, oxygen-enriched air, pure oxygen, steam or a combination of both. The gasifying media's nature and amount are the main parameters influencing the product gas composition and energy content Several gasifier models have been developed in the past 20 years If high H Methanation process can be used to convert carbon oxides into methane. After the reaction and gas upgrading, it is possible to obtain a gaseous fuel with the same properties as NG. The most important reactions are shown below. The water-gas shift reaction is represented by As can be seen from reaction Methanation reactions are exothermic, and therefore low temperatures are desired. In practice, temperatures between 300 and 450 °C are achievable with cooling and/or recirculation Gas upgrading may be necessary in order to further remove H Many large-scale CFB air gasifiers are currently under operation in Europe The calculation methodology is divided in two parts. Firstly, the mass and energy balances were calculated for the currently utilized fuels (NG and coal) and for each gasification technology in order to evaluate the impacts of product gas in the iron ore pelletizing process. Secondly, the approach utilized in the economical assessment is discussed. The economical evaluation was performed in order to support the definition of the best gasifier model. In this study, different gasification technologies such as CFB air and oxygen gasification, DFB steam gasification and bio-SNG production were compared, focusing on their applications in the iron ore pelletizing process. Mass and energy balances for the base case, which utilizes fossil fuels (NG and coal), and several alternative gasification-based fuels were calculated and compared to available operating data. Flame temperature and gas flows in the firing zone were considered as key technical parameters for this analysis. First, the maximum theoretical flame temperature for the currently utilized fuels (NG and coal) was calculated including preheated excess combustion air, which is relatively high in the pelletizing kiln. Despite the fact that the theoretical flame temperature does not consider any energy losses, the value found for the base case was 1440 °C, which is fairly close to the expected 1400 °C, often used as reference value for traveling grates in iron ore pelletizing. This result suggests the losses are somehow negligible, in the order of 3%. In any case, this value is an approximation of the real temperature in the kiln, and should be always regarded as the maximum temperature thermodynamically possible to achieve with a certain amount of fuel. Because the temperature in the kiln is one of the most important parameters in order to guarantee the pellet quality, it was considered fixed in the model, and the amount of the alternative fuel required to achieve such temperature was calculated as well as the gaseous stream flow rates. The Brazilian average specific energy consumption in the pelletizing process in 2011 was extrapolated from the National Energy Balance As the data included mining and pelletizing sectors together, it was assumed that, from the amounts shown in Average dry NG in Brazil was considered to contain methane (89.1%-mol), ethane (5.90%-mol), propane (2.90%-mol), carbon dioxide (0.90%-mol) and nitrogen (1.20%-mol) The product gas composition in each case was estimated by mass balances. In order to reduce the degree of freedom, the methane content for each technology was fixed according to typical values (see Ambient air entering the gasifier was considered to be at 25 °C, sea level pressure (101 325 Pa) and 60% of relative humidity. In the case of oxygen gasification, a mixture of 95% O The product gas was considered to be a mixture of CH In steam gasifiers, fuel biomass and steam are fed into the system and heat is provided indirectly, for example, by circulating bed material from a combustion chamber. Therefore, the input composition is the sum of elements present in wood and water, which is given by the steam biomass (SB) ratio. The SB ratio is often expressed in terms of total mass of water (including biomass moisture content) per kilogram of wood on a DAF basis. The amount of water in the product gas from steam gasification is considerably higher than other technologies. Therefore, drying before combustion may be desirable. Drying the product gas would allow the net energy content to increase; on the other hand, sensible heat would be lost. In order to assess the benefits and drawbacks of product gas drying, the maximum flame temperature for the dried gas was estimated, considering that the gas would be cooled to 50 °C. This case is presented under the name of “Steam (dry)” in the results. In order to estimate the bio-SNG composition, a chemical equilibrium approach was utilized. For more details, please refer to In order to estimate the flue gas composition in the kiln, complete combustion is considered and the only species present in flue gas are CO The maximum flame temperature is the hypothetical temperature that exhaust gases would achieve if no energy were lost. Thus, the energy balance is calculated when no other heat output than the flue gas is present. Incoming energy streams are: preheated air from cooling zone, energy provided by fuel combustion and gas sensible heat. Solid sensible heat is considered negligible. Net calorific values can directly substitute the enthalpies of combustion, thus: The hot gas efficiency was also utilized to compare different gasification agents. It is defined by the heat provided by the product gas, including combustion and sensible heat, divided by the heat input in the wood. For each gasification technology, the amount of wet biomass, planted area and total area required were estimated, assuming that Eucalyptus productivity of 96 dry tons (with bark) per hectare after 5 years The project's economical evaluation is an important parameter to support the decision between air, oxygen and steam gasification and bio-SNG production. As a preliminary assessment, the numbers presented here refer to basic design information and values available in the literature. Therefore, this analysis should be regarded only as an order of magnitude estimate The total investment is divided into total direct costs (TDC) and indirect costs (TIC). Direct costs mainly concern equipment purchase prices, installation and construction. These costs were based on values or correlations available in the literature. Biomass harvesting and chipping are out of the scope. Detailed values and references are listed in In many cases, costs for equipment of other sizes than those presented in this study were found. In such cases, the cost curve method was utilized, with an exponential factor of 0.7 Indirect costs ( The economic feasibility of each gasification technology was assessed based on the sum of capital costs, fuel, electricity, and operation and maintenance costs (O&M). This value corresponds to the plant total annual costs expressed as € MWh The project is considered feasible if the total costs are lower than the actual NG costs, in € MWh Other parameters utilized in the economical assessment are listed in This study assessed the use of several gasification technologies for NG substitution in a traveling grate induration furnace. Mass and energy balances were solved in order to calculate the maximum theoretical flame temperature and gas flow rates for each case. It was found that the use of the same firing rate for NG and product gas causes the temperature to decrease in the kiln, which is not desirable. Therefore, a new energy consumption was estimated maintaining the NG original flame temperature. Finally, the economical evaluation is presented to aid the choice between the gasifier models. In order to compare to alternative fuels, energy consumption, maximum flame temperature, and gas flows for NG and solid fuels were fist calculated. The main input parameters and results are summarized in CFB air and oxygen gasification and DFB steam gasification and bio-SNG production were discussed as the most promising large-scale models. Firstly, product gas/bio-SNG compositions for each technology were calculated, based on mass balances presented in In order to compare the different gasification technologies with NG, the maximum theoretical flame temperature for 81 MW of product gas was calculated. However, the temperature is lower than the one obtained for NG in all cases except for bio-SNG, as shown in The economical assessment showed that air-blown CFB gasification and direct utilization of low energy content gas is the lowest cost option ( The present work discussed the use of product gas/bio-SNG as a renewable substitute for NG in iron ore pelletizing processes. Biomass gasification has proven to be one of the most promising technologies for NG replacement. Currently, the most relevant large-scale biomass gasification model is the CFB. It can not only handle a wide range of alternative fuels but also different gasification media, such as air, oxygen and steam. Each gasifying medium leads to different product gas characteristics, such as composition and LHV. Bio-SNG can be best obtained by DFB steam gasification followed by methanation. The aforementioned thermochemical processes were compared under technical and economic perspectives. First, maximum theoretical flame temperature for the current fuels (NG, petcoke and coal) was determined. The amount of product gas and bio-SNG required to maintain this constant temperature was calculated in each case, as well as the gas flow through the indurating machine. The air flow was kept constant since it is defined by the requirements in the cooling zone. It was found that, for all gasification processes except bio-SNG production, the specific energy consumption would increase as well as the gas flow rate through the kiln. Burner substitution seems inevitable in all cases, except for bio-SNG. On the other hand, it is possible that the fans would not require substitution in any of the cases since the maximum increase in the flue gas flow is approximately 5%. Preliminary assessment has shown that air and oxygen gasification plants can be economically attractive. On the other hand, bio-SNG production is still more expensive than NG. However, required modifications in the induration furnace itself were not taken into account in the economic assessment, and it is possible that this would make gasification less attractive. Nonetheless, sustainability, environmental and security of supply aspects should be also considered in this investment. In the future, this work could be expanded to other NG consuming processes such as electricity production, pig-iron manufacturing, cement and lime kilns and other metallurgical industries. This Appendix elucidates how the mass balances were calculated in order to obtain the product gas and bio-SNG composition for each technology. In air or oxygen gasification, the biomass is partially combusted in order to provide sufficient heat for endothermic gasification reactions. Based on the eucalyptus ultimate analysis, the theoretical O Air gasifier inlet is calculated considering wood and air compositions, as well as the ER as follows: Similar equations are adopted for oxygen gasification. However, oxygen composition from air separation unit is combined with the amount of water added in the riser (SOR). Mass balances relating the gasifier inlet, in terms of C, H, O, N and H The water balance is based on oxygen and hydrogen balances; for instance, the unreacted oxygen (after carbon reactions) must combine with hydrogen to form water, as no oxygen shall remain in the product gas. At this point, it should be noted that the water balance is a linear combination of oxygen and hydrogen balances. As a result, there are four independent mass balances (Equations Firstly, it is known that the CO/CO Methane molar fraction in the product gas (dry basis) was specified. According to several studies, methane formation is difficult to predict utilizing simple gasification models, such as those based on equilibrium constants or Gibbs free energy In steam gasifiers the input composition is the sum of elements present in wood and water, which is given by the SB ratio according to the following equation: The CC in this case is much lower than for air/oxygen gasification, based on the premise that part of the char is burnt in the combustion zone in order to provide energy to gasification reactions. Contrary to air or oxygen gasification, the combustion products and nitrogen do not mix with the product gas. Thus, the burnt char must be subtracted from the mass balance in order to obtain an accurate product gas composition. Van der Meijden Once the gasifier input and CC are defined, the product gas composition can be determined from equations similar to A. In order to estimate the bio-SNG composition, a chemical equilibrium approach was utilized. Equilibrium constants at a fixed temperature ( The standard Gibbs free energy change for each reaction can be calculated utilizing pure species enthalpies and entropies. As entropy and enthalpy are functions of state, their variation always equals the difference between products and reactants: Pure gaseous component enthalpies at Equation Once Gibbs free energy changes are determined, equilibrium constants for each reaction can be obtained. The equilibrium constant for a generic chemical reaction at fixed pressure ( Applying this definition to reactions