A REFLUX™ Classifier (RC™), consisting of a fluidized bed with a system of inclined channels above, was used to recover zircon from an ultrafine, low grade mineral sands feed, deslimed to varying degrees below 38 μm. This paper builds upon previous studies concerned with mineral sands, revealing here the benefits of using an inclined channel spacing of 3 mm. The solids feed flux was increased from 22.5 through to over 40 t/(m2 h), resulting in the zircon recovery decreasing only marginally from approximately 99% to 97%, with a concentration upgrade of approximately 13. The partitioning of the silica sand and the zircon to the underflow were found to be reasonably consistent with the recently determined partition surface for the REFLUX™ Classifier based on a 3 mm inclined channel spacing. The zircon recovery at the ultrafine sizes was higher than expected, a result attributed to the favourable hindered settling of the zircon within a suspension dominated by silica sand.Mineral sands deposits have increasingly become more finely disseminated and lower in grade, making their beneficiation less efficient and less economic. The standard method of beneficiation has involved spiral separators, configured into combinations of rougher, middlings, cleaner, recleaner and scavenger stages (  Fluidization water is introduced into the plenum chamber below the distributor, the purpose being to ensure the particles within the fluid are formally fluidized, with their buoyant weight force supported by the fluid drag force. Two pressure transducers located on the vertical walls of the vessel are used to quantify the average suspension density between those two elevations. When the density exceeds a set point value, the PID controller releases some of the dense suspension through the lower valve until the density drops back below the set point. This paper is the third in a series focussed on the processing of mineral sands using the REFLUX™ Classifier. A new laminar-shear mechanism was discovered in 2008 using closely spaced inclined channels of only 1.8 mm operated under dilute semi-batch elutriation conditions ( It was recognised at the time that the real value of the laminar-shear mechanism was in applying the knowledge to advance continuous steady state separations. Based on this work, and the obvious practical concerns associated with shifting to using closely spaced channels under industrial conditions, a decision was made to implement a standard 6 mm channel spacing in full-scale REFLUX™ Classifiers. The step-change improvement in the gravity separation of fine metallurgical coal was confirmed following a series of full-scale installations (   The mineral of commercial interest in that feed was the zircon, despite the focus on the HM condition at densities in excess of 2800 kg/m More recently our work has been focused on quantifying the benefits from reducing the inclined channel spacing from 6 to 3 mm. The present paper is an extension of the work of The experiments were run using equivalent conditions to those used in the 2016 study, with the same feed pulp density, fluidization rate, and density set point. Thus, this study provides a clear measure of the step change in separation performance using the 3 mm inclined channel spacing, especially the potential to increase the solids throughput to more than 40 t/(m The hydrodynamics within the inclined channels of the REFLUX™ Classifier are sensitive to the inclined channel spacing, Under laminar flow through an inclined channel, the local fluid velocity,     It is noted that for small laboratory scale systems it is essential to use an underflow buffer arrangement, designed to moderate the rate of underflow removal, thus allowing the control valve to open to a significant level. This feature (not shown in The feed was a mineral sands sample from a commercial Australian deposit, nominally −2 mm. This is virtually the same feed as studied by  Experiments were conducted for a period that was sufficiently long for achieving steady state. It is emphasized that consideration needs to be given to the separation of particle species that ultimately have a 50:50 probability of reporting to either the underflow or overflow, invariably relatively dense zircon particles as fine as 38 μm. Initially these particles do not present to the overflow due to their capture by the inclined channels, returning to the lower zones. Nor do these particles transport downwards against the rising flow in the system. Rather, their concentration builds up in the zone just below the inclined channels. Once their concentration builds sufficiently, the particles eventually disperse towards both the overflow and the underflow, and then leave the system. Other particle species reach steady state much earlier. The solids split to underflow will therefore appear to reach a steady value, but the composition will still continue to gradually evolve until it reaches true steady state. An additional Run 5 experiment was also carried out which in most respects duplicated the operating conditions of Run 2. The major difference was that the level of −38 μm slimes in the feed was increased from 3 wt% to 6 wt%. Another variation in this experiment was that once steady-state had been reached, the dynamic response of the system to a brief 5 min spike of higher feed concentration was also investigated. The higher feed grade was achieved by combining underflow produced previously with the entering feed. This roughly doubled the feed grade and increased the solids and volumetric throughput marginally. Note that  The results obtained in the present study are also shown in      The level of slimes, defined by the wt.% less than 38 μm, was approximately 3 wt%, higher than the approximate 2 wt% level in the 2016 work. This level of slimes does not appear to have impacted significantly on the separation performance. Given the concerns within the industry of the effects of slimes on beneficiation, a further experiment (Run 5) was conducted with 6 wt% slimes (below 38 μm), operated at 29.6 t/(m  In practice, the grade of the zircon from a given resource can vary significantly, hence it is important to ensure the process can accommodate such variations. The REFLUX™ Classifier operates through PID control based on the measured suspension density between two elevations within the vertical part of the fluidized bed. If the rate of supply of the dense particles decreases, the system should in principle respond directly through a reduction in the underflow rate. Similarly, an increase in the supply rate of dense particles should lead to an increase in the underflow rate. This principle was here formally investigated for the first time.   The validity of the above partition estimation approach needs to be more generally validated. In particular, it is evident the zircon recovery obtained in this study was better than the result predicted from the simulated partition surface. When liberated the recovery is close to 100%, declining gradually with decreasing particle size, and then more rapidly at finer sizes. The performance is much higher than expected, hence an explanation is warranted. The zircon content and more generally the HM content of the overflow is exceedingly low compared to that of the silica sand. This study has quantified the improvement in separation performance of the REFLUX™ Classifier that arises from using an inclined channel spacing of 3 mm, half the 6 mm spacing normally used in the industry. This improvement in performance was quantified in terms of the recovery of zircon from a mineral sands feed as a function of the solids throughput. For the wider 6 mm channels, the zircon recovery decreased from 97.7% at 18.5 t/(m  The University of Newcastle holds international patents on the REFLUX™ Classifier and has a Research and Development Agreement with FLSmidth Pty Ltd. One of the authors, K.P. Galvin, is the inventor of the REFLUX™ Classifier and beneficiary of the University’s intellectual property policy. The authors acknowledge the support of the See See See