Boron carbide powders are usually synthesized by carbothermal or magnesiothermic reduction of boron oxy-compounds, a carbon source is usually graphite or some organic phases. The aim of the work is using of mono- and polysaccharides for synthesis of boron carbide powders in which the final grains are separated from each other by an unreacted excess of carbon preventing both grain growth and formation of strong aggregates. Aqueous solutions of glucose, fructose, dextrin or hydroxyethyl starch and boric acid were dried, pyrolyzed at 850 °C for 1 h and then heat-treated at temperatures from 1300 to 1700 °C for 1 h. The amount of boron carbide in the powders depends both on the saccharide and on the temperature. The grains prepared from precursors containing monosaccharides had oval shapes whereas polysaccharides were applied they had rhombohedral shapes corresponding to the boron carbide structure. This effect can be attributed to presence of molten boron oxide.Boron carbide materials, with formal stoichiometry B The carbothermal reduction is the method most commonly used even in the industry where substrates are boric acid, H The need to conduct boron carbide synthesis at high temperatures creates two phenomena: a strong growth of carbide crystallites and their joining into large, strong aggregates practically in any case regardless the form of precursors. One way of limiting these phenomena is to isolate the areas of the system in which the synthesis reaction takes place. In the case where the majority phase is carbon, the formation of boron carbide will only occur in a volume corresponding to a single particle of boron oxide and a stoichiometric amount of carbon surrounding it. The products of such a reaction will be separated from each other by the unreacted excess of carbon which will prevent both the growth of crystallites and their merging into larger aggregates. Certainly, the problem remains to remove excess carbon from the system. The aim of the present work is to verify the presented idea using different types of saccharides as a precursor of carbon. Boric acide, H The structure of the precursors dried at 90 °C was investigated by the middle infrared (MIR), spectroscopy measurements were carried out using Bruker Vertex 70v spectrometer. Standard KBr pellet method was employed and 128 scans, in the range of 4000–400 cm Thermal decomposition of the precursors pyrolyzed at 850 °C was studied with a differential thermal analysis (DTA), combined with thermogravimetry (TG) and a spectral analysis of selected gases (QMS), formed during heat treatment of the samples. The Netzsch STA 449 F3 Jupiter equipment and mass spectrometer QMD 300 Thermostar, Balzers were used for measurements. Phase composition of the final powders was determined by an X-ray analysis (XRD) with the Empyrean diffractometer (Panalytical) using Cu K The X-ray diffraction analysis reveals that the powders prepared by dissolution of saccharides and boric acid in distilled water and then dried at 90 °C in vacuum are composed of an amorphous phase and crystalline boric acid, except the powder prepared with glucose which is fully amorphous, The differences in intensities of the X-ray lines of boric acid and the amorphous phase in the other samples suggest that some reaction between the substrates can take place. The results of MIR spectroscopy seems to be in good agreement with this statement. The XRD analysis indicated that all the powders pyrolyzed at 850 °C for 1 h are amorphous. The powders were protected by oil phase against reaction with water vapor during the XRD measurements. The results of the Raman spectroscopy measurement show that they are mostly composed of carbon - in all cases only two bands are visible on the spectra that can be attributed to the structure of carbon. It can be stated that for all reference materials, saccharides without addition of boric acid pyrolyzed at 850 °C, the I   The chemical and phase compositions of the precursors before the heat-treatment process suggested that the basic reaction of boron carbide formation should be the carbothermal reduction of some oxygen‑boron compounds taking place formally according to the scheme: The Ellingham diagram [ SEM images in Larger changes in morphology of the powders are visible during their heat-treatment, these changes are the higher the higher is the temperature. Powders obtained by the heat-treatment of precursor composed of dextrin and boric acid contain significant amounts of isometric particles with a wide range size distribution, from 100 nm to 1 μm, even calcined at 1400 °C, Grains of similar shapes but larger sizes, more than 3 μm, are visible on the surfaces of the carbon grains in the powder prepared using the precursor containing HES and boric acid heat-treated at temperature as low as 1300 °C, Boric acid, two monosaccharides, glucose and fructose, as well as two polysaccharides, dextrins and hydroxyethyl starch (HES) were used for synthesis of boron carbides. Aqueous solutions of H This work was performed within the framework of funding for statutory activities of