I am pleased to publish the first book on alumina since 1984. I can still recall using the 1984 alumina book (Dorre and Hubner) as a reference source during the 1980s, as I was pursuing research in the emerging new fields of biomaterials, biomedical engineering, and advanced ceramics. I did not imagine at that time that three decades later I would be writing its sequel. I have been involved in alumina in its many important applications, ever since 1984, and therefore I am pleased to be the one to receive the baton from my distinguished predecessors of so long ago: Erhard Dorre and Heinz Hubner. Erhard Dorre was a pioneer of the early CeramTec (then called Feldmuhle) alumina hip bearing. The fledgling alumina industry began in the 1950s. In 1984, 30 Alumina ceramics have today become a multibillion dollar industry that has changed the world over the last few decades. Alumina uniquely combines low cost with extreme hardness, extreme electrical resistivity, extreme corrosion resistance, high refractoriness, and it is the most biocompatible material in current clinical use. This book is about an extraordinary material, and its extraordinary applications, combining science, engineering, technology history, and a look to the exciting future.    I have been a consultant in this field since the early days (1988) and I was a director of one of the two leading RSSC armor ceramic companies in the world from the 1990s. This book is also the first published document I am aware of that traces the origin of ceramic body armor to its original inventor, whose name appears in a classified 1945 US Military report (now declassified) and was lost to history until now. His discovery has protected millions of lives worldwide since 1996. Life-saving alumina body armor is the focus of    The role of alumina in other important fields such as dentistry (transparent orthodontic brackets, implants, etc.), aerospace, architectural ceramics, machine tools, oxygen sensors, and other industrial uses is also outlined in this book. This book also has four chapters on alumina fundamentals. Its history, an industry overview, a detailed review on Bauxite and Bayer refining, and a detailed overview of alumina manufacturing techniques, its structure, and properties. I have been involved in alumina ceramics as a researcher and as an industrial consultant, for three decades. My career has uniquely straddled both bioceramics for medical devices, for which alumina is the premier bioinert and wear-resistant candidate (a significant focus of my academic research career), and technical ceramics for industrial and general engineering applications for which alumina is the premier cost-effective wear-resistant material of choice (a major focus of my long career as an industrial consultant). There is almost not an area covered in this book that I have not at some stage been involved in. The last three decades have been an interesting journey in the world of advanced ceramics and biomaterials. Moreover, I believe the time is now right for a book like this one to bring us up to date on the extraordinary progress in alumina ceramic technology of the last few decades. This book is not just a scholarly update on alumina research, it has a dual focus on the research and the commercial applications. In that regard it contains an important industrially relevant case study from a company with a stellar track record of over 40 The intention is that this will be a useful reference work for engineers, medical personnel, students and scholars, as well as those in the diversity of industries that depend on alumina ceramics: orthopedics, bionics, dentistry, armor, mineral processing, paper making, textile production, chemical processing, the electrical and microelectronics industries, and refractories.  The book documents all the applications of alumina, both those that are currently significant and those that are currently insignificant, always with a fourfold focus: History and evolution of the technology. Without understanding the past, how can we understand the present or envisage the future? The underlying science and engineering principles. The applications from both a technological and commercial perspective. The future: where to from here? The chapter structure is designed to focus on the most commercially significant applications, but secondary applications were also addressed. Minor applications of today may be significant tomorrow. For example, bionics is arguably the number one commercial application for alumina ceramics in the world today, the focus of three chapters of this book, but it did not even appear in the last alumina book in 1984, at which time it was a seemingly insignificant niche application. The book is divided into three sections: Section A: Alumina as a ceramic Introduction to alumina Bauxite Bayer refining Processing structure and properties Section B: Alumina in biomedical engineering Dental and biomedical niche applications Alumina in orthopedics: Origin and evolution Alumina in orthopedics: Present and future Alumina in bionic implants: Pacemaker Alumina in bionic implants: Bionic ear Alumina in bionic implants: Bionic eye and the future Alumina in lightweight body armor Section C: Alumina as an industrial ceramic Alumina as a wear-resistant ceramic Alumina as an electrical insulator Alumina-metal bonding for electrical feedthroughs Refractory and industrial niche applications I do not wish to prolong this preface with a detailed exposition on each chapter. The title of each is self-explanatory. However, it is important to note that the proportion of the book allocated to each alumina ceramic application is approximately equal to the level of its commercial significance in the world today. However, this is not to be taken as a statement regarding either its technical significance, or its significance in the world of the future. No application, whether significant or niche, is overlooked in this treatise. While this book has a technical and industrial focus, I am mindful of the importance of history, and where appropriate, incorporate history into my review sections. We must never forget, as we move onward, and ever upward, that we stand on the shoulders of giants to do so. There is much to learn from the footsteps of our predecessors. I would therefore like to finish this preface with a quote from the 1831 book of Thomas Thomson, who chronicled the slow process of the discovery of alumina by a series of visionary pioneers during the 1700s.