The 2012 Zhuzhou International Conference on Cemented Carbides was held in Zhuzhou, China from September 12 to 16, 2012. The conference was co-organized by the State Key Laboratory of Cemented Carbide and the State Key Laboratory of Powder Metallurgy, China. A total of 172 participants came from Sweden, Austria, USA, Japan, Germany, UK, Luxemburg, Korea and China, representing 70 institutions including industrial corporations, research institutes, and universities. It was particularly notable that representatives of multiple major international corporations were present, including those from Sandvik, Plansee, Kennametal, IMC, Sanalloy, CemeCon and others. Key note presentations were delivered by the internationally recognized academia from the Vienna University of Technology, Austria and the University of Utah, USA. The most impressive presence was, of course, demonstrated by the host country China. Almost all large and medium sized Chinese enterprises of cemented carbides participated. The largest number of papers and poster contributions were from Chinese universities and research institutes that are involved in research and education of powder metallurgy, composites, and materials processing. Sixty eight (68) papers were published in the conference proceedings, among which twenty seven (27) were presented as plenary lectures. In June, 2012, Prof. Hugo M. Ortner, the Editor-in-Chief of IJRMHM, prepared a Special Issue dedicated to this conference, which contained contributions from only Chinese authors, demonstrating the impressive efforts, directions, and breadth of the scientific community in China in the field of cemented carbides and refractory metals. In this previous Special Issue, the contributions were chosen arbitrarily based on the submissions from China and a broad variety of topics were covered. In the present Special Issue, 10 papers were selected from the 68 conference papers from different countries. All selected papers underwent the regular peer review process as set forth by IJRMHM and its publisher (Elsevier Publishing Ltd). The referees were mainly from outside China. The selected papers represent the scope of the conference, including: materials, surface engineering, P/M processes, modeling and characterization. The largest group (5 papers) in this Special Issue belongs to the category of materials, three of which are based on the classic WC–Co cemented carbides, focusing on the effect of microstructure imperfections on the fracture strength of submicron cemented carbides (Chonghu Wu et al.), the binder phase structure with Cr and V carbide additions (Jessica Marshall et al.), and the solubility of Cr in cubic and M There is one paper in the category of P/M processing, which focused on the electron beam welding-brazing of hard metal to steel (Guoqing Chen et al.). In the category of surface engineering, one paper is selected on the topic of multilayer coatings (Ping Li et al.). Three papers in the category of modeling and characterization were on the thermodynamic evaluation of the Ti–C–N based system (Yingbiao Peng et al.), oxidation kinetics (Liyong Chen et al.), and the influence of pH on thermal fatigue behavior of WC–Co cemented carbides (Zhongjian Zhang et al.). Finally, this Special Issue, together with the previous Special Issue prepared by H. Ortner, aims to reflect the cutting edge of research and development in the field of cemented carbides in China, as well as in the world. On behalf of the Editorial Board, we sincerely thank all the contributors and the staff members of Elsevier, without whom this Special Issue would not have been possible.