Titanium and its alloys are characterized by an exceptional combination of properties like high strength, good corrosion resistance and biocompatibility which makes them suitable materials for biomedical prosthesis and devices. The wrought Ti–6Al–4V alloy is generally favored in comparison to other metallic biomaterials due to its relatively low elastic modulus and it has been long used to obtain products for biomedical applications. In this work an alternative route to fabricate biomedical implants made out of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy is investigated. Specifically, the feasibility of the conventional powder metallurgy route of cold uniaxial pressing and sintering is addressed by considering two types of powders (i.e. blended elemental and prealloyed). The characterization of physical properties, chemical analysis, mechanical behavior and microstructural analysis is carried out in-depth and the properties are correlated among them. On the base of the results found, the produced alloys are promising materials for biomedical applications as well as cheaper surgical devices and tools.Titanium, a relatively new lightweight engineering material, is characterized by the highest specific strength (strength to density ratio), excellent corrosion resistance and outstanding biocompatibility The staring materials were a blended powder, labeled as Ti–6Al–4V–BE, and a prealloyed powder, identified as Ti–6Al–4V–PA. The description of the optimization of the purchased master alloy to produce the Ti–6Al–4V–BE alloy can be found in a previously published work The loose powders were poured inside the cavity of a floating die whose die-walls were lubricated with zinc stearate and consolidated with a uniaxial press. It is important to remark that no lubricant was added on purpose to the Ti–6Al–4V powders to limit as much as possible the contamination of the starting powders. The geometry of the specimens chosen for this study is the one known as “dogbone” (ASTM: B925) to be tested to measure tensile properties. For the sintering of the green samples an electrical resistance tubular furnace was used and sintering was carried out under high vacuum (10 The variation of the dimensions induced by the sintering step was considered and for that the dimensions of green and sintered specimens were measured. The relative density values ( An ultrasonic transducer (Grindosonic) having a frequency range in between 20 The green density of the cold uniaxially pressed tensile test samples with “dogbone” geometry is 86.56% Analyzing the data of the shrinkage underwent from the green samples during the sintering step ( The results of the chemical analysis done on sintered samples are presented in From the data of the chemical analysis carried out on the sintered Ti–6Al–4V–BE and Ti–6Al–4V–PA alloys to determine the amount of interstitial elements dissolved ( A microstructural analysis was carried out to study the development of the microstructure and the evolution of the porosity and the representative micrographs of both materials are displayed in The microstructure of the Ti–6Al–4V–BE and Ti–6Al–4V–PA alloys sintered at 1250  The total amount of residual porosity, which can be clearly seen in the BSE images reported in The results of the EDS analysis carried out to further confirm the homogeneous distribution of the alloying elements, which is paramount to guarantee reliable and consistent properties, are reported in The results of hardness measurements for Ti–6Al–4V–BE and Ti–6Al–4V–PA alloys are shown in From the data of the Vickers Hardness measurements performed into the cross-section of the sintered specimens ( The typical tensile stress–strain behavior found for Ti–6Al–4V–BE and Ti–6Al–4V–PA materials sintered in the range 1250–1350 As it can be seen in The variation of the yield stress, ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and strain at fracture (ε) with the sintering temperature in comparison to the value of the wrought alloy is shown in Analyzing the data shown in The fractographic analysis of the tensile test specimens by SEM was carried out and the results are presented in From the analysis of the fracture surfaces ( The results of the dynamic Young modulus carried out on Ti–6Al–4V–BE and Ti–6Al–4V–PA alloys sintered samples are reported in From the characterization of the starting powders and of the behavior of the Ti–6Al–4V–BE and Ti–6Al–4V–PA alloys, it can be stated that the irregular morphology of the Ti–6Al–4V powders makes them ideal and suitable materials to be processed by the conventional route of cold uniaxial pressing and sintering. This is because during cold pressing the asperities of the irregular powder particles deform and form the interparticle locking which constitutes the green strength of the green components. This guarantees the handling of the parts without breakage or delamination which is paramount for maintaining the original shape of biomedical devices. Moreover, the difference in maximum particle size plays a role during the consolidation and the densification of the Ti–6Al–4V components because the smaller the particle size the greater the specific surface area where the reduction of the total surface area is one of the driving force of the sintering of particulate materials. More in detail, Ti–6Al–4V–PA alloy has slightly lower green density but this is due to the fact that it already has the alloying elements dissolved inside the titanium matrix in each single powder particle. This aspect makes them harder and less deformable and, therefore, more difficult to shape by cold uniaxial pressing. Nevertheless, the Ti–6Al–4V–PA alloy is characterized by a higher contraction during sintering (i.e. shrinkage) and undergoes a much higher densification (somewhat lower than 80%) with respect to the Ti–6Al–4V–BE alloy (50–60%). This is due to the fact that none of the thermodynamic energy supplied to the system is invested in the diffusion of the alloying elements towards the titanium matrix and on the homogenization of the alloying elements throughout the whole microstructure. Because of these aspects, the Ti–6Al–4V–BE alloy reaches final lower relative density values, of at least 1% ( This feasibility study of the production of the biomedical Ti–6Al–4V alloy by powder metallurgy demonstrated that, actually, titanium alloys processed by means of the conventional powder metallurgy route of cold uniaxial pressing and (vacuum) sintering show similar mechanical behavior to that of the wrought alloy. The main advantages of the employment of powder metallurgy for the production of biomedical devices are the reduction of the final production cost and the possibility to consolidate components to their near-net shape. Irregular powders are suitable for the pressing and sintering route where the increment of the sintering temperature leads to higher shrinkage and densification as well as relative density level regardless of the nature of the powder. A great range and combination of mechanical properties can be achieved by changing the processing temperature to adjust them for specific products. Moreover, the employment of different types of powders (namely, prealloyed or blending elemental) is another aspect which permits to wide the spectrum of properties achievable and required for different applications. The authors want to acknowledge the financial support from the Regional Government of Madrid through the