A new method to determine the concentration of copper in seawater has been developed. It was based on the use of a bulk liquid membrane (BLM) system to separate and preconcentrate the copper ions, allowing the use of a very simple and common analytical technique as flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS). The liquid membrane consisted of an organic solution containing di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (DEHPA) in kerosene. The chemical optimization of the preconcentration system was performed by using the modified simplex method. Under optimum conditions, the preconcentration yield for real samples was 76.21%, copper preconcentration factor being 4.30. The reliability of the new method was confirmed by analyzing several real seawater samples, with copper concentrations ranging between 2.5 and 5μgl−1, previously analyzed by a well-established technique. For these real samples, the average relative error of the determination was 9.96%, while relative standard deviation averaged 0.33%.In many cases, the analysis of heavy metals in environmental samples presents a notable difficulty due to both the low levels of metals in the samples and the high complexity of the matrices. This is especially true of seawater analysis, and it is usually necessary to carry out a separation step prior to analysis, to preconcentrate the metal to be analyzed and to separate it from the matrix At present, several techniques are available to perform this separation step, solvent extraction and ionic exchange being the most frequently used In a typical liquid membrane system, the donor and acceptor aqueous phases are separated by an organic phase containing an extracting agent (the liquid membrane). Among the several liquid membrane configurations, bulk liquid membranes (BLMs) and supported liquid membranes (SLMs) are the most appropriate to be applied as analytical tools, because of the simplicity and easy accessibility of the aqueous phases in BLM and the high preconcentration factors reached in SLM As mentioned before, the use of liquid membranes in the extraction and enrichment of environmental samples has been previously described. They have been applied to sample preparation in the determination of levels of organic compounds, such as herbicides and pesticides, in natural waters In this study, a BLM containing DEHPA in kerosene was used to separate and preconcentrate copper in seawater samples. A modified simplex method has been applied to optimize the chemical variables involved in the transport of copper through the liquid membrane. After the separation step, the concentration of copper in the receiving solution was determined by flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS). Nitric acid (65%, reagent grade) was obtained from Scharlab (Barcelona, Spain). Acetic acid (100%, p.a.), ammonium hydroxide (25%, p.a.), sodium chloride (p.a.) and ammonium acetate (p.a.) were obtained from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Kerosene (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) and DEHPA (Sigma–Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) were used as received. Aqueous copper solutions were prepared from 1000 Liquid membrane experiments were performed using a homemade glass beaker-in-a-beaker type cell. It consisted of two concentric beakers, containing the sample solution (external beaker) and the acidic receiving solution (internal beaker). Aqueous solutions were stirred with a model Agimatic-S magnetic stirrer (Selecta, Spain). The concentration of copper in receiving solution was measured by an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer, Solaar M Series (Unicam, UK). A model 2001 pH-meter equipped with a model 52-02 combined glass-Ag/AgCl electrode (Crison, Spain) was used to measure pH. For preconcentration experiment, the volumes of sample and receiving solution were 48 and 8.5 During transport experiments, different 1.6 The parameter used to determine the efficacy of the preconcentration system was the permeability coefficient ( To optimize the efficiency of the liquid membrane separation process we studied the influence of the chemical variables affecting the permeability coefficient. These variables were the pH of source solution and the concentration of buffer solution used to control it, the concentration of nitric acid in receiving solution and the concentration of DEHPA in the organic phase. Due to the high correlations between the chemical variables studied, they must be optimized simultaneously. In this case, a modified simplex method was applied At optimum chemical conditions, the hydrodynamics were also studied, in terms of the dependence of permeability coefficient on the stirring rate of both aqueous solutions within the range 600–1000 Once the conditions controlling the behaviour of the system were optimized, we studied its applicability to real samples of seawater. Thus, on the one hand the variation of preconcentration yield versus time was studied in real samples with known copper concentration, and then an optimum preconcentration time was selected. Finally, the method was validated by analyzing several real samples of seawater in duplicate, and the results obtained were compared with those obtained using a standard methodology based on anodic stripping voltammetry. A statistical analysis of the results was carried out to determine whether there were significant differences between the concentrations of copper determined by both methodologies. The preconcentration system was based on the following reaction:  Optimum conditions corresponded to experiment number nine: pH 5.0 and buffer concentration of 0.43 Once the chemical variables were optimized, the influence of hydrodynamic conditions was studied (previous studies were done at 700 Once optimized, and before its application to the analysis of copper in seawater, the preconcentration yield of the system was studied. With this aim, we studied the temporal variation of copper concentration in the receiving solution for seven different real samples of seawater. The concentration of copper in these samples was previously determined by anodic stripping voltammetry, and this value was used to calculate the temporal variation of the metal transported from the sample to the receiving solution. The concentration of copper was different for each sample, ranging between 2 and 50 To validate the new method, the analysis of five real samples of seawater from the Gulf of Cadiz (SW Spain) was done. Samples were filtered on-line through 0.45 A simple analytical technique (FAAS) has been used to determine copper concentration in seawater, after a preconcentration step based on the use of a simple liquid membrane system. The method enables eliminating matrix interferences and has a preconcentration efficiency of 76.21%, and a copper preconcentration factor of 4.30. The method was demonstrated to be both precise and accurate and was successfully applied to the analysis of copper in real samples of seawater containing copper at the ppb level. The authors gratefully acknowledge Maria Kretzmann for revision of the manuscript and Antonio Tovar and José A. Jurado for sampling and voltammetric analysis of real samples, respectively. Financial support from the Spanish Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a is also acknowledged.