In sulphidic refractory gold ores, fine gold particles may be highly disseminated and locked up in sulphide minerals such as pyrite and arsenopyrite. Hence, pre-treating processes are necessary to extract gold for further processing methods like cyanidation. In this paper, the selective and bulk flotation methods are considered as primary sulphidic refractory gold ore pre-treating options. The results show that it is impractical to remove arsenic (As) and antimony (Sb) from downstream processes by using selective flotation. It was observed that 22% of total Sb and 31.1% of As remained in the final tailings. In this case, 24% of gold was recovered in the initial stage of flotation. On the contrary, in the bulk method of flotation, which was aimed at maximizing the gold (Au) recovery, the maximum Au recovery of 90.6% obtained after 60min of flotation at the grind size with d
                     80 of 146μm. The bulk flotation method as a pre-treating method resulted in the concentrate with less toxic chemical elements such as As and Sb.In sulphidic refractory gold ores, fine gold particles may be highly disseminated and locked up in sulphide minerals such as pyrite and arsenopyrite A significant proportion of the sulphidic refractory gold appears to be hosted by the arsenical pyrite, arsenopyrite and stibnite components of the ore. These minerals are amenable to flotation recovery. Significant amounts of essentially barren porphyroblastic pyrite which consumes oxygen and cyanide A number of papers and several books have been published on the mineralogy of gold in ores Orpiment (As Monte et al. It will be necessary to undertake a series of metallurgical scoping tests to determine the nature, composition, and gold content of potential concentrates that might be produced from the ore. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate a series of initial bench-scale metallurgical scoping tests in advance. This helps to determine if it is feasible to recover the refractory gold by flotation. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate selective and bulk flotation pre-concentration methods to find out which of these methods could produce better concentrates for further processing stages like cyanidation process. The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section A sulphidic refractory gold ore containing 2.7 A portion of the sample was submitted for mineralogical characterization. As indicated in The mineralogical sub-samples were washed and wet-screened to recover the −500 The bulk of the stibnite appears to be developed within transgressive late-stage veinlets where it is commonly intergrown with orpiment and/or quartz. The bulk of the stibnite is therefore also relatively coarse grained compared to the arsenical pyrite and arsenopyrite. The bulk of the stibnite should therefore be clearly librated during comminution and, if necessary, it should be possible to separate it from the arsenical pyrite–arsenopyrite–pyrite-rich concentrate by differential flotation. In this case, 1000 Selective flotation tests were conducted to selectively pre-float a realgar-orpiment concentrate to reduce the arsenic in a concentrate for further gold recovery treatment. Firstly, stibnite concentrate and secondly a bulk sulphide (pyrite) concentrate were recovered. In the realgar-orpiment pre-float only frother was added. Subsequently, lead nitrate was added to activate the stibnite and small additions of Cytec’s dithiophosphate, 3477, were applied to recover a stibnite concentrate. Finally, portions of potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) were added to recover all remaining sulphides (primarily pyrite).  Conditions of the bulk flotation as a pre-flotation method is shown in The aim of the selective flotation method is to minimize the amounts of As and Sb from tailings. Since antimony causes problems in the cyanidation process, its separation from the other sulphides is desirable According to the results presented in    Bulk flotation tests were directed at maximizing gold recovery in a bulk sulphide concentrate. The effects of fineness of grind, collector addition, activator and flotation time were examined and shown in The addition of copper sulphate as an activator to the pulp with   The total amounts of As removed by using bulk flotation method was about 40%. More grinding had little or no significant effect on As and Fe recoveries to the concentrate. As it is shown in The performance of the bulk floatation method can be further optimized using the models for liquid–solid flows as described in earlier works The experimental results are summarized as below: Selective flotation method: It would not be possible to pre-float realgar and orpiment to remove them from downstream processing, because of the presence of fine free gold particles. 22% of antimony (Sb) remains in the final tailings and produce a stibnite concentrate which was not warranted. Presence of 31.1% As in the tailing postulated that the removal of As by using selective flotation method is not warranted. Bulk flotation method: In bulk flotation method, the maximum Au recovery obtained 90.6% after 60 The best results of the bulk flotation method were achieved at the constant grind size with a In addition, the bulk flotation method as a pre-treating method resulted in the feed with less toxic chemical elements such as As and Sb. This indicates that the bulk flotation method is more environmental friendly than the selective flotation method.