Dual-frother blends are becoming popular in flotation practice. There is no work showing how frothers in the blend partition between the pulp and froth zones. In this paper two methods, high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) and a novel proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H NMR) associated with total organic carbon analysis (TOC) are developed to determine partitioning in alcohol/polyglycol blends. In two-phase air–water tests using a bubble column partitioning with three blends is examined. Two examples show strong partitioning of alcohol which corresponds to reported cases of these blends giving an increase in bubble size.The significance of frother in controlling flotation efficiency has long been recognized ( There are two types (classes or families) of frother commonly used in flotation practice today, alcohols and polyglycols ( As general guidelines, alcohol frothers tend to be more effective for selective fine particle recovery while polyglycol frothers are more effective for selective coarse particle flotation ( Recent frother characterization methods have stressed the need to capture both functions: air dispersion, e.g. by measuring bubble size; and froth stabilization, e.g. by measuring equilibrium froth height ( Accompanying the characterization effort has been development of frother analysis techniques. These include: gas chromatography (  There has been no measurement of partitioning in the case of blends beyond one case where an alcohol contaminant was tracked along with a polyglycol frother by adapting the colorimetric technique ( Analysis of blends poses a challenge. In this study we have developed techniques based on HPLC (high pressure liquid chromatography), and a novel combination of A bubble column, measuring 350 Three blends were selected to represent particular cases of two blends giving an increase in bubble size (1-butanol/dipropylene glycol and 1-pentanol/F150) and one that did not change bubble size (1-butanol/tetraethylene glycol). The two 1-butanol base blends were analyzed by HPLC, and the third blend was analyzed by the combination of NMR and TOC. The frothers, with their HLB (hydrophile–lipophile balance) and CCC (critical coalescence concentration, i.e. concentration giving minimum bubble), are listed in The instrument was HP model series 1050 with a Hypersil ODS column (series 93108-8, particle size 5 To perform NMR, the frothers were extracted into deuterated chloroform (99.96 at.%, from Sigma Aldrich) by shaking vigorously for 5 min in a 125 In the blend the two frothers are identified by their characteristic peak in the spectra. Advantage is taken of the fact that the ratio of integral areas of the characteristic peaks is dependent on the molar ratio of the two frothers. Once the molar ratio of the frothers in the blend is given by NMR, the individual frother concentration is determined from the total organic concentration (TOC) knowing that the two frothers are the only organics present. The instrument was a Dohrmanns DC 80 (TELEDYNE Instruments Company, U.S.). The detectable concentration range for organic carbon is 0–1000 The blends analyzed were 1-butanol/tetraethylene glycol, and 1-butanol/dipropylene glycol. To calibrate, the area under the peak was used. The calibration for 1-butanol and tetraethylene glycol is shown in  Ten increments of additive (polyglycol) up to 200  The partitioning results for 1-butanol/dipropylene glycol are shown in The technique is illustrated using the 1-butanol/tetraethylene glycol blend which affords verification by comparing with the partitioning results from HPLC. The  A second verification is from the mass balance, as used to verify the HPLC technique. The estimate of 1-butanol concentration in the overflow (i.e. 103.7 The real organic carbon content due to 1-butanol is then calculated as From Finally, the concentration of 1-butanol in the blend in the overflow is determined as The selection of the non-overlapping characteristic peaks for these two frothers is illustrated in   Research into and application of frother blends demand methods to analyze the component frothers. This need was emphasized to determine the properties of dual-frother blends when some unexpected findings were encountered and showed that bubble size notably increased in the case of 1-butanol/dipropylene glycol ( Partitioning refers to increased concentration in the froth (or overflow) compared to the solution (or underflow). Frothers by their amphipathic nature concentrate at the air–water interface (bubble surface) and thus are transferred to the froth. In continuous tests, as used here, partitioning can be measured by analyzing samples of the overflow and underflow. Partitioning has been measured for single frothers, with F150 for example showing strong partitioning ( HPLC was used for two blends, 1-butanol/tetraethylene glycol and 1-butanol/dipropylene glycol. The two components were readily discerned in the chromatogram and linear calibration concentrations were obtained. The technique was validated by showing the mass balance ‘closed’; i.e., the feed concentration back-calculated from the products was in agreement with the known, added concentration. Partitioning was demonstrated by comparing the overflow and underflow concentrations as a function of concentration of added frother to base frother at a concentration above its CCC. The 1-butanol/dipropylene glycol blend showed that butanol was strongly partitioned by small additions of polyglycol, more so than for butanol in the 1-butanol/tetraethylene glycol blend. This corresponds to the noted effect for the former blend that showed an increase in bubble size upon small additions of polyglycol while the latter did not ( The results also show partitioning of polyglycol. Tetraethylene glycol initially appears to partition more than dipropylene glycol, with the first 5 HPLC is probably capable of analyzing the third blend, 1-pentanol/F150, but the columns available proved unsuited because of the longer chain (7 PO groups) of F150. It is also the case that certain combinations can prove troublesome in HPLC due to overlapping peaks, thus there is an incentive for alternative techniques. We had used NMR previously in characterizing frothers, determining the H-ratio as an alternative to HLB, for example, and identifying the family in the case of some commercial frothers ( The NMR/TOC technique revealed strong partitioning of 1-pentanol to the overflow, with small additions of F150 bringing the solution (underflow) 1-pentanol concentration below its CCC for which the small addition of F150 could not compensate hence correlating with the increase in bubble size noted by Strong partitioning seems a compelling explanation for observed increases in bubble size with some dual-frother blends. In concert with speculations based on effects on coalescence or breakup ( Further speculation on the mechanism of partitioning is not warranted by the limited data available. What we have shown is that dual-frother systems can be analyzed not only by HPLC as anticipated but also by a novel NMR/TOC combination. Together these analytical methods provide great flexibility in the analysis of frother blends which as illustrated here has helped interpret bubble size effects of possible importance in flotation systems. Two techniques were developed to analyze individual frother concentration in dual-frother blends, HPLC and a second using an NMR/TOC combination. The methods were used to determine frother partitioning to overflow in continuous testing in a bubble column. Strong partitioning of 1-butanol and 1-pentanol was shown in blends with dipropylene glycol and F150, respectively, but little partitioning for 1-butanol blended with tetraethylene glycol. These findings offer an explanation of the increase in bubble size reported in the former two cases. Together HPLC and NMR/TOC offer a flexible way to analyze frother blends to help interpret their action in flotation systems. The authors would like to thank Andrew Golsztajn for his assistance in the HPLC tests. The authors acknowledge the financial support under the