Introduction
                  Pronator quadratus (PQ) is an important contributor to forearm pronation, and there is concern that volar plating of a distal radius fracture (DRF) may damage the PQ function. The purpose of this study was to determine whether isokinetic pronation strength would decrease considerably after volar locking plating of a DRF, and whether clinical outcomes would be affected by any pronation strength decrease.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Thirty-four patients of mean age of 55 years (range, 21–74 years) underwent bilateral isokinetic testing at 6 months and 1 year after open reduction and internal fixation using volar plating. Isokinetic pronation and supination strengths were compared between the operated and normal sides. Clinical outcomes such as grip strengths, range of motions and disabilities of the arm, shoulder and hand (DASH) scores were evaluated and analysed for any associations with isokinetic results.
               
                  Results
                  At 6 months, peak torque and total work values for both pronation and supination were lower in the operated sides than in the normal sides (all p
                     <0.001). However, at 1 year postoperatively, the differences in pronation strength were not statistically significant (p
                     =0.188 for peak torque and p
                     =0.190 for total work), whilst supination torque and total work were still significantly lower in the operated sides (p
                     =0.015 and p
                     =0.029, respectively). Decreases in pronation strength were found to correlate significantly with decreases in supination strength and grip power. Wrist motion and DASH scores were not found to be correlated with decrease in pronation or supination strengths.
               
                  Conclusions
                  In patients with a DRF treated by volar plating, pronation strength was not significantly different between the operated and normal sides at 1 year postoperatively, and decreases in pronation or supination strengths were not found to affect clinical outcomes as assessed by DASH scores. This study suggests that dissection of the PQ may have minimal clinical impact on forearm pronation function.Volar open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using the volar locking plating system has become a popular option for the treatment of unstable distal radius fractures (DRFs). During the volar approach, the pronator quadratus (PQ) is elevated off the radius to accommodate the volar plate. Isokinetic testing provides means of assessing muscle strength. It involves controlling a predetermined speed of motion and improves the The purpose of this study was to determine whether isokinetic pronation strength would decrease considerably after volar locking plating of a DRF, and whether clinical outcomes would be affected by any pronation strength decrease. We obtained Ethics Committee/Human Studies Committee approval for this study. From May 2008 to August 2009, 98 patients with a DRF were treated by volar plating at the authors’ hospital – an urban tertiary referral hospital. The inclusion criteria were (1) an age over 20 years, (2) inadequate initial reduction or loss of reduction within 3 weeks of injury and (3) volar ORIF of a closed DRF without carpal bone or ligament injuries. The exclusion criteria were (1) multiple trauma, (2) an open fracture or fractures with neurovascular injury, (3) the development of complex regional pain syndrome and (4) a history of a condition capable of affecting upper extremity muscle functions, such as, a cerebrovascular accident or Parkinson's disease. Of those who underwent surgery, 34 patients were excluded from the study; six had carpal bone or ligament injuries, 11 had concomitant trauma of other sites, seven had conditions affecting muscle functions and 10 did not visit at 3 months follow-up. The other 64 patients met the inclusion criteria and were approached for enrolment in the study at 3 months follow up, and 43 agreed to participate in the study. Of these, 34 completed isokinetic tests at both 6 months and 1 year postoperatively, and these constituted the study cohort. There were 20 female and 14 male patients of overall mean age 54.6 years (range, 21–74 years). The right wrist was injured in 20 patients (all dominant) and the left in 14 (all non-dominant). Average time from operation to isokinetic testing was 6 months (range, 5.2–7.0 months) and 1 year (range, 0.93–1.22 years). Fracture types are presented in All operations were performed by one surgeon (H. G.) under regional or general anaesthesia. At the beginning of each operation, a longitudinal incision was made on the volar side of the distal forearm and the radius was approached through the sheath of the flexor carpi radialis tendon. The PQ was then elevated off its radial insertion, and fractures were reduced and fixed using a volar locking plate system (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR) ( Isokinetic testing allows torque to be measured through range of motion (ROM) during constant movement rate and, thus, allows the quantification of functional strength. Although dominant hand grip power has been shown to be 10% stronger than that of the non-dominant hand, Patients underwent outcome assessments at the same time as isokinetic testing at 6 months and 1 year postoperatively. Functional outcomes included grip power, wrist ROM and results of the disabilities of the arm, shoulder and hand (DASH) questionnaire. Grip power was measured using the Jamar dynamometer (Asimow Engineering, Los Angeles, CA, USA) with the elbow ﬂexed at 90° and the forearm in neutral rotation. Results were recorded in kilograms. Radiological outcomes were evaluated by a single physician. Initial fractures were classified using the AO classification system as; type A (extra articular), type B (partial articular) or type C (complex articular). A previous study found that the mean forearm pronation peak torque (±standard deviation) was 7.4 (±3.0 The paired Student's At 6 months postoperatively, peak torque values for both pronation and supination were significantly lower in operated sides than in normal sides ( At 1 year postoperatively, peak pronation torque values were not significantly different between operated and normal sides ( At 6 months, grip power averaged 14.9 DASH scores averaged 15 points (range, 0–44) at 6 months, and 13.3 points (range, 0–43) at 1 year postoperatively. Clinical outcomes at 1 year postoperatively, including grip power, DASH scores, wrist ROMs and radiological findings, are presented in All 34 patients achieved fracture union, and there was no case of reduction loss or fixation loss. There was no case of neuropathy, infection, stiffness of the hand or complex regional pain syndrome. Percentage decreases of pronation and supination torque were found to be significantly correlated with percentage decreases in grip power both at 6 months ( No significant correlation was found between DASH scores and percent decreases of isokinetic measurements at 6 months ( We hypothesised that pronation strength decreases considerably after volar plating of a DRF because the PQ is elevated off the radius during the volar approach and, thus, we compared isokinetic forearm pronation strengths between operated and normal sides in patients with a DRF treated by volar plating, and investigated any relationships between isokinetic strengths and clinical outcomes. This study demonstrates that at 6 months, patients with a DRF have significantly less pronation and supination strengths in the operated forearm than in the normal side, but at 1 year, the differences in pronation strength are not statistically significant, although supination strength decrease was persistent at 1 year postoperatively. However, isokinetic performances were not found to affect clinical outcomes as assessed by DASH scores. No previous report has been issued on isokinetic power of forearm rotation in patients with a DRF treated by volar plating. McConkey et al. In this study, dissected PQ muscles were not completely repaired at the end of surgery. Recently, a technique of repairing the PQ and a technique of preserving the PQ when fixing DRFs with a volar locking plating system have been described. Some limitations of the present study require consideration. First, we performed isokinetic testing only at 6 months and 1 year postoperatively and we lacked long-term follow up data. However, studies have shown that clinical outcomes approach normal at 1 year although small improvement continues thereafter. In patients with a DRF treated by volar plating, pronation strength was not significantly different between operated and normal sides at 1 year postoperatively, and pronation strength was not found to affect clinical outcomes as assessed by DASH scores. This study suggests that dissection of the PQ may have minimal clinical impact on forearm function. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.