This paper contributes the shear flocculation method as a new approach to determine the critical surface tension of wetting of minerals treated with surfactants. This newly developed approach is based on the decrease of the shear flocculation of the mineral suspension, with decreasing of the surface tension of the liquids used. The solution surface tension value at which shear flocculation does not occur can be defined as the critical surface tension of wetting (γ
                     c) of the mineral. By using the shear flocculation method, the critical surface tensions of wetting (γ
                     c) for calcite and barite minerals, treated with surfactants, were obtained as 30.9 and 35.0 mN/m, respectively. These values are in good agreement with data reported previously on the same minerals obtained by the contact angle measurement and flotation methods. The chemical agents used for the treatment of calcite and barite particles were sodium oleate and sodium dodecyl sulfate, respectively.Shear flocculation is the aggregation of fine particles in a convenient stirring regime after hydrophobization by the adsorption of surfactants Fine particles produced during the grinding process in mineral processing operations decrease the efficiency of the concentration processes. Slimes or ultrafines are difficult to separate Similarly to the flotation process, the shear flocculation technique also utilizes differences in wettability of minerals. Wettability characteristics of mineral surfaces can be defined in terms of their values of critical surface tension of wetting ( The wettability of solid or mineral particles is known to be an important parameter which affects many technological processes such as froth flotation, oil agglomeration, solid–liquid separation, and dust abatement In the Zisman contact angle method The flotation method Pure calcite and barite minerals were used in this study. The chemical analysis results of these mineral samples are given in Methanol–water solutions of different concentrations (w/w%) were prepared and employed in order to obtain wettability data for the construction of the shear flocculation recovery (SFR%) versus The shear flocculation tests were carried out in a 300 cm The critical surface tension of wetting (  The shear flocculation recovery values obtained without surfactants were due to sedimentation process governed by gravitational, hydrodynamic, and inertial effects A comparison of the Consequently, the shear flocculation method for determination of the critical surface tension of wetting ( The shear flocculation of the mineral suspension decreased in tandem with the decrease of the surface tension of the liquids used. By using this property, the critical surface tension of wetting value of a mineral treated with surfactant can be determined by the shear flocculation method. The shear flocculation of a mineral suspension does not occur below that value of the critical surface tension. The values of the critical surface tension of wetting (