Nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH) batteries have a high metal content, mainly nickel associated with the positive electrode and also with the negative–hydrogen storage electrode. In addition, most commercial Ni–MH batteries have several rare earth elements (REE) such as lanthanum, as part of the negative electrode, and contain a significant amount of cobalt. Current recycling strategies simply use the battery material (including steel casing) in stainless-steel manufacture, which does not use either the cobalt or REE. As yet, there has been no commercial activity that recovers individual metals or groups of metals from the used batteries. There have been developments made in the use of pyrometallurgical and mineral processing techniques to recover the batteries’ metal content. Several proposed routes to recover individual metals using hydrometallurgical processing have been devised and tested. Most of these processes are fairly complex and inherently expensive. It would seem that Ni–MH battery recycling should focus on recovering particular groups of metals and using these within existing processing, such as steel making. In this way, an economic and viable strategy may be developed to ensure that batteries are not simply discarded and/or sent to landfill.metal alloy used for hydrogen store concentration initial concentration 7-bis(2,4,4-tri-methyl-pentyl)phosphinic acid di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid diethylhexylphosphoric acid metal hydride nickel–metal hydride rare-earth element trioctylamine The most significant rechargeable battery systems are lead–acid, nickel–cadmium (Ni–Cd), nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH), and lithium ion. Lead–acid was the first rechargeable battery, invented by Planté in 1859. It has been the most widely used rechargeable electrochemical storage system, owing to its low cost, and it is especially used when the battery weight has little importance. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, fundamental inventions in the field of nickel–cadmium batteries were made by Edison and Junger; an important feature of these batteries was that the electrolyte did not take part in the electrochemical reaction, but operated only as a conducting medium. Nickel–cadmium batteries had no serious competition until the early 1990s, when they had to face the challenge from the Ni–MH and the lithium-ion systems. The Ni–MH system, developed in 1989, was the most popular rechargeable battery system for several years. The first commercial secondary lithium-ion cell was produced by Sony, in 1991, and since then, various lithium combinations have been studied as battery materials and there has been a rapid growth in the use of this battery. The emergence of new types of Ni–MH and lithium rechargeable batteries has accelerated the replacement of portable Ni–Cd batteries in many applications, particularly in northern Europe. This replacement has been driven by the need for better battery performance and higher energy density without memory effects, which can be achieved with Ni–MH and lithium-ion and lithium-polymer systems. Another important reason for the replacement of Ni–Cd batteries is the toxic properties of cadmium. The new battery technologies are based on metals (e.g., lanthanum, neodymium, cobalt) that are believed to have lower environmental impact. However, the new batteries contain metals for which only few toxicological or ecotoxicological data are available, and consequently, their introduction should be evaluated to determine whether they will lead to other environmental problems. The design of the appropriate battery recycling scheme necessitates the knowledge of the chemistries of Ni–MH cells. This battery type consists of four major components: a positive nickel electrode, a plastic separator, a negative metal hydride electrode, and an alkaline electrolyte, a concentrated potassium hydroxide solution containing other minor constituents to enhance the operating characteristics of the cell. The electrolyte, in which the active materials are insoluble, does not take part in the electrochemical process. The nickel electrode generally consists of a porous nickel substrate that is impregnated with nickel hydroxide as the main active material. The substrate acts as a mechanical support for the active material, as a porous electrode, and as a current collector. Addition of small amounts of cobalt, calcium, and zinc improves the characteristics of the electrode, mainly the material’s efficiency and the electrical conductivity. The active material of the negative electrode is composed of a hydrogen storage alloy that can absorb up to a thousand times its own volume of hydrogen. The alloy and a conducting agent are pasted into a nickel or nickel-plated steel substrate, which acts as a conducting path, a current collector, and a physical support for the active-material. Two general classes of metallic alloys have been identified for battery use. These are mixtures of rare-earth element (REE) alloys, so-called mischmetals, designated as AB A fact of battery recycling is that the composition of the components will change frequently, according to different manufacturers and also with time/date of manufacture. Recycling metals is becoming more and more necessary for supply problems, as there is a continuous demand for mining of primary metals. The amount of nickel needed to make Ni–MH batteries reached 50 Nickel–metal hydride and nickel–cadmium batteries are often collected together and they can be handled in the same recycling plant. Recovered cadmium is upgraded to high-purity metal and is used in new batteries and other applications such as pigments or coatings. Nickel and iron from Ni–MH (and Ni–Cd) batteries are used in the steel industry. Recovery of nickel from batteries is profitable, which has led to increased interest in developing efficient recovery technologies. Mischmetal, from Ni–MH (AB As Ni–MH batteries are a relatively new product, their recycling is also still under development. In the literature, no major proposal is made for the pyrometallurgical recycling of Ni–MH. Most of the research work done has focused on hydrometallurgical treatment. The hydrometallurgical processes are difficult to put into practice owing to their high complexity. The use of mechanical processing as a preliminary stage for a new process is possible. The best available technology is currently the use of Ni–MH as a cheap source in stainless-steel production. However, the cobalt is not recovered and the REEs are slagged and are thus useless. The methods for battery recycling can be classified as either separation of components through unit operations used in mining treatment (physical and mechanical processes), pyrometallurgical or hydromettalurgical. The first method generally does not achieve individual component or metal recovery. The main advantage of hydrometallurgical processes is that it consumes less energy, but it generates wastes that must be treated afterward. Separation of components through unit operations is used to classify materials of interest or to concentrate such materials for further recovery by other processes and is especially used in industrial batteries. This separation is often the first phase of the recycling process, i.e., the initial treatment of the scrap for a later recycling process. The unit operations use physical/mechanical stages and are therefore cheaper than other treatments. However, these processes can have limited applications, although it can lower the cost of further processing. In the case of Ni–Cd batteries, most of the nickel plates and a compound with a high amount of cadmium can also be recovered, which can then be treated in a pyrometallurgical process for cadmium distillation and recovery. In addition, in the separation of cadmium electrodes, the battery case material and the electrolyte are also recovered. Hydrometallurgical recycling consists basically of leaching of scrap in acid or base to solubilize metals. The metals can then be recovered either by precipitation, i.e., by altering the pH of the solution or adding a reagent, or by electrolysis. The solution can also undergo solvent extraction, to bind the metal ion(s) to a solvent and thus separate the metal(s) from the solution. The metal can then be recovered by precipitation or electrolysis. Pyrometallurgy consists of recovering materials using high temperatures. In the case of Ni–Cd batteries, presently there are two main pyrometallurgical processes. One process evaporates cadmium in an open furnace, and cadmium is recovered as cadmium oxide powder. In the other process, cadmium is distilled, in a controlled furnace atmosphere, giving cadmium metal powder and a high-content nickel alloy. Pyrometallurgy can also use other reactive gases (than air) to obtain metal separation. For example, for Ni–Cd batteries, a chlorination was proposed to recover the cadmium as cadmium chloride. In this process, the battery is contacted with chlorine or hydrochloric acid to form cadmium chloride, while nickel and cobalt remain stable in the initial process. The reacted mixture is then heated to 950 The major disadvantage of pyrometallurgical recycling is the high energy consumption, in achieving operating temperatures in the range of 800–1000 The recycling of Ni–MH batteries may, in principle, be problematic owing to the high number and the complexity of the metals present. Most of the recycling methods are still under experimental research. Several typical recycling processes, mainly based on pyrometallurgy or hydrometallurgy, have been reported or patented. In the pyrometallurgical processes, a Ni–Fe-based alloy, which could be smelted for further utilization, was usually obtained. The processes are simple, but the value of recovered alloys is low. Although in the hydrometallurgical processes metal values of cobalt, nickel, and REEs could be recovered, they involve many steps and several waste solutions that must be treated. Nickel–metal hydride batteries are more complex, in terms of metals content, than zinc and Ni–Cd batteries. Additionally, the systems are constantly evolving as a result of modern technology and the development of the Ni–MH battery industry. For example, a copper web is used as the negative substrate in some high-capacity Ni–MH batteries. Consumption of such batteries has grown rapidly, which is due to restrictions on the use of Ni–Cd batteries. Nickel–metal hydride batteries are not included in most battery recycling policies. Nickel–metal hydride batteries can be partially reclaimed today through pyrometallurgical processes, for example, by SNAM in France; although the process is focused entirely on the recovery of the nickel, chromium, and iron fractions. Rare earth elements and other metals contained in the hydride alloy are not recycled and end up in the slag. Presently, the SNAM process is used for both Ni–Cd and Ni–MH batteries. The process begins by automatic separation of batteries, followed by a distillation process yielding cadmium vapor and a Fe–Ni alloy. The cadmium produced has 99.99% purity. In the first step, industrial batteries are cut for the separation of plastic cases. The electrolyte is drained and treated for cadmium recovery and then sold to battery manufacturers. The cathode and the anode are separated. These materials and the batteries are then classified into three categories: materials containing cadmium, materials containing nickel but not containing cadmium, and materials containing neither nickel nor cadmium. Materials containing cadmium first go through a pyrolysis process to remove organic materials. Then, cadmium distillation is performed. Cadmium is cooled and melted, and it is then sold to Ni–Cd batteries manufacturers or to the coating industry. Iron–nickel residue is treated through smelting together with the material containing nickel but not containing cadmium. The result is a Fe–Ni alloy that is sold to steel-making plants. A technology developed by INMETCO investigated the recovery of metal hydrides in reusable forms, in order to replace the virgin metal hydride materials. Mineral processing techniques have been suggested for the recovery of nickel-based alloys from spent batteries. The process involved hammer milling, magnetic separation, knife milling, a second and a final magnetic separation, and size separation. The AB D. A. Bertuol and colleagues have examined a method of mechanical processing of nickel batteries labeled Ni–MH. A sample of the spent batteries was milled, and the polymer and metal fractions were magnetically separated. The batteries, five types in total, selected for the characterization were of the AB In the batteries characterization, the components were manually separated and classified as accumulators (active battery components), polymers, and metals (electronic circuits and contacts). The average results showed that of the total weight, the accumulators represented 81.5%, polymers 17.3%, and metals 1.2%. Among the five selected batteries, three were prismatic accumulators (denoted batteries 1–3) and two were cylindrical accumulators (denoted batteries 4 and 5). Overall, the electrodes represented >50 For all batteries, it was possible to separate the perforated plates from the paste in the negative electrodes. The positive electrode paste of the batteries with cylindrical accumulators was easily removed from the separator, whereas it was not possible to separate the components of the positive electrode for the prismatic accumulators, these being a very fine metallic screen impregnated with the paste. The battery cases are made essentially of a Ni–Fe alloy that is also ‘contaminated’ by the presence of substances from the electrolyte, glues, and other contaminants that adhered to the case surface. The perforated plates from the negative electrode were also basically a Ni–Fe alloy with elements such as cerium, lanthanum, manganese, and sulfur, related to the contamination of the plates by the electrolyte and the paste. The metals content of the pastes from negative electrodes, and of the paste and screen from positive electrodes, are presented in A significant outcome of the battery composition analysis was that battery 5, despite being labeled Ni–MH, contained a large amount of cadmium and in reality was Ni–Cd. In general, this feature complicates the recycling of Ni–MH batteries as it is not possible to characterize all batteries before sending them to the recycling process. Therefore, an efficient recycling process should foresee the possible presence of Ni–Cd batteries together with Ni–MH batteries.  hammer milling; a first magnetic separation to release the metallic fraction (accumulators) from the polymeric fraction; knife milling of the accumulators to separate the metallic cases and screen from paste and separators; a second magnetic separation of the nickel-containing parts of the accumulators; and a final magnetic separation between the strong magnetic material (metallic cases and screen) and weak magnetic material (powder containing the material from positive and negative electrodes). Overall, the mechanical processing was shown to be very efficient for the separation of the different materials present in the batteries (polymer, circuits, and metals). The strongly magnetic material is suitable for charging to electric furnaces, without any kind of melting or briquetting process. The strongly magnetic material was a Ni–Fe alloy, which could be used, without any prior treatment, as raw material for secondary ferrous alloy production. The results obtained demonstrated that recycling, aimed at the recovery of nickel, cobalt, and REEs, is viable due to the great amount of these metals that are present in batteries. It also demonstrated that magnetic separation is a very efficient process to recover nickel alloys. However, the effects of cadmium contamination (originating from incorrectly labeled batteries) will cause the recycling processes to be reevaluated. Today, discarded Ni–MH batteries are used in the steel industry as a cheap nickel source. The dismantled and processed Ni–MHs are melted in an electric arc furnace producing a nickel–cobalt alloy and a slag phase highly enriched in REE oxides. However, the valuable cobalt is not recovered and the REEs in the slag are not reused. Thus, investigation into an alternative slag system in this process that ensures best separation of Ni–Co alloy from the REE oxides was undertaken. The approach shown in Hydrometallurgical processes have been widely investigated for recycling Ni–MH batteries. SNAM and the US Bureau of Mines have worked on recycling techniques aimed at the recovery of all battery components, especially those of the negative electrodes. The REEs were recovered as phosphate precipitates, whereas cobalt and nickel were recovered after precipitation with oxalic acid. It is not clear, however, if the purity of the recycled metals enabled their use in the manufacture of new batteries. T. Yoshida and colleagues have suggested a basic recycling process in which the valuable metals are recovered through a combination of mechanical and hydrometallurgical processing, including magnetic separation, a double-salt method for recovering REE, as well as electrowinning of nickel and cobalt. About 80% recovery of the REE contained in spent batteries through precipitation in the form of insoluble double sulfate salts has been achieved. C. Lupi and D. Pilone reported the development of an industrial installation in Italy to recycle Ni–MH batteries. The process consists essentially of milling and separation of plastic and magnetic materials, followed by leaching in a sulfuric acid solution and a purification phase in multiple steps aimed at selective precipitation by adjusting the pH. In this case, the process also allows the recovery of REEs. P. Zhang and colleagues investigated the recovery of REEs by solvent extraction followed by precipitation with oxalic acid. The cobalt and the nickel in the raffinate were separated by selective extraction of cobalt using 7-bis(2,4,4-tri-methyl-pentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) as the extraction agent. The individual cobalt and the nickel were recovered as oxalates by the addition of oxalic acid. Overall, recoveries of 96% for both cobalt and nickel were obtained. Impurities that are present in the process of separating cobalt and nickel include manganese, zinc, cadmium, and other elements. C. Lupi and D. Pilone proposed a process in which high-quality Co–Ni alloy was obtained by electrolysis. The recovery rate for this process was over 91%. In addition, the recovery of the metal hydride (MH) electrode was also investigated. K. Kleinsorgen and colleagues patented a hydrometallurgical process that combined leaching, solvent extraction, precipitation, and electrolysis for recovery of the different metal values. The spent batteries were first cut, and the battery cases and plastic materials were separated using a magnetic method and a winnowing machine, respectively. The residues were dissolved in a H L. Pietrelli and colleagues also investigated leaching the spent Ni–MH batteries with 2 In general, for leaching of Ni–MH batteries, sulfuric acid has been chosen as the leaching agent, mainly to prevent iron dissolution, an important competing ion during the selective separation of nickel, cobalt, cadmium, and zinc using either ion exchange or solvent extraction. Sulfuric acid is a good leaching agent for AB A chemical treatment and a smelting process have also been investigated for regenerating the hydrogen storage alloy from Ni–MH batteries. The negative electrodes were leached with acid at room temperature to dissolve the oxides on the surface. After being washed and dried, the recovered materials were used to synthesize hydrogen storage alloys. The regenerated alloy had discharge and cycle properties comparable to the original. O. G. Prickett and colleagues also showed that the MH electrodes could be directly reused after the removal of activating agent from the surface of the electrodes. A new process, shown in Overall, hydrometallurgical recycling processes for batteries are very similar in terms of the processing steps needed to recover the battery components. A typical scheme is shown in Research on the leaching of nickel–metal hydride batteries has been conducted by a number of groups. J. W. Lyman and G. R. Palmer investigated hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, and nitric acid dissolution and evaluated the effect of acid concentration, leaching time and temperature, and scrap weight using both AB P. Zhang and colleagues suggested that dissolution using 3.0 In the proposed process of N. Tzanetakis and K. Scott, hydrochloric acid was chosen as an agent, because it is more amenable to subsequent process recovery steps, due to its low cost, and also due to the suitability of extracting nickel ions from chloride solutions. Tests were performed on decanned cylindrical AA Ni–MH batteries (1.2  Following the leaching stage, the use of solvent extraction to separate the REEs from the other metals has been suggested as one of the most efficient separation techniques for the treatment of Ni–MH batteries. However, it is crucial that at an acidic pH, selective complexation and extraction using the extraction reagent can be achieved for the REEs but not for nickel and cobalt. A suitable extractant is D2EHPA, although the main disadvantages of the extractant are the environmental problem created by its toxicity and also its high cost and low solubility in organic solvents. From batch extraction studies ( The results indicated that, at a pH close to 2.5, the extractant showed a strong selectivity for the REEs and thus all of the REEs and most of the iron could be extracted into the organic phase. Removal of iron from the aqueous phase has benefits in simplifying the recovery of nickel and cobalt, using either electrodeposition or precipitation. The recovery of the REEs from the organic phase, as shown in the proposed recycling scheme ( The recovery of nickel and cobalt metal from spent batteries solutions using electrodeposition has been investigated quite widely. Nickel–cobalt separation using deposition is very difficult because of similarities in their electrochemical behavior. Overall, the proposed processing methods for recycling Ni–MH batteries using hydrometallurgy involve a significant number of steps if pure compounds and metals are to be obtained. The processes require a number of extraction stages to separate the many metals that tend to make the costs quite high and generally not economic in terms of the material value recovered. In addition, the process itself generates a significant number of additional potential waste streams that should also ideally be treated and recycled. It would seem that an immediate, more sensible way forward would be to focus on recovering particular groups of metals and using these within existing processing, such as steel making. In this way, an economic and viable strategy may be developed to ensure that batteries are not simply discarded and/or sent to landfill.