In this study, the rate of dissolution of Turkish trona was measured as a function of the trona brine concentration and temperature. The results were compared with a theoretical model of the rate of dissolution from a vertical wall under conditions of natural convection driven by the density gradient in the boundary layer caused by salt concentration differences. The average rate of dissolution in water was measured to be 2.8 g/m2 s. It was found that the temperature is apparently a more important factor at low solution concentrations than at high concentrations.Trona is a double salt known as sodium sesquicarbonate (Na The two principal types of solution flow through a porous ore bed are: downward percolation under the influence of gravity and flow within an immersed system. In the former system, solution transfer may be either by convection or by diffusion. Convection may be caused by differences in the density of the solution at different points within the system. This type of flow offers positive movements of solutions through the ore bed at a desired flow rate and complete contact of the solution within the bed. Solution circulation within the system would result from the convection effects and convection currents, and the pumping of solution in closed circuit within the system The objective of these studies on Turkish trona mineral was to evaluate, from a technical, economic and environmental viewpoint, the feasibility of solution mining of the deposit. There are three factors that determine feasibility: solubility, rate of dissolution, and cavity size and consequent subsidence. Solubility is an important economic factor because it determines the limiting brine density. Since the soda ash beneficiation process most likely to be used involves evaporators, the higher the solubility the less water to be evaporated per ton of product and lower energy costs. The rate of dissolution is a function of time, temperature, concentration and surface area exposed for dissolution. High dissolution rates, hence large production volumes, can be attained by recovering dilute unsaturated exit brine as feed for the refinery. However, unsaturated exit brines require expensive processing and concentrating steps to obtain the final soda ash product. Achievement of a saturated exit brine reduces surface processing costs, but slows underground dissolving rates, thus requiring a larger well system. The third factor, size of cavity, determines the area exposed for dissolution and affects the flow rates and productivity of each well. A larger cavity will last longer and reduces costs, by reducing the number of wells required over the life of the project. The rate at which fresh solution is injected into a cavity affects the shape of the cavity and the rate at which salt is removed. The upper limit for the rate of dissolving the salt is the rate at which salt dissolves under the influence of convection in fresh solution. Since the actual solution mining will take place at temperatures near ambient temperature, the temperature effect has been neglected in previous dissolution rate studies The objective of this study is to investigate the mechanism of the dissolution for Turkish trona. Rate of dissolution is an important factor to evaluate the potential for trona solution mining and to provide engineering data for future economic evaluations. The mechanism is explained using the analogy between heat and mass transfer. The objective was focused on the effect of the temperature on dissolution rate. Natural convection effects are of prime importance in the analysis of controlled dissolution of the mineral. The theoretical formula to evaluate convection flow with water exposed to a vertical salt surface is developed by analogy from Fick's law of heat transfer and it has been shown by The forces acting on the boundary layer are equated to obtain a momentum equation. Neglecting acceleration, the rate of momentum change equals force due to gravity minus viscous shear force: The coordinate axis used here has the Trona samples were secured from the trona mine in Beypazarı and from these samples, cylindrical specimens in various diameter (2–2.5 cm) and height (3–4.5 cm) were cut. A series of experiments was conducted to measure the rate of dissolution as a function of concentration. Starting solutions, obtained by dissolving crude trona in water, are presented as sodium ion molarity. The experimental procedure comprises measuring the physical dimensions and surface area of the sample, preparing a dissolving solution containing a specified concentration of trona, recording starting weight of the sample, immersing the sample for 20–40 s in the solution, drying at 50 °C, cooling at room temperature and recording final weight of the sample. The average rate of dissolution was obtained by dividing the weight loss by the surface area and the immersion time. These steps were repeated using increasing trona concentrations. The solution concentrations ranged from 0.1 to 2.3 M Na With the rate versus concentration relationship established, the next task was to establish the dissolution rate versus temperature relationship. The study to investigate the effect of temperature was run at 25, 35, 45, 70 and 80 °C and at 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 M Na The results of the dissolution rate experiments were plotted along with their corresponding theoretical curve in The average rate of dissolution at room temperature was 2.8 g/m The results of the dissolution rate experiments for various temperatures are shown in The experimental results showed that the rate of dissolution of trona can be theoretically explained by natural convection. Solution mining is similar to dissolution of salt from a smooth vertical surface controlled by convective flow process and rate of dissolution of the trona is hence determined by the water salinity. The data also showed that the rate of dissolution increased slightly with temperature. Temperature is apparently a more important factor at low solution concentrations than at higher concentrations. Even with the effect of different samples eliminated, it is difficult to quantify the effect of temperature on rate. The temperature dependence of solution concentration should be expressed by theoretical estimation at higher temperatures. The rate of dissolution is needed to evaluate the feasibility of solution mining. This factor affects flow rates and the productivity of each well. A higher flow rate increases productivity and reduces the number of wells required for a given production rate. Using the rate of dissolution data provided here, an economic model can be constructed to estimate the cost of solution mining relative to the cost of mining methods for Turkish trona deposit. Since the overall problem is complex, definitive answers require long-term, large-scale testing at the site. Molar concentration of test solution, mol/L Function coefficient for Molar concentration at the water–salt interface, mol/L Molar concentration of solution bath, mol/L Diffusivity constant, m Acceleration due to gravity, m/s Height of the test sample, m Mass of salt in a volume of water of unit salinity, kg L/mol m Heat of salt in a volume of water of unit temperature, J/m Average mass of salt removed per unit surface area, kg/m Average heat transferred per unit surface area, J/m Mass of salt removed per unit surface area at a point on the surface, kg/m Temperature, K Solution bath temperature, K Salt surface temperature, K Time, s Unknown function of velocity, m/s Velocity, m/s x-Axis, parallel to the vertical salt surface, m y-Axis, horizontal direction away from the salt, m Thermal diffusivity, m Conversion from concentration difference to specific gravity difference, 1/mol/L Coefficient of expansion, 1/K Width of the boundary layer, m Kinematic viscosity, m