In the current study, the effect of flotation and dewatering reagents on cyanidation process, loading capacity and adsorption kinetics of gold onto activated carbon has been evaluated through a developed experimental program.
                  The experimental results showed that the flotation reagents have a detrimental effect on the cyanidation process and this effect increases with increasing their concentrations. It was also clearly revealed that the occurrence of organic fouling influences the gold sorption kinetics onto activated carbon but not the loading capacity.
                  By applying a reagent scheme, in which the dosage of flotation reagents is very high, the gold sorption kinetics onto an activated carbon severely decreased and the kinetic constant of gold sorption (k value) fell below 50h−1. This problem was overcome by applying the optimized reagent scheme in which the dosage of flotation reagents is set to a minimum required amount for the optimum recovery of Mouteh gold bearing sulfides. By using this reagent scheme, the fouling effect of flotation and dewatering reagents was negligible and the gold sorption kinetics was slightly decreased in comparison with the non-fouled carbons.In gold processing plants, when gold occurs as finely disseminated particles in sulfides or in a solid solution, flotation is commonly used as a pre-concentration step to allow one of the more expensive pretreatment process including fine grinding, roasting, bacterial or pressure oxidations to be carried out on a smaller and concentrated fraction of materials ( The effect of collectors, frothing agents, flocculants, oils and grinding aids as the main organic foulants present in the leach solution on the kinetic activity of gold sorption has been investigated by   In this study, two reagent schemes corresponding to the initial and optimized flotation reagent schemes of Mouteh gold processing plant in Iran were employed. The initial scheme represents the preliminary design of the plant in which roasting was chosen as an oxidative pretreatment process for the flotation concentrate and a high dosage of flotation reagents was determined to ensure that all of the sulfide and partially oxidized sulfide minerals to be floated ( The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of flotation and dewatering reagents at these two reagent schemes, on cyanidation process, loading capacity and adsorption kinetics of gold onto the activated carbon. For this purpose, a sequential experimental procedure as shown in A sample of gold bearing sulfide ore was taken from Mouteh gold mine in Iran. The chemical composition of the sample was 2.51 Analytical grade sodium cyanide (NaCN), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) were supplied from Merck Co. and PEX and potassium PIBX were obtained from New Brunswick, USA. Anionic polyacrylamide with the trade mark of Nasfloc, Aero promoter 238 (AP238) and lime were of commercial grade. A size fraction of 2 to 2.36 The ore sample was crushed and thoroughly passed through a 2 For the preparation of the gold stock solution, accurately weighted gold slices, cut from a pure gold plaque provided from Pamp S.A. Switzerland, were added to 1000 As shown in The prepared filter cake was divided into three equal parts and each of them was added into a 4 Appropriate amounts of NaOH and NaCN solutions were added into three 1 After 24 The results of CIL tests are given in   Thus, from the above discussion it is concluded that the occurrence of organic fouling influences the adsorption kinetics but not the loading capacity. This finding supports the proposed assumption by The difference between the adsorbed gold onto the activated carbons of Run 1 (i.e., without fouling) and the adsorbed gold onto the activated carbons of Runs 2 and 3 over a period of 24 As shown in   The kinetic activity of gold sorption is used in determining plant efficiency ( The linear form of Eq. where: change in gold loading onto the activated carbon since zero time (g/t). gold concentration in the solution at time t (mg/L) kinetic constant (h empirical constant dependent on carbon time of adsorption (h). From Eq. The amount or residence time of the activated carbons in leach tanks should be increased when the k value falls below about 50 This study revealed that the presence of flotation and dewatering reagents in the leach solution has a detrimental effect on the cyanidation process and the effect would be greater by increasing their concentrations. The current study showed that the occurrence of organic fouling influences the adsorption kinetics but not the loading capacity. This supports the hypothesis that the organic fouling agents do not penetrate significantly onto the pores of the activated carbon and only form a layer on the superficial surface of the carbon granules that diminish mass transfer, resulting in reduced sorption kinetics. The evaluating of k values indicated that the occurrence of organic fouling reduces the kinetic activity of the activated carbon for gold sorption and when the organic fouling occurs to a great extent, the k value falls below the minimum practical level of 50 By using the initial reagent scheme in which the concentration of flotation reagents is above the required amounts, the carbon fouling occurred to a greater extent. Accordingly, the kinetics of gold sorption onto the fouled activated carbon severely decreased and the k value fell below the minimum practical level of 50 By using the minimum required amounts of flotation reagents, in addition to the optimum recovery of sulfide minerals, the fouling of the activated carbons occurs to a much lower extent. As a result, the gold sorption kinetics onto the fouled activated carbons slightly decreases in comparison with the no-fouled activated carbons. Also, the adsorption of the all available gold complexes from the solution is achieved in a shorter time in compare with the carbons of Run 3 which fouled to a higher extent.