In the present study, the phase equilibria in the “FeO”-SiO2 system in equilibrium with matte at controlled P(SO2) 0.3 and 0.6 atm and fixed matte grade 72 wt% Cu were experimentally investigated. The high-temperature equilibration using primary phase material as the substrate, quenching and Electron Probe Micro-analysis (EPMA) were applied in the experiments where the P(O2) and P(SO2) were accurately controlled by CO/CO2/SO2 gas mixtures. The correlations between oxygen partial pressure and the matte grade were determined at P(SO2) 0.3 and 0.6 atm to obtain the target matte grade in the samples. The liquidus temperatures of this “FeO”-SiO2 system in equilibrium with matte at controlled P(SO2) 0.3 and 0.6 atm and fixed matte grade 72 wt% Cu were also reported. The present experimental results were also compared with the FactSage predictions and show the differences. The present results are expected to be useful for the copper smelting operations and also provide reliable information for the thermodynamic database.The pyrometallurgical copper-making process remains the dominant process to produce copper. In the copper smelting process, the slag phase is in contact with the matte phase and the gas containing O Careful literature review indicates that publications were mainly related to the liquid/tridymite/matte/gas system from the previous researchers [ It is believed that accurate equilibrium data is vital for the guidance of the current operations of copper smelting and will also provide useful information for the thermodynamic database for further process modeling. Briefly, high-temperature equilibration using the primary phase material as the substrate, quenching and Electron Probe Micro-analysis (EPMA) are the experimental techniques used in the present study [ The slag of oxide mixture and the matte of sulphide mixture were prepared from pure chemicals. The oxide mixtures were prepared by SiO The spinel substrate was prepared from the iron foil (99.5 + wt%, Goodfellow Cambridge Ltd). The iron foil was folded to a basket with an unsealed gap at the bottom to allow the gas to pass through. The iron foil was then pre-conditioned under P(O Equilibrium experiments were carried out in a vertical reaction tube (impervious recrystallized alumina, 30 mm inner diameter) furnace heated by lanthanum chromate (LaCrO The sample was introduced from the bottom of the reaction tube and was left at the cold base of the tube while the reaction tube was preconditioned for more than 30 min at the required atmosphere condition. The sample was then raised and kept in the hot zone of the reaction tube by FeCrAl alloy wire (Kanthal, Sweden). All samples were equilibrated at the target temperature for the required period. After equilibration, the bottom end of the reaction tube was immersed in water and the lower lid sealing the tube was removed. Then, the sample was dropped directly into the water when pulling up the wire. The specimen was dried on a hot plate, mounted in epoxy resin, and polished for examinations. The polished samples were coated with carbon using JEOL (Japan Electron Optics Ltd) Carbon Coater for electron microscopic examination. A JXA 8200 Electron Probe X-Ray Micro-analyser (EPMA) with Wavelength Dispersive Detectors was used for microstructure and composition analyses. The analysis was conducted at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV and a probe current of 15 nA. The standards used for analysis were from Charles M. Taylor Co. (Stanford, California): CuFeS In the present study, FactSage 7.2 [ In the current temperature range, the equilibrium system is a complex one between gas, liquids and solids including gas, matte liquid, slag liquid and solid crystals, where mass transfers take place between different phases. It is necessary to ensure that the equilibration of the whole system has been attained within a certain period. In the beginning of this study, the equilibrium time was tested before further equilibrium experiments were undertaken. Same starting slag and matte compositions with different holding time 2, 4 and 6 h at P(O Therefore, in the following experiments, the holding time for all the experiments has been selected to be 6 h to ensure that the samples are in the equilibrium state. The matte grades are functions of P(O The correlations of oxygen partial pressure and matte grade at fixed SO FactSage predictions were also compared with the present measurements in the figures. The comparisons clearly show that the FactSage calculations underestimate the matte grade compared to the present measurements at all temperatures, especially when P(SO The present measurements with different P(O With the P(O The equilibrium results of samples in “FeO”-SiO From the results, it clearly shows that most of the experiments realize equilibrium with spinel solid phase and matte, except for the liquid phase in equilibrium with tridymite and spinel solid phases at 1200 °C with P(SO As the concentrations of “Cu FactSage predictions were also plotted in The phase equilibrium in “FeO”-SiO In the present study, the equilibria in “FeO”-SiO The authors would like to thank