Objectives
                  The aim of the study was to investigate the impact of hypoxia on proliferation, apoptosis and mineralization of cementoblast-like cells (OCCM-30) in vitro.
               
                  Methods
                  The effects of different periods of hypoxia (2% O2) on proliferation, apoptosis, cementoblastic potential and root cementum resorption capability of OCCM-30 were evaluated, by using MTT, flow cytometry, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity assay, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction measurement, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and mineralization nodule formation assay.
               
                  Results
                  OCCM-30 viability was significantly inhibited by hypoxia while the apoptosis ratio was enhanced in a time-dependent manner; hypoxia inducible factor-1α and vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA were induced by hypoxia in different manners; temporary hypoxia (<24h) stimulated cementoblastic function of OCCM-30, while long-term hypoxia inhibited it, manifested by decreased mRNA level or release of ALP, osteocalcin, bone sialoprotein, osteopontin and osteoprotegerin. In addition, hypoxia affected mineralized nodule formation of OCCM-30 in a time-dependent fashion; moreover, root cementum resorption function was also induced by hypoxia, manifested by increased receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand mRNA and protein expression.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Temporary exposure of OCCM-30 to hypoxia inhibited proliferation, promoted apoptosis and mineralization, while longer duration of hypoxia could inhibit the cementoblast function. The findings may provide theoretical basis for developing novel therapeutics to prevent root resorption during orthodontic treatment.Cementum is a mineralized tissue lining the surface of tooth root, and shares numerous similarities with bone in composition, mechanical property and disease responsiveness. Hypoxia is a featured phenomenon in solid tumour, ischaemic disease and tissue injury. Hypoxia is often coupled with inflammation. Meanwhile, the orthodontic force also induces local root resorption with characteristics of inflammation. Discovery of RANK/RANKL/OPG system sheds light on bone research. The immortalized murine cementoblasts (OCCM-30), characterized as highly differentiated cementoblasts. OCCM-30 cells were placed in 50 A 90% confluent cell culture of OCCM-30 was treated with trypsin and seeded into a 96-well plates at 1 Apoptotic cell death was assessed by flow cytometry assay using propidium iodide (PI) staining. Cells were of each group were harvested by trypsinization. The resultant cell suspension was transferred for centrifugation, and fixed with cold 70% ethanol at 4 At defined time points, the ALP activity of treated and untreated OCCM-30 cells was detected using an ALP assay kit (BoDing, Beijing, China). In brief, cells were washed 3 times with PBS, and lysed in non-denaturant conditions by using 0.1% Triton X-100. After centrifugation, a reaction buffer, pH 7.4, composed of 100 After hypoxic treatment, cells were washed twice with PBS. The total RNA was extracted using Simply P (BoRi, Hangzhou, China) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Total RNA was quantified, in a spectrophotometer, at an absorbance (A) of 260 Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at  OPG and RANKL protein contents in supernatant of OCCM-30 culture were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using the Human OPG and RANKL Quantikine ELISA Kit (R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. The intensity of colour was measured at 540 Mineralization nodules were assessed by using the modified von Kossa's silver nitrate staining method. Briefly, cells were grown in differentiated medium (DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1 All experiments were repeated at least three times and data of evaluation parameters were expressed as mean The cementoblast-like cells exhibited irregular polygonal or fusiform morphologies, with the nucleus in the middle of the cytoplasm. The cells presented cobblestone appearance at high density. It seemed that OCCM-30 cells under hypoxia, compared with the control group, were minimally affected in alignment and morphology. However, the cell density was relatively low under hypoxia. Initially, we verified OCCM-30 proliferation following hypoxic exposure by MTT assay. As shown in In order to further investigate into the biological response of OCCM-30 to hypoxia, we carried out quantitative real-time RT-PCR to evaluate HIF-1α and VEGF mRNA transcription. As shown in Having proved that hypoxia up-regulates HIF-1α and VEGF mRNA transcription, we proceeded to validate whether it induces cementoblastic potential and root cementum resorption function of OCCM-30. Results revealed that ALP activity was not apparently affected by hypoxia except at 12 To find out whether the RANK/RANKL/OPG system is involved in the response of cementoblasts to hypoxia, we further investigated OPG, RANKL mRNA transcription and release of OCCM-30 after hypoxic treatment. The OPG mRNA was transiently increased by 2.4-folds at 6 Thereafter, OPG and RANKL accumulation in the supernatants of OCCM-30 culture was examined after the cells were treated with indicated periods of hypoxia. Results of our study documented that hypoxia stimulated a significant augmentation in OPG and RANKL release at later stages of the culture comparing to the control ( In order to better understand the effect of hypoxia on the mineralization of OCCM-30, we carried out von Kossa staining experiments to measure calcium nodule formation of cementoblasts under hypoxia. Results indicated that density of calcium nodules formed by cementoblasts was at first significantly augmented after 7, 10, 14, 17, and 21 d of hypoxic exposure, and then reduced after 24, 28 d, significantly higher than the control ( In the present study, we have demonstrated that hypoxic treatment was capable of inducing a variety of biological responses in OCCM-30: (i) impairing cell proliferation; (ii) up-regulating apoptosis ratio; (iii) increasing HIF-1α and VEGF mRNA transcription; (iv) stimulating ALP activity and mRNA transcription of ALP, OCN, BSP, OPN; (v) increasing OPG, RANKL mRNA level and release; (vi) promoting mineralization nodules formation at first and then suppressing it. As a unique avascular mineralized tissue, cementum plays an important role in periodontal remodelling during orthodontic treatment. In vivo studies preliminarily unveiled that cementoblasts participated in orthodontically induced root resorption and repair, and displayed a distinct genetic response to mechanical stress compared with osteoblasts. In addition, the roles of orthodontic loadings in forming local ischaemic and hypoxic milieu within periodontal ligament have been extensively investigated. Then we demonstrated that 2% hypoxia provoked HIF-1α and VEGF mRNA transcription in OCCM-30 cells, which were potentially involved in cementoblast-endothelial interactions and repair of post-injury microenvironment. And the findings were analogous to those of osteoblasts. Osteocalcin (OCN) is widely present in bone, cementum and dentine, and has been proved to be expressed in cells lining tooth root surface during cementogenesis. In the present study, hypoxia significantly stimulated OPG, RANKL mRNA transcription and secretion in OCCM-30 cells. And most importantly, the OPG/RANKL mRNA ratio was also significantly increased by temporary hypoxic treatment, which indicated a cementoblast-mediated inhibition of cementoclastogenesis or a protection of cementum resorption. Thereafter, the ratio gradually decreased to the normal, meaning an inclination for cementoclast formation. This was similar to the response of osteoblasts to hypoxia. In conclusion, exposure of OCCM-30 to hypoxia inhibited proliferation, promoted apoptosis and hypoxia-related genes expression. Temporary hypoxic treatment augmented cementoblastic potential, root cementum resorption and mineralization of the cells, while longer duration of hypoxia inhibited cementoblast function. This work was supported by grants from There are no financial or other relationships that might lead to a conflict of interest. None declared. This work was supported by grants from China National Natural Science Foundation (No. 30970705 and 11172190) and conducted in State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University. Thanks for Prof. Somerman's generous gift of immortalized murine cementoblast-like cells (OCCM-30).