Forest biomass is used in many countries as an abundant and easily accessible source of renewable energy. While forest biomass has certain advantages in terms of carbon sink capability, it cannot be considered an emission-free energy source, and the environmental differences among various forest biomass sources have been unclear. This study uses life cycle assessment for two purposes. The first is to quantify the environmental impacts of the energy production of a small-scale, combined heat and power production plant utilizing different forest biomasses. The second aim is to estimate the change in environmental impacts on district heat production from natural gas when partially replacing it by heat from the combined heat and power plant. The environmental impacts include global warming potential, acidification potential, and eutrophication potential. The calculated environmental impacts of utilizing different forest biofuels in the CHP plant in relation to produced energy are 2.2–5.1 gCO2,eq./MJenergy excluding biogenic carbon emission, 59–66 gCO2,eq./MJenergy with biogenic carbon emission, and 133–175 mgSO2,eq./MJenergy and 18–22 mgPO34-,eq./MJenergy with pellets, showing the highest values. The results indicate that by using forest biomass instead of natural gas in energy production, the global climate impacts are reduced when biogenic carbon is excluded, while the local effects are higher (acidification potential and eutrophication potential). Including biogenic carbon reduces the calculated climate benefit since the total emissions end up being 4–7% over those of natural gas use. The potential benefits need to be weighed against the possible drawbacks.Most of the current energy production methods cause adverse environmental impacts and often involve considerable resource uncertainties ( Biomass is a renewable energy source with the highest potential to contribute to the energy needs of modern society worldwide ( To contribute to the mitigation of climate change, renewable energy technology has to produce less emission than the conventional fossil fuel-based energy production. Life cycle assessment (LCA) examines the potential environmental impacts throughout a product's life cycle, from raw material acquisition to final disposal (  LCA has been also used in calculating GHG emission impacts of biomass production chain ( Thus, this study's first goal is to quantify environmental impacts, including the global warming potential (GWP), the AP, and the EP of producing energy in a small-scale CHP plant that utilizes different forest biomasses. The second goal is to compare the environmental impacts of producing district heat solely from natural gas against producing part of the district heat in the CHP plant in the selected case area. The examined wood-based fuels include WCs from forest residues and small-diameter wood, as well as pellets from cutter dust and sawdust. The technology examined in this study is a small-scale CHP plant using forest biomass, located in the Saimaanharju area in the municipality of Taipalsaari, Finland. The plant is used alongside the natural gas heating plant. The total heat demand in the Saimaanharju district heat grid averages 7000 MWh/a ( First, this study calculates and compares the environmental impacts of using wood-based fuels for the small-scale CHP plant. Second, the environmental impacts of producing district heat solely from natural gas are compared against partially producing heat from the small-scale CHP plant in the Saimaanharju area. The system boundaries for calculating the emissions of energy production in the CHP plant and the changes in the environmental impacts of the Saimaanharju district's heat production are represented in LCA was performed in accordance with ISO standards 14040 and 14044 ( The emissions from land use change (LUC) were not included since the small diameter wood and forest residues are assumed to come from thinning of existing forest without land use change. The saw dust and cutter dust on the other hand are residuals from wood industry and as wastes considered to have zero emission burden for following processes. The environmental impact caused by manufacturing and maintaining of capital goods related to obtaining forest fuel were excluded due to earlier findings on low effect on environmental impact results when studying seedling production ( The feedstocks for WC products include small-diameter wood and forest residues. The information for a small-diameter WC production chain was obtained from a local supplier in the Taipalsaari municipality ( The emissions of the harvester, agricultural tractor, forest tractor, and full trailer truck were obtained from the ( The pellets were assumed to be produced from either sawdust or cutter dust. Sawdust pellets require heat in the production process since the raw material is wet and has to be dried, whereas cutter dust is already dry enough for pellet production. Additionally, electricity is needed in the pellet production process ( Included in the LCA, but the energy consumption of construction phase was not recorded and it was excluded from the LCA.”. The lifetime of the plant was assumed to be 20 years, and the yearly emissions were divided evenly by that period. The NO Ash from combustion is assumed to be granulated by using electricity, transported with full trailer trucks, and spread into the forest with a forest tractor ( The emission factors for electricity were determined by using the Finnish production mix plan from Gabi 6 and by applying the average electricity production mix in Finland between June 2006 and September 2013 ( The values collected for the life cycle inventory data often include the selection of values for calculation from a set of available values. Uncertainty analysis was conducted for the calculation of the Saimaanharju CHP plant's environmental impacts to increase the robustness of the LCA results and to find out how much the environmental impacts would vary according to the changes made in the initial data. The energy efficiency of production processes is improving continuously, and it is also possible to reduce the energy use of the wood-based fuel production chains. Therefore, the impact of decreased energy use in the production chains of WCs and pellets was estimated in the uncertainty analysis. The values used in the uncertainty analysis for WC production are summarized in The NO The Saimaanharju CHP plant emissions causing global warming, eutrophication, and acidification were calculated when using 4400 MWh/a of wood-based fuel and producing 790 MWh/a of electricity and 3000 MWh/a of heat.  Combustion is responsible for the main percentage of the emissions causing the AP (72–94%), as shown in Eutrophication results from airborne emissions containing nitrogen. The findings show that combustion comprises the largest segment of emissions causing the EP (77–95%) ( The Saimaanharju area needs approximately 7000 MWh/a of heat annually for district heating purposes. The situation where all this heat is produced with a natural gas boiler is compared to the case where the Saimaanharju CHP plant produces part of it (3000 MWh/a), and the rest is produced with a natural gas boiler. The Saimaanharju CHP plant also produces electricity (790 MWh/a), and taking into account the emission reductions from displacing the average grid electricity reduces the overall emissions.   The change in relation to the yearly emissions of the EU-25 + 3 is more significant in GHG emissions than in acidification and eutrophication. Natural gas emissions have the lowest acidification impact, but the difference from wood-based fuels is small. All of the examined fuels have relatively low eutrophication impacts. The results show that the reduction in GHG emissions is more significant than the increase in emissions causing acidification and eutrophication. From the GHG emission perspective, obtaining fuel for CHP production causes the most significant percentage of the emissions (approximately 90%); therefore, it is worthwhile to examine the causes of emissions in fuel-obtaining chains. These emissions are caused by the diesel used in working machines in the case of WCs, as well as heat and electricity consumption in pellet production. According to According to The combustion of forest biomass is often assumed to be carbon neutral. However, the temporal asymmetry between biomass combustion and regrowth has an impact on the GWP of forest biomass use ( Combustion is responsible for the main percentage of emissions causing acidification (72–94%). The combustion emissions consist of SO In relation to the produced heat, wood-based fuels contribute less to the GWP than natural gas (53% decrease on average) when excluding biogenic carbon emissions but contribute more to acidification and eutrophication (on average, 57% and 44% increase). Including biogenic carbon reduces the calculated climate benefit since the total emissions end up being 4–7% over those of natural gas use. In comparison, The normalized results in Environmental impacts—including the GWP, the EP, and the AP of the small-scale CHP plant utilizing different wood-based fuels and replacing the district's heat produced from natural gas with heat from the CHP plant—were calculated. Obtaining fuels (including the related transport, heat, electricity, comminution, hauling, and cutting) generates the majority of the GWP (82–92%) of the small-scale CHP plant. Combustion is responsible for the main percentages of the emissions causing the AP (72–94%) and the EP (77–95%). The calculated environmental impacts of utilizing forest biomass in the small-scale CHP plant in relation to produced energy are 2.2–5.1 g The research was conducted in the Distributed Energy System (DESY) program funded by industrial and research partners and managed by