In this study calcium phosphate coatings with different amounts of strontium (Sr) were prepared using a biomineralization method. The incorporation of Sr changed the composition and morphology of coatings from plate-like to sphere-like morphology. Dissolution testing indicated that the solubility of the coatings increased with increased Sr concentration. Evaluation of extracts (with Sr concentrations ranging from 0 to 2.37μg/mL) from the HA, 0.06Sr, 0.6Sr, and 1.2Sr coatings during in vitro cell cultures showed that Sr incorporation into coatings significantly enhanced the ALP activity in comparison to cells treated with control and HA eluted media. These findings show that calcium phosphate coatings could promote osteogenic differentiation even in a low amount of strontium.Strontium (Sr) has been shown to play an important role in bone formation The effect of Sr on the mineralization of bone seems to be connected to the dose of Sr. A low dose of Sr has previously been shown to increase the mineralization of bone The metal titanium has been used for a long time as an implant material in orthopaedic and dental surgery Sr substituted calcium phosphate coatings on titanium dioxide substrates have been prepared using a biomineralization method, with the purpose to further improve the bone implant contact as compared to using pure HA The dissolution and release of ions from these biomimetic coatings have also been studied previously in model media such as Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane-hydrochloride buffer solution (Tris–HCl) and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solutions containing Ca The effect of Sr ions on properties of coatings such as topography, crystallinity and solubility is interesting because these factors have previously been shown to be important for cell interaction with materials Ti (Gr2) sheet was cut into disks with a diameter of 9 A phosphate buffer solution containing Ca and Mg ions was used to prepare HA coatings. The composition of the phosphate buffer solution is: Na The morphology of the coatings was analysed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, LEO 1550). The crystallinity of the coatings was determined using thin film X-ray diffraction (TF-XRD, D8). The surface composition of the coatings was evaluated using inductive coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Optima 3000 DV (Perkin Elmer)). The coatings were dissolved in HNO The dissolution study of the HA, 0.06Sr, 0.6Sr and 1.2Sr coatings on disks was performed in two model media: Tris–HCl solution and cell culture medium (DMEM/F12) were used for the cell study of the different coatings. For the release in Tris–HCl, 2 disks were placed in 10 The ion release of HA, 0.06Sr, 0.6Sr and 1.2Sr coatings in cell culture medium was performed according to the following protocol. Disks coated with HA, 0.06Sr, 0.6Sr or 1.2Sr were incubated in 0.5 Human osteoblast-like SaOS-2 cells were maintained in a DMEM/F12 cell culture medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Massachusetts, USA) ands 2 All coated titanium pieces were placed into DMEM/F12 culture medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 SAOS-2 cell proliferation was evaluated using the alamarBlue® reagent. Cells were seeded at a density of 10,000 cells/cm To quantify ALP activity, the Alkaline Phosphatase Substrate System for ELISA (Sigma) was used, according to the manufacturer's instruction. ALP values were then normalized to total intracellular protein concentrations, and determined using the Micro Bicinchoninic Acid assay kit (Micro BCA, Pierce). Statistics was done using the SPSS software. One way ANOVA and Scheffe's post hoc analysis were used to determine significance. Significance was determined by a p value less than 0.05. The morphology of the coatings was different from pure HA, see XRD patterns of the different coatings with different amounts of Sr are shown in The composition of the coatings is shown in   For Sr At 1 and 3 ALP, an early marker for osteogenic differentiation, was evaluated at 3 and 7 In this study SrCaP coatings with spherical morphology with different amounts of Sr were prepared from 0.06 The increase of the Sr/Ca ratio with increased concentration of Sr The medium extracts of the HA, 0.06Sr, 0.6Sr, and 1.2Sr coatings were evaluated in vitro. The results show that during the first 3 In this study SrCaP coatings with spherical morphology have been prepared and characterized with three low amounts of Sr. The morphology of the coatings could be changed even by adding a small amount of Sr ions in solutions. The solubility increased with increased Sr content in the coatings while the (Ca This work was supported by the