We propose a new configuration of a 3-compartment electrochemical cell for producing alkali that is subsequently utilized for mineralization of carbon dioxide. In this new membrane configuration, a second cation exchange membrane (CEM) replaces the anion exchange membrane (AEM) employed in a standard cell configuration. The electrochemical cell comprising of two cation exchange membranes (a CEM-CEM system) eliminates the issues associated with the AEM such as low ionic conductivity and inferior mechanical strength. All of tested CEM-CEM combinations exhibit superior electrochemical performance with considerable reduction of energy requirement for NaOH production in comparison to the standard AEM-CEM configuration. The optimized two-CEMs-based system presents a remarkable enhancement of output current density by 2.5-fold and a substantial input energy savings up to 740kWhton−1 for mineralization of carbon dioxide to produce sodium carbonate.Accelerated greenhouse gas emissions, primarily carbon dioxide (CO A relatively different approach that involves conversion of CO Regarding the process energetics, HOR at the anode is a spontaneous and kinetically fast reaction that does not require any input energy. The only energy driven reaction is the water splitting at the cathode. The thermodynamic equilibrium potential for splitting water into H In a 3-compartment electrochemical cell that employs two different types of polymer electrolyte membranes (AEM and CEM), a considerable performance drop is caused by the poor ionic conductivity of AEM. Commercially available AEMs exhibit inferior conductivities of anions as compared to what CEMs (mainly Nafion In the current study, we have investigated an alternative membrane configuration of the continuous-flow electrochemical cell by replacing the AEM with a second CEM (a CEM-CEM configuration) in order to address the issues associated with the commercially available AEMs. After substantiating the feasibility of newly proposed membrane configuration, several configurations of Nafion The hardware of electrochemical cell including anode and cathode bipolar plates and a central compartment plate were all made of Ti. There were serpentine flow channels (with a channel width of 0.1 Output current densities of the electrochemical cell with different membrane configurations were measured at an applied voltage of 1.5 All diffusion experiments were conducted at room temperature (25 Additional diffusion experiments were conducted to determine the diffusion coefficients of Na Caustic efficiency (CE) was determined as follows: When the electrochemical cell was operated with the standard AEM-CEM (ACS NEOSEPTA-N115) membrane configuration, the average output current density at 1.5 In this electrochemical salt-splitting cell, there are two major mechanisms that drive ionic fluxes across the AEM: diffusion and migration. Diffusive flux is caused by concentration gradient, while migratory flux takes place under potential gradient that exists between the two electrodes of the electrochemical cell. Proton permeation behavior through AEM by diffusion is also examined in a 2-compartment diffusion cell. One compartment of the diffusion cell contained 0.1 Another major drawback of contemporary AEMs that are commercially available is their inferior mechanical strength as compared to Nafion Employing a CEM at the anode side changes only the anode reactions but not those taking place at the cathode. Unlike standard AEM-based configuration where Cl The feasibility of this newly proposed CEM-CEM configuration was tested by employing two N115 membranes and the results are presented in After the successful operation of the electrochemical cell comprised of the new CEM-CEM membrane arrangement, another trial has been made to further promote the proton diffusion from anode to the central compartment. As thinner ion-exchange membranes have higher ionic conductance, therefore, 127 In addition to the output current density, several other figures of merit, for instance, caustic efficiency (CE), specific energy consumption, space-time yield and normalized space velocity, etc., should also be taken into account for the performance evaluation of electrochemical cells Subsequently, N212 is fixed as the anode side membrane and three different CEMs have been evaluated at the cathode side. The cathode side membrane is probably the most crucial component of the electrochemical cell as its properties predominantly determine the caustic efficiency and thus overall energy consumption. As can be seen in The caustic efficiencies and other figures of merit for three cathode CEMs are compared in From The energy consumption values listed in The subsequent experiments for evaluating the effect of applied current density on the caustic efficiency and caustic concentration have been carried out with the optimized N212-N212 membrane configuration. As can be seen in This has been further confirmed by other supplementary experiments, of which results are provided in Figs. S2 and S3. The effect of OH  As shown in  Finally, mineralization reaction of CO Issues associated with the AEM in a 3-compartment electrochemical cell to produce NaOH from brine have been successfully addressed by an alternative two-cation exchange membrane configuration in which an additional CEM replaced the AEM. Several configurations of Nafion This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: