Aqueous mixtures of six commonly detected emerging contaminants (acetaminophen, antipyrine, bisphenol A, caffeine, metoprolol and testosterone), selected as model compounds, were treated by different solar-driven photochemical processes including photolysis, photocatalytic oxidation with Fe(III) or TiO2, photo-Fenton and single, photolytic and photocatalytic ozonations. Experiments were carried out in a compound parabolic collector photoreactor. It was found that photolysis and photocatalytic oxidation using Fe(III) are not effective for the complete removal of the selected contaminants, while TiO2 photocatalysis, photo-Fenton, single, photolytic and photocatalytic ozonations can rapidly remove them and decrease total organic carbon to some extent. The combination of photocatalytic oxidation and ozonation considerably enhances the system efficiency by reducing the ozone demand and energy requirements to completely remove the contaminants. Results also demonstrate that, at the operational conditions applied in this work, the contaminant removal and mineralization by ozone processes takes place in the slow kinetic regime, therefore the application of the ozone combined processes studied instead of single ozonation is recommended. Kinetic considerations on the application of solar photocatalytic processes for mineralization have been also assessed.Nowadays a great number of pharmaceuticals and personal care products, commonly known as emerging contaminants (ECs), are being detected in aqueous systems such as rivers, lakes, streams, aquifers and wastewater treatment plant influents and effluents. These compounds are considered potentially hazardous as some are ubiquitous, persistent to conventional wastewater treatments and biologically active, many of them with recognized endocrine disruption functions Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) constitute an alternative for the degradation of ECs. AOPs are physicochemical processes based on the generation of hydroxyl radicals ( Heterogeneous photocatalytic oxidation, being one of the most applied AOPs, involves the absorption in a semiconductor particle of photons of energy (hν) equal to or exceeding the band gap energy ( Likewise, homogeneous photocatalytic systems using iron-based catalysts have been widely applied. Thus, Fe(III) photocatalytic oxidation can generate iron (III) aqua complexes, primarily Fe(OH) Ozonation has also been extensively used in water treatment. Ozone is a selective oxidant ( It is well known that the combination of various AOPs may lead to an enhanced production of In this work, various AOPs, such as ozonation, photolytic ozonation, Fe(III) photocatalytic oxidation, photo-Fenton, TiO Previous works have addressed the abatement of ECs in water using solar-driven photocatalysis Unbuffered ultrapure water (18.2 Iron (III) perchlorate hydrate (Sigma–Aldrich) was used as Fe(III) source in homogeneous Fe(III) photocatalytic oxidation experiments while AEROXIDE® TiO Chemically pure (>99%) sodium chloride, sodium sulfate, sodium carbonate, sodium nitrate and sodium phosphate 12-hydrated, all of them supplied by Panreac, were used in some experiments. Other laboratory reagents used throughout the experiments were sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate (Merck), potassium indigo-trisulfonate (Sigma–Aldrich), acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific), phosphoric acid (85%, Fisher Scientific), titanium(IV) oxysulfate-sulfuric acid solution (Sigma–Aldrich), hydrochloric acid (37%, Acros Organics) and sodium hydroxide (Panreac). A compound parabolic collector (CPC) was used as photo-reactor. The reactor was assembled by Ecosystem Environmental Services S.A. (Spain) and equipped with 4 borosilicate glass tubes (32 Semi-batch mode experiments were carried out in Badajoz, Spain (38°52′43″ N, 6°58′15″ W) under sunlight and at ambient temperature. Typically, a reservoir tank was first loaded with 5 The initial concentration for each compound was 10 Some samples taken from the reactor during the course of experiments using ozone were immediately bubbled with helium to remove residual ozone. Likewise, excess hydrogen peroxide in samples could be quenched by adding an aliquot of concentrated sodium thiosulfate solution. These procedures avoided further ozone and/or hydrogen peroxide reactions while samples were kept before ECs and TOC analyses. It was checked that no volatile organic compounds were removed as a result of helium bubbling. Prior to analysis, the samples were filtered by a 0.22 The concentration of the compounds was analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography with an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC apparatus (Hewlett Packard) equipped with a Kromasil C18 column (150 Total organic carbon (TOC) was measured using a TOC-VSCH analyzer (Shimadzu) equipped with an ASI-V autosampler. Dissolved ozone concentration was spectrophotometrically measured at 600 To determine whether the selected ECs formed solar-photoactive iron complexes at the experimental conditions used in this work, aqueous solutions of each target compound and mixtures of each of them and Fe(III) were prepared at pH 3 and their UV–vis spectra were recorded. It was found that the spectra of each compound and that of its corresponding mixture with Fe(III) were identical, which means that no photoactive iron complexes were formed. Aqueous solutions containing a mixture of the six ECs were subjected to various AOPs. The oxidation systems applied were: photolysis (hν), Fe(III)-photocatalytic oxidation (Fe(III)/hν), photo-Fenton (Fe(III)/H Also, the TOC evolution vs. supplied solar energy is shown in All solar experiments were started around midday in order to have similar radiation conditions. Thus, as can be seen in As stated in the experimental section, when TiO None of the ECs investigated but TST was removed by direct photolysis. This fact was expected since solar radiation under 290  According to The addition of H As seen in The application of single ozonation in the absence of solar radiation led to a complete removal of the ECs. Since ozone reacts selectively with compounds having unsaturated moieties (double or triple carbon bonds) or aromatic rings with substituent groups that activate the ozone electrophilic reactions, it was expected that the ECs studied here were removed by direct ozonation The experimental results indicate that CAF, MTP and TST have low reactivity towards ozone compared to the other ECs investigated, as it took longer times (around 30–35 Single ozonation led to mineralization percentages of 7% (pH 3) and 14% (pH 7). As a selective oxidant, ozone can remove the parent compounds and transform them into intermediates that may be recalcitrant to ozone attack, especially small oxygenated species, short chain acids and alcohols, thus not high mineralization capability was expected for this system The application of ozone in the presence of radiation (O The generated hydrogen peroxide undergoes photolysis to yield It is worth mentioning that during the course of solar experiments, the temperature of the aqueous solution increases gradually from c.a. 20 The depletion profiles observed during single ozonation experiments for BIS, CAF, MTP and TST show an induction stage which was not observed in the rest of the ozone processes. This induction stage is likely due to a competitive use of ozone between the parent compounds and their primary degradation intermediates. Intermediates formed during the first stages of reaction might still present available moieties that could react fast with ozone If present, Fe(II) species can decompose O As a general trend, the presence of Fe(III) exerted a positive effect on ECs removal rates. However, in the case of ACE, which reacts fast with ozone, Fe(III) did not affect the removal rate. With regard to ECs mineralization, similar TOC conversion was observed for both Fe(III)/O The Fe(III)/H The mechanism on photoinduced oxidation of organic compounds mediated by TiO The ozone molecule is able to accept electrons from the surface of TiO In this work TiO The results discussed above confirm the synergistic effect when combining some oxidizing systems. This effect was specially observed in terms of ECs mineralization. For instance, single ozonation and Fe(III)/hν did not lead to significant mineralization while their simultaneous application allowed a high TOC removal. The quantification of the synergy in terms of ECs degradation rates, ECs mineralization degree and ozone consumption is summarized in In As observed in Regarding SI for the pseudo-first order degradation rate constant of ACE, MTP and TST removal, photolytic ozonation (at pH 3 and 7) and Fe(III)-photocatalytic ozonation (at pH 3) enhanced the compounds degradation rate considerably. However, SI was found to be around 1 for both photo-Fenton (at pH 3) and TiO With respect to SI for ozone consumption, Efficient use of ozone is a key factor in ozonation systems as it reduces operational costs. According to our experimental results, the simultaneous application of ozonation and other AOPs leads to a positive impact in terms of ozone requirements for ECs mineralization. Determination of ozone mass transfer rate to the water phase where ozone reacts with the organic matter can be accomplished by first applying an ozone mass balance in the water. For the semicontinuous perfectly mixed photoreactor used in this work, the ozone mass balance can be expressed as follows: The slope of each curve, defined here as Different inorganic species present in wastewater may affect AOP removal rates. Thus, the effect of the presence of inorganic compounds in the aqueous matrix, such as nitrate, phosphate, chloride, carbonate and sulfate ions was also studied. These species were added to the aqueous solution at concentration levels commonly found in WWTP effluents  Similar comments can be applied to the Fe(III)/H Finally, a kinetic evaluation of the ECs mineralization processes was carried out. The kinetic studies of the AOP systems have been classified here according to the pH of water (3 or 7) and focuses on TOC removal since the AOPs involve many different reactions, most of them with the participation of free radical entities and intermediate compounds of different nature, with mass transfer and chemical steps. First, the mass balance equation corresponding to the reactor used has to be known. This largely depends on the type of flow the water has through the reactor. In this work, given the turbulent flow regime and the recirculation flow, perfect mixing has been assumed. On the other hand, whether or not ozone was fed, a non-stationary regimen holds (batch or semi-batch CPC photoreactor) so that the mass balance of TOC (as surrogate parameter that undergoes reaction) is: The AOP processes applied at pH 3 were Fe(III)/hν, Fe(III)/H For Fe(III)/hν system the concentration of hydroxyl radicals, In the Fe(III)/H For ozone systems, Eq. For a second order irreversible reaction between a gaseous compound A and the liquid compound B, Ha is defined as follows: Eq. In these systems, Eq. In Fe(III)/O Only iron-free ozonation systems were studied at pH 7, that is, O With regard to the TiO In The following conclusions reached in this work were: Solar photolysis and photocatalytic oxidation using Fe(III) are not effective for the complete removal of the selected contaminants. However, the use of H Although the application of single ozonation can lead to the complete removal of the ECs, it does not lead to a significant mineralization. On the other hand, the application of ozonation and solar irradiation leads to an improvement of the mineralization degree. The joint application of ozonation and photocatalysis has a synergistic effect, which is shown by the increases in the initial degradation and mineralization rates and the decrease in the ozone consumption. In the ozone-based AOPs systems, ECs mineralization takes place in the slow kinetic regime, which means that the indirect oxidation by hydroxyl radical is an important contribution to the overall degradation process. The adjustment of experimental data to apparent pseudo-first order reaction models allows TOC conversion kinetics to be simulated for the AOPs applied. Also, contribution of ozone processes to mineralization can also be estimated. Authors thank the financial support received from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 