The present work deals with a study of an innovative method for processing Egyptian monazite by alkaline leaching in ball mill autoclaves, where grinding and leaching of monazite take place simultaneously. This was followed by selective separation of thorium and uranium from lanthanides by autoclave leaching of the hydroxide cake obtained with ammonium carbonate–bicarbonate solutions. This method was based on the fact that thorium and uranium form soluble carbonate complexes with ammonium carbonate while lanthanides form sparingly soluble double carbonates.
                  It was found that complete alkaline leaching of Egyptian monazite (99.8%) was attained at 150 and 175 °C within 2.5 and 1 h, respectively (satisfying favorable conditions of the hydroxide cake obtained for subsequent selective carbonate leaching). Monazite leaching was intensified and accelerated in ball mill autoclaves as a result of the grinding action of steel balls, removal of the hydroxide layer covering monazite grains and the continuous contact of fresh monazite surface with alkali solution.
                  The study of selective carbonate processing of the hydroxide cake with ammonium carbonate–bicarbonate solutions revealed that the process must be carried out in an autoclave under pressure. Complete thorium recovery (99.4%) with uranium recovery (94.7%) and their separation from the lanthanides were attained at 70–80 °C during 1–2 h. The extraction of lanthanides in carbonate solution was low and did not exceed 1.5–2%. On the contrary, at atmospheric pressure, the recovery of thorium was low 18.4% at 70 °C. This is due to the instability of ammonium thorium carbonate complex, ammonium carbonate and bicarbonate and their dissociation with the liberation of ammonia, carbon dioxide and water vapor.Monazite is the most important commercial source of thorium and lanthanides. Uranium is extracted from it as well as a by-product. Monazite occurs widespread as a common accessory mineral in pegmatites, granites and gneisses. It frequently occurs as a detrital mineral in placer deposits, principally in river and beach sands. Large commercial detrital deposits are found in Australia, USA, India, Brazil and Egypt. Monazite is associated with other heavy minerals such as ilmenite, magnetite, zircon, and rutile Egyptian workers Several methods are used for industrial processing of monazite to extract thorium, uranium and lanthanides Commercially, both acid and alkaline leaching are commonly used, but alkaline leaching of monazite is most preferable and widely used as it has many advantages. The most important of these advantages are the simultaneous removal of phosphorous during leaching, the production of useful by-product (sodium phosphate) as fertilizer and the regeneration of alkali. The hydroxide cake obtained from alkaline processing of monazite is leached with hydrochloric acid at 80 °C, then diluted with water. The separation of thorium and uranium from lanthanides is carried out by selective neutralization of solutions with ammonia or alkali up to pH=5.8–6. The result is nearly complete precipitation of thorium and uranium in the form of thorium concentrate, containing about 3% lanthanides. The present work is a study of an innovative method for processing Egyptian monazite with sodium hydroxide solutions in ball mill autoclaves, where grinding and leaching of monazite take place simultaneously. This is followed by selective separation of thorium and uranium from lanthanides by another autoclave leaching of the hydroxide cake (obtained from prior alkaline leaching) with ammonium carbonate–bicarbonate solutions. This method is based on the dissolution of thorium and uranium hydroxides in ammonium carbonate solution with the formation of ammonium thorium and uranyl carbonate complexes, while the lanthanide hydroxides form sparingly soluble double carbonates. The selective carbonate leaching of the hydroxide cake with ammonium carbonate solution is preferable to sodium carbonate, as the produced ammonium thorium and uranyl carbonate complexes have low stability with respect to the more stable corresponding sodium compounds and they intensively decompose on heating at low temperature. The process of decomposition of these ammonium complexes may be simply applied in industry by passing steam through carbonate solutions. This leads to the production of thorium concentrate, containing thorium in the form of hydrated basic thorium carbonate and uranium in the form of hydrated uranium oxide This research was carried out using monazite concentrate separated from Egyptian black sands. The concentrate had a pale brown color. Experiments were carried out in stainless steel ball mill autoclaves of cylindrical shape with a volume of 250 ml. A number of autoclaves were mechanically rotated in an electric furnace by means of a roll mechanism as shown in A 50-g monazite concentrate at 87%—0.25+0.09 mm was charged into the autoclave without preliminary grinding with sodium hydroxide solution. After a predefined stirring period at a given temperature, the autoclave was cooled to room temperature. The pulp obtained after leaching was discharged from the autoclave into a beaker and diluted with hot water to a ratio S/L=1:4 to improve the solubility of sodium phosphate. The pulp was filtered under vacuum and the hydrated cake was washed with hot distilled water until complete removal of phosphate ions, evidenced by the ammonium molybdate test. The monazite leaching efficiency was determined by the dissolution of the hydroxide cake of thorium and lanthanides in 10% hydrochloric acid (amount: 250% of theoretical requirement) at 80 °C within 30 min in a beaker with electrical stirrer. The solution was filtered under vacuum and the insoluble residue was washed with dilute acid and then water. Filtrate and washed water were added together and analyzed for the total content of thorium and lanthanides and in some experiments for uranium content A given weight of the hydroxide cake was charged in the autoclave with ammonium carbonate solution and the theoretical requirement of ammonium bicarbonate for a time range of 0.5–3 h. The slurry obtained after leaching was discharged into a beaker and was diluted with 3% ammonium carbonate solution to avoid hydrolysis of the thorium and uranyl carbonate complexes. It was filtered under vacuum and the resulting double carbonate of lanthanides was washed with 3% ammonium carbonate solution. Filtrate and washing solution were combined and analyzed for thorium and lanthanides and in some experiments, for uranium as well Before starting the experiments of monazite processing, the vapor pressure over sodium hydroxide and ammonium carbonate solutions (containing ammonium bicarbonate) of different concentrations was measured at different temperatures, in a specially designed autoclave connected to a manometer. The processing of Egyptian monazite by alkaline leaching, followed by separation of thorium and uranium from lanthanides by selective carbonate leaching of the hydroxide cake with ammonium carbonate–bicarbonate solutions is based on the following chemical reactions: The chemical reaction of alkaline processing of monazite may be represented as: Thorium and uranyl hydroxides are soluble in ammonium carbonate solution in the form of ammonium–thorium and uranyl carbonate complexes, while lanthanide hydroxides form sparingly soluble ammonium–lanthanide double carbonates The reactions for selective carbonate leaching of the hydroxide cake (produced from alkaline leaching of monazite) may be represented as: The mineralogical and chemical compositions of the studied monazite sample are given in The vapor pressure data obtained over sodium hydroxide solutions of different concentrations at different temperatures are shown in The corresponding results for ammonium carbonate solutions (containing the theoretical requirement of ammonium bicarbonate) are shown in  (1) The leaching efficiency of monazite increases with increasing temperature from 125 up to 225 °C. Between 150 and 225 °C, maximum leaching is attained after 2 h, beyond which leaching rate is independent of temperature for the next 3 h. (2) At 6-, 8- and 10-h leaching, there is a gradual increase in leaching efficiency up to 150 °C. Then, it decreases at different rates with a rise in temperature. The higher the temperature, the greater the decrease in leaching efficiency. The increase of leaching efficiency of monazite with temperature during 2–4 h is due to the increase of vapor pressure over the pulp (at 125, 150, 175 and 200 °C, the vapor pressure is 1.25, 3.2, 5.6 and 10 kg/cm (3) At 175 °C, complete leaching of monazite is attained within 2 h and remains unchanged up to 5 h. At longer time than 5 h, there is a gradual and small decrease of leaching efficiency. (4) At 200 and 225 °C, complete leaching of monazite is attained during the first 2 h. After 4 h, the leaching efficiency decreases with time. The decrease is very large for higher temperature and longer time of leaching (62.3% at 225 °C). The decrease of leaching efficiency after reaching maximum may be due to the partial dehydration of the resulted hydroxides of thorium and lanthanides or the formation of the corresponding sparingly soluble complex phosphates of indefinite composition From these data, it is concluded that complete leaching of monazite (99.8%) is attained at 150 and 175 °C during 2.5 and 2 h, respectively. The selection of the leaching temperature depends an the condition of the produced hydroxide cake and its next processing step with ammonium carbonate solution. Carbonate leaching of the hydroxide cake was studied under atmospheric pressure using a reflux condenser and in an autoclave at 70 °C for an hour each. As shown in The high recovery of thorium in the autoclave is due to the low rate of dissociation of ammonium carbonate under pressure of carbon dioxide, ammonia and water vapors. This leads to enhanced stability of the ammonium thorium carbonate complex in the presence of the excess of ammonium carbonate. On the contrary, at atmospheric pressure, the ammonium thorium carbonate complex is unstable and dissociates rapidly due to the ammonium carbonate deficiency (as a result of its decomposition). Also, the dissociation of thorium carbonate complex may be accelerated in the presence of lanthanide hydroxides and double carbonates. Ammonium thorium pentacarbonate is thermally unstable and quickly decomposes in air with the liberation of ammonia, carbon dioxide and water The recovery of lanthanides in solution was low under atmospheric and autoclave conditions (1.4–2.3%). The carbonate solutions had a yellow color, which changed after sometime to reddish brown. This is due to the presence of ferric carbonate complexes. The hydroxide cake obtained from alkaline processing of monazite at different temperatures 150, 175, 200, 225 and 250 °C was leached with 30% ammonium carbonate solution (containing 250% theoretical requirement of ammonium carbonate and the theoretical amount of ammonium bicarbonate) at 70 °C for 1 h.  The recovery of RE in carbonate solution was very low (average 2.5%) and independent of the temperature of alkaline processing of monazite. To determine the optimum amount of ammonium carbonate at which complete recovery of thorium is attained, a series of experiments were carried out at 70 and 80 °C for an hour, each using 30% solution strength of different amounts of ammonium carbonate. The effect of temperature and time on the selective carbonate leaching of hydroxide cake was investigated using 30% ammonium carbonate solution containing 250% stoichiometric requirement. From the results obtained (1) The recovery of thorium sharply increases with temperature up to 50 °C, then gradually increases up to 70 °C. At temperatures higher than 70 °C, the efficiencies decrease and the rate depends on the temperature and retention times. (2) The increase of thorium recovery with the rise of temperature up to 80 °C is due to the increase of vapor pressure over the pulp (3) The decrease of thorium recovery with temperature above 80 °C and longer time is due to the intensive dissociation of ammonium carbonate and bicarbonate and the instability of the resulting thorium carbonate complex and its dissociation at different rates depending on the temperature and time.  (4) The recovery of lanthanides in carbonate solution was low at all temperatures and times and did not exceed 2.5%. (5) The highest recovery of thorium (99.9%) was attained at 70–80 °C within 1–2 h. The recovery of lanthanides was very low and did not exceed 2.5%. The behavior of uranium was studied under these conditions and 94.7% recovery was attained. This result is probably due to the fact that some uranium remains in an adsorbed state in the double carbonates of lanthanides. The study of the laboratory processing of Egyptian monazite (by its alkaline leaching followed by selective separation of thorium and uranium from lanthanides by ammonium carbonate method) revealed the following conclusions. (1) In general, the leaching efficiency of monazite with alkali increased with temperature during the first 4 h, beyond which it decreased at different rates, depending on the temperature and retention time. The higher the temperature and the longer the retention time, the larger the decrease (62.3% at 225 °C and 10 h). (2) It was found that complete alkaline leaching of monazite (99.8%) (satisfying favorable conditions of the hydroxide cake obtained for subsequent selective carbonate leaching) could be attained at 150 and 175 °C within 2.5 and 2 h, respectively. (3) The high leaching efficiency of monazite in ball mill autoclaves was due to the grinding action of the steel balls that caused continuous removal of hydroxide product from reacting particle surfaces. This leads to the exposing of fresh monazite particle surfaces to the alkaline leach solution. (4) The study of selective carbonate processing of the hydroxide cake with ammonium carbonate–bicarbonate solutions revealed that the process must be carried out in an autoclave under 6.5–10 atm pressure. Complete thorium recovery (99.4%) and 94.7% uranium recovery and separation from the lanthanides were attained at 70–80 °C within 1–2 h. The extraction of lanthanides was low and did not exceed 1.5–2.5%. At atmospheric pressure, the recovery of thorium was low (18.4% at 70 °C). This is due to the dissociation of thorium carbonate complex in the presence of a deficient amount of ammonium carbonate as a result of its dissociation and liberation of ammonia, carbon dioxide and water. Also, the dissociation of thorium carbonate complex is accelerated in the presence of the hydroxides and double carbonates of lanthanides. (5) The main advantages of the present technological processing of Egyptian monazite can be summarized as: No preliminary grinding of monazite concentrate is required. Grinding and leaching of monazite can be combined together in one process. Cheap and common reagents (sodium hydroxide, ammonium carbonate and bicarbonate) can be used in the leaching and these can be regenerated. Relatively low temperature requirements for alkaline leaching (150 °C), and selective carbonate processing (70–80 °C) and moderate time.