Combined recording of masticatory muscle activity and jaw movement patterns during eating was used to examine the process of food breakdown in the mouth for a series of “Rich Tea”-type biscuits in 19 ordinary consumers. These data indicated an initial increase in chewing work from the masticatory muscles over the first 5–10 chews followed by a decline over the remainder of the chewing sequence. The work was concentrated in vertical closing of the jaw during the early chews but as this declined over the later chews there was an increase in the amount of work occurring with the teeth in near occlusion. The relative amount of work input into the chewing sequence, the duration of the sequence, and the degree of work undertaken at occlusion, differed among groups of the consumers who were classified according to their chewing efficiency (CE). Subjects from different CE groups appeared to have different understandings of the textural characteristics of the samples which they assessed as “hardness”, “crunchiness” and “crumbliness”. Differences in the oral breakdown patterns for different CE groups may provide an understanding of differences in consumer preferences for the samples. ©The relative affluence and sophistication of consumers in the developed world, their demand for novelty and variety, and the benefits to the food industry arising from satisfying these consumer demands, have resulted in a need for greater efficiency in product development and more stringent quality control. Greater efficiency will be gained from a clearer understanding of the factors which underlie food acceptability and preference, while quality control should incorporate measurement of factors which are relevant to consumer concepts of quality. The importance of these factors is becoming more widely recognised ( The last 30–40 years has seen a marked change in our attitude to food, both from the point of view of food scientists, and as consumers in our own right. Concentration on food composition, in terms of macronutrients and a limited number of vitamins and minerals, has given way to interest in a wide range of specific components and non-nutrients which are physically or physiologically active in maintaining function at the organism or cellular level. The predominant perception of food as sustenance has given way to it being viewed and portrayed for its hedonic value and/or its benefits for health and vitality. The availability of new processes and technologies to the wholesaler, retailer, manufacturer, and in the kitchen, has transformed food from a basic commodity, limited in terms of geography, season, culture, and technology, to a source of basic components which can be reconstructed to provide endless variations. But the purpose of foods is to be eaten, and with the ability now to “construct” foods to match set criteria, it is essential to consider not only their nutritional and health functions, but also their appeal to the consumer in being acceptable, and also desirable. Competitive advantage will be obtained by being able to predict a highly desired product during development. What makes some foods desirable and others not? This can be broken down broadly into two factors, context factors and sensory factors, and we will deal only with the latter. The relationship between consumer preference and individual sensory characteristics of foods (sweetness, firmness, thickness) usually exhibits an inverse U shape. However, the peak of the curve differs for different food types (firmness of biscuit compared with peach, for example). Even within a single food type, for example cake, the preferred firmness may vary—the preferred firmness of a fudge brownie is very different from that of a fat-less sponge cake. Product development may involve optimisation of a number of sensory characteristics with little understanding of why certain combinations are seen as desirable and others not. The situation is clearly complicated by the fact that all consumers do not like or dislike the same products ( The samples and subjects used in the mastication/sensory part of this study have been described in detail in “Rich Tea” type biscuits were supplied by United Biscuits Ltd., UK. Samples comprised a single product in which the formulation was altered to create textural differences by modification of flour type and additives. These samples all exhibited the same outward appearance (overall shape, size, logo etc.) yet differed in their mechanical and sensory properties. Prior to each session 2 samples (sample 1 and 10) were “softened” slightly by leaving them in a moist atmosphere for 1 h prior to testing. In all, 10 different samples were examined, they were presented to the subjects as pre-cut quarter circles. Twenty seven subjects were recruited into the study and gave their informed consent to participate in the study. The study was approved by the Institute's Ethics Committee. Of the 27 subjects, 23 completed an initial sensory study on the biscuits and 19 of these completed the mastication recording (13 female, 6 male, age range 18–44 years, mean age 26). Subjects were paid for participating. The subjects attended 10 sessions in all, as described in Brown et al. (1998b). The first 2 sessions were used for training to familiarise the subjects with the sensory procedures for profiling,and the samples, and to undertake measurement of chewing efficiency (see below). In the following 3 sessions the subjects assessed the “hardness”, “crunchiness” and “crumbliness” of the biscuits using 10 cm line scales on a computer screen. The samples were presented in a balanced block design to the subjects within a session and across the 3 experimental sessions to counter the effects due to the order of sample presentation. After completion of these sensory sessions, all 19 subjects attended 2 further training sessions during which they were asked to monitor the “wetness of the sample” continuously during the mastication sequence using the Time Intensity (TI) procedure. This involved them recording their assessments on a 10 cm line scale presented on a computer screen. The subjects were asked to start the recording by clicking the mouse button as they placed the sample in the mouth and then to move the cursor along the line to indicate how the wetness of the sample changed throughout the chewing sequence, and finally to bring the cursor back to the left end of the scale as they swallowed the sample. All instructions were displayed on-screen during these sessions. These preliminary sessions were undertaken without recording their chewing patterns in order to familiarise the subjects with the TI procedure. The subjects were subsequently asked to record their Time Intensity (TI) assessments of “wetness of the sample” during the mastication part of the study which followed. Chewing patterns were recorded from all subjects as they attended 3 individual sessions during which they ate and assessed the 10 biscuits using TI. They were prepared for the recording of jaw movement (KI), and for electromyography (EMG) from the masseter and temporalis muscles as described in Chewing efficiency was determined for each subject using 2 food products, chewing gum and almonds as described in A separate group of 50 ordinary consumers (age range 18–67, mean 39) scored their preference for each of the 10 samples. Subjects attended only one session and were given no directives with regard to assessment. None of these subjects were members of the consumer sensory panel. They were paid for participating.  From each EMG/KI record a number of parameters were computed for each chew within the chewing sequence from which were calculated the total chew time (ChewT), number of chews (Chews), chew rate (ChewR), total chew work (CW—equal to the sum of the areas under each of the activity bursts within the sequence) and overall chew work rate (CWR) as described previously ( Within each chew the work was divided into that occurring during vertical closing of the jaw and horizontal gliding at the end of the chew stroke as described in Brown et al. (1998a). These aspects of chew work were also represented as that occurring over the whole sequence (CWVert, or CWHoriz) and for the first 5, next 5 and last 5 chews separately (i.e. F5CWVert, N5CWVert etc.). All the work parameters were calculated from the appropriate areas under the EMG curve for each chew, and normalised relative to the work rate for chewing gum for each subject/session (as per From the TI records the time of initial perception (Tini), of maximum intensity perception (Tmax) and of extinction of perception (Tend—equal to time of swallowing) were calculated in addition to the maximum intensity (Imax) of “wetness of the sample”. These values were calculated from a time zero indicated by the start of the first burst of EMG activity, i.e. the start of the first chew. The Time Intensity results will be discussed in more detail in a separate paper. An internal preference map was prepared from the preference data using the method of Chewing efficiency data indicated a range of median particle sizes for the expirated nuts of 1.24 to 1.59 mm with a mean value of 1.41 mm. For chewing gum the percentage weight loss after 100 chews ranged from 17.1 to 40.3 with a mean of 28%. The subjects were separated into chewing efficiency groups according to their efficiency with gum and nuts relative to the mean values for the whole group. This provided 4 chewing efficiency groups as indicated in Mean values for aspects of the chewing patterns across all the biscuit samples were calculated for each CE group individually to provide an indication of the basic patterns used by each group (  The way that the work of a chew was devoted to different portions of the jaw closing movement is shown in The TI parameters were extracted from each chewing record. Full analysis of these data is the subject of another paper which discusses the between-sample differences found, only one aspect of the TI curves, Tini, will be discussed here by virtue of its importance to the dynamics of oral breakdown of the samples. Mean values for the initial perception of “wetness of the sample” are shown in  There were strong significant relationships between the “hardness” and “crunchiness” (positive) and “hardness” and “crumbliness” (negative) of the samples, with a weaker but still significant negative correlation between “crumbliness” and “crunchiness”. However, Preference scores for the 10 samples from the preference panel are represented as an internal preference map in  The dynamic process by which a series of biscuits samples was broken down by a randomly selected group of ordinary consumers has been revealed by analysis of data obtained using a combination of EMG of the masticatory muscles, and jaw movement tracking. How this process compares to those for other common foods is described in Brown et al. (1998a). This study examined how the basic process for biscuits differs between individuals, with an attempt at relating these differences to the texture of the samples as perceived by the individuals, and the diversity of consumer preferences among the samples. For this purpose the subjects were classified by their efficiency in mastication of a brittle product, almond, and an elastic product, chewing gum. Although a subject's chewing efficiency may change over time as a result of changes in dentition, salivation rates (as a result of medication for example) etc., these results refer to the subjects' assessments and mastication patterns in relation to their chewing efficiencies at the time of the study, and represent the results of a random set of ordinary consumers. Oral breakdown of the samples was characterised by an increase in the effort devoted to successive chews over the beginning of the chewing sequence with a subsequent decline in effort. This was associated with parallel changes in the amount of effort devoted to the vertical penetration phase of jaw closing, but with an increase in effort devoted to the horizontal phase of jaw movement at the end of the chew stroke. Subjects within the different CE groups differed with respect to the time course over which the changes occurred, the relative amounts of work input to the process, and the degree of transfer of effort to the horizontal phase. It may be possible to understand the differences between the CE groups on the basis of knowledge about their oral breakdown of other products—almonds and chewing gum, and an assumption that oral breakdown of biscuits requires both size reduction (comminution) and creation of a cohesive, lubricated mass (moistening). CE groups 1 and 3 exhibited low efficiency for almonds, indicating a relative inability to comminute or grind down a solid sample. Thus over the course of several chews at the start of the chewing sequence these subjects may be expected to have generated a small number of large fragments compared to larger numbers of smaller fragments for subjects within groups 2 and 4 (high efficiency for almonds). Nevertheless the comparatively low total surface area created would become sufficiently moistened with saliva to allow swallowing more quickly than the larger surface area yielded by groups 2 and 4. This may account for the shorter chewing sequences for the CE groups 1 and 3. CE groups 3 and 4 exhibited high efficiency for chewing gum, indicating greater ability to manipulate and knead the gum, and possibly a greater saliva flow, in order to more effectively extract sucrose from the gum base. The combination of slow comminution rate and high salivation rate proposed for CE group 3 may underlie the shortest chewing times shown by this group, whilst the higher gum efficiency of group 4 relative to group 2 (both groups having high efficiency for almonds) may underlie the shorter chewing sequence for group 4 relative to 2. Under these criteria group 2 would appear to be the least well equipped to deal effectively with oral breakdown of a dry brittle product such as biscuit since they would be proposed to quickly generate a plethora of small biscuit fragments without the means to moisten and mould them back into a bolus for swallowing, and may in fact be conscious of a marked mouth-drying effect as the biscuit particles rapidly absorb saliva from the oral cavity. The above analysis is supported by the time intensity results relating to wetting of the samples during eating. Despite the fact that both CE groups 1 and 3 chewed for short times, group 3 recorded significantly earlier first perceptions of sample wetting than group 1, which could be attributed to greater salivation within group 3. Moreover groups 2 and 4 might be hypothesised to fragment the samples at similar rates, the longer chewing times given by group 2 may therefore be attributed to the slower salivation rate for this group which is reflected in the later perceptions of initial wetting of the samples. It is a common finding that chewing patterns for a particular product differ widely among individuals. Clearly the changes which were wrought in the biscuits during mastication were not the same for all the subjects in the study. These changes appear to be determined to some extent by anatomical, physiological and neurophysiological factors which are highly individualistic. Nevertheless, in this study all the subjects appeared to have the same appreciation of the sample differences (no significant sample×CE group interaction for any of the sensory characteristics examined). Since the sensory feedback the subjects received during the oral breakdown process would reflect the temporal changes in sample consistency, the specific feedback would differ between subjects. The fact that subjects achieved a level of agreement in their sensory analysis of the samples suggests that experience and communication are major factors in the development of our awareness of food texture, and that we learn to identify sensory cues which reflect commonly stated descriptions of food products, although the specific cues used may be different for different individuals. Much more work is necessary in this area in order to more fully understand what these cues are, and how they combine to provide our concepts of food texture. Nevertheless such differences may contribute to inconsistencies found between individuals in their appreciation of the texture of products, and may be more noticeable when comparing products which differ more markedly, or in more dimensions, than those used in this study. The preference study was performed on only a relatively small number of subjects (50), and consequently care must be taken not to over interpret the data. The preference map indicated a consistent dislike of the softened samples. However subjects differed markedly in their relative liking of the other 8 samples. The preference scores were not tightly linked with any of the sensory attributes usually used by consumers to describe this type of biscuit, in agreement with the generally acknowledged bimodal relationship between preference and single texture (sensory) attributes. However subjects differed in the level of each attribute which they most preferred. The chewing sequence appeared to be determined principally by the hardness of the sample in terms of duration and level of work required for mastication, and these factors were unrelated to preference. In contrast, chew rate was independent of these mastication parameters and correlated significantly with preference, although its location on the preference map [ It might be simplistic to suggest that individuals chew faster those samples which they find easiest to comminute, moisten and manipulate, and that they prefer such samples. Nevertheless the foregoing discussion has highlighted differences in oral breakdown patterns between subjects who exhibit different relative chewing efficiencies. It is, therefore, likely that these subjects will differ in the samples which they find easiest to manage, and indeed the location on the preference map of chew rate for each of the CE groups identified in this study provides evidence for this (  The oral breakdown path for biscuits differed between consumers and was related to subjects' chewing efficiencies with almonds and chewing gum. The breakdown path may be determined by the mechanical actions employed (as a consequence of muscle strength, facial morphology, dentition), and physiological responses (especially salivation), during mastication. Subjects arrived at similar sensory judgements of specific texture attributes but different relationships between attributes, and may use different markers to assess particular texture attributes. Preference may be a function of the relative ease of oral breakdown of a sample, and differences in preferences among consumers may be due to them finding different samples easier to manage orally. The authors would like to thank Ian Wakeling and Lloyd Vallis for assistance with statistical analysis of the data. This work was supported by funds from the BBSRC and the European Commission (Project number AIR3-CT92-0925).