The effect of ultrasonication on the precipitation of zinc hydroxide, as well as the separation of zinc hydroxide and gypsum precipitates by use of dissolved air flotation are considered in this paper. Both ultrasonic treatment and the addition of carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) resulted in flocculation of the zinc hydroxide formed during precipitation. The best flotation results could be obtained by using the CMC during precipitation of the hydroxides, followed by ultrasonic conditioning prior to flotation. Apart from flocculating the zinc hydroxide particles, expediting precipitation and enhancing reagent adsorption, ultrasonic treatment also promoted the mechanical removal of the zinc hydroxide from the surfaces of the gypsum particles.Considerable quantities of effluent polluted with heavy metals are produced by metal finishing and plating facilities, mine drainage, etc. These effluents are often are severely acidified owing to the use of large volumes of sulphuric acid in the process (such as in electrolytic plating or pyrite oxidation). The standard method for treatment of acidified wastewaters containing heavy metals is chemical precipitation after coagulation and flocculation. Hydroxide precipitation, using either sodium hydroxide or hydrated lime is commonly used for this purpose. During precipitation with hydrated lime, large quantities of gypsum are typically formed and co-precipitated with the heavy metals. With increased outputs of precipitated solids resulting from this approach to the treatment of wastewater, further steps towards disposal of the solids are usually necessary. This could include use of the solids with a high gypsum content as construction materials, or recycling and disposal in some other way. Unfortunately, contamination of the gypsum with concentrated heavy metals can limit these approaches considerably, so that separation of the heavy metal hydroxides from the gypsum also needs to be considered. This can be done by flotation and several successful applications have been reported in this context in recent years ( In this paper, the use of ultrasonically assisted dissolved air flotation for the removal of zinc from hydroxide precipitates is consequently considered. It is well known that irradiation of liquid with high intensity ultrasound produces the phenomena of cavitation and microstreaming, generating flow associated with sharp velocity gradients. This produces a variety of effects in fluids and solid–liquid interfaces, such as erosion, depassivation, emulsification, the production of radical and excited species, etc., depending on the particular system ( The sulphuric zinc solution was synthesized using zinc sulphate (AR) and sulphuric acid containing 1×10 The experimental work was split into separate two parts, viz. precipitation in a jar, followed by ultrasonic treatment, and ultrasonic preconditioning in a jar, followed by column flotation. All experimental runs were duplicated. The precipitation tests were carried out in 250 ml beakers with magnetic stirring or ultrasonic treatment. In order to evaluate the ultrasonic effects on the precipitates, the same alkaline dosage was used for every 100 ml of synthesized sulphuric zinc suspensions and the pH probe (PHM 82 Standard pH Meter) was immediately inserted into the suspensions immediately thereafter. The time required for the pH of the suspensions to stabilize was recorded. After standing overnight, the suspensions of the pH were measured and the residual Zn The experimental set-up is shown diagrammatically in The flotation tests were performed in a laboratory scale dissolved air flotation column with a net capacity of 200 ml of precipitate suspension. The compressed air was introduced at the bottom of the column at the a rate of 3–4 ml/min for 5–6 min. The floated concentrate was allowed to overflow from the side outlet on the top part of the column into a 250 ml collecting beaker. After flotation, the concentrates and tailings were filtered separately with double-layered Whatman no. 45 filter paper. In order to prevent the loss of zinc hydroxide owing to a change in pH during flotation and filtration, distilled water conditioned with NaOH to maintain the same pH value as the precipitate suspensions was used to supplement the water used in flotation and the washing water of the filtration cake. The filtration cakes were repeatedly washed to get rid of any dissolved Ca and Zn species that might have influenced the grades of the flotation products. The filtrated cakes were dissolved with 1:1 HCl (AR) and diluted with distilled water to 500–1000 ml. The diluted samples were assayed on Zn and Ca content with atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The separation index of the flotation was evaluated based on the recovery of Zn in the concentrates or the Ca recovery in the tailings. Scanning electron microscopy (Topcon ABT-60) was used to examine the morphology of the colloidal particles in the precipitates arising from different experimental conditions. The overnight suspension was shaken and ≈1 ml was drawn off with a small pipette. A drop was then put onto a glass slide and allowed to dry in air at room temperature in a dust-free cupboard. In order to enhance the SEM images, a thin coating of gold was applied to the surface of the sample by sputter coating under vacuum. This is a routine technique for depositing a layer of gold a few atoms thick on the sample’s surface. At magnifications of 10,000 or 20,000 times, this makes little difference to the topography of the sample, but gives a significantly better image. With hydroxide precipitation, a given heavy metal is removed from solution by adding basic agents such as NaOH and Ca(OH) For example, zinc has its minimum solubility in water at 25 °C at a pH of approximately 9.4 (  The effect of ultrasonication on the stabilization of the pH, residual Zn concentrations and the percentage Ca precipitation (precipitated Ca/total Ca added) in the solution are shown in  Precipitation in the sulphuric zinc solution with CaO powder proceeded as follows. First, hydrolysis of CaO powder (neutralizing the acid) generated hydroxides ions, followed by the nucleation and growth of gypsum crystals, as well as zinc hydroxides. Approximately two-thirds of the added CaO was required to neutralize the solution. While nucleation of the zinc hydroxide could take place in the later stages of neutralization of the solution, growth of the crystals only proceeded significantly when excess CaO was added to the solution. Nucleation of the gypsum was substantially slower during neutralization, than afterwards with the addition of excess CaO, since the solubility of the gypsum is higher than that of zinc hydroxide. It is at the solid–liquid interface that the effects of ultrasound on the mass transfer of material, crystallisation, dispersion and dissolution of solids, the use of supported catalysts and heterogeneous synthesis take place. The cavitation bubbles in the forced oscillations associated with ultrasonication can be seen as chemical minireactors in which extreme conditions, such as corona discharges owing to bubble fragmentation or thermal heating owing to the implosion of cavities occur, especially during the collapse of the bubbles ( The increase in the kinetics of pH neutralization and the higher rate of Ca precipitation suggest that CaO hydrolysis and gypsum formation can be enhanced by ultrasonication. Likewise, the reduced concentrations of residual zinc resulting from ultrasonic treatment indicate that the formation of zinc hydroxide and precipitation can be improved by exposure to ultrasound. This can be attributed to the enhancement of liquid-mass transfer. The similar effects of CMC and ultrasonic treatment on precipitation suggest that they affect precipitation in a similar way, i.e. through the formation of an intermolecular bridge that expedites flocculation. The particles exhibited two different morphologies, viz. needle- or rod-like particles (mainly gypsum) and flocculate aggregates (mainly zinc hydroxide). The ultrasonic treatment and the presence of CMC influenced the spatial arrangement and association formulas of these two different morphological particles. This is evident from the SEM photographs in These results confirm that both ultrasonic treatment and the CMC had influenced the flocculation of the zinc hydroxide particles formed in the precipitation process. Furthermore, the results shown in In addition, the photographs in Flotation of the precipitates was investigated by adding 29 mg/l SLS to the slurry immediately after ultrasonication. That is a two-stage precipitation process at a pH of 9–10, with 2 mg/l CMC added before neutralization, followed by overnight stabilization and ultrasonication. As expected, the results in Considering the results portrayed in There are two aspects of ultrasound that are important in heterogeneous systems. The first is microstreaming, which creates turbulent flow and promotes mass transport. The second is acoustic cavitation, which produces high local temperatures of up to 5000 K and pressures of up to 100 MPa as a result of bubble implosion. Moreover, bubble collapse generates supersonic microjets of solvent, which impinge on particle surfaces and assist in the desorption of species adhering to these surfaces. In this investigation, ultrasonication speeded up hydrolysis and nucleation in the precipitation process, which probably improved flotation recovery by giving rise to higher concentrations of active sites for reagent adsorption during preconditioning prior to flotation. When industrial scale-up of processes associated with ultrasonics is considered, two issues need to be taken into account. These issues are the estimation of the acoustic energy required to achieve a particular effect on a large scale and the mechanisms by which this effect is achieved (  Both ultrasonic treatment and the presence of CMC promoted flocculation of the zinc hydroxide formed during the precipitation process. The best flotation results could be obtained by using the CMC during precipitation and applying ultrasonic conditioning before flotation. Apart from flocculation, increasing the rate of precipitation and enhancing reagent adsorption, ultrasonication could remove the zinc hydroxide particles mechanically from the surfaces of the gypsum via cleavage.