Distribution equilibria of approximately 0.01 mol dm−3 Ga(III), Cd(II), Fe(III), Zn(II), 0.1 mmol dm−3 Cu(II) and Pb(II) from 1–4 mol dm−3 HCl media were studied using the commercial trialkylamine ADOGEN 364 (ADG) dissolved in kerosene as extractant. Self-association of this extractant in the organic phase was taken into account when analyzing the extraction reactions. Numerical analysis of the data with the LETAGROP-DISTR program allowed the evaluation of the equilibrium constants of the proposed equilibria. The dependence of the extraction constant values with ionic strength was analyzed using the specific interaction theory (SIT) treatment, from which the interaction coefficients of Ga(III), Cd(II), Fe(III), Zn(II), Cu(II), and Pb(II) with chloride anion were estimated. Data previously obtained for HCl and In(III) extraction were also analyzed in this form. Results obtained on the stoichiometry of extracted complexes are consistent with similar published work.Chloride hydrometallurgy has been indicated to be a promising technology for recycling metallurgy, precious metals recovery and complex sulfide concentrate processing Due to the increasing demand for gallium in electronics, the recovery of Ga(III) from different primary and secondary sources is of great importance. Ga(III) is usually present in small amounts compared to similar metals (Al, Fe, Zn) since the main sources of gallium are the Bayer solutions of aluminum and the acid sulfate or chloride solutions from hydrometallurgical production of zinc In this work, the solvent extraction behavior of Ga(III) together with that of other metals (Cd(II), Fe(III), Zn(II), Cu(II), and Pb(II)) with ADG dissolved in kerosene from 1–4 mol dm ADG, kindly supplied by Witco, is a 50% mixture of C The analysis of metal ions present in the aqueous phases was carried out by flame atomic absorption spectrophotometry (F-AAS) using a Perkin Elmer 3100 Atomic Absorption Spectrometer. Instrumental conditions employed were those recommended by the operation manual. Equilibration of the aqueous and organic phases was carried out with a Burrell (Mod. 75) mechanical shaker. Equal volumes (10 mL) of the organic phase containing the amine dissolved in kerosene and the 1–4 mol dm Several extractant concentrations were used (2.5–25 mmol dm Experimental results are shown in The extraction of metal ions by ADG in kerosene may be described by The equilibrium constant of The total cation concentration in both phases is: The following expression is obtained for the distribution coefficient: This expression takes the form: It is worth noting that This free ADG concentration in the organic phase is related to the total ADG concentration through the mass balance equation: It is known Continuous lines in  The evaluation of log It is observed that the linear relationships in The use of mixed electrolyte solutions (HCl/MgCl The dependence of the percent of extraction with HCl concentration is shown in Liquid–liquid extraction of Ga(III), Cd(II), Fe(III), and Zn(II) (approximately 0.01 mol dm The authors wish to thank DGAPA (IN501897) and PADEP for financial support.