A magnetic fraction (15%) from a waste of foundry sand (WFS), composed of sand, carbon, bentonite clay and iron (10%) was modified by thermal treatment at 400, 600 and 800°C under inert atmosphere. Mössbauer analyses showed that the thermal treatment increased the amount of Fe3O4 from 25 to 55% by reduction of Fe2O3 and highly dispersed Fe3+ by the carbon present in the waste. The Fe3O4 caused a significant increase on the activity of two important reactions with application in environmental remediation: the Fenton oxidation of indigo carmine dye with H2O2 and the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III). The magnetic fraction of WFS was also mixed with hematite (Fe2O3) and thermally treated at 400, 600 and 800°C. This treatment produced large amounts of surface Fe3O4 and increased substantially the rate of Fenton reaction as well as Cr(VI) reduction. This reactivity combined with the presence of carbon (an adsorbent for organic contaminants), bentonite clay (an adsorbent for metallic contaminants) and the granulometry/packing/hydrodynamic features make WFS a promising material for use in reactive permeable barriers.Waste foundry sand (WFS) is produced in large amounts in different parts of the world. Although this waste represents a significant problem for the foundry industry, only few studies have been carried out to address its reuse potential. For example, WFS has been investigated as aggregate in asphalt mix, in concrete production and in agriculture Permeable reactive barriers (PRB) have been investigated to treat groundwater contamination for the last 20 years. PRB should combine a reactive material with appropriate physical/hydrodynamic properties to allow contaminant removal and fluid transportation. Several reactive materials have been investigated In this context, waste sands from the iron foundry industry (WFS) show several interesting features for application in PRB, e.g. (i) composition based on harmless materials, e.g. silica sand, clay binder, carbon and residual iron particles; (ii) only Brazilian industries generate, per year, ca. 2 millions t of this waste and (iii) WFS contains sands with specific size, as required by PBRs composition. In this work, a new approach is used to convert the iron rich magnetic fraction of WFS into a versatile material suitable for different environmental applications. In this approach, the magnetic iron rich fraction of the WFS is thermally treated and the carbon present in the waste reduces the different iron species to form active reducing iron phases (Eq. Two different environmental applications for the reduced WFS have been investigated, i.e. the heterogeneous Fenton reaction and the reduction of Cr(VI). The classical Fenton reagent (a mixture of Fe The development of an active heterogeneous system to promote the Fenton chemistry is of considerable interest since it could offer some advantages over the classical homogeneous Fenton reaction, such as no sludge formation, operation at near neutral pH and the possibility to recycle the iron promoter. In previous works, we have demonstrated that the combination of Fe Some works in the literature have suggested the use of H Iron reduced phases, e.g. Fe The waste of foundry sand (TEKSID, Brazil) was separated magnetically and only the magnetic fraction (15 The transmission Mössbauer spectroscopy experiments were carried out in a CMTE spectrometer model MA250 with a The adsorption tests were performed with 10 The hydrogen peroxide (synth) decomposition was carried out with 7 Cr(VI) reduction was performed using a 10 In the foundry process silica (sand), coal and bentonite clay are mixed to produce the green sand which is used to mold the molten metal ( The SEM images for the raw materials, the green sand and the WFS are shown in It can be observed that particle size ranges from 100 to 800 Coal and bentonite show relatively high surface areas in contrast to the low surface area of silica ( Mössbauer analysis of the WFS ( In order to increase the amount of reduced Fe phases, i.e. Fe The Fe phase compositions obtained from the relative Mössbauer spectral areas are shown in After treatment at 400 Upon treatment at 600 After treatment at 800 For all samples, Mössbauer suggested the presence of a Fe silicate phase Fe Another approach to increase the concentration of reduced Fe phases in the material is to mix the magnetic WFS with hematite followed by thermal treatment. The added Fe The mixture of 20% Fe The thermally treated WFSs were used to promote hydrogen peroxide decomposition to water and oxygen. The hydrogen peroxide decomposition is a versatile probe reaction and can be used to investigate the activity of heterogeneous systems towards Fenton chemistry. The obtained results for peroxide decomposition in the presence of the reduced materials are shown in WFS showed no activity for peroxide decomposition. After treatment at 400 The oxidation reactions were carried out using the indigo carmine dye (IC) and H The oxidation of the IC dye was monitored by its discoloration which is related to the first oxidation steps to produce non-colored intermediates. TOC (Total Organic Carbon) measurements were also carried out to obtain information on the mineralization process (Eq. The discoloration of IC solutions with H WFS does not promote the IC discoloration with H Plot of ln The two parameters, i.e. The effect of thermal treatment on the reactivity of WFS towards Fenton chemistry can be discussed in terms of the iron species present and their availability for surface reactions. Although the non-treated WFS showed considerable concentration of reduced phases, such as Fe Thermally treated WFS materials were also used for the reduction of chromate in aqueous medium. The obtained results are shown in The non treated WFS did not show any activity for Cr(VI) reduction, likely due to the non exposure of the reduced Fe phases, Fe Previous works Although the WFS treated at 600 The materials based on the treated WFS/Fe Reactions using an equivalent amount of commercial Fe The waste of foundry sand can be modified by two simple processes, i.e. thermal treatment or by mixing with Fe Moreover, foundry waste sand shows several interesting features for application in permeable reactive barriers: (i) it is non hazardous waste produced in big quantities (ii) it shows a very regular granulometry compatible with permeable reactive barriers which allows good hydrodynamic characteristics, (iii) the carbon particles can adsorb different organic and inorganic contaminants and (iv) the bentonite clay can adsorb different cationic contaminants by an exchange mechanism. We are currently carrying out experiments in columns to simulate the hydrodynamics of PRB to access the real potential of modified WFS for leachate decontamination. The authors are grateful to CAPES, CNPq, FAPEMIG and Teksid do Brasil. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 