There is extension of the Kocher-Langenbeck approach using trochanteric osteotomy for posterior wall fracture extending to acetabular roof, but it exposes to complications such as nonunion, breakage, and heterotopic ossification. The current study introduces a submuscular sliding plate technique. We retrospectively analyzed 13 patients treated with this technique. It is based on conventional method for posterior wall fracture. After reduction of roof fragment with direct visualization, a pre-contoured plate was passed through a submuscular tunnel under the gluteus medius and minimus. A small split incision was performed on the muscles, and screws were inserted with a triple trocar complex safely under fluoroscopic imaging. All patients had fracture union without complications. X-rays results showed anatomical reduction in 10 cases and imperfect reduction in 3 cases. Our results were satisfactory, particularly without heterotopic ossifications despite no prophylactic regimen of NSAID was applied and no neurological complications, so we believe that this technique is a good option for posterior wall fractures extending to the acetabular roof.Posterior wall fractures are the most common type of acetabular fractures, accounting for approximately 35–47% of such fractures The optimal treatment for displaced posterior wall acetabular fractures is surgery, and various fixation methods such as reconstruction plates and spring plates have been introduced. Kocher-Langenbeck approach is standard for posterior wall fracture, but there is a limit to access acetabular roof This study introduces the submuscular sliding plate technique (SSPT) for posterior acetabular wall fractures extending to the acetabular roof without flip osteotomy to avoid related complications and to minimize damage to the gluteus medius and minimus muscles. The patient was positioned in the lateral decubitus position on a radiolucent operating table that allowed easy access of the C-arm image intensifier. The incision is basically same to Kocher-Langenbeck approach. The fascia lata was incised and the gluteus maximus muscle split. The piriformis muscle and obturator internus muscle were released from their insertion. After retracting those muscles, the acetabular posterior wall and gluteus medius muscle could be seen. The displaced fragment of the posterior wall and roof was reduced anatomically under direct visualization and held temporarily using K-wires. The overall fixation was neutralized by application of a 3.5 We retrospectively analyzed the patients treated for posterior wall fractures extending to the acetabular roof from an institutionally-approved, single-center orthopedic database between 2001 and 2004. During this period, 196 patients underwent surgery for acetabular fractures including 84 posterior wall fractures. Among 84 posterior wall fractures, 13 patients enrolled. We used SSPT for all of those patients to avoid trochanter osteotomy and vigorous muscle retraction. The mean follow-up was 5 years (minimum 1 year), based on x-ray and CT study. The average patient age was 48.6 years (range; 24–68). The time from injury to operation was an average 10 days (range; 2–32 days). The fractures pattern was described in The mean operation time was 199 The radiologic results showed anatomical reduction in 10 cases ( A number of techniques have been employed to expose the acetabular roof and posterior wall In the SSPT, there is minimal retraction of the gluteus muscles without detachment, and heterotopic ossification consequently does not develop. The SSPT does not provide extended visualization of the acetabular roof, because it does not detach gluteus muscles. Reduction of acetabular roof was performed with direct visualization, but the fixation of the acetabular roof was somewhat difficult in this limited space. We adopted concept of minimal invasive plate osteosynthesis for fixation of acetabular roof. However, there is limitation in case of bone graft for impacted roof fractures in this technique. In this technique, possible risk is injury to the superior gluteal nerve and vessels, which can cause abductor weakness. Bos et al. The current study showed 15% of imperfect reduction and 46% of fair functional outcomes. We evaluated the radiological result with CT, which revealed more accurately than plain radiograph. In addition, it should be considered that most of the fractures were complex fractures when considering the outcomes. We have described a technique to fix acetabular roof fractures, which resulted in satisfactory radiologic outcomes without complications. Therefore, we believe that the SSPT is a good option for treating posterior wall fractures extending to the acetabular roof. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.