This last part, which is a rather personal history of the development of the theory of sampling, is written in the first person singular—for a reason. For a long time already, I have been asked to tell how I became interested in sampling and how I developed the theory. I don't like to speak of myself and I have hitherto refused to do so. I have always been reluctant to accept such an undertaking, at least as long as I thought that my work was not completed. It would now appear that this is no longer the case and so, when the editor requested also the present Part IV as part of the series, he originally invited me to write for the SSC6 proceedings (see Introduction to this issue), I finally ran out of excuses and obliged (in point of fact, it took much more than a mere “request”). Upon reflection, I am very grateful for offering me this opportunity.
                  The development of the theory of sampling has been a solitary work from the very beginning. With the exception of the “variogram”, a mathematical tool borrowed from geostatistics and Matheron [23] in 1962, I did not use any pre-existing scientific work. On the other hand, no one or no body such as university, school of mines, research organization or industry, even my own employers, ever asked or encouraged me to search in this direction and nobody ever paid for my research work (with an exception concerning the theory of “bed-blending”, which was sponsored in 1978 by a blending equipment manufacturer—exception duly mentioned in my publications). Unusual.From 1946 to 1949, I worked as a Mineral Processing Engineer in a small lead mine, north of the lower course of the Congo River, in the middle of the equatorial bush that covers what was at that time the French Congo (or Congo-Brazzaville). I was in charge of the processing plant and of the laboratories. In 1947, I received a 1-week-old “cable” from Paris asking me to provide the head-office with an estimate of the average grade of a huge heap of lead concentrate of dubious quality, stored in the open since 1940, to study the possibility of its re-treatment. I discussed the question with the mine manager and I soon realized that: I was asked “to sample” a batch of some 200,000 tons that contained blocks weighing anything between several tons down to microgram particles. I knew nothing about “sampling”. The available literature (very scarce at the equator), was mute, naive or vague at best. I had to The seed was planted, but I did not realize it was the starting point of a lifetime's work ( Back home in France in 1949, as I was in charge of a mineral-processing laboratory in Paris, our team worked on a huge variety of ores and minerals from all over the world. I soon found out that I had to solve sampling problems practically Brunton's formula was based on very reasonable considerations of geometrical similarity: the idea was that, at different sizes, the same number of fragments was required. That of Richards was based on (quote) “…the fact that the quantities proposed by Brunton's formula were much larger than those accepted in practice”… “the most satisfactory rule must be based on habits acknowledged by the trade of minerals” (in this year 2000, i.e. nearly a century after Richards, the same philosophy is implemented by ISO Technical Committees.)… “by adopting the rule that the sample weight should be proportional to the square (sic) of the top particle size, one should obtain figures that have every chance of being approved by sampling operators” (end of quote). For a famous M.I.T. Professor, this can hardly be called a As far as Brunton's formula is concerned, I was worried by the fact that the In the 1930s, the trade of coal comprised very large tonnages, as well as huge amounts of money, which were computed on the basis of In the1940s, the Mineral Processing Engineer's Bible was the “Taggart” (first edition 1927; second revised edition 1945, In 1949, the French Mining Engineer R. Duval, searching the handbooks of statistics for a ready-made solution, proposed to approximate a batch of ore with a population of black and white balls ( Sampling is always necessary for a single, simple reason: in most cases and for a question of cost, analysis can of course not be carried out on the Specifically, the idea was to develop a mathematical model with the purpose of devising a relationship between: The variance of the sampling error (a random variable), The physical properties of the material being sampled, assumed to be known, and… The lot and sample masses. From this relationship, the minimum sample mass to be extracted from the lot in order to achieve a given degree of reproducibility (characterized by a given The theoretical model I first devised was derived for particulate solids of mineral origin such as ores, concentrates and much later for feed to cement factories, etc. irrespective of their nominal particle size. Later again, I was also able to formulate the following further developments: In a first generalization step, the theory was also applicable to In a second generalization step, it was applicable also to More generally, with the development of environmental control, the theory was found valid also for sampling of the Matter is discrete, or discontinuous, by essence: with particulate solids the discontinuity appears at the scale of fragments (sizes expressed in centimeters, millimeters or micrometers). With liquids and gases, it is observed at the scale of molecules or ions (sizes expressed in Angstroms). The difference between particulate solids and liquids is thus not one of essence but rather one of scale—as far as sampling is concerned of course. The general sampling model is valid irrespective of the component size(s); it would therefore appear applicable to all material “objects”, irrespective of their physical state ( The 1950 sampling model assumed that the number To remain as close to reality as possible, I had decided: In a first step, to take into account In a second step, to introduce In a third step, to devise At the end of the first step, I had devised strict formulas for the mean and variance of the population of “equally probable samples of According to its definition, the TSE is relative. The variance of any relative error is This basic fomula At the end of the second and third steps, I had indeed obtained an It can be expressed as follows (=∼ “approximately but practically equal to”):       Thanks to simplifications and approximations which are not supposed to alter the order of magnitude of the variance, I had succeeded in transforming a sum extended to a Formulas The formula If the sampling is correct, i.e. if If the sampling is correct, and if the elements are selected It entirely falls upon the user to implement a correct sampling but except in tests or computer simulations we cannot select the elements making up the sample When using The Formula, the reader should never forget that it is valid In order to check the validity of my approach, I had, in 1950–1951, organized an experiment (described in Section 23.3 of Ref. [18]), which consisted of splitting a lot The error FSE was only The internal My next step was to devise a certain number of charts making it easier to implement the 1950 formula. These were presented at the occasion of the Back in 1956, however, I showed that the 1950 formula could easily be transposed to the case where component It was in 1957 that I first presented the formula in English at an annual meeting of the Society of Mining Engineers of the American Institute of Mining Engineers (SME of AIME) in New Orleans, LA [11]. It was not presented in the UK—at an annual meeting of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (IMM) in London—until 1965 [12]. In 1960–1962, I concentrated my attention on the problem posed by incremental sampling of flowing streams, a problem of paramount importance in mineral processing and ship-loading facilities for example. One can imagine three ways of reducing the mass of a flowing stream of particulate solids, liquids or multiphase media (e.g. pulps of finely ground minerals in water): Taking Taking Taking In the mineral industries, the first method is often implemented (with exceptions) whereas in the chemical, pharmaceutical, oil, food industries, etc. the second and third methods, cheaper in the short term, are always preferred. I was conscious of the existence of two problems yet Cross-stream samplers should respect certain rules regarding, for instance, the cutter velocity and the cutter opening, shape and width. These rules remained to be defined scientifically, which was achieved only in 1977, after a campaign of experiments carried out on bauxite blocks [22]. But at that time I was interested in the mathematical problem posed by the second point (next paragraph). The increments extracted from the stream, usually at a constant interval, are I had already collected many series of experimental data and was studying them when I heard of In 1962, I felt the need (perhaps the I became a freelance For the years to come, my time was shared between numerous forms of activity always overlapping each other in time and space: theoretical research, consulting, troubleshooting, lecturing, teaching regular courses in various schools and universities, teaching privately organized short-courses and, last but not least, writing magazine articles and books. My activities, limited to France at the beginning, led me all over the world as soon as my articles and lectures in English helped the mining and metallurgical industries realize the importance of scientific sampling. I now had the opportunity to work on practically all kinds of mineral materials, from coal or cement raw materials to diamond, gold or platinum ores by way of uranium. So far, I had dealt only with the quantitative approach to the sampling problems where I thought I had proposed adequate solutions for both zero- and one-dimensional objects. I endeavored to gather all the results already obtained in the first of a two-volume book to be published by “Societe de l'Industrie Minerale” (SIM). This project met with more objections than I had anticipated, from one member of SIM scientific committee. The publication of the book, ready in 1965, was delayed until 1967 [13]. It was published in its original version thanks to This first volume was followed, in 1971, by its second part [14], in which I developed solutions to specific problems such as studies of spatial distributions, the sampling of coal and precious metal ores, sampling for size analysis or for moisture estimation, study of sampling errors resulting from the practical implementations of the model, etc. A large part of this book deals very In 1972 [23], I tried for the first time ever to propose a qualitative approach to the sampling theory and to answer publicly the question “how?”, neglected so far. I presented the concepts of probabilistic, A sampling was then said to be A sampling was then, and still is, said to be A probabilistic sampling is then, and still is, said to be With zero-dimensional objects: when With one-dimensional objects: when the density of selection probability is A probabilistic sampling was said to be The idea that sampling could be treated as a science was new and shocked some distinguished members of the audience. One of them favored a definition whereby, if sampling was at all to be thought of in terms of probability, the selection probability of each fragment had to be As soon as the 1971 book was published, I felt the need to write a new book. I had acquired a quarter of a century of experience as a theoretician, consultant and troubleshooter and this book was to be full of practical experience. For personal reasons, I decided to be my own publisher. The writing, typing (by a professional typist), printing and binding of the new book took about 4 years and the first copy of the book was handed over to For the first time in a book, I was able to distinguish between the a priori selecting conditions—   Some of the definitions used today (part I) are During congresses, or on the occasions of lectures in English-speaking countries, I had been asked to write a book in English, but nobody had volunteered to translate my latest book. On the other hand, since 1974, I had been working in cooperation with I vainly tried to hire in Cannes the services of a professional typist capable of typing an I decided to make a test. I would write, as best I could, what was to be an introductory chapter and submit it to an American newsman living in Cannes, whom I had met and who was willing to help me. A few mistakes considered minor by the American reader were corrected and I went on with his benediction. Since then, I have had some doubts as to the reliability of his advice. I still vividly remember the winter 1978–1979 when I worked over 10 h a day, 6.5 days a week to type the 431-page manuscript, doing nothing else. At the average rate of 3 pages/day, I spent 4 months on the typing. It very seldom snows in Cannes, but it was one of these rare snowy winters and, on Sunday afternoon, I would walk around the nearby mountains, in knee-deep snow, for a wonderful change. The book was, for a large part, a translation from existing texts in French. Its most original feature probably was a statistical chapter presenting a Chemometricians also should be very careful with the Student–Fisher test as it is presented by these and other standards. As early as 1981, the first edition was nearly out of print and the publishers asked me to prepare a second revised edition, which was available in 1982. The major revision concerned the statistical chapter 31, which was refined and became definitive. My latest book in French [15] was 7 years old when the second edition of Ref. [16] was released. In the meantime, I had developed several ideas leading to new applications of the theory, namely: Point by point computation of the auxiliary functions of the variogram, Theory and practice of proportional sampling, Theory of bed-blending derived from the theory of sampling and industrial implementation. On the other hand, from hundreds of missions carried out in more than 80 countries in a time span of 40 years, I had gathered a respectable amount of practical experience illustrating my theoretical conclusions and I thought it useful to publish them. The French Publisher, It took me 6 years to achieve this because I had a number of new subjects to incorporate into former texts and I also had to work as a consultant and short-course teacher, my only sources of income (authors' royalties paid by publishers are ridiculously low, but having a book published by a well-known, respected publisher usually generates a certain amount of consulting work.). My troubleshooting activities had started with base metals such as lead, zinc and copper, but with the developments of the uranium industry in France and abroad, the latter had become one of my major sources of work in the 1980s. Ever since the 1950s, I had worked in close cooperation with the French “Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique” (CEA) and, when they were created, with its mining and metallurgical subsidiaries COGEMA and COMURHEX in France, Gabon, Niger, Canada and South Africa. These companies became my major clients, as kindly recalled by my friend During these years, in addition to illustrations or refinements of the existing theory, I had also developed two new subjects, which similarly needed to be presented in a textbook. I believe that they have an enormous industrial potential: Mass and volume measurement by proportional sampling, Theory, and industrial implementation, of bed-blending. In 1954, I was confronted with my first problem of “metallurgical balance reconciliation” in a group of North African lead and zinc flotation plants. A metallurgical balance is nothing other than the application of the Over the years, I discovered that all kinds of scales could be found operating on conveyor belts (all types of mechanical scales, nuclear scales), and they all suffered from a structural lack of reliability. It is one thing to carry out an easy electrical measurement and quite another to convert it accurately into a tonnage of ore. This opinion was reinforced when I read This is true also of nuclear scales, ibid. (chapter 9). When developing the theory of sampling, I had reached the mathematical, indisputable conclusion that, when sampling was carried out correctly with uniform selection probability In addition to this property, when the number of increments in the sample is “large enough” (which is nearly always the case) the confidence interval of According to my experience, this unbiased estimator is much more reliable than A variant of proportional sampling was implemented at the mineralurgical pilot plant of the In practice, the rules of sampling correctness are always applied with a safety factor so as to make sure that the mass estimation will be as highly reliable as desired, with the consequence that this proportional sample is also “perfectly”  Since the 1960s, Lafarge Cements had realized the necessity of an accurate sampling of the feed to their cement kilns. Together with the sampling equipment manufacturer MINEMET-INDUSTRIE (a reincarnation of my former employer Minerais et Metaux), we designed and installed highly reliable sampling plants in their Cement Works. Cement kilns, like metallurgical furnaces, are known for their severe lack of flexibility. They require to be fed with material as uniform as possible—the ultimate, very costly penalty is the loss of a kiln. To achieve this purpose, in a first step, Lafarge plants feed their raw materials to what is known as a “bed-blending system”, which ensures an imperfect form of one-dimensional homogeneity. The feed to this system is sampled in a MINEMET sampling plant coupled with an X-ray analyser capable of assaying a sample for its major components in a few minutes. The whole system, assisted by a computer which calculates the average composition of the pile being formed, works in such a way that at the end of the constitution of a blending pile, its average composition is very well known and, when properly managed, is practically equal to the ideal feed to the kiln. One of Lafarge subsidiaries had installed a bed-blending system manufactured by PHB-SOMERAL (now MBH) of Mulhouse, France. The blending was adequate but the technical manager of PHB had observed that the blending system did not work in agreement with Gerstel's theory, published in 1977 [29] and generally accepted. He asked my advice in 1978 and I offered to develop a theory of bed blending, which, I realized, could easily be derived from the existing sampling theory. This new theory of In order to convince potential clients, I was further asked to carry out a full-scale check of the theory, which was realized about 6 months later at the Heming Cement Works (Lorraine). Lafarge carried out the X-ray assays. To everybody's satisfaction, these experiments showed that the new theory was in perfect agreement with experience, contrary to Gerstel's. This theory and the experimental check were published for the first time in 1981 [30,31] and can now be found in the books [17–20]. The Canadian mineral industries were interested and invited me to present the philosophy of blending the feed to a plant at the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the Canadian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (CIM) in Montreal (1998) [32,33]. As soon as my latest book [17] in French was released, The voluminous 700-page textbooks [17,18] contained complete, updated mathematical demonstrations and I had to write them as reference books, but they were simply too heavy and too costly to reach a wide audience. There was a need for much shortened (on the order of 150-page) versions. My French publisher With this, my account has reached 50 years, indeed between one and two generations. First of all—always—there is the family. I am not a man to talk of my family in a public context such as this. The editor of this account, however, is very persistent. Thus, one I was originally writing this series with the intention that it was to be part of the proceedings of the I don't know, but the intensity of this work must soon be reduced. It may be the beginning of the end for me but certainly not for the Theory of Sampling and its applications. I am very glad to have reached beyond the mythical “Year 2000”—Now I have begun to hand the relay to a new generation of professors and engineers, students and industrialists—to all I would like to mention my Scandinavian friends who have played an important role in disseminating my work in the later years. There has been a steadily growing sampling activity in Scandinavia since, and equally pleasing. I am not worried about the future of sampling in Northern Europe. In France, the ISI is active in organizing short courses in France (and abroad), in French and in English. Here again, the future of the sampling theory is in good hands. It is ably led by Denis Thirouin. The newest offspring of organized sampling activity concerns the It is also most appropriate here to acknowledge the active help in discussing, publishing, co-writing many of my later papers, which has been given to me by Last but not least, I would like to express my deep gratitude to my very good friend, to my excellent editor