Ahmad et al. are to be commended for developing a classification system for craniofacial trauma, as there have been few published. There are reasons why craniofacial trauma is difficult to classify. There is huge variability in the number and orientation of fracture lines; near-universal involvement of orbital, nasal or antral cavities, or both; often comminution of delicate bones; and functional impairment such as derangement of occlusion. There are 3 requirements that a classification system of craniofacial injuries must have to be clinically useful. First, each measure of severity of injury must be scored. An alphanumeric scoring system is convenient and logical, and permits coding both for insurance and for statistical purposes. Secondly, a total numerical score should correlate directly with prognosis; Pederson's excellent Difficulty Index for Removal of Impacted Mandibular Third Molars provides operators with a usable, numerical estimate of operative difficulty. Thirdly, associated complications that either alter the operative plan (such as tearing of the palatal mucosa) or are of great clinical relevance (such as a leak of cerebrospinal fluid) should be scored. Variables that have dissimilar degrees of clinical relevance must be appropriately weighted. For example, in our hypothetical scoring system a moderate leak of cerebrospinal fluid that scores 2 may have graver implications than maxillary mobility that scores 2, so would be given greater weight. The proposed index to calculate total craniofacial trauma score (TCTS) would be: TCTS The total score obtained would not suggest any specific action in planning of treatment, but would provide surgeons with a rapid way of estimating severity of injury at the bedside, predicted aesthetic and functional outcome, and estimated duration of the operation. Current craniofacial trauma severity scoring systems lack the elegance of the Glasgow Coma Scale, but with the method suggested and a multicentre trial, we may be closer.