A systematic structural separation study was carried out for the separation of Pr(III) and Fe(III) from nitric acid medium with unsymmetrical diglycolamides (DGAs). Four kinds of diglycolamides, N,N′-di-methyl-N,N′-di-dodecyl diglycolamide (DMDDdDGA), N,N′-di-ethyl-N,N′-di-dodecyl diglycolamide (DEDDdDGA), N,N′-di-propyl-N,N′-di-dodecyl diglycolamide (DPDDdDGA) and N,N′-di-butyl-N,N′-di-dodecyl diglycolamide (DBDDdDGA) with different alkyl substituent were synthesized and characterized. The effect of the structure of extractant on the separation of iron and praseodymium was studied. A high separation coefficient of Pr(III) and Fe(III) was obtained by DMDDdDGA in a wide range of nitric acid concentration, which shows good application prospect in the recovery and purification of rare earth.Selective separation of rare earths and iron from nitric acid medium In view of the important relationship between extractant structure and extraction separation process, a series of diglycolamide (DGA) compounds have been investigated worldwide The rare earth ores in North China contain mainly light rare earths, La, Ce, Pr and Nd, and also a large amount of iron ore. The preparation of high-purity and ultra-pure rare earth metals is the basis of the research on high-performance rare earth materials. For the separation and purification of rare earth, iron is an impurity element with high content in rare earth products Praseodymium oxide (Pr The four kinds of DGAs were synthesized and purified by using the three-step method reported in our previous work DMDDdDGA, pale yellow oil, yield 90%; IR (KBr, cm DEDDDdGA, pale yellow oil, yield 92%; IR (KBr, cm DPDDdDGA, pale yellow oil, yield 90%; IR (KBr, cm DBDDdDGA, pale yellow oil, yield 91%; IR (KBr, cm Liquid-liquid solvent extraction was implemented by vibrating equal volumes of organic and aqueous phases for 1 h in a water bath at a constant temperature. The two phases were then centrifuged and separated, and the concentration of Pr(III) in the aqueous phase was measured with arsenazo III visible spectrophotometric method The distribution ratios (D) of Pr(III) with DMDDdDGA, DEDDdDGA, DPDDdDGA and DBDDdDGA in kerosene were investigated as a function of nitric acid concentration. As shown in From In order to understand the nature of the extracted complexes in the organic phase, the effect of the concentration of DGAs on the distribution ratios (D) of Pr(III) in nitric acid medium was studied. In general, the extraction equilibrium of extraction of Pr(III) by DGAs from nitric acid medium can be represented as follows: The conditional extraction constant (Kex) is Thus, the stoichiometry of the extracted complexes was obtained from the slope of the line drawn from lg D vs lg C The effect of the concentration of extractants on the distribution ratio (D) is shown in In order to illuminate how the extractant coordinated with Pr(III), the IR spectra of the organic phase were studied before and after Pr(III) extraction. After the extraction experiment, the organic phase was separated and dropped onto potassium bromide tablet. The solvent was removed by volatilization. Then, the infrared spectra were collected with resolution of 4 cm It was found that the peaks for the stretching vibration of C The distribution ratios (D) of Pr(III) in nitric acid medium with DMDDdDGA, DEDDdDGA, DPDDdDGA and DBDDdDGA were investigated at different temperatures ( The diluents have a major impact on the extraction ability The simple and effective reverse extraction method is of great significance to production practice. Water is the simplest and cheapest, so we firstly tried the reverse extraction effect of pure water. As shown in The separation of Fe(III) and Pr(III) with DMDDdDGA and DBDDdDGA diluted by kerosene was investigated. According to extraction efficiency (E) ( The separation factors, β (D These results indicate that these systems could potentially be used for the separation of Fe(III) from Pr(NO Four unsymmetrical DGAs with different amidic alkyl chain lengths were synthesized and extraction of Pr(III) from nitric acid medium was investigated. The distribution ratio (D) of Pr(III) was found to decrease with an increase in the length of alkyl chain attached to the amidic N atoms of the DGA extractants. The extracting ability of the DGAs toward Pr(III) in kerosene decreased in the order: DMDDdDGA > DEDDdDGA > DPDDdDGA > DBDDdDGA. DGAs with short chain alkyl substituents on one N atom can improve the extraction performance. The main extracted species of Pr(III) from nitric acid medium by DGA are Pr(NO This work was supported by the