Metals in −0.5 mm waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) are effectively recycled by flotation technology. Ionic renewable collector was prepared from waste oils and subsequently used in flotation of −0.5 mm WPCBs. Morphology of renewable collector and WPCBs powder was detected by scanning electron microscope (SEM). Laboratory flotation tests were conducted to analyze the flotation performance. The adsorption behavior of the collector was revealed by infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). SEM results show that the particle size of collector is in the micron scale and the impurity particles in WPCBs are in strip shape. Organic matter is proved to exist on the glass fibers surface, which helps to enhance its hydrophobicity. FT-IR analysis results indicate that both the collector and WPCBs powder contain hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups, which help to increase the attachment point of collector to strengthen the flotation process. Laboratory flotation test results show that the concentrate yield decreases with the increase of collector dosage. When the collector dosage is 2 kg/t, copper and iron grade in concentrate reaches 31.32% and 37.28% with the recovery of 65.75% and 14.55%, respectively. The study has provided an alternative method for the recycling of metals in WPCBs.Electronic waste and kitchen waste are two important environmental threats produced by human activities. With the rapid development of electronic technology, the life cycle of electronic products is gradually shortening, which leads to a sharp increase in the electronic waste quantity. It is predicted that the annual amount of electronic waste will increase from 44.7 million tons in 2016 to 52.2 million tons in 2021 ( Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are the core components in most electronic equipment, accounting for 4–20% of the mass of electronic products. WPCBs contain a variety of organic and metal elements ( Physical and physicochemical separation technology is efficient and clean for the separation of traditional natural ore. Fortunately, physical beneficiation technology is also effective for the disposal of electronic waste, which mainly includes two processes: liberation and separation ( Natural hydrophobicity differences between components particles are usually significant. With the aid of collectors, this difference can be selectively enhanced ( Limited treatment technology limits the potential value of the waste oil and e-waste. This study focuses on the flotation to achieve the resource utilization of waste oil and WPCBs. Ionic renewable collector was synthesized by saponification and used in flotation process of liberation products of WPCBs. In previous studies, the flotation feasibility of 1–0.5 mm liberation products of WPCBs with an ionic renewable collector prepared from waste oils was verified ( Liberation products of WPCBs were screened and −0.5 mm materials were used as test objects . The particle morphology and element distribution of the samples are shown in  Waste oil from kitchen waste was collected, heated, and then centrifugation was applied to enhance the settling process to remove impurities. The crude oil was reacted with sodium hydroxide to form soap at 70 °C. Then soap was heated to remove the moisture. The solid product was ground by a ball mill to prepare renewable collector. In order to analyze the morphology of the particles and element composition, scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Apreo, FEI, USA) and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS, XFlash 6160, Bruker, Germany) were used for detection. The sample surface was sprayed with gold before detection to improve its conductivity. The detection was carried out under high vacuum. Resource utilization of waste oil and WPCBs was designed and shown in Two harmful substances were used as test objects, waste oil and WPCBs. The renewable collector prepared from waste oil was used in flotation of WPCBs particles with size of −0.5 mm. The renewable collector selectively adhered to the surface of impurity particles in flotation cell by agitation, so the hydrophobicity was significantly enhanced, and the separation process between metal particles and impurity particles was realized. Metals in WPCBs could be recovered by reverse flotation. In the separation test, XFD The functional group composition of WPCBs powder and renewable collectors has significant effect on the adsorption process. The functional groups of the two materials were determined by infrared spectrum analysis (FT-IR, Nicolet 380, Thermo). Potassium bromide (chemical purity) was used in the sample pressing process. Samples were dried to eliminate the effect of moisture. Potassium bromide was evenly mixed with the sample and pressed for 60 s at 10 MPa pressure. The scanning process of the sample was carried out at room temperature. The scanning range was 4000–400 cm The morphology and element distribution of the renewable collector are shown in  Glass fibers are the most abundant impurities in the dissociated products. The morphology and element distribution of glass fibers are shown in   The effect of renewable collector dosage on flotation concentrate yield and element recovery of −0.5 mm of WPCBs is shown in   The particle morphology of flotation tailings is shown in  The results presented in The recycling of municipal waste has received extensive attention. This study focuses on the recycling of waste oil and WPCBs. The flotation technology was proposed to make the two wastes resources rather than environmental threat. Waste oils were purified and synthesized into renewable collectors, which were subsequently used in the flotation of −0.5 mm liberation products of WPCBs. Morphology analysis of renewable collector shows that micron-scale collector particles are in regular shape, which helps to improve the solubility of the collector. The feasibility of −0.5 mm WPCBs flotation with ionic renewable collector was proved by laboratory flotation test. Results show that renewable collector has excellent recovery ability for copper, but poor recovery ability for iron. Surface functional group composition of collector and WPCBs powder indicates that both the renewable collector and WPCBs powder contain hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups, which help to increase the attachment point of collector to strengthen the flotation process. The ionic renewable collector prepared from waste oil has been proved to be applicable to the flotation of −0.5 mm WPCBs powder, which provides an alternative way for metal recovery from WPCBs.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the