Ipsilateral fractures of the femoral neck and shaft are rare, high-energy injuries that typically occur in young polytrauma patients. The associated fracture of the neck is often vertical in nature and is more frequently non-displaced than in isolated femoral neck fractures. Historically the diagnosis of an associated femoral neck fracture was delayed or missed in approximately one third of cases. Studies have shown that detection can be significantly improved with the implementation of a protocolized approach to hip imaging in all patients with femoral shaft fractures.
                  Prompt recognition of an associated femoral neck fracture allows for timely stabilization and may decrease the risks of non-union and avascular necrosis. In contrast, failure to recognize a non-displaced or minimally displaced associated neck fracture prior to fixation of the shaft can lead to displacement, a decrease in neck fixation options, a technically challenging secondary procedure and increased risk of long-term sequelae.
                  A vast array of treatment strategies have been described for this combined injury. Published options range from spica casting to open reduction and internal fixation of both fractures and include almost all conceivable combinations in between. While timely surgical stabilization is now universally recommended for both shaft and neck, no consensus exists as to the most appropriate method of fixation for either fracture. Most authors recommend prompt, but not emergent, surgery with priority given to anatomic reduction and stabilization of the neck fracture by either closed or open methods. Fixation of the shaft fracture follows as patient condition allows.
                  The rare nature of this injury makes it very challenging to study and most published series’ are retrospective with very small sample sizes. In short, no scientificallycompelling study is available to definitively support any one implant choice or method of stabilzation over another for the treatment of associated fractures of the femoral neck and shaft.Associated fractures of the ipsilateral femoral neck are rare, occurring with only 1–9% of femoral shaft fractures Historically the diagnosis of an associated femoral neck fracture was delayed or missed in approximately 20–50% of cases The historic high rate of missed femoral neck injuries and the seriousness of subsequent complications have led multiple authors to recommend dedicated imaging of the neck with radiographs or computed tomography (CT) Prompt recognition allows for timely stabilization and may decrease the risk of non-union and avascular necrosis. In contrast, failure to recognize an associated neck fracture prior to fixation of the shaft can lead to fracture displacement at the time of surgery, limited neck fixation options and an unplanned return to the operating room for a technically challenging secondary procedure A vast array of treatment strategies have been described for this combined injury Different authors have recommended ideal surgical fixation fall within 8 Published treatments range from spica casting to open reduction and internal fixation of both fractures and include almost all conceivable combinations in between. Successful fixation strategies using a single implant have been described Some studies have described successful use of femoral shaft plating in ipsilateral neck–shaft injuries Standard antegrade femoral nails and those with cephalomedullary or reconstruction screws have been used successfully in combination with cannulated screws across the neck The use of a cephalomedullary or reconstruction nail alone for fixation of both fractures has also been described and offers the benefit of fewer incisions and lower implant cost Our preferred treatment algorithm for this challenging combination of injuries places highest priority on a prompt anatomic open reduction and stabilization of the femoral neck fracture. For displaced, intra-capsular neck fractures either a sliding hip screw or crossing cannulated screws is our preferred implant choice. When a sliding hip screw is used it is often supplemented with one or more derotational screws (see Although complications associated with treatment of the femoral neck fracture can be devastating, they are rare with reported average healing times of 11.0–20.5 weeks Complications related to ipsilateral femoral shaft fractures are more common than for the neck in almost all published series. Compared to isolated femoral shaft fractures, associated shaft fractures have higher average time to union (20.3–27.3 weeks) When recognized and treated appropriately, functional outcomes following ipsilateral femoral neck and shaft fractures appear to be good in the majority (63–94%) of cases The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.