The applicability of the automated ball indentation (ABI) technique for non-destructively determining the yield strength and flow properties of a high-manganese twinning-induced plasticity steel has been explored for different grain structures. True stress–true plastic strain curves derived from the ABI measurements agreed closely with those from conventional uniaxial tensile tests showing that the technique can be used to determine the yield strength, true-stress versus true-plastic strain curve, the strength coefficient and the strain hardening exponent of the steel concerned.In recent years, there has been a significant increase in research on manganese stabilized austenitic steels exhibiting the twinning-induced plasticity (TWIP) effect. TWIP steels provide a great potential in applications for structural and safety components in the automotive industry owing to their excellent strain hardening properties that result from the formation of mechanical twins during deformation. The high strain hardening capacity promotes high tensile strengths, high uniform elongation and high formability The disadvantage of TWIP steels is their relatively low yield strengths, especially when compared with existing advanced high strength steels (AHSS). Currently, considerable efforts are being devoted to the development of TWIP steels with a view to increase the yield strength. For example, precipitation strengthening by microalloying with Ti, Nb and V is being explored by the ArcelorMittal research group TWIP steels can readily display big differences in the austenite grain size depending on the manufacture processing route and annealing conditions. These differences affect the strength properties of the steels, as reported by Ueji et al. To the authors' knowledge, all reported scientific publications concerning TWIP steels have relied on destructive tensile testing to determine yielding and plastic flow behavior. Sometimes it would be convenient to be able to obtain flow properties from samples that are too small for conventional tensile testing: for example when production processes are simulated using Gleeble physical simulation techniques or when insufficient material is otherwise available for standard tensile testing According to the literature, Das et al. In the present study, the applicability of the ABI technique for non-destructively determining the yield strength and flow properties of a high-manganese TWIP steel has been explored for three different grain structures: fine grained (FG), coarse grained (CG) and partially recrystallized (PR). The studied material is a fully austenitic high-manganese TWIP steel containing in wt% 0.3C–16Mn–1.5Al (balance Fe). The material has been cold rolled in a laboratory rolling mill to a 60% reduction and subsequently annealed in a Gleeble 3800 thermo-mechanical simulator in the temperature range 650–1100 Small pieces of 2 Conventional uniaxial tensile tests were carried out at room temperature using a Zwick Z 100 tensile device (Zwick Roell GmbH) together with full-thickness flat tensile specimens having a width of 6 The Automated Ball Indentation (ABI) technique is a novel multi-cycle indentation test, where progressive indentations with intermediate partial unloading are made in a single penetration location. During ABI testing, a number of successive ball indentations are made at one location of the sample, interrupted by partial unloadings. During this process the ABI computer system acquires the applied load In a standard tensile test, the uniaxial deformation is almost confined to the constant volume of the specimen's gauge section. Initially, the material is deformed elastically, following which plastic yielding and strain hardening commence. In contrast, in an ABI test, the elastic and plastic deformations are not distinctly separated; both elastic and plastic deformations take place simultaneously during the entire course of the test. With increasing indentation penetration depth, an increasing volume of test material is forced to flow under multiaxial stresses generated by the advancing indenter. The indentation strain that results from ABI testing is determined using an empirical relationship given by Tabor The plastic diameter of the indentation can be calculated through a regression analysis of the following Hertzian equation Under a load Evaluation of the yield strength (YS) depends on determination of the total indentation chordal diameter Annealing the 60% cold rolled TWIP steel at 650   The ABI-hardness is calculated from the last/final indentation cycle, similar to the calculation of the Brinell hardness number with two exceptions (namely, the plastic-indentation diameter is calculated from the final plastic depth instead of the optical measurement of the Brinell test, and secondly, the indenter diameter of the ABI test is different than those of the Brinell test). Hence, a new hardness definition was used as “ABI-Hardness (030G)” to indicate that it is determined from an ABI test using a ground-tip with 0.030-inch (0.762 The ratio of the ABI-YS to the ABI-UTS [estimated from the ABI-hardness (030G)] was successfully correlated to the uniform elongation from the tensile tests according to the following relationship (Eq. The new relationships (Eqs. Regarding the actual plastic behavior of the present steels and the effect of grain size, the observed stress–strain curves, including uniform and total elongation, are in line with the behavior reported elsewhere for TWIP steels. All results indicate that the strength increases and the uniform elongation decreases as the mean grain size decreases. The PR structure with ultrafine grains ( In low SFE materials like TWIP steels, mechanical twinning enhances ductility and strain hardening capacity It has been shown that, for strains up to 0.15, the automated ball indentation (ABI) technique developed by Advanced Technology Corporation gives reliable true stress–true plastic strain curves in the case of a high-manganese TWIP steel with three different grain structures: partially recrystallized, fine-grained, and large-grained. The studied stress–strain microprobe (SSM) system with its novel ABI technique is suitable for the determination of flow curves when only a small amount of test material is available or when non-destructive evaluation is desired. The ABI-determined YS and UTS values are in excellent agreement with those from tension tests within 1–6%, and the uniform elongation values are within 3–9%. Using the new correlations of