Al–Al2O3 composite coatings were produced on AZ91D magnesium alloy substrates using kinetic metallization (KM), which is a special type of cold spray using a convergent barrel nozzle to attain sonic velocity. The effect of the volume fraction of Al2O3 particles and KM spray temperatures on the microstructure, hardness of the composite coatings, the deposition efficiency, and the bond strength between the coating and substrate was studied. Results show that addition of Al2O3 particles not only significantly improves the density of the coating, but also enhances the deposition efficiency to an optimum value. The bond strength of the composite coatings with the substrate was found to be much stronger than the coating itself, measured using a specially designed lug shear method. Furthermore, based on bond strength data and SEM analysis, higher Al2O3 content resulted in a failure mode transition from adhesive failure to cohesive failure. This is considered a result of a competition between the strengthening of the ceramic reinforcing particles at the coating/substrate interface, and the weakening of coating cohesive strength due to an increase in the proportion of weaker Al–Al2O3 bonds compared with stronger Al–Al bonds. Characterisation of the composite coating in terms of hardness, porosity and microstructure was also conducted.The high strength-to-weight ratio of magnesium (Mg) alloys has attracted increasing interest in the transportation industry for the purpose of vehicle weight reduction. However, the application of Mg alloys has been significantly limited due to poor wear and corrosion resistance In the cold spray process, powders ranging in size from 1 to 50 As a relatively new technology of surface coating, there are two major concerns about cold spray: the bond strength between the coating and the substrate, and the coating density. A coating is highly functional only if the interface between the coating and the substrate is reliable and strong. The bonding of particles in cold spray is presumed to be the result of extensive plastic deformation and related phenomena at the interface, such as spray jet formation and spray splats interlocking As-cast AZ91D magnesium alloy (nominally Mg–9 A kinetic metallization (KM) system, developed by Inovati in Santa Barbara, CA, USA, was used to spray the coatings. KM is a cold spray variant that uses a convergent barrel nozzle under choked flow conditions to achieve an exit gas velocity of Mach 1, with a slight divergence to compensate for friction effects The microstructure of the coatings was examined using optical microscopy and SEM. The porosity was measured by means of image analysis, and the values were averaged using 20 backscatter SEM images captured randomly within the coating, taking care to avoid the surface or substrate interface. It was not possible to use Archimedes' method to measure porosity as it was not sensitive enough for the small samples used. The hardness measurements were performed on the coating cross-sections using a Vickers hardness tester with a 2.5 The bond strength of the coating was determined under shear conditions using a lug shear test. First, a coating strip 10  During the spray process, both the absolute deposition efficiency of the feedstock powder mixture, and the relative deposition efficiency of the Al and Al In the case of two-phase powder mixtures, normally the actual volume fraction deposited is not the same as that of the feedstock powder, since each component will have a different relative deposition efficiency. The relative deposition efficiency of the Al and Al The authors have observed that the deposition efficiency of 100% Al It is noteworthy that changing the spray temperature increases the overall deposition efficiency ( The high kinetic energy of the Al particles results in significant plastic strain on impact, which produces substantial work hardening. As a result, in most cases cold sprayed metallic coatings are expected to have a significantly higher hardness than the equivalent annealed bulk material  The substrate fracture surfaces of the KM coatings after lug shear testing are shown in Based on the presence of a peak in the bond strength curves shown in Another interesting feature of the failure between the coating and substrate after lug shear testing can be observed on the coating side of the fracture surface as shown in  Al coatings reinforced with Al The deposition efficiency of the Al The spray temperature has little effect on density, hardness and bond strength of the Al A transition in fracture mode from adhesive to cohesive failure with increasing Al The authors are grateful to the