The rapid emergence of micro-devices for biomedical applications over the past two decades has introduced new challenges for the materials used in the devices. Devices like microneedles and the Nanopatch, require sufficient strength to puncture skin often with sharp-slender micro-scale profiles, while maintaining mechanical integrity. For these technologies we sought to address two important questions: 1) On the scale at which the device operates, what forces are required to puncture the skin? And 2) What loads can the projections/microneedles withstand prior to failure. First, we used custom fabricated nanoindentation micro-probes to puncture skin at the micrometre scale, and show that puncture forces are ∼0.25–1.75mN for fresh mouse skin, in agreement with finite element simulations for our device. Then, we used two methods to perform strength tests of Nanopatch projections with varied aspect ratios. The first method used a nanoindenter to apply a force directly on the top or on the side of individual silicon projections (110μm in length, 10μm base radius), to measure the force of fracture. Our second method used an Instron to fracture full rows of projections and characterise a range of projection designs (with the method verified against previous nanoindentation experiments). Finally, we used Cryo-Scanning Electron Microscopy to visualise projections in situ in the skin to confirm the behaviour we quantified, qualitatively.
               
                  Statement of Significance
                  Micro-device development has proliferated in the past decade, including devices that interact with tissues for biomedical outcomes. The field of microneedles for vaccine delivery to skin has opened new material challenges both in understanding tissue material properties and device material. In this work we characterise both the biomaterial properties of skin and the material properties of our microprojection vaccine delivery device. This study directly measures the micro-scale puncture properties of skin, whilst demonstrating clearly how these relate to device design. This will be of strong interest to those in the field of biomedical microdevices. This includes work in the field of wearable and semi-implantable devices, which will require clear understanding of tissue behaviour and material characterisation.Micro-devices for biomedical use have in recent years received a lot of research attention, with many products advancing towards commercialisation and clinical trials Effective skin puncture is achieved with a highly localised stress; reported to be ∼35 A further compounding factor is that the topography of skin makes it unlikely for all tips to enter the skin perpendicularly, introducing additional lateral forces on the microneedle structures. Finally, as the structures reach further into the skin they encounter a different range of skin layer material properties Previous studies that have aimed to quantify the forces required to puncture skin generally make use of their single microneedles or arrays thereof The challenge that is presented for microdevice design is to ensure that the strength of penetrating structures is sufficient for their use. But if the device is designed with excessive mechanical integrity (ie larger dimensions) then it may end up with a size that hinders its ability to penetrate skin – a problem exacerbated in high density array configurations such as with our Nanopatch (e.g. 20,000/cm Although our Nanopatch vaccination device has been used in a number of successful animal studies, we have not fully assessed either: a) its required strength to puncture skin; or b) the size of projection that is required to ensure sufficient strength for use. However, both are of critical importance for clinical translation and production scale-up, i.e. aiming for penetration in thicker human skin using an inexpensive manufacturing material. Within this paper we address both of these pieces of information, to provide a complimentary assessment of the device characteristics. First, we utilise nanoindentation using custom manufactured probes to identify the puncture forces that the tip of our projections (small microneedle structures) must reach in order to penetrate skin. This is particularly important on a scale that is unique from previous work in this area. We complement this with modelling of projection skin puncture to correlate the dynamic application of a Nanopatch device to skin with low speed nanoindentation testing. Following this, the second part of this paper is a set of mechanical tests on a range of Nanopatch projection geometries to assess their strength. We then compare these two aspects of our device and demonstrate using CryoSEM the capacity for these devices to puncture skin without fracturing. Nanopatches were manufactured from silicon wafers using Deep Reactive Ion-Etching (DRIE) as published previously For the nanoindentation experiments, two types of probe were required. The first type was that to be used for testing the puncture properties of skin. This required a defined frontal contact area and had to be similar in size to the tips of Nanopatch projections, to make any results scale-relevant. The method for manufacture of this probe is discussed in Crichton et al. To measure the force/stress to puncture skin, the two small probes (1 Forces of failure were measured by the nanoindenter and it was desirable to be able to understand the local failure stress of the skin. To do this, the maximum stress, The mouse ear tissue (and PDMS backing) models were taken from the established method described in earlier works Using the large (40 A secondary method of lateral tests were performed which allowed a higher throughput of experimental tests. This used an Instron 5543 with a 500 Skin that was used for this study was from C57/Black 6 mice in accordance with University of Queensland Animal Ethics Approval 520/08. The skin that was selected was from excised mouse ears due to the ease of accessing that tissue and the minimal presence of hairs meant no processing was required prior to testing. The skin was mounted on a nanoindentation stage using double-sided tape with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) soaked filter paper mounted at the excision sites to maintain tissue hydration during the tests. To visualise the ability of projections to puncture the skin, we utilised CryoSEM. We have previously published this technique Data plotting and statistics have been performed using GraphPad Prism version 6.00. For micro-structures like microneedles/microprojections, theoretical analyses can be provide insights into their expected behaviour, but small manufacturing, material or composite discontinuities can cause high stress concentrations under load and cause early failure. The theoretical analyses for strength are provided for the lateral loading case and for trapezoidal buckling. For these calculations, we made the simplifying assumption that the small geometric variations along the length of the projections and any tip angle differences were lower order effects than the projection aspect ratio. Where a projection is considered to act like a cantilever beam with an applied lateral load, the peak failure stress will happen when the stress to balance the moment exceeds that of the material ultimate tensile stress ( The failure force of projections is considered axially using the approach by Smith This gives the buckling force for varied cross-section fixed-free beams of given material Young’s modulus, Silicon Nanopatches 4 To understand the axial forces that act on our projections when they first breach the skin surface, we performed nanoindentation tests using customised micro-probes. These probes are shown in The puncture measurements were performed at the maximum velocity allowed by the indenter (100 Following the identification of the forces required to puncture skin, a large (40 To allow higher throughput of experimental conditions, an Instron was used to perform indentation of full patches, similar to those methods used previously by others When patches were mounted at a 45° angle on the Instron and full rows of projections were loaded, a single clear point of failure was much more prominent, a raw data example of which is shown in The results that were obtained from the Instron testing were compared to the nanoindentation experiments, in To demonstrate how these projections could enter the skin, we visualised a Nanopatch, Puncturing skin to deliver vaccines to the upper layers where high densities of immune cells reside has been performed for well over a decade in animal models, with a range of microneedles, ranging from a few tens of microns to over a millimetre These forces are lower than those reported for larger microneedles as would be expected for our smaller scale of device. These larger studies include the work of Davis et al. Demonstrating that larger projections can enter the skin efficiently, despite their high density, The compliment data to skin puncture is to ensure that projection strength is sufficient for the task it is designed for. Measuring the strength of the projection design shown in Overall, the early projection tip fracture behaviour in axial testing reduced the use of this measurement. The theoretical calculations showed that the failure mode was not buckling and therefore a more appropriate experimental setup for failure testing would be better for future studies. Loading a tapered projection terminating in a small tip with a high force is not representative of the distributed forces that will be experienced when a projection is pushed against/into the skin. As is visible in In the development of micro-devices for biomedical applications, there is a significant challenge of understanding the mechanical interactions with biological tissues. This study has shown that whilst relatively simple approaches (instron testing and standard mechanical theory) can be used to understand the device material properties, relating this to tissue properties is more challenging. Doing so requires more sensitive equipment (nanoindentation), micro-manufacture of testing probes, and finite element modelling add significant complexity to this process. However, understanding these interactions will allow more accurate modelling and development towards clinical devices. Puncture of skin is currently an important topic, with the evolution of micro-devices for vaccine delivery. Within this paper we report on the measurement of skin puncture on a scale that is directly relevant to micro-device development, and then combine this with an examination of the structural capacity of our micro-device, the Nanopatch. Measuring skin puncture with custom fabricated micro-probes of 1 Authors Kendall and Crichton are previous employees of Vaxxas Pty Ltd., a company developing the Nanopatch for clinical trials. They remain shareholders in the company. Nanopatch technology has been licenced to Vaxxas for use in clinical development. We thank all members of Prof Kendall, Prof Martin and Prof Huang’s groups at the University of Queensland. This work is funded by a