The effect of cold high pressure densification (CHPD) on anisotropy of the critical current density (J
                     c) in « in situ » single core binary and alloyed MgB2 tapes has been determined as a function of temperatures at 4.2 K, 20 K and 25 K as well as at applied magnetic fields up to 19 T. The study includes binary and C4H6O5 (malic acid) doped MgB2 tapes before and after CHPD. It is remarkable that the CHPD process not only improved the J
                     c values, in particular at the higher magnetic fields, but also decreased the anisotropy ratio, Γ = J
                     c
                     ///J
                     c
                     ┴. In binary MgB2 tapes, the anisotropy factor Γ increases with higher aspect ratios, even after applying CHPD. In malic acid (C4H6O5) doped tapes, however, the application of CHPD leads only to small enhancements of Γ, even for higher aspect ratios. This is attributed to the higher carbon content in the MgB2 filaments, which in turn is a consequence of the reduced chemical reaction path in the densified filaments. At all applied field values, it was found that CHPD processed C4H6O5 doped tapes exhibit an almost isotropic behavior. This constitutes an advantage in view of industrial magnet applications using wires with square or slightly rectangular configuration.The manufacture and commercialization of industrial MgB In the present paper, the attention is centered on The C The round binary and alloyed wires (Ø 0.83 mm) for the present work were manufactured at Hyper Tech Research, Inc., Columbus, OH, USA. The MgB Crystal structures of the samples were characterized by x-ray diffraction (XRD) using Philips PW1730 instrument and lattice parameters ( The geometrical changes, the variation of lattice parameters, carbon content and The variation of the anisotropy factor, Γ vs. At 4.2 and 20 K, almost isotropic behavior found at lower fields in both binary and malic doped tapes, regardless of CHPD condition. From This interesting observation can be further supported by the microstructural characterization conducted by SEM and TEM shown in The effect of operating temperature on Γ after pressing at 2 GPa (only with malic acid doped tapes) with similar The variation of the irreversible fields ( It is known In this article, it has been shown that the effects of CHPD on anisotropy in binary tapes as well as in malic acid doped MgB This work was supported by the