A cone crusher and a vertical shaft impact (VSI) crusher were operated in closed circuit to compare the performance of the two different crushing machines. The crushers were operated in closed circuit with a 9mm final screen aperture size. A comparison of capacity, size reduction and power draw shows that the VSI crusher is significantly more energy efficient than the cone crusher, and it produces significantly more fine material. The study also shows that the recirculating load is higher with the VSI than with the cone crusher. Compared to the cone crusher, the VSI product contained 65% more material smaller than 1mm while at the same time consuming less power. An alternative energy measure was introduced to assess the value of feeding a finer product to a grinding mill. This measure suggests that a VSI can save 2–14% of the energy consumed in grinding, depending on the energy model used and the final product size. This estimate is in agreement with an energy saving of 11.8% observed in an iron ore application where VSI’s were introduced as a crushing step preceding the grinding circuit.Cone and gyratory crushers are commonly used in the mining industry. A mine typically has a primary, a secondary and a tertiary crushing step. For energy efficiency, it is normally recommended that the secondary crusher is preceded by a screen that separates the fines and passes them directly into the tertiary crushing circuit. The tertiary crushing step is usually operated in closed circuit with a screen aperture size typically in the range 9–12 But in a mine, the cost and energy consumption associated with fine grinding are considerably larger than those associated with the compressive crushing. This difference in cost and energy consumption has essentially two explanations. As the particle size is reduced, the specific surface area increases. As the particle size approaches zero, the number of particles and specific surface of all those particles approaches infinity. The amount of energy consumed is a monotonic function of that new surface area. Another explanation is that breakage occurs at micro defects in the rock particles. As the particles get more and more broken into smaller and smaller fragments, these defects are “consumed” and the remaining particles become, relatively, more and more difficult to break. This was shown experimentally by  The operating principle of the vertical shaft impact (VSI) crusher is shown in In a typical mining application, a primary crusher reduces the size of blasted rock; from several hundred mm down to 0–250 In metal recovery, flotation is a commonly used process. The rock from the crushing plant needs to be reduced typically from the range 1–10 Crushing tests were made in a test plant located in Dalby in Southern Sweden. Tests were made with a Sandvik H3800 cone crusher equipped with a set of F-liners, which is a fine crushing chamber. For comparison, tests were made in the same plant, with a Sandvik Merlin RP-106 VSI (vertical shaft impact crusher). The crushers were operated in a closed circuit. For the VSI, the test plant was also operated with a 4 The cone crusher has a limited minimum CSS, and the cone crusher performance deteriorates if too much fines are fed into the crusher. The cone crusher was only operated with 9 During operation, the hydraulic pressure in the cone crusher is not constant. The peak pressure is the filtered envelope pressure, see The VSI test results are presented in As can be seen in When operating the VSI with 4 One explanation for the significantly lower energy consumption of the VSI is that it has fewer moving parts, only the rotor, and it has only roller bearings, as opposed to the cone crusher which has more moving parts and several oil lubricated plain journal bearings that consume more energy. Possibly the impact breakage mechanism of the VSI is more energy efficient, than the cone which compresses a bed of rock particles, but the power draws recorded here are all gross input power draw. One can hence not conclude with any certainty, that the breakage mechanism as such, is more energy efficient for the VSI. A commonly used formula to estimate the energy consumption in comminution is Bond’s equation, Eq. Here, Researchers have shown that the models in Eqs.  For a last stage crushing step and a following grinding circuit, Eq. A drawback with all of these energy models, however, is that they only look at a single number, in these cases, the An alternative energy measure is hereby adopted that estimates the energy cost for the entire size distribution. Consider a particle size distribution As shown in Here, This sum can be computed as an integral. Let { The size distribution function This expression conforms to the definition of a Riemann integral. According to Or with the function The energy consumed in comminution is the difference between the energy potentials of the feed and the product. The alternative energy index, here denoted as Matt’s index, named by adapting the author’s first name, becomes Here, If it is so that impact or compressive crushing is a more energy efficient method than grinding, it will be tempting to reduce the size as much as possible in the crushing circuit that precedes the mill. A common objective for a crushing plant is to maximise the tonnage of, let us say −12.5 One important question is how much more is the finer VSI product worth, for a subsequent grinding circuit? The energy model of Eq. The mill products from Let us assume that the cone and VSI products of The numbers in According to To check the validity of Eq. In It should be emphasized that Morrell’s derivation of the exponent of −0.3 was made under the assumption that the exponent is in fact a variable function, and this function was obtained by fitting the model of Eq. The results found here indicate that a VSI can achieve considerable energy savings in a grinding circuit following a crushing plant. The reasons for this are that the VSI consumes less energy and produces more fine material than a conventional cone crusher. The higher fines content should be valuable for a subsequent grinding mill. The estimate made here of a potential energy saving between 2% and 14%, can be compared with an observed energy saving of 11.8% in an iron ore processing plant. The results presented here suggest that Eq.