Printed circuit boards are a metals rich fraction of e-waste streams and their recycling to recover the metals promotes growth of a secondary resources economy. Reported successful cases of PCB recycling are carried out in large volumes using high-level technology and high capital investment smelter house operations. Hydrometallurgical processes have the potential to provide an option for the scalable processing of smaller volumes of PCBs and can be set up at relatively lower capital costs. However, to date, the hydrometallurgical treatment options available rely on precursor communition processes that also require high capital and energy costs. This study evaluates the options of using NaOH pre-treatment, milling, combustion and other alternative PCB pre-treatment methods to promote the leaching of metals which are otherwise inaccessible. A batch of custom-made PCBs of known and consistent metal content has been used to allow effective comparison. The effectiveness of each pre-treatment method is evaluated through carrying out an ammoniacal copper leach and recoveries are compared. X-ray CT scans are used to characterise the boards and map out accessibility of metals for leaching as well as to demonstrate the effectiveness of each pre-treatment method. Results from the X-ray CT scans showed 69% of the copper to be located in the inner layers of the PCB rendering chemical pre-treatment which only exposes metal on the outer surfaces of the board ineffective. It was concluded that an integration of pre-treatment methods effectively liberates metals without the use of heavily mechanised tools and at relatively minimum environmental impacts.Waste Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs) are a valuable fraction of electronic waste (e-waste) streams and are often the focal stream of e-waste recyclers. PCBs form about 1–3% ( In general, metal fractions in PCBs are found clad in layers of fibre glass and flame retardant coated epoxy resins. As technology continues to advance, more complex PCBs (with an increased number of fibreglass and metal layers) are being produced making the metal less and less accessible to leach agents when boards have not been pre-treated. In this paper chemical and non-chemical methods of liberating the metal are being considered and the effectiveness as well as practicality will be assessed. Chemical methods involve the use of chemical reagents, typically as solvents for the surface coatings found on PCBs and can possibly facilitate the delamination of the metal and fibre glass layers. Physical mechanical treatment methods of PCBs are often considered more promising and to have technological and environmental advantages; they neither produce a chemical change in the components nor use water as a processing medium, thus avoiding the generation of liquid effluents ( In developing countries such as South Africa energy costs are very high and feed volume streams are low and supply of this feed stream is unstable. This presents challenges when considering adopting the already established technologies in the pre-treatment of PCBs. The physical separation methods considered for this study are those that are scalable and can be implemented even at small scale. Usually, cutting of boards to smaller sizes, often determined by the size of the subsequent shredder is the first step and this is then followed by the milling of the PCBs. Particle sizes from a shredder vary with discharge grid sizes and discharge material is often further treated through comminution processes. Another method of liberating metal from PCBs that has been considered in this study is that of delaminating the PCBs under high heat or through combustion. This is a common practice in informal recycling despite its associated hazards ( The objective of this paper is to evaluate different pre-treatment methods that can be employed at small scale to liberate metals for subsequent leaching stages. The leaching tests are used as a diagnostic to indicate the extent of accessibility of metals to leach agents. A custom made sample of uniformly designed 10 cm × 15 cm (52.4 g per board) PCBs with a known blueprint was supplied by Trax Interconnect (Pty) Ltd a local manufacturing company. The blueprint gives information on the design of the PCB pointing to the number and location of metal layers as well as the location and number of vias on the board. It was important that PCBs of the same design and material quality be used in order to achieve effective comparison of experimental data. To obtain the head grade of the PCB, for each test, a single PCB was cut then pulverised in a sealed ring mill. The sample was weighed before and after the cutting and pulverisation and minimal loses of 0.523 g were incurred. The sample (now in powder form) was equivalent to 1 PCB; it was then split using a rotary micro riffler. The four samples were digested in aqua regia and metal content was then analysed using ICP. In a separate test, a single PCB was cut into 5 cm × 5 cm pieces which were then combusted in a furnace at 400 °C and the residue was then dissolved in aqua regia and analysed using ICP. The PCBs were found to contain 29.1 g of copper per board which translates to the mass fraction of copper in each individual PCB being 55.45%. This gives a copper grade of approximately 555 kg/Tonne of PCBs while the gold grade was found to be 1.1 kg/Tonne. The PCBs were also analysed using 3D X-Ray computed tomography to map out the location and volume of metals prior to and after processing. 3D X-Ray computed tomography is a non-destructive technique for visualizing interior features within solid objects, and for obtaining digital information on their 3D geometries and properties. The digital x-ray scanner is mounted and rotates producing 2D panoramic views of the object being scanned. These 2D images are stacked together as slices in the x, y and z axes forming the 3D image of the object. The resolution is dependent on how far the image is from the x-ray source and how big the object is. Each new PCB was pre-treated uniquely then leached in ammonia-ammonium sulphate solutions (4 M ammonium hydroxide + 2 M ammonium sulphate), to extract copper. The ammonia-ammonium systems have been established to be effective lixiviants for some base metals including copper ( Test solutions were prepared from deionised water and analytical grade CuSO   Pre-treating in sodium hydroxide removed the surface coating on the boards exposing the copper layers immediately below the surface. This resulted in copper recoveries increasing to 25% however, this is still only a small fraction of the total copper on the PCB. The low percentage (25%) extracted is due to the multi-layered nature of the PBC. Introducing additional points of weakness on the PCB through the drilling of holes and only marginally improved the leaching process (from 25% to 27%), was also assessed using image analysis. X-Ray analysis of copper distribution on the PCBs prior to leaching in terms of percentage of total volumes is shown in For the sample prepared by Method 7 (milled PCB, In context of copper recoveries reported in literature, even the highest recovery reported in this study (69% for the combusted sample) remains significantly lower than most literature studies which report high recoveries usually of higher than 80%. In their critical review paper, While the furnace pre-treated sample gave the best results in the current study, it has not been identified as the suitable route for future work in this ongoing research. It is important that the identified pre-treatment technology be one that could be employable at small scale and low capital investment and that the chosen method is applicable with relatively minimal environmental impact and occupational safety and health risks. Method 4 (cut into 2 cm × 1.5 cm PCBs and soaked in NaOH) was identified as the method with potential for further development. A more detailed criterion for the selection of the suitable pre-treatment has been documented by This project has been funded through the