A froth separating device was tested in which heavy, hydrophobic particles break froth films and sink to the bottom, while light, hydrophilic particles are supported by the froth to form a top tailings product. Two potential industrial applications for the reverse froth flotation process were evaluated. As a coarse particle flotation technique for sulphide bearing ores, it was found that xanthate pre-conditioning of the ore results in concentrating the sulphur bearing particles to the concentrate. By increasing the xanthate addition, the relative mass recovery as well as sulphur recovery increases. This increase in mass and sulphur recovery is not linear. These results were promising in terms of finding a coarse particle flotation technique for the pre-concentration of sulphide bearing minerals. Preliminary tests indicated that the reverse froth flotation process is not suitable for the replacement of grease belts for fine (−3 mm) diamond recovery. The major concern is the high potential losses of valuable material to the tailings. These losses are mainly due to the fact that the major separation process in the reverse froth flotation cell is based on particle mass beyond a certain critical value. The surface properties of the particle account only for a secondary separation process. Nevertheless, this technique still offers the potential to be applied to coarse coal flotation and recycling waste separation within certain operating limits. In a further paper ( In this paper, two potential industrial applications were evaluated for the reverse froth flotation process, i.e., coarse flotation of sulphide bearing ores and the possible replacement of grease belts in the diamond mining industry. Two samples were received from the Orapa diamond mine in Botswana as final recovery tailings, and two samples were prepared from Harmony gold mine ROM ore. Three methods were used to determine the average density of each size fraction of the ore samples: density bottles, a helium pycnometer and water displacement tests. The densities of these samples are summarised in The design and operation of the flotation cell were described earlier ( The bubble size in two and three phase systems was measured by the UCT bubble size analyser ( No modification to the surface properties of the Orapa tailings was attempted. Density tracers (described by It has been shown previously ( The mass and sulphur recoveries were determined under operating conditions #1, #3, #4 and #5 without any addition of xanthate. Under these conditions, the particles would separate purely on the basis of particle mass. The sulphur recovery would therefore be due to mineral association with the various mass fractions. The mass and sulphur recoveries were determined under the same four operating conditions, but with the addition of 500 g/ton of sodium ethyl xanthate and a conditioning time of 30 min. The objective of this set of experiments was to determine whether a concentrating effect can be obtained by rendering the exposed sulphide surfaces hydrophobic with the addition of xanthate. For each experimental run, 100 g of ore was fed onto the froth bed. Particles were isolated in the froth, allowing the particles to separate on individual properties. From An increase in the liquid–froth interface level results in an increase in the mass recovery to the concentrate. This is in accordance with the model output results conducted on various shapes and sizes ( An increase in the respective air flowrates through the spargers located in sub-compartment A (operating condition #5) and sub-compartment B (operating condition #4) results in the mass recovery to the concentrate to decrease when compared with the results of the operating conditions #1 and #3. This is to be expected due to the increase in the horizontal bubble velocity in the various cell compartments, as well as the increase in the upward force component of the force balance (due to the increase in the vertical velocity component). The components of the force balance, exerted by the bubble films on a particle, vary with operating condition. Since the mass recovery varies per operating condition, it must be concluded that a distribution of particle masses exists in the feed sample. With an increase in the mass recovery to the concentrate, the associated sulphur recovery increases as well. However, the increase in sulphur recovery is not directly proportional to the increase in mass recovery. With the addition of 500 g/ton sodium ethyl xanthate: The mass recovery and sulphur recovery again vary with operating condition (similar trends to the non-xanthate condition). However, per operating condition, there has been an increase in the respective mass and sulphur recoveries. By pre-conditioning the particles with xanthate, the sulphide present on the particle surface will be rendered hydrophobic. Since hydrophobic particles would act as bubble film breakers, it would be expected that the sulphur recovery to the concentrate would increase. However, by pre-conditioning the particles with xanthate, the overall mass of the particles still remains the same. If a particle has reported to the concentrate under the no xanthate condition, it would be expected that the particle would still report to the concentrate (purely due to its mass). However, a particle (with sulphide on its surface) that reported to the middlings or tailings can now act as a bubble film breaker and report to the concentrate. The increase in sulphur recovery therefore has to coincide with an increase in the mass recovery. For the 500 g/ton xanthate condition, the gradient in the line depicting % mass recovery vs. % sulphur recovery has increased. This means that although the % mass recovery increases by pre-conditioning the ore with xanthate, a concentration effect takes place resulting in a relative increase in the sulphur recovery. The reverse froth flotation cell produces three products, i.e.: concentrate, middlings and tailings. The experimental work on the +2.8−3.35 mm Harmony ROM ore fraction has shown that the mass and sulphur recoveries to the concentrate are dependent on the operating condition of the cell, as well as the pre-conditioning of particles with sodium ethyl xanthate. The +1.7−2.8 mm size fraction, however, showed poor recoveries to the concentrate, other than under operating condition #3. The reason for this is that the particles are too light, resulting in the upward force component to dominate the force balance. Although the particles can still break the bubble films (due to contact angle) they are not heavy enough to settle through the froth under gravity. Attempts were therefore made to operate the cell at significantly lower air flowrates and increased liquid–froth interface level. However, since all controls on the cell (i.e., re-circulating water) are manual, it was impossible to attain pseudosteady state conditions. Under operating condition #3, however, limited particles did fall through the froth. It was therefore decided to investigate the influence of xanthate addition, on the concentrating effect, as established above. Four levels of xanthate addition were tested. With each experimental set a pre-conditioning time of 30 min was used. The results of these experiments are presented in   The results presented above are promising in terms of finding a coarse particle flotation technique for the pre-concentration of sulphide bearing minerals. However, it is recognised that several potential problems might exist with the technique: The pre-concentration of coarse sulphide bearing minerals is dependent on the liberation of sulphide, as well as the distribution of sulphide between the various particle mass fractions. Separation in the reverse froth flotation cell is primarily based on the particle mass, followed by the With any of these factors changing, cell performance will be drastically influenced. Therefore, since the composition of an ore body is never constant, it can be expected that the cell performance will vary for each ore type in an ore body. The flotation cell was originally developed to answer a need in the diamond processing industry for the replacement of grease belts in the final recovery of fine (−3 mm) diamonds. The Orapa tailings samples were “spiked” with 100 cubic density tracers of 3.5 SG. For the first sample, 2.1 and 1.0 mm cubic tracers were used, while 3.05 and 2.1 mm cubic tracers were used in the second sample. In addition, it was assumed that it would be possible to selectively render the diamond tracer surface hydrophobic to a contact angle of 98°. The density tracers were therefore coated with candle wax. Test runs for both particle size fractions were conducted under operating condition #3 and operating condition #5. The recovery distributions to the concentrate, middlings and tailings for the −3+2 mm Orapa tailings and spiked tracers are given in Operating condition #5 was subsequently tested. Although a significant mass reduction (45.5%) was obtained, huge losses (74%) of valuable 2.1 mm product could occur. By incorporating the middlings fraction as product, the mass reduction would increase to 43.7%, while losses of valuable 2.1 mm product reduce to 18%. A significant mass reduction is therefore possible by treating coarse (−3+2 mm) diamond concentrate. However, a possible loss of 18% of the fine valuable material could occur. A similar analysis was conducted for the −2+1 mm Orapa tailings fraction. In this case, the tails were spiked with 2.1 mm cubic density tracers and 1.0 mm cubic density tracers. An SG of 3.5 was used for the density tracers together with a candle wax coating yielding a contact angle of ∼98° on the surface of the tracers.  The results presented above would indicate that the reverse froth flotation process is not suitable for the replacement of grease belts for fine diamond recovery. The major concern is the high potential losses of valuable material to the tailings. These losses are mainly due to the fact that the major separation process in the reverse froth flotation cell is based on particle mass. The surface properties of the particle only account for a secondary separation process. This sensitivity towards particle mass would require the screening of feed material in very narrow size fractions. Not only is such screening difficult, but also the number of unit operations in the process would increase, resulting in unnecessary capital and operational costs. Despite these unsatisfactory results gained using density tracers, encouraging results have been obtained using real diamond ores. As a coarse particle flotation technique for sulphide bearing ores, it was found that xanthate pre-conditioning of the ore results in concentrating the sulphur bearing particles to the concentrate. By increasing the xanthate addition, the relative mass recovery as well as sulphur recovery to the concentrate increases. This increase in mass and sulphur recovery, however, is not linear. These results were promising in terms of developing a coarse particle flotation technique for the pre-concentration of sulphide bearing minerals. The results further indicated that the flotation process is not suitable for the replacement of grease belts for fine diamond recovery. The major concern is the high potential losses of valuable material to the tailings. These losses are mainly due to the fact that the major separation process in the reverse froth flotation cell is based on particle mass. The surface properties of the particle only account for a secondary separation process. The flotation community has struggled for many years to separate coarse particles using flotation froths. The “reverse froth flotation” technique, however, is capable of separating coarse particles on the basis of a combination of particle mass, hydrophobicity and mass to area ratio, and thereby providing a solution to the problem. In order to optimise the technique, the effect of physical parameters on the rupture of bubble films in the novel flotation cell has been characterised. Although only two industrial applications of the technique have been tested, it is felt that the technique might find suitable application in the separation of coarse coal, as well as the separation of plastics from metals in the recycling industry. In these cases, the density of material is lower, so that hydrophobicity will become a more significant variable. The financial support of De Beers Industrial Diamond Division, the former Foundation for Research Development in South Africa and the Australian Research Council is gratefully appreciated.