It has long been established that earthworms beneficially affect plant growth. This is to a large extent due to the high fertility of their casts. However, it is not clear how fertile casts are compared to bulk soil, and how their fertility varies between earthworm feeding guilds and with physico-chemical soil properties. Using meta-analysis, we quantified the fertility of earthworm casts and identified its controlling factors. Our analysis included 405 observations from 81 articles, originating from all continents except Antarctica. We quantified cast fertility by determining the enrichment of earthworm casts relative to the bulk soil (“relative cast fertility”; RCF) for total organic carbon (TOC), total phosphorus (P) and total nitrogen (N) concentrations, as well as for plant available pools of N (total mineral N) and P (available P: P-Olsen, P-Bray or comparable metrics), C-to-N ratio and microbial biomass C. In addition to these response variables, we studied four additional ones closely related to soil fertility: pH-H2O, clay content, cation exchange capacity (CEC), and base saturation. With the exception of C-to-N ratio, microbial C and clay content, all studied response variables were significantly increased in casts compared to the bulk soil. Increases in total elemental concentrations (TOC, total P and total N), which are the result of preferential feeding or concentration processes, were comparable and ranged between 40 and 48%. Nutrient availability, which is to a large extent the result of (bio)chemical transformation processes in the earthworm gut, was increased more strongly than total elemental concentrations (241% and 84% for mineral N and available P, respectively). Increases in pH (0.5 pH units), cation exchange capacity (40%), and base saturation (27%) were also large and significant. None of the soil-related possible controlling factors could satisfactorily explain the variation in RCF; plant presence (or other sources of organic C input such as residue application) was the only controlling factor that consistently increased RCF across soil properties. With the exception of available P, none of the studied response variables could be linked to earthworm feeding guild. Our results show that earthworm casts are much more fertile than bulk soil for almost all analysed cast fertility properties. However, these positive RCFs are to a large extent dependent upon the presence of plants. In general, earthworm feeding guild or specific physico-chemical soil properties could not explain the large variability in RCF for the various response variables. Therefore, we hypothesize that RCF effects depend on intricate interactions between earthworm species traits and specific soil properties. Understanding these interactions requires trait-based approaches combined with mechanistic modelling of biochemical processes in the earthworm gut and casts.It has long been established that earthworms are beneficial to plant growth (e.g. Given the long list of sources citing the Here we focus on increases in various soil fertility properties in the casts of earthworms. To quantify this increased soil fertility we introduce a new concept: First, earthworms can increase RCF due to what is in essence a Second, RCF increases may occur due to Like pH, nutrient availability in the casts is typically higher than in the surrounding soil, mostly due to Despite the fact that many of the basic processes that can contribute to increased fertility in earthworm casts have been studied, a systematic overview of the extent of the RCF effects and its controlling factors is missing. However, such an overview is important in order to determine management measures that might ensure the largest effect of earthworms on soil fertility in agroecosystems. Here we present the first synthesis of peer-reviewed literature on cast fertility in a meta-analysis. We aimed to address the following research questions: (i) To what extent are earthworm casts more fertile than the bulk soil with respect to a variety of relevant cast properties? (ii) What is the role of concentration versus transformation processes in increasing RCF; and (iii) how is RCF affected by factors such as soil physico-chemical properties, plant presence and earthworm feeding guild? By answering these questions we also aim to identify knowledge gaps that need to be addressed in future research to ensure an optimal integration of the yield-increasing properties of earthworms in sustainable agroecosystems. We conducted a literature search in the ISI-Web of Science database on peer-reviewed articles published before May 1 Starting with the query “earthworm* AND (cast$ OR dropping$ OR midden$) AND soil NOT vermicompost” and the time-span “all years”, we also included peer-reviewed papers that were too old to be included in Web of Science when they were cited by other papers. Finally, in a few cases we included peer-reviewed articles not found by our query based on suggestions by authors whom we contacted for more information on the data in their articles. Besides articles in English, we included peer-reviewed articles written in French, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Chinese and Dutch that showed up in our query (mostly because they included an English-language abstract). As the main focus of our study is on effects of earthworms in the soil on soil fertility within an agricultural context, we excluded soils that did not have an agricultural use – e.g. soils in polluted mining sites, urban soils and forest soils. Likewise, we did not include studies on vermicomposting as this is a process taking place outside the soil. We only included articles where both data from casts as well as a corresponding value for the bulk soil were reported. Studies that reported only analyses of subsamples of casts or the bulk soil (e.g. macro-aggregates) were excluded. When data from several types of “bulk soil” analyses were included, we preferred the analyses from soil unaffected by earthworms (a different experimental unit for a laboratory experiment or a sample some distance laterally removed from the cast in a field experiment) over soil sampled directly below or next to the casts. When analyses from different layers of the bulk soil were reported, we calculated a mean of the upper 20 cm of soil as “bulk soil”. A total of 81 articles matched our criteria, originating from all continents except Antarctica (Suppl. Table 1). In total, these articles contained 405 paired comparisons of earthworms casts and the bulk soil with respect to the various RCF properties. Most observations were found for TOC (235 paired comparisons from 53 studies); fewest were found for base saturation (23 observations from 9 studies), microbial C (28 from 10 studies) and total P (54 from 10 studies). The papers were published between 1941 and 2018. For each observation in our dataset we noted the means for the respective response variables for the bulk soil as well as for the cast. In addition we noted the standard deviation (SD) and number of replicates (n), estimating missing SD values from the average coefficient of variation (CV) across the dataset. In articles where data were reported in figures rather than in tables, we estimated the values using specialized software (Plot Digitizer 2.0). When it was not clear whether error bars denoted SD or standard error (SE), we conservatively assumed them to be SE. In several cases we contacted the authors of the articles for additional information. If organic matter rather than organic C was reported, the conventional conversion factor of 1.72 was used ( Besides total N and total P, we also analysed total mineral N (the sum of NO pH was included as measured in water extract. If only pH measurements in KCl or CaCl Finally, besides clay content and CEC, we also included the base saturation of the CEC in our analysis. Due to the limited number of studies reporting CEC data, we combined studies reporting CEC measured at the actual soil pH with those measured at a buffered standard pH (such as ammonium acetate) (  Concerning the earthworms, we considered both the feeding guild that they belonged to ( We considered three initial soil properties as controlling factors for RCF: soil organic matter (SOM) content; texture and pH-H Finally, we distinguished two management factors: first, the presence of growing plants (either in the field or under controlled conditions in the greenhouse or laboratory) as an important driver for many soil processes and -properties, and secondly whether any external C was added to the soil. This could be either due to the before-mentioned presence of plants or due to the application of plant residues, organic manure or other organic amendments. We quantified RCF for all response variables except pH by calculating the natural log of the response ratio (r), a metric commonly used in meta-analyses ( The RCF for pH was simply determined as the absolute difference in pH between cast and bulk soil. To test whether the controlling factors affected RCF values, we categorized each study as described in All response variables showed significantly positive RCFs, except for microbial C, C-to-N ratio, and clay content ( Plant presence and input of organic C strongly and significantly increased the RCF of TOC; it was more than doubled in the presence of plants ( RCF values for specific earthworm species did show some differences ( Errors bars for mineral N concentrations were very wide ( Only soil texture and initial soil pH had significant effects on the RCF for pH: lighter texture as well as a lower initial pH resulting in a strong positive RCF for pH ( The RCF values with respect to TOC, total N and total P (48, 46 and 40%, resp.) can be considered concentration effects. They are remarkably similar and not significantly different ( The RCF for base saturation (27%) is also in line with those mentioned above, although the nature of this response variable (with a maximum value of 100%) prohibits direct comparison with other response variables. Especially plant presence and external C input strongly increased most cast fertility properties ( The lack of an overall RCF effect for clay content might suggest that preferential feeding occurs mostly on fresh residue rather than fertile hotspots in the soil and avoids soil organic matter associated with clay particles ( It has been suggested by some authors that earthworms are able to break mineral soil particles by comminution during passage of the gizzard ( The absence of a significant overall RCF effect with respect to C-to-N ratio is remarkable ( Whereas concentration effects due to preferential feeding of organic material mostly show similar RCFs, results with respect to soil properties depending on The significant RCF of available P is not affected by any of the initial soil properties, nor by plant presence or external C input ( As expected, the RCF for pH in the casts was strongly dependent on the original pH of the soil ( With the exception of the marginal effect on available P, feedings guilds did not affect any of the soil fertility properties that we studied. This is quite remarkable, as feeding guild is still by far the most important grouping criterion used in earthworm ecology ( Significant differences between the four most commonly studied earthworm species with respect to TOC ( This study shows a strong and consistent increase in almost all relevant soil fertility properties in casts. The most striking finding, however, is the large variation in the effect sizes among them. This shows that there is no simple way to predict the effects of earthworms on soil fertility. These effects are not consistently linked to earthworm feeding guild, initial soil properties, plant presence or external C input. It therefore appears that these effects are linked to more complex interactions between specific traits of earthworm species, and soil-specific properties. For example, it seems probable that the increase in pH in casts is mostly unrelated to earthworm species or plant presence. Therefore, the main controlling factor for the pH effect in earthworm casts might be the soil proton buffer capacity. Mineral N content, in contrast to pH, is likely to be influenced by feeding behaviour of earthworm species, microbial composition of the soil and will show strong temporal dynamics. The RCF of available P is likely to be affected by earthworm properties such as DOC production in the intestines (e.g. through mucus) or phosphatase activity (e.g. This synthesis limited itself to direct effects of earthworms on soil fertility by looking exclusively at composition of casts. However, earthworms do affect soil properties in other direct ways: the drilosphere also includes burrow walls beyond casts ( The most important finding of this study is the very large extent to which the presence of plants (or other external C input) determines cast fertility. As such, our analysis underlines the importance of proper residue management, as well management practices such as intercropping, covercropping and tillage strategy (e.g. We would like to thank Damian Asawalam, George Brown, Thibaud Decaëns, Jorge Domínguez, Pascal Jouquet, Ridvan Kizilkaya, Renée-Claire Le Bayon, Cindy Shaw, and Jaswinder Singh for providing additional information related to their published work and/or for suggesting additional articles to be included in our analysis. We are grateful to Emilia Rota for information on earthworms in ancient literature; to Laura Ferron for translating texts from French; and to two anonymous reviewers for their constructive remarks. This study was funded through two grants from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research/Earth and Life Sciences (  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at