This study investigate the feasibility of sequestering CO2 via mineral carbonation of calcium-rich alkaline industrial wastes, such as steel slag (SS) and coal fly ash (FA) in acidic mine tailings. Mine tailings are treated with SS and FA at various liquid-to-solid ratios (15 and 30 ml/g) to extract metal components present in FA and SS to supplement the Ca2+ and Mg2+ content of the tailings and to partially neutralize the mine tailings. This remediation step has the benefit of reducing the consumption of neutralizing reagent, such as NaOH, required for pH adjustment to induce mineral carbonation. Compared with FA, it is found that SS with higher MgO and CaO content shows greater neutralizing effect. The ICP-AES analysis of the treated tailing shows its Ca2+ content significantly increased from 111 mg L−1 to 1100 mg L−1; which can proportionally increase the CO2 capture capacity. The highest carbonation efficiencies are observed at carbonation pH of 9 as confirmed by Total Carbon (TC) analyzer and TGA analysis. Mineralogical phase analysis of the carbonated products using TGA-DTG, XRD, and FTIR shows the carbonated solids precipitated at pH 7 and 8 are mainly nesquehonite, while hydromagnesite is the main constituent of carbonates that precipitated at pH 9. The insights from this study direct effort towards sustainable process development focused on remediation of alkaline industrial wastes and the utilization of anthropogenic CO2 emissions.The significant increase of atmospheric concentrations of CO Another route for CO There have been numerous studies on the mineral carbonation of alkaline industrial wastes with high Ca and Mg contents, such as fly ash ( It is recognized that the solution pH in the mineral carbonation should be carefully controlled to balance the dissolution of the active metals and CO In this study we use alkaline industrial wastes, such as fly ash and steel slag, for the remediation of other wastes, such as acidic mine tailings, as well as for CO The fly ash (FA) used in this study was provided by Vales Point power plant (Delta Electricity, Australia). Steel slag (SS) was supplied by Port Kembla Steelworks (Australia). The chemical composition of FA and SS as determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) are shown in The amount of CO Mine tailings were prepared by atmospheric acid leaching (AL) ( The Mg-rich mine tailings were then treated with SS and FA to further enrich the liquor by extracting the metals (mainly Ca) from these alkaline waste materials. Treatment with FA and SS also partially neutralized the acidic mine tailings, thereby reducing the amount of neutralization reagent, such as NaOH, that was required for pH adjustment before carbonation process. Treatment experiments were conducted by adding SS and FA to mine tailings at liquid-to-solid ratios of 15 and 30 ml/g and stirring for 24 h at 30 °C. The working volume of mine tailings was fixed at 30 ml. The resulting slurries are denoted as “ A diagram exemplifying the procedure used for preparing the mine tailings, treatment with FA and SS, and carbonation experiments is shown in The concentration of dissolved metals in mine tailings prepared by acid leaching of saprolite as well as in treated mine tailings at various pH are summarized in Treating with FA and SS increased the pH of the mine tailings which can be attributed to the hydration and dissolution of MgO and CaO contents of FA and SS. According to Eqs It can be observed the treatment with FA increased the pH from 2.1 to 2.7 and to 3.6 with liquid-to-solid ratios of 30 and 15 ml/g, respectively. However, treatment with SS resulted in higher solution pH, i.e. 4.4 and 5.5 for liquid-to-solid ratios of 30 and 15 ml/g, respectively. The greater neutralizing ability of SS compared with FA can be explained by the higher MgO and CaO contents of steel slag. Carbonation tests on supernatants without solid particles were conducted at carbonation pHs of 7, 8, and 9. The total NaOH used for each carbonation, including the NaOH used for increasing the solution pH to carbonation pH and that for maintaining the pH during the carbonation process is summarized in The concentrations of metals in the liquid phase of carbonated leachates and slurries after carbonation at different pH are summarized in The carbonated solids were further analyzed using TGA-DTG, FTIR, XRD, and SEM-EDX to identify their mineralogical phases. The TGA-DTG curves revealed four distinctive steps during the thermal decomposition of carbonated solids. These steps include dehydration (removal of water of crystallization) at temperatures below 250 °C, dehydroxylation (decomposition of Mg(OH) The formation of nesquehonite at carbonation pH 7 and 8 is further evident from the FTIR spectra of the solid samples recovered from carbonation of leachates presented in The TGA-DTG results for carbonated precipitates from carbonation of SS-MT and FA-MT leachates at pH 9 (SS-15-CLCH-pH9 and SS-15-CLCH-pH9) showed a relatively large dehydroxylation weight loss of 9.67% and 8.41%, respectively. The high hydroxyl content of the samples suggests that carbonation at pH 9 is more likely to yield carbonated precipitates in the form of hydromagnesite Mg  The formation of nesquehonite at low carbonation pH can be further supported by the XRD results for carbonated precipitates at pH 7 and 8 presented in  The carbonation conversions or efficiencies were calculated based on the percentage of the initial reactive ions (total Ca This study examined the carbonation and remediation of acidic mine tailings rich in magnesium by supplementing and pH nuetralisation of the tailing with Ca and Mg from Ca-rich alkaline wastes, such as steel slag and coal fly ash. Treating the acidic mine tailings from atmospheric acid leaching of saprolite ore with SS and FA significantly increased the Ca This research was supported by funding from the