Guar and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) polysaccharides play an important role in the mineral processing industry as gangue depressants in the flotation process. As with all polymers, they are polydisperse molecules, exhibiting a range of molecular weights about a mean. Thus, the aim of this study was to determine whether there is competitive adsorption between chain lengths of different molecular weights and to determine which chain lengths adsorb preferentially. Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was used to assess the molecular weight distribution of guar and CMC depressants of low and high molecular weights, before and after adsorption onto a talc substrate. The depressant solutions were allowed to react for increasing periods of time and the change in the molecular weight of the adsorbed fraction over time was assessed. Equilibrium adsorption isotherms and cryogenic scanning electron microscopy were utilised to complement the GPC data.
                  It was found that the shorter chain lengths of the high molecular weight depressants adsorbed preferentially. The kinetics of adsorption were rapid and the molecular weight of the adsorbed fraction did not change substantially thereafter. This was contrary to most of the literature which suggests that the shorter chain lengths will diffuse rapidly to the mineral surface and adsorb, but will be replaced by the longer chain lengths over time due to favourable changes in entropy. An explanation is offered in terms of a greater dependence on adsorption energy in the case of this system. The low molecular weight depressants adsorbed more evenly across the entire molecular weight range, but still showed some preferential adsorption of the shorter chains. The implications for the flotation industry are discussed.Polysaccharide depressants, guar and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), play an important role in the selective separation of unwanted gangue minerals from the valuable minerals in the South African platinum mining industry. Polymeric depressants reduce the hydrophobicity of floatable gangue minerals, rendering these particles hydrophilic and resulting in an upgraded concentrate. Guar and CMC depressants are both made up of simple sugars (galactose and mannose) joined in a branched configuration. The principle difference between a CMC and a guar depressant is that CMC’s carry charged carboxylate groups, described by the degree of substitution, while guar depressants are relatively neutral molecules. In order for a CMC depressant to be an effective depressant, the negative charge must be shielded by positively charged cations present in the solution ( As with any polymer, depressants are polydisperse, meaning that they are made up of polymers of different chain lengths, usually normally distributed around a mean. As the distribution approaches a uniform chain length, the polydispersity approaches unity. The effect of molecular weight of depressants on the depression of floatable gangue has been investigated by The objective of this paper is to determine which chain lengths in a polydisperse CMC and guar depressant preferentially adsorb onto a floatable mineral such as talc. This was tested for both high and low molecular weight CMC and guar depressants and the implications for flotation are discussed. Talc from Balmat, New York, was purchased from Wards Natural Science Establishment. It was pulverised in a ring pulveriser for 2 The depressants were obtained from Senmin Pty (Ltd). These consisted of two CMC’s with molecular weights of 34,300 and 854,000 The ionic strength of all experiments was maintained constant at 1 2.5 In order to determine whether any degradation of the depressant molecule occurred during freeze drying, the chromatogram of the freeze dried reference samples were compared to depressant samples that had not been through the freeze drying process. This confirmed that the freeze drying did not alter the depressant molecular weight distribution in any way. Talc was pulverised to 100% passing 38 An excess of two commercially available CMC and guar depressants of molecular weight 310,000  In order to ascertain the molecular weight of the fractions that were being adsorbed over time, the molecular weight distribution at zero time (before adsorption) was subtracted from each of the subsequent molecular weight distributions of the residual solutions after contact with talc. This represents the adsorbed fraction and is shown in The weight average and number average molecular weights were calculated from the residual and adsorbed distributions. The weight average molecular weights are shown in  In order to illustrate the molecular weight adsorption more clearly,   Cryo-SEM was used to create images of adsorbed CMC and guar depressants on talc. Cryo-SEM has the advantage of capturing the system in its natural state rather than dehydrating the system with all the conformational changes that this might entail for the adsorbed depressant, before subjecting it to high vacuum. The data presented in this paper shows that the low molecular weight fraction of the polydisperse depressants was preferentially adsorbed over the large molecular weight fraction. Previous studies led us to expect that this may happen initially, but that over time, the smaller chain lengths would be displaced by the longer chain length molecules because of the increase in entropy when shorter chains go into solution and active sites are replaced by longer chains (  An alternative explanation may relate to the change in entropy related to the change in conformation when molecules in solution are adsorbed on the mineral surface. Both SEM ( It is common knowledge that talc is an anisotropic mineral consisting of edges and basal planes ( With respect to the kinetics of adsorption, these are determined, not by the overall free energy change, but by the magnitude of any energy barrier ( In terms of their flotation application, guar and CMC depressants do not generally undergo long conditioning times. Depressants are often added to the feed-well of the flotation bank where conditioning times would be in the order of minutes. At 5 This paper demonstrates the change in the molecular weight of the adsorbed polysaccharide depressant as a function of time. This was done for four depressants: a low and high molecular weight CMC and guar, respectively. The data showed that, contrary to most of the published literature, the low molecular weight fraction of a polydisperse guar or CMC depressant adsorbs preferentially onto the mineral substrate. The rate of adsorption was rapid – adsorption was complete after 5 Low molecular weight depressants adsorbed over the entire range, showed a higher affinity for the mineral surface and had a greater maximum adsorption density than high molecular weight depressants of the same type. High molecular weight depressants do not utilise the high end of the molecular weight range and may be superfluous to the flotation process. The authors wish to acknowledge funding from Anglo American Platinum, Impala Platinum, Lonmin, Nkomati, the University of Cape Town and the National Research Foundation. Thanks to Miranda Waldron for the cryo-SEM imaging.