Here we highlight a single pot green synthetic protocol for gold nanoparticles (AuNps) using acetyl salicylic acid (ASA) drug as reducing and capping agent. These nanoparticles were characterized using UV–Vis (UV–Vis) spectroscopy, Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) Spectroscopy, X-ray diffractometry (XRD) and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). The estimated average size of AuNps was 33 nm. These ASA-AuNps were employed to develop a highly selective and sensitive colorimetric sensor for Fe3+ detection. This sensor responded linearly to Fe3+ in the range of 0.3–2.1 μmol L−1. The limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) of sensor was 0.051 and 0.17 μmol L−1 respectively. The response of the developed sensor to the interfering ions like Ni2+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Cr3+, Co2+, As3+, Pb2+, Fe2+ and Zn2+ was negligible. The sensor was used successfully to detect Fe3+ in real water samples collected from various locations of the Sindh River.Iron (Fe) is essential metal involved in several biochemical pathways in humans such as red-ox reactions, processes associated with electron or oxygen transfer and so on [ With nanotechnology scenario, iron determination has become more sophisticated, easier and simpler. Nanomaterial based sensors for iron determination include, electrochemical [ Synthesis of gold nanoparticles with the help of drugs especially analgesic drugs has been included in our several reports [ Herein we demonstrate the synthesis of ASA based AuNps by a single-pot facile protocol and their application for a highly sensitive and extremely selective Fe Initial characterization of ASA-AuNps was performed by UV–Vis spectrometer, model lambda 35 from Perkin Elmer (Shelton, USA), within the spectral range of 400–800 nm. Interaction between AuNps and oxidized -ASA was investigated with the help of Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy Model Nicolet 5700 of Thermo (Madison, USA). AFM images were recorded using Atomic force microscope of Agilent 5500 (Santa Clara, USA). Crystalline properties of fabricated nanoparticles were verified by XRD model D-8 of Bruker (Germany). Photographs of the colloidal ASA-AuNps for visual colorimetric detection of Fe All chemicals and reagents were of ultra pure analytical grade quality and used as we received. All solutions including those of metal ions and other solutions such as hydrochloroauric acid (HAuCl All glassware were soaked overnight in a 3 mol L ASA-AuNps were synthesized by adding 200 μL of 0.2% HAuCl Various concentrations of Fe Five water samples collected from different areas of Sindh River were filtered and diluted appropriately. These samples were finally analysed following the same procedure as true in case of standard Fe As the SPR properties of metal nanoparticles especially Au, Ag and Cu, reside in the optical area of electromagnetic profile [ The ASA-AuNps were synthesized in neutral aqueous medium using ASA as reducing and capping agent. Concentrations of HAuCl AFM study was performed to estimate the size and roughness of the synthesized AuNps. Interaction of AuNps with ASA molecules was studied using FT-IR spectroscopy. In the presence of NaOH and in the light of FT-IR studies, we propose the formation mechanism of AuNps via interaction with oxidized ASA as shown in In As depicted in AuNps sol is usually recognized by its characteristic wine-red colour based on SPR band between 500 and 600 nm [ The increase in size with increase in absorption intensity after addition of Fe The change in colorimetric response of the ASA-AuNps at 522 nm upon the addition of Fe  ASA-AuNps based colorimetric Fe Water samples collected from various locations of River Sindh around Kotri Barrage were subjected for Fe The use of ASA as green reducing and capping material for formation and functionalization of AuNps is presented here as the first report. ASA-AuNps sol was employed as extremely cost effective, simpler and highly sensitive chemical sensor regarding the colorimetric sensing of Fe 