An experimental procedure is presented to order kaolinite particles on substrates for interrogation of the two basal plane surfaces by atomic force microscopy. Surface force measurements were performed between a silicon nitride tip and each of the two faces (silica tetrahedral face and alumina octahedral face) of kaolinite in 1mM KCl solution at pH 4, 5, 6, 8 and 10, using atomic force microscopy. The colloidal force measurements reveal that the silica tetrahedral face of kaolinite is negatively charged at pH>4, whereas the alumina octahedral face of kaolinite is positively charged at pH<6, and negatively charged at pH>8. Such measurements have not been reported previously and the results suggest that the iso-electric point of the silica tetrahedral face is at pH<4, and that the iso-electric point of the alumina octahedral face lies between pH 6 and 8. These results contradict the generally accepted view that basal plane surfaces of kaolinite carry a permanent negative charge due to minor substitution of Al3+ for Si4+ in the silica tetrahedral layer, and suggest some surface charge dependency of the two faces with respect to solution pH. With this new information it may be possible to further explain the electrokinetic behavior of kaolinite particles, and their interactions in aqueous suspensions.The interaction of kaolinite [Al It is believed that the basal planes of kaolinite carry a permanent negative charge due to isomorphous substitution of Al Limited research has been reported on the experimental characterization of these face surfaces, if the faces can even be distinguished from one another for that matter A few studies have reported the averaged FTIR spectra of both faces of kaolinite It is now well established that AFM instrumentation can also be used to measure surface forces between the cantilever probe/tip and a selected substrate. In this regard, an experimental procedure has been developed to organize a set of well ordered, nanosized kaolinite particles for in situ AFM surface force measurements, following the approach of Drelich et al. The objective of this paper is twofold, (1) to describe an experimental procedure to order kaolinite particles so that a selected face is exposed for in situ examination, and (2) to characterize the two faces of kaolinite (the silica face and the alumina face) by surface force measurements using AFM. In order to order kaolinite particles with the silica face exposed, a negatively charged glass-substrate is used so that the alumina face might attach to the glass-substrate as shown in A clean English kaolin (Imery Inc., UK) was obtained from the St. Austell area in Cornwall, UK. The sample was cleaned with water only using elutriation to achieve classification at a size of less than 2 XRD analysis conducted on the kaolinite sample confirmed that the kaolinite is the dominant mineral phase. EDAX analysis of the kaolinite sample showed nearly 1:1 atomic distribution of aluminum (7.98%) and silicon (7.95%) with trace amounts of potassium (0.35%), calcium (0.08%) and iron (0.15%). Two substrates – a microscopic glass slide (Fisher Scientific Inc.) and a fused alumina-substrate (Red Optronics, Mountain View, CA), were used to order the kaolinite particles. Two cut pieces of a microscopic glass slide (10 A picoforce AFM with Nanoscope V controller (Veeco Instruments Inc., Santa Barbara, CA) was used with a PF-type scanner designed for picoforce measurements. Triangular beam silicon nitride (Si The force measurements were made in 1 The cantilevers used for the surface force measurements have pyramidal-shaped silicon nitride tips. The shape of the tips can be reasonably approximated as conical with a spherical cap at its apex (see With these equations (Eqs. AFM images of the glass and fused alumina-substrates are shown in Five force curves are shown for each pH value of interest to establish the good reproducibility between the experimental force curves (see In contrast to the glass-substrate, attractive interaction dominates between a silicon nitride tip and the fused alumina-substrate at pH The two faces of kaolinite are the silica face (0 The topographic images of kaolinite particles on glass and fused alumina-substrates are shown in Similar to the pH dependency of our AFM measurements and our calculated surface densities for the basal planes of kaolinite, Zhou and Gunter As expected, the interaction forces obtained on the silica face of kaolinite are comparable to that obtained on the glass-substrate with slightly decreased forces on the silica face of kaolinite at pH 4 and 10, and slightly increased forces at pH 5, 6 and 8. It should be noted that the glass-substrate is mainly composed of SiO In contrast to the silica tetrahedral face of kaolinite, attractive interaction dominates between a silicon nitride tip and the alumina octahedral face of kaolinite at pH 4, 5 and 6. At higher pH of 8 and 10, repulsive interactions were observed. The attractive interaction forces only decreased by a factor of 1.5 (−0.31 to −0.22 Interestingly, at pH 4 the attractive force field of the alumina face of kaolinite (−0.30 The surface potentials and surface charge densities determined from the DLVO fits to the experimental force curves on the glass-substrate and the fused alumina-substrate are shown in  The electrokinetic characteristics of kaolinite are typically considered based on electrophoretic measurements. It is evident that the electrophoretic measurements are compromised by the shape and anisotropic character of kaolinite particles and do not reveal too much surface chemistry detail. The present work describes a procedure to expose the two faces of kaolinite (silica tetrahedral face and alumina octahedral face) by ordered deposition of the kaolinite particles on glass and alumina substrates, respectively. In this way, the 0 The electrokinetic properties of kaolinite will have a contribution from both faces of kaolinite (silica tetrahedral face and alumina octahedral face), as well as from edge surfaces. AFM surface force results are encouraging and the surface charge density and surface potential of kaolinite faces provide more detail regarding the surface chemistry of kaolinite. With this new information it may be possible to further explain the electrokinetic behavior of kaolinite particles, and their interactions in aqueous suspensions. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of Grant