Platinum producers are evaluating hydrometallurgical process routes to extract platinum group metals (PGM) and base metals (BM) from flotation concentrate that are alternative to conventional pyrometallurgical matte smelting treatment of flotation concentrates. This approach would attract several potential benefits to the cost-effective processing of lower-grade and high-chromium concentrates. Ivanhoe Nickel and Platinum Ltd. wished to investigate this option on samples arising from their Platreef project in the northern limb of the Bushveld Complex in South Africa, from concentrate containing 1.5g/t Pt, 2.5g/t Pd and 0.5g/t Au, as well as 1.5% Ni and 1.2% Cu. Other PGMs assayed rather low grades in the concentrate (Rh 128ppb; Ru 153ppb; Os 18ppb; Ir 31ppb) so the focus was on Pt, Pd and Au in this study. Some twenty-two hydrometallurgical process flowsheet variants were considered for evaluation in a testwork programme combining several conventional and proprietary unit process technologies.
                  The testwork outcomes suggested that a hydrometallurgical flowsheet alternative to smelting (the patented Kell Process) is potentially a practical, environmentally benign and energy-efficient approach for treating low-grade Platreef concentrate with relatively low risk. This process broadly comprises selective leaching of base metals by pressure oxidation, followed by leaching of PGMs after a roasting pretreatment step shown to render PGMs and particularly Pt amenable to leaching. The process embodies separation of the value metals (PGM and base metals) into separate chloride and sulfate solution streams, respectively, and impurity elements (Fe, Al and gangue) into a tailings product. Key elemental deportments from the un-optimized process were Ni 96%, Co 94%, Cu 94%, Pt 96%, Pd 94% and Au 87%.
                  Preliminary work indicated that further improvements in value metal recoveries, impurity separations and reagent consumptions may be gained from further optimization of the individual unit processes. Moreover, the recycle of key reagents uses existing proven technologies, rendering the process more economically and environmentally favourable. Initial assessment suggests that the Kell Process should offer both economic and environmental benefits over conventional pyrometallurgical matte smelting treatment of Platreef flotation concentrate.As high-grade, low-chromium orebodies within the Merensky horizon in South Africa are mined at increasingly deeper levels, platinum producers are increasingly mining and processing UG2 and Platreef ores. Moreover, they are evaluating projects with low-grade ores and in some cases higher contents of deleterious elements such as chromium. Ivanhoe Nickel and Platinum Ltd. have been evaluating their Platreef project in the Mokopane area of the northern limb of the Bushveld Complex in South Africa. This ore has lower precious metal tenors and higher base metal contents than conventionally mined PGM ore, having characteristics closer to a polymetallic ore type. It contains approximately 0.36 The objective of this testwork programme was to consider the potential for hydrometallurgical processing of Platreef flotation concentrate containing 1.5 The twenty-two process flowsheet variants investigated comprised various combinations of the following unit operations: Grinding of flotation concentrate to P80 of 53 Pressure oxidation: Conventional pressure and temperature to completely oxidize sulfides to sulfate and dissolve base metals without dissolution of precious metals (POX). Mild pressure and temperature to oxidize sulfides predominantly to sulfur and dissolve base metals without dissolution of precious metals (MPOX). Roasting of residues from pressure oxidation (R). Aqueous chlorination leaching of pressure oxidation residue and roaster calcine to dissolve precious metals (CL). Proprietary processes for the combined leaching of PGM and BM (C1 and C2). Flowsheet variants included G/UFG–POX/MPOX with residue treated under various roasting conditions and roaster calcine leached for PGM. Programme components were carried out across nine metallurgy, assay and mineralogy laboratories. In the case of some unit process variants, both proprietary and commercial laboratories provided testwork services; hence, unit processes are generalized in this paper. Ivanhoe Nickel and Platinum Ltd. provided ∼2.2 Twelve individual flotation mini-plant runs were conducted on various ore and waste blends from the three zones to target an average concentrate representation of the ore-body, including a 5% waste component. Concentrate from each individual run was dried and homogenized prior to being bagged. The individual samples were nitrogen sealed in drums for transport. On receipt at the receiving laboratory the individual concentrates were homogenized into one composite sample prior to splitting into appropriate sample lot sizes, sealing in fresh plastic bags and storing in a freezer until required. Testwork was coordinated across some six metallurgical testwork facilities for the various components of the work. POX testing was conducted using titanium autoclaves; roasting utilized a Midrex rotary kiln and atmospheric leach tests used agitated tanks. Inductively-Coupled Plasma–Optical Emission Spectroscopy/Mass Spectrometry (ICP–OES/MS) and lead collection fire assay (FA-Pb) methods were primarily used for solids assays, while ICP–OES/MS was used for solution analyses. Selected samples were subjected to nickel sulfide collection fire assay with ICP–MS finish (FA-NiS) for total assay of all six platinum-group elements (Pt, QEMSCAN® analyses were carried out on a sample of the flotation concentrate, a POX residue and two calcines. Results presented in this paper are necessarily restricted to those useful in illustrating the key programme outcomes only, given the large quantity of data generated through the programme. The concentrate head sample was characterized via multi-element, size-by-size and sulfur-species assay and QEMSCAN® quantitative mineralogy. The un-milled concentrate was also submitted for carbon species assay to determine whether significant acid-consuming carbonate was present; the results being 0.96% total carbon, 0.96% organic carbon, <0.1% carbonate carbon. The low carbonate content eliminates the need for a pre-acidification step; however, addition of some acid to the autoclave may assist leach kinetics. Head size-assay results by sieve and cyclosizer are given in The concentrate contained some 8% sulfide sulfur, with the grinding process resulting in a small amount of oxidation, as seen from the data in A sample of the composite concentrate was subjected to quantitative mineralogy using QEMSCAN® analysis. The main sulfides identified in the sample were pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and pentlandite with minor pyrite. Of the fourteen particles containing PGMs that were located during the analysis, five different compositional groups were distinguished: Bi, Sb, Pd; Bi, Te, Pd; Bi, Pd; Au, Ag, and As, Pt. These compositional groups are consistent with the work reported by Grain sizes of the fourteen PGM particles were estimated to be as follows: Smallest PGM Largest PGM Only four of the fourteen PGM particles were liberated, with the remainder being locked in silicates and various sulfides. Representative QEMSCAN® particle image maps showing the textural settings of the PGMs in the fourteen particles are indicated in A key component of the testwork programme was the pressure oxidation step. To this end a series of sighter tests was first carried out to determine conditions for bulk pressure oxidation tests to generate residue samples for downstream treatment. Sighter tests were also carried out sequentially on the downstream unit processes, in each case culminating on the selection of pre-optimized conditions for bulk material preparation for the downstream tests. Sighter POX testwork using a batch autoclave of nominal 4.5 Bulk POX and MPOX testwork was completed using a batch autoclave of nominal 20 Sighter roasting tests were carried out under several conditions of temperature, time and atmosphere (reducing or oxidizing). Roasting the UFG–POX and UFG–MPOX residues produced hematitic red calcine products from the oxidizing roasts and grey calcine products from the reducing roasts, as illustrated in Sighter single-stage chlorination tests (see Roasting resulted in a significant improvement (17–45%) in Pt chlorination leach efficiency, with smaller and variable effects for Pd and Au. This result is ascribed to the presence of several different Pt-bearing mineral phases, with the PtS phases such as cooperite generally known to be more refractory than the PtAs Two proprietary processes for the combined leaching of PGMs and BMs (depicted C1 and C2 in this study) were also tested on concentrate and selected residues and calcines generated in the programme. For C1, Au extraction efficiencies were 0–60%, with trends suggestive of reprecipitation in several tests. Ultrafine grinding of concentrate was required to achieve 85–88% Pt and Pd extraction. Pt extractions increased to 92–95%, when treating pressure oxidation residues; however, Au extractions remained low. Treatment of the calcines showed reprecipitation of all three precious metals (Au, Pt and Pd). Base metals returned extraction Cu efficiencies of 80–98% with 65–98% for Ni, with evidence of reprecipitation in some tests. PGM extraction efficiencies for C2 were 27–98% with evidence of some Au and Pd reprecipitation from solution in several tests. PGM extractions of 91–94% were achieved from the G–POX sample; Pd extractions from the calcines were 50–70%. Base metal extraction efficiencies were 40–70% Ni, 20–70% Co, 20–95% Cu. A comprehensive testwork programme was carried out on a Ni/PGM Platreef concentrate (∼1.8 Some twenty-two hydrometallurgical process flowsheet variants were tested, broadly covering sequential POX, roast and PGM leach steps, and enabling the suggestion of a flowsheet variant that shows a good and consistent metallurgical response with the base and precious metal products in a form presentable to traditional custom refineries for final metal production. The testwork outcomes suggested a hydrometallurgical flowsheet alternative to smelting that could provide a practical, environmentally benign and energy-efficient approach for treating Platreef concentrate to provide high recoveries of all the value metals. The Kell Process (depicted in Conventional POX of the concentrate converts all the sulfur to sulfate, avoiding SO Key non-optimized metallurgical outcomes from the Kell Process flowsheet variant in the programme are given in the elemental deportment summary in Additional key outcomes were as follows: Grinding finer than 53 Addition of relatively low dosages of sulfuric acid to the pressure oxidation stage under all conditions improved Ni, Co and Cu extraction efficiencies, probably by removing surface coatings. Under continuous flow autoclave conditions it is likely that much of this acid can be generated autogenously from sulfide in the concentrate with concentrate being repulped with acidic recycle from the base metal recovery section. For this concentrate’s mineralogical suite reducing roast conditions are preferred to ensure high Pt recovery in the chlorination stage by conversion of the variety of PGM minerals into leachable metalliferous phases. Chlorination using gaseous chlorine or hypochlorite in HCl is effective in extracting the precious metals with relatively low mass losses and reagent consumptions because most of the reactive phases have been removed upstream. A second chlorination stage is an effective scavenger and optimization will likely increase precious metal recoveries further. HCl may be regenerated and recycled after metals recovery, minimizing its consumption. The authors are grateful to Ivanhoe Nickel and Platinum Ltd. for permission to publish this paper. The excellent technical services provided by the nine metallurgy, assay and mineralogy laboratories are acknowledged.