Edward T. Wessel, well known for his work in fracture mechanics and his application of that technology to the power generation industry, died Monday, November 15, 2004 in Boonsboro, MD. He was born January 8, 1923 in Pittsburgh, PA. He began a technical career while serving in the US Army at Los Alamos during World War II (1943–1946). He later joined Westinghouse R&D center in Pittsburgh, PA in 1946. While working there he completed his technical education earning a BS degree in Mechanical Engineering in 1953 and a BS degree in Metallurgical Engineering in 1955 both from Carnegie–Mellon University. He was one of the first researchers to promote the newly developed fracture mechanics technology for use in the power generation industry. His promoting of fracture mechanics methods for fracture and fatigue testing and analysis earned him international acclaim for his work. He was the developer of the “million dollar” fracture toughness curve in which various size fracture toughness specimens were tested including specimens up to 12-in. thick to experimentally verify the fracture toughness size constraint parameters. As manager of a Westinghouse R&D group specializing in fracture and fatigue research, he developed it into one of the premier fracture and fatigue centers in the world. Mr. Wessel retired from Westinghouse in 1981 and continued his technical activities as a consultant on special fracture problems and on the development of testing techniques for the next decade. Mr. Wessel was a fellow of ASTM International and ASM, and the recipient of the ASTM Fracture Mechanics Medal. He joined ASTM in 1966 and was active in ASTM committee work from that time forward. He was one of the original members of ASTM committee E 24 on Fracture Testing, and was an active member of the group that developed the first fracture toughness test method, E 399, for Mr. Wessel’s technical contributions to the fields of Fatigue & Fracture Mechanics and to the entire mechanical testing community were extremely valuable. It was his promotion of this technology for use in industrial applications, which helped to improve structural integrity of our structures and to reduce costly failures. The members of ASTM Committee E 08 will always remember his positive contributions to the fields of Fatigue & Fracture Mechanics.