Several years of mining in the Pachuca y Real del Monte mining district have led to the production of a great amount of mining tailings which is currently a great environmental problem. However, these residues contain metals of value and interest that cannot be recovered using harmful and aggressive reagents such as cyanide. Thiosulfate solutions represent a good alternative because of the advances made during the last few years of research on this subject. The kinetic study carried out indicates that the process involved in the leaching treatment of mining tailings for silver was only slightly affected by the stirring rate in the range studied; the reaction orders were 1 (oxygen partial pressure 0.2–1atm), 0.074 (thiosulfate concentration 100–500mol·m−3), 0.455 (pH4–12) and 0.26 (Copper concentration 50–300mol·m−3). The apparent activation energy of the process was 1.912kJ·mol−1 in the temperature range from 288 to 318K. A change of control seemed to occur above 318K, possibly due to the destabilization of oxygen in the inner portion of the solution at higher temperatures. According to the results, kinetic is controlled by a mass transfer of oxygen at the solid–liquid interface. In the presence of copper ions and oxygen, the reaction rate increases, so the process was carried out using a stoichiometric excess of oxygen. The process was applied to a mining tailing, containing both metallic and silver sulfides, having a similar behavior to that observed by previous authors using silver powder and silver plate.In Mexico, mining has been one of the most important economic activities since the pre-Hispanic era to the present day; traditionally, this activity has focused more on gold and silver ores. Processing of these types of ores has included technologies ranging from “The Benefit of Patio” and Pachuca tanks, to circuits of processing, which involve milling, froth flotation and cyaniding. In Hidalgo State (Mexico), during more than 458 To date, several studies on leaching have been carried out, and the most studied systems have been those based on cyanide use. Very few are based on thiosulfate media [Na For this study, the dump “Dos Carlos”, which is located in the urban zone of Pachuca city, Hidalgo (Mexico), was selected for sampling. Four representative samples, each of 50,000 All leaching experiments were carried out in a 0.001 The kinetic study using thiosulfate was carried out under the following experimental conditions; concentration of [Na The progress of the extraction reaction was monitored by sampling at pre-fixed times (from 0 to 14,400 The characterization using XRD, XRF, SEM and EDS, confirmed that the majority of the mineral in mining tailings contains the following principal species: quartz, alumina, hematite and potassium oxide, with minor percentages of calcium oxide, sodium oxide, lead, zinc, copper, silver and gold among others. The morphology imaging showed particles of irregular shapes characteristic of quartz-type material, presenting irregular faces in an equal dimensional style with sizes varying from 177 to 37 The distribution of particle sizes and the economic values (Ag and Au) is shown in Due to the complex mineralization in these dumps, it was quite difficult to determine the stoichiometry of the leaching system under study. Therefore, theoretical stoichiometry based on the results of characterization was used to estimate the presence of the silver in the mining tailings either as native silver or silver sulfide. For the case of metallic silver: For the case of the silver sulfide: For this part, two experiments were conducted at different oxygen partial pressures using the following experimental conditions: stirring rate, 600 The study of silver extraction in the Na  The effect of [Na The effect of temperature is shown in The activation energy of the system was calculated by plotting the natural logarithm of The results obtained during the study of the effect of stirring rate are shown in The pH effect is presented in  The leaching reaction of silver from the burrows, in the oxygen–thiosulfate–copper system involves two types of silver compounds that were adequately leached (metallic silver and silver sulfide). The order of the reaction with respect to the thiosulfate concentration was n The apparent activation energy in the temperature range of 288 to 328 The reaction order with respect to pH was n The reaction order with respect to the concentration of Cu According to the results, this work shows a real possibility of using the oxygen–thiosulfate system for silver leaching with copper as an oxidizing reagent in this system to improve the kinetics conditions of the leaching process. This system is now used for leaching of silver involved in a real mineral, and in this case, the mineral is considered to be a waste from mining or the metallurgical industry, which represents a novelty. The authors thank