The extraction of rare earth elements with N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutyl- 3-oxy-glutaramide (TBDGA) in different diluents from hydrochloric acid medium was investigated to evaluate the effect of diluent on the distribution ratio and the stoichiometry of extracted species. The extraction capacity of TBDGA in different diluents for lanthanides increases in the order: toluene<n-octane<CCl4
                     <CHCl3. The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration, extractant concentration, and temperature on the distribution of rare earth elements was also studied.In recent years, amides have been considered to be promising extractants that could replace phosphorus-containing extractants ( Outstanding performance of amides in the extraction of rare earth elements draws the attention of more and more researchers. The relationship of its structure and property has been studied extensively in view of its large potential for extraction of f-metal elements ( Solvent extraction and separation of lanthanides from chloride leach liquor are very important in lanthanide hydrometallurgy and have attracted much attention ( The diluents have a major impact on the extraction distribution ratio due to their polarity ( In this publication, the extraction of some heavy rare earth elements with N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutyl-3-oxy-glutaramide (TBDGA),which is very cost effective when compared with TODGA, from hydrochloric acid medium was investigated. The effect of diluents on the extraction behavior of rare earth elements is also reported. N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutyl-3-oxy-glutaramide (TBDGA) was synthesized by a three-step process as reported in our previous paper ( Equal volumes of TBDGA in diluent and rare earth element solution were shaken for 30 minutes (to obtain equilibrium) at a constant temperature. The two phases were then centrifuged and separated, the concentration of rare earth elements in aqueous solution was determined by Arsenazo-III visible spectrophotometric method and that in the organic phase was obtained by subtracting the aqueous concentrations from the total initial aqueous concentration of rare earth. The distribution ratio The experiment was conducted at 25 The IR spectra were recorded with liquid cell on Nicolet 6700 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The tendency of TBDGA to extract Gd(III), Dy(III), Er(III) and Yb(III) from different HCl concentrations was investigated. The order of extraction capacity of TBDGA for some trivalent ions is Yb (III) The chemical reaction involved during the extraction of metal ions from hydrochloric acid medium by TBDGA in different diluents can be described as: Solvate numbers of metal ions obtained by slope analysis (logD vs. log[TBDGA]) are different in various diluents and the solvate numbers are shown in According to  The values of Δ As previously mentioned, the extraction capacity of TBDGA in various diluents for the rare earth elements increased in the order: toluene In order to obtain the definite relationship between distribution ratio and the polarity of diluents, n-octane was mixed with polar n-octanol in different ratios to extract the lanthanides.  It was found that the structure of the coordination compounds varied in different diluents ( An analysis of the IR spectra of the loaded organic phase was also performed. The IR spectra of TBDGA in different diluents was investigated before and after rare earth elements extraction from HCl. Compared with the free extractants, the carbonyl group (C═O) stretching vibration of the extracted species was shifted from about 1652 The lanthanides in the organic phase (n-octane/n-octanol,8:2 The rare earth elements can be extracted effectively from hydrochloric acid solutions employing different diluents by the diamide, N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutyl-3-oxy-glutaramide. The extraction capacity of TBDGA in different diluents increases in the order: toluene The authors are grateful for the support from the