In nanoindentation, especially at very low indenter displacements, the indenter/material contact area must be defined in the best possible way in order to accurately determine the mechanical properties of the material. One of the best methodologies for the computation of the contact area has been proposed by Oliver and Pharr [W.C. Oliver, G.M. Pharr, J. Mater. Res. 7 (1992) 1564], which involves a complex phenomenological area function. Unfortunately, this formulation is only valid when the continuous stiffness measurement mode is employed. For other conditions of indentation, different contact area functions, which take into account the effective truncation length or the radius of the rounded indenter tip, as well as some fitting parameters, have been proposed. However, most of these functions require a calibration procedure due to the presence of such parameters. To avoid such a calibration, in the present communication a contact area function only related to the truncation length representative of the indenter tip defect, which can be previously estimated with high resolution microscopy, has been proposed. This model allows the determination of consistent indentation data from indenter displacements of only few nanometers in depth. When this proposed contact area function is applied to the mechanical characterization of a TiHfCN film of 2.6μm in thickness deposited onto a tool steel substrate, the direct determination of the hardness and elastic modulus of the film leads to values of 35.5±2GPa and 490±50GPa, respectively.The determination of the mechanical properties of thin films by nanoindentation often requires the application of models for separating the contribution of the substrate from the indentation data. For hardness measurement, the models must be applied as soon as the indenter displacement is higher than ~ To avoid the application of such models for which the above mentioned limiting values cannot be defined precisely and whose accuracy depends significantly on the adjustment parameters intrinsic to each model, a direct determination of the mechanical properties of the material will sometimes be preferable. However such a determination requires reliable indentation data at very low indenter displacements and as the film thickness decreases. This concerns the computation of the contact indentation depth and contact area, both used in the methodology of Oliver and Pharr In these conditions, the unavoidable presence of a rounded indenter tip due to the bluntness of the indenter must be taken into account to limit the deviation from the usual values of the contact area. Whereas a simple additional term is sufficient for calculating the indenter displacement, the contact area computation requires a much more complex formulation. To take into account the effect of the indenter tip-rounding on the determination of the projected contact area, Oliver and Pharr On the other hand, Gong et al. Consequently, to avoid this limitation, some authors Despite their interest in microindentation, it is widely recognized that such simple polynomial laws cannot be validly applied for indenter displacements less than a depth value close to 200 To obtain a better description of the contact area function for very low indenter displacements and to give physical meaning to the adjustment parameters, Antunes et al. To avoid a calibration procedure, in the present work a contact area function has been proposed, which takes into account the truncation length of the indenter tip defect in a similar way to the models of Antunes et al. In practice, the proposed contact area function is applicable without any calibration procedure if the truncation length is previously determined by means of high resolution microscopy. When compared to the model of Troyon and Huang The determination of the contact area function is usually performed using fused silica, whose elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio are 72  For fused silica, the reduced modulus is then equal to 69.6 For a perfect Berkovich indenter, the projected contact area, To take into account the bluntness of the indenter, Oliver and Pharr To reduce the number of constants and to give physical meaning to the fitting parameters, a variety of second degree polynomial describing the contact area function versus the contact depth has been proposed. For example, Hermann et al. For Thurn and Cook Similarly, Troyon and Huang Nevertheless, this is consistent enough for indenter displacements higher than about 200 For obtaining a null value for the contact area when the contact depth equals zero, Franco et al. Due to the presence of the parameters In the above equation Another model was proposed by Antunes et al. Berla et al. Thus, only one identified parameter, i.e. The TiHfCN film was deposited on a high speed steel substrate (M2), in a HEF TSD400-CD magnetron sputtering unit, using a TiHfCN target brazed on a copper plate. Prior to the deposition, the substrates were polished to a mirror-like finish with 1 Finally, the film was deposited by applying the following parameters: bias voltage equal to − Nanoindentation experiments have been performed employing a Nano Indenter XP™ (MTS Nano Instruments) with a Berkovich indenter. Not less than 30 indentation tests have been conducted randomly at the surface of the coated system by applying the same indentation testing conditions. Considering the main parameters used, the maximum indentation depth reached by the indenter was fixed at 800 To analyze the tip defect of the Berkovich indenter used in nanoindentation, a field emission scanning electronic microscope from HITACHI, type S-4300 SE/N, was employed. The instrument allows the use of an acceleration voltage between 0.5 and 30 In practice, when studying the contact area of Oliver and Pharr, the number of constants of Eq. On the other hand, Eqs. Thus, the linear regression must be conducted after reaching a critical penetration depth higher than a limiting value, to avoid the contact area deviation between the linear representation and the experimental one clearly visible at the beginning of the indenter penetration. In practice, by considering different critical initial penetration depths chosen between 0 and 200 Finally, the regression coefficients indicated in The use of the model advanced by Bei et al. The model advanced by Berla et al. In our study, the model of Antunes et al. As a main conclusion, the different models can be applied but their choice will depend on the depth range required for the indentation analysis, which in turn depends on the type of sample and characterization features. In any case, it can be observed that most of these models require a calibration procedure for the determination of the fitting parameters and/or the indentation test is conducted under the CSM mode. In microindentation, where application of the CSM mode is not possible, the model of Troyon and Huang In the present work, Eq. It is important to observe that the value of However, when using the contact area function (Eq. Moreover, it is important to note that the application of the models of Antunes et al. In any case, the proposed model could replace the model of Oliver and Pharr for studying very low indenter displacements, typically lower than 20 Now, considering the contact area function of Eq. However, we can observe that the change in hardness in  As a conclusion, we suggest studying the hardness variation over the displacement range in agreement with the hardness variation obtained on the fused silica sample, i.e. for indenter displacements higher than 90 Concerning the determination of the elastic modulus of the TiHfCN film, Moreover, it is interesting to compare the direct measurement with the results obtained from classical methodologies used when no direct determination of the elastic modulus is possible. Indeed, in these conditions, the application of a model is required. In a previous work  It is important to note that the difference between the predicted value by means of Gao's function and the actual value can diverge to a large extent depending on the two elastic properties of the film and the substrate and of the film thickness. To estimate this deviation between the two extreme elastic modulus values, a schematic representation of the elastic modulus variation as a function of phi is presented in To conclude, it is noticeable that similar values for the elastic modulus of this film have been given in the literature. Indeed, the TiHfCN target supplier has indicated an elastic modulus of 425 The determination of consistent values of the mechanical properties of materials by means of indentation techniques requires necessarily the consideration of the indenter tip defect influence. Therefore, to compute the contact area, an alternative approach for a Berkovich indenter is proposed, where only the truncation length of the indenter-tip defect is incorporated into the model. It has been determined that the contact area calibration and the mechanical characterization of a thin film by applying the model proposed are nearly as good as those obtained by means of the Oliver and Pharr's phenomenological polynomial function and better than those determined with other existing models, using only the same indenter tip defect parameter. In addition, the proposed contact area function exhibits additional features: i) the function can be applied when the truncation length is previously estimated by high resolution microscopy, ii) the function can be easily calibrated by conducting a linear fit to large-depth data by neglecting the deviation observed at very low indenter displacements lower than 200 Professor Puchi-Cabrera gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the