It is important to understand the behaviour of voussoir beams in the design of underground excavations. There are a large number of discrepancies between the results obtained by different researchers so far. To resolve these discrepancies, physically testing the stress distribution at the midspan and abutment of voussoir beam is the key. In this paper, a simple two-block voussoir beam was built with loading system. The displacement and strain of the voussoir beam were measured by a digital image correlation system. The strain distribution along the joints of voussoir beams was firstly revealed. Then, the relationship between transverse load and midspan displacement of voussoir beam was presented. It is found that the stress distributions at the midspan and abutment are different both in shape and depth. The stress distribution is changing as the loading changes as well.Stratified rock masses are often encountered in underground excavations. The stratified roof is usually cut by discontinuities. The discontinuities could be the joints or faults which exist before excavation or the appearance of tensile fractures caused by excavation. The stratified roof should therefore be treated as jointed beams rather than intact, elastic beams. It is widely accepted that the self-support ability of jointed beams develops from the compression arch formed within the beam under transverse loading. Voussoir beam theory is a method for assessing the stability of a stratified roof based on the arching mechanism, as shown in The first analytical approach to describe the deformations of cracked roof beds was made by       Based on the above literature review, a number of questions emerge with respect to assumptions about the stress distribution size and shape that lead to incompatibilities between results obtained by different investigators. All the analyses, except for In reality, the stress distribution along the boundary is not necessarily linear, and experimental studies are necessary to determine its exact geometry ( A series of tests was performed to investigate the behaviour of a two-block voussoir beam under transverse loading; two of the tests were explained below. The objectives of this series of tests were: (1) to investigate the behaviour of voussoir beams; and (2) to calibrate the numerical model for further investigation using the results from these tests. The testing apparatus consists of a constraining frame, loading system, and Vic-3D correlation system which will be discussed in detail in the following sections. The constraining frame consists of two end-plates of 25 mm in thickness, which was connected via four screwed rods of 30 mm in diameter, as shown in The load was applied by a servo-controlled loading frame, and a two-point load-spreading system was used, as shown in The displacement and deformation on the beam surface were measured by the Vic-3D DIC system, as shown in In typical set-up, the Vic-3D DIC system can see an in-plane displacement accuracy of 1/50,000 of the field of view. This means that if a 1-m area is imaged, a 20-μm motion can be detected ( From the literature review, three materials were considered: concrete, plaster and sulfaset. Since the sulfaset provider could not be contacted, only concrete and plaster samples were made for the tests, as shown in The properties of the plaster and concrete samples are detailed in In order to be tracked by the Vic-3D DIC system, the front surface of the beam was painted with black speckles on a white background (see The concrete 1 and plaster 1 in Four points on the beam's front surface were selected to monitor the displacement of the beam (see The load–deflection relationship is shown in In the linear range for load-deflection of the beam behaviour, two images were selected for analysing the stress distributions at the abutment and midspan of the voussoir model under transverse load. The parameters of the images are presented in Two lines, It is observed that the area near the edges of the front surface is not covered by the contour in In this study, the positive strain is tension, and the negative strain is compression. The positive stress is compression. The contour of the horizontal strain The strain measured along line  From the compressive strain in The strain measured along line  The stress distribution at the abutment is shown in Similarly, the image concrete 1-040 was analysed in the same way as that for image concrete 1-033. The contour of horizontal strain of image concrete 1-040 is shown in The strain along the line The strain along the line The stress along the line The stress along the line Plaster 1 in Similarly, four points were selected to track the displacement at abutment and midspan of the voussoir beam, as shown in Within the linear range of load–deflection relationship, two images, image plaster 1-038 and image plaster 1-070, were selected to investigate the stress distribution characterises at midspan and abutment. The load and displacement of the two images are presented in The two lines, The contour of the horizontal strain The strain along the midspan was extracted and is shown in With the Young's modulus, the stress at the midspan was obtained by Eq. Similarly, the strain along the abutment is shown in The contour of the horizontal strain The stress along the line The characteristics of stress distribution are summarised in It is should be noted the strain measured including not only the strain in the beam body but also the displacement of the joints. This resulted in the relative large strain at the joints. The findings are summarised as follows: The stress distribution at the midspan is best fitted by a linear function, and the extent of the distribution is much smaller than that at the abutment. The depth of the distribution changes with increasing loading. The stress distribution at the abutment is best fitted by a polynomial function, and the extent of the distribution is more than one half of the beam's thickness. The distribution decreases rapidly with an increasing load. The maximum stress at the abutment is larger than that at the midspan. The first stress is nearly two times that of the last one. The shear sliding failure at the abutments is likely to occur with the voussoir beams of high strength and low span/thickness ratio. For stable voussoir beams, sliding also occurred at the beginning of the test, until it ceased at a certain stage. The load-bearing ability of the beam kept increasing at this time. This indicates the onset of stable arching after initial shearing. Except for the area near the top of the abutment, the whole beam is under axial compression. This means that the thickness of the arch developed is equal to the beam's thickness. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interests associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.