The solution pH in a given bioleaching operation is determined by the balance between the acid-producing and acid-consuming reactions and also by the input of acid or alkali into the system by the mine-site operator. Despite the general understanding of the need for low pH for bioleaching of mineral sulfides, very little research has been conducted to describe the effect of pH on rates of Fe2+ and S0 oxidation by bioleaching strains. A series of experiments was performed using pH-stat batch stirred tank reactors and selected bioleaching strains to examine the effect of pH on the growth of the strains and oxidation rates of Fe2+ and S0. Activity and growth of test strains at pH ranging from 0.5 to 3.5 were monitored over time. Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans had a narrow optimum pH range for oxidation of Fe2+, whereas Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans had a relatively broad optimum pH range for growth and oxidation of S0. To a lesser extent, Leptospirillum ferriphilum and Metallosphaera hakonensis also had a relatively broad optimum pH range for oxidation of Fe2+. The two archaeal strains grew or oxidised energy sources optimally over a lower pH range than most of the bacterial strains tested. This study showed that some microorganisms respond differently when grown at different pH. This variation in the effect of pH on the growth and activity of bioleaching strains has implications for selection of strains applied to bioleaching processes.Dissolution of acid-soluble mineral sulfides like sphalerite, and to a lesser extent chalcopyrite, occurs by a combination of ferric iron and proton attack via the polysulfide pathway ( The composition of ore, i.e. the quantity and type of mineral sulfide and gangue components, plays a major role in determining the solution pH in bioleaching operations. Dissolution of mineral sulfides can be defined as either acid-producing, which leads to a decrease in pH (e.g. pyrite dissolution) or acid-consuming, which leads to an increase in pH (e.g. chalcocite dissolution). Gangue minerals such as carbonates are acid-consuming. The solution pH in a given bioleaching operation will be determined by the balance between the acid-producing and acid-consuming components of the ore and also by the input of acid or alkalinity into the system by the mine-site operator. Most heap bioleaching operations treating low grade ore operate with a solution pH between 1.5 and 2.5, although heaps containing chalcocite and pyrite at the Monywa operation in Myanmar operate at pH Despite the general understanding of the need for low pH for bioleaching of mineral sulfides, very little research has been conducted to describe the effect of pH on rates of Fe Oxidation of S Here we report the effect of pH on Fe Six bioleaching strains were selected to test the effect of pH on rates of iron and sulfur oxidation. Three sulfur oxidisers Testwork was performed by growing test strains in pH-stat batch stirred-tank reactors. Each of the seven pH-stats consisted of a 2 Batch stirred tank reactors were inoculated (10% vol:vol) with a fresh culture of strain grown on either sulfur or ferrous iron. Reactor pH together with volumes of acid and alkali added to maintain pH were recorded over time. Samples for analysis of total sulfur concentration in solution and cell density were collected on a regular basis. Sulfur analysis was performed using ICP-OES and cell density measurements were obtained by measuring optical density using a spectrophotometer at 550 Maintenance of pH-stat control in each of the stirred tank reactor experiments was mostly successful. Some problems due to an unknown source of electrical interference caused minor fluctuations in pH control in some of the reactors, however, most of the pH setpoints were maintained adequately throughout each experiment. Some minor problems were experienced in the iron oxidation pH-stat experiments. Rapid oxidation of ferrous iron to ferric iron upon addition of KOH followed by subsequent formation of jarosite precipitates made monitoring cell growth using turbidimetric measures impossible in most of the stirred tank reactors containing iron. Jarosite formation resulted in a pH decrease and the addition of KOH to maintain constant pH exacerbated the problems of jarosite precipitation within the reactors by rapidly oxidising more Fe An examination of the growth and sulfur oxidation by each of the sulfur oxidising test strains showed zeroth order kinetics in pH-stat stirred tank reactor experiments.  The pH range for growth and sulfur oxidation by Maximum rates of sulfur oxidation by each strain were similar to those obtained in our study on the effect of temperature on sulfur oxidation kinetics ( The rate of elemental sulfur oxidation by Oxidation of Fe  The maximum rate of Fe  Relationships between specific growth rate and pH have been described previously ( This work was conducted as part of AMIRA funded projects P768 and P768A “Improving Heap Bioleaching”. The authors thank AMIRA and the sponsoring companies, Anglo American, BHP-Billiton, Phelps Dodge, Rio Tinto, and WMC for their funding support and permission to publish this work.