We aimed to describe the treatment of comminuted fractures of the base of the thumb metacarpal using a cemented bone-K-wire frame. Between March 2010 and January 2016, 41 fractures of the base of the thumb were treated using a cemented bone-K-wire frame. The mean age of the patients was 34 years. The patients’ history included a fall onto the hand in 7 cases, direct trauma in 31 cases, and polytrauma with an unclear mechanism of injury in 3 cases. At the final follow-up, hand grip and pinch strength were measured using a dynamometer. All measurements were compared with those of the opposite hand. The patients were assessed functionally using the Smith and Cooney score.All K-wires were left in place until the bone healed. Bone healing was achieved in all thumbs in an average of 5.2 weeks. Follow-up averaged 27 months. The mean hand pinch and grip strength was 8.7 kg ± 2.4 kg and 38.4 kg ± 5.9 kg, respectively. The mean measurements on the opposite side were 9.2 kg ± 2.5 kg and 40.2 kg ± 6.6 kg, respectively. Based on the Smith and Cooney score, we obtained an average score of 87 ± 9.3, with 25 excellent, 9 good, and 2 fair results. The cemented bone-K-wire frame is an external fixator alternative that can be used for treating comminuted intra-articular fractures of the base of the thumb metacarpal. The system is cheap, easy to apply, and provides rigid fixation, resulting in good functional recovery.Thumb metacarpal fractures make up almost 25% of all metacarpal fractures Fractures at the base of the thumb metacarpal are classified into four types: Bennett fracture, Rolando fracture, comminuted fracture, and extra-articular fracture For the treatment of comminuted fractures, there are various surgical procedures, including open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with K-wires A mini plate-and-screw system can achieve more rigid fixation, which allows almost full joint motion soon after surgery. However, the extensive dissection required carries a high risk of nonunion, infection, tendon excursion limitation and stiffness, as well as higher treatment costs and the need for secondary implant removal The purpose of this retrospective study was to report on closed reduction and percutaneous fixation for the treatment of comminuted thumb basal fractures. We also introduce our fixation technique using a cemented bone-K-wire frame. Between March 2010 and January 2016, 49 consecutive patients with comminuted fractures were treated in our unit. The ethics committee of our hospital approved the study. The eligibility criteria were as follows: patient age between 18 and 65 years; acute fracture within 14 days; a normal opposite hand for comparison. Patients with any of the following criteria were excluded: fractures that could not be reduced by closed means; older than 65 years of age (due to possible osteoporosis); skeletal immaturity ( combined tendon or neurovascular injury( extra-articular fracture ( old fractures exceeding 14 days; diabetes, gout, ganglion, or bone tumors; declined to participate in the study. Thus, a total of 41 patients (41 thumbs) were analyzed for this study ( Preoperative radiographs and CT images were obtained in all patients ( The procedure was performed under brachial plexus block without tourniquet control. First, the intra-articular fracture of thumb base was reduced with axial traction in most cases ( To avoid secondary retraction of the first web space, a palmar splint was used postoperatively to maintain the thumb in maximal abduction for 4 weeks. Active motion of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of the thumb started on the second post-operative day as tolerated ( Outcome assessments were performed by the same senior hand surgeon. Pin tract infection was assessed from the third post-operative day to the time of wire removal. The accuracy of reduction of the articular fragments was assessed according to criteria described by Ovadia et al. At the final follow-up, joint stability was tested in all directions. We measured active movements of the hand with a goniometer. The Kapandji Score Patients rated trapeziometacarpal joint pain on the dorsum of the joint using a visual analog Scale (VAS) (0 = no pain, 10 = worst pain) Quantitative variables were described as mean and standard deviation when normally distributed or median and interquartile range when not. We used the one-way analysis of variance to determine whether there were any significant differences between groups. Differences were considered statistically significant at In our study, 37 of 41 (90%) fractures could be successfully reduced by closed means, and only 4 (10%) fractures were reduced percutaneously using a K-wire and arthroscope. The fractures were typical three-part Rolando fractures ( Follow-up averaged 27 months (range, 25–30 months). The mean total palmar abduction of the thumb was 59° ± 8° and the radial abduction was 64° ± 7°. The mean flexion-extension arc the thumb was 43° ± 5°. The mean thumb opposition Score was 9.3 ± 0.7. The mean first web span was 84° ± 9°. The mean grip and pinch strength was 38.4 kg ± 5.9 kg and 8.7 kg ± 2.4 kg, respectively. Based on the Smith and Cooney score, we obtained a mean score of 87 ± 9.3, which corresponded to 37 (90%) excellent, 3 (7%) good, and 1 (2%) fair results. Two of the 41 (5%) thumbs developed mild radiographic osteoarthritis. The mean QuickDASH score was 5 (range, 0–11) ( There were significant differences between both thumbs in the palmar abduction, radial abduction, flexion-extension arc, first web span, and grip and pinch strength ( Thumb function constitutes about 50% of the function of the entire hand. The metacarpal base of the thumb is a unique joint that has a wide range of motion The price of bone cement, external fixators, and implants varies widely depending on the manufacturer, location, and country. The price of a cement package is typically about US$ 110. The price of each K-wire ranges from US$ 3 (stainless steel) to US$ 45 (titanium alloy). When compared with the cost of a plate-and-screw system (about US$ 2500) or an external fixator (about US$ 2600), the price of a cemented bone-K-wire frame is less than US$ 500 when eight K-wires are used. Thus, our system compares favorably with other systems as it costs five times less. Ebelin et al. used K-wires and bone cement to construct an external fixator, but the cement globs were used as connectors rather than bars A biomechanical study showed that significant incongruity in the joint surface might adversely affect hand function, including grip and pinch strength, and even contribute to the development of secondary arthritis A cadaver study demonstrated that comminuted fractures can be treated with two parallel K-wires between the shafts of the first and second metacarpals by the mean of closed reduction and percutaneous fixation Dartée et al. In another series of nine comminuted fractures treated with ORIF using a mini T-plate and screws, there were three (30%) excellent, five (60%) fair, and one (10%) poor result, based on the measurements of palmar abduction, and the sum of total active flexion of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints In severe comminution with very small fragments, the majority of fragments may be reduced by traction maneuvers Our study showed that the cemented bone-K-wire frame is a clever and effective option for treating comminuted fractures. Because all K-wires are cemented into one construct, wire loosening and migration can be avoided. This rigid fixation can control shortening, rotational, and angular deformities, as well as prevent post-operative shifting. Stability of the fixation depends not only on the fixation system, but also the bone's comminution. For the thumb base with comminution, fixation across the CMC joint to the trapezium provides a more rigid fixation, which decreases the risk of losing the reduction postoperatively. Assessing the range of motion of the CMC joint alone is usually difficult. Fracture and immobilization can cause joint stiffness, but our study showed this morbidity was minimal. For preoperative assessments, Kapandji's six-view radiographs show the thumb CMC joint well We would like to share some surgical pearls and pitfalls: percutaneous leverage, hooking, and joystick techniques are helpful in difficult fractures; to reduce exposure to radiation, a lead apron is used to cover the patient's body; the surgeons can stay outside the operating room while X-ray irradiation is on-going; keep a 1-cm distance between skin and cement glob so the K-wires can be removed easily later on; the shape of cement is not unified, but wrapping the cement dough around all the K-wire ends can lead to a rigid system; when removing the frame, first remove the cement by cutting off the K-wire ends using diagonal cutting pliers, and then remove the K-wires one by one. Indications for the cemented bone-K-wire frame are closed comminuted thumb basal fractures involving the articular surface of the metacarpal. Contraindications are non-displaced and stable fractures that can be treated by conservative means. Advantages of the cemented bone-K-wire frame include a minimally invasive procedure, rigid fixation, and the possibility of controlling shortening and rotation. The disadvantages are that the frame is inconvenient for patients during their daily activities and the risk of pin track infection. Therefore, when compared with conventional cross pinning, cemented bone-K-wire fixation may be more appropriate for comminuted fractures. Our retrospective study has limitations. The kinematics of external fixation needs further study. In addition, surgeon preference, experience, and ability may determine the effectiveness of the techniques. The cemented bone-K-wire frame is a clever external fixator and is an alternative in the treatment of comminuted intra-articular fractures of the base of the thumb metacarpal. The system is cheap and easy to apply, and provides rigid fixation, resulting in good thumb function. The authors have no support or funding to report. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. The institutional review board of the participating hospital approved the study. Informed consent was obtained from each patient. The authors have no acknowledgement to report.