Wet grinding with stirred media mills is a wide distributed unit operation which occurs in many different industrial areas from milliliter to cubic meter scale. For different applications diverse rotor, stator and grinding media separation systems were developed. The transfer from one scale or mill type to another is a challenge in the process development. Scale-up rules for geometrically similar mills exist but reach fast their boundaries when changing the mill geometry. Besides the mill dependent values each material and particle size needs a certain breakage energy which is provided by colliding grinding media and which has to be considered for those transfer processes as well. Thus the transferred energy depends on the process parameters, the mill geometry and the formulation of the suspension including material and rheological parameters. The introduced energy is reduced to a product relating amount. This product relating energy can be optimized following the stress model, thus an estimation of optimum process parameters for different geometries and materials is possible which offers the chance to transfer processes in an energetically efficient way with a low experimental effort.surface area [m rotor surface area [m fitting parameter [–] mass related solids content [–] volumetric solids content [–] fitting parameter [–] grinding media diameter [m] mill constant [–] specific energy [J/kg] product relating specific energy [J/kg] shear force [N] product mass [kg] number of grinding media inside grinding chamber [–] rotation number of the stirrer [1/s] power [W] idle power [W] particles surface area [m median stress energy of the grinding media [J] median stress energy of the product [J] stress frequency [1/s] stress number [–] grinding time [s] velocity gradient [m/s] grinding chamber volume [m particle volume [m stirrer tip speed [m/s] water volume [m particle size [m] distance [m] grinding media density [kg/m shear rate [1/s] viscosity [Pas] shear stress [Pa] shear stress of pure liquid [Pa] energy transfer coefficient [–] energy transfer coefficient of the mill [–] energy transfer coefficient of the product [–] energy transfer coefficient of the suspension [–] Wet milling in stirred media mills is, like many grinding processes an energy and time intensive process, especially if the desired product is in submicron or nanometer size range. Its transfer and scale-up or -down is challenging due to a wide range of adoptable process parameters, selectable mill geometries and formulation requirements. Hence the amount of experiments due to setup a new process, to scale or optimize a known process or to generate material parameters of a new feed product is high and should be decreased to the lowest necessary amount. The energy introduced to the mill dissipates to a huge amount into heat energy. The main part of energy dissipation is taking place for processes which are not included to breakage events of particles, like friction at of grinding media with grinding chamber walls or with each other, friction and movement of suspension or elastic deformation of grinding media ( One approach bases on the coupling of the fluid flow behavior inside the grinding chamber with the power consumption of the mill. In this case the grinding media were considered to be a part of the introduced suspension. The suspension is characterized by its flow behavior in combination with the occurring viscosities. Eskin et al. showed a microhydrodynamic model for stirred media mill, with the influence of different process parameters to predict movement and oscillation velocities of grinding media ( The model following Kwade and Stender used the results based on fluid flow observations as well ( The stress frequency or number as well as the stress energy distribution are no direct measureable values. Thus to get a more detailed result current and future work will more and more give insights by DEM-simulations ( Within this work, the stress model known by Usually results of grinding experiments are expressed by product quality e.g. particle size x For the calculation the measurement of the power input (P–P Following Stender the energy transfer coefficient The mill related energy transfer coefficient represents the energy dissipation due to frictional elements of the mill e.g. at the grinding chamber wall. Here wet stirred media milling is the focus of this work, thus the friction of grinding media with the grinding chamber walls and each other under the operation with pure water was used to establish the value for Relating to Kwade the mill related stress number SN is defined as product of grinding media contacts N The median stress energy of the grinding media The product relating stress model like introduced by The following work is discussing the different energy dissipation coefficients and the relation between the measured specific energy E The different energy transfer coefficients recognize mill, suspension and material depending parameters. Thus depending on the discussed energy transfer coefficient and the intension to validate the transferability different mills, suspension formulations and product materials were investigated. The analysis methods for particle size and rheology of the product suspension were equal within all experiments. Grinding experiments were carried out using deionized water and α-alumina (MSZ 1, Martinswerk GmbH) as standard material. The material was stabilized electrostatically by adding nitric acid to the suspension. A pH-value of five was chosen due to low solubility values of the material and high numerical zeta-potential values ( For the determination of the product related energy transfer coefficient different other materials were recognized. They were ground in deionized water as well whereas the stabilization was adapted for each material: silicon carbide (F 1200-D, ESK-SiC GmbH), silicon nitride (HC Starck), silica (Sikron SF800, HPF The Mineral Engineers Quarzwerke GmbH) and titanium dioxide (Sigma Aldrich) were stabilized electrostatically. To figure out the adapted pH-value the zeta-potential was measured in dependency of the pH-value under addition of nitric acid or caustic potash. Zinc oxide (Sigma Aldrich), limestone (Escal 500, KSL Staubtechnik GmbH), pyrene (97% Sigma Aldrich) and anthrachinone (Sigma Aldrich) were stabilized electrosterically due high solubility tendency for non-neutral pH-values or due to bad wettability in water. The grinding experiments with following materials were carried out within different research projects and published: titanium dioxide ( The used mills were operated in circuit mode. As grinding media material yttrium stabilized zirconia beads were used. The stirrer tip speed, grinding times, suspensions solids content and grinding media sizes were varied. For the estimation of the mill related energy transfer coefficient different mill geometries were adapted: an anular gap mill with pins (Advantis V 15, Bühler AG), a disc mill (PML1, Bühler AG), two pin mills (Labstar LS 1 and Minicer, Netzsch), an anular gap rotor geometry for PML1 (PML 1, Bühler AG) and an accelerator mill (NPM, WAB AG). The grinding chamber volumes vary from 0.14 The particle size was measured using ultrasonic spectroscopy (DT1200 (Dispersion Technology)). For acoustic spectroscopy pulses of sound are applied to the suspension. The pulses are transmitted through the sample. The instrument measures the attenuation and propagation velocity of the sound over a wide range of ultrasonic frequencies. The ultrasound pulses pass through the sample and the acoustic sensor measures energy losses. The most important part of the energy loss occurs while the ultrasound pulse propagates through the suspension and interacts with the particles and the liquid. So the total loss can be used to calculate the particle size distribution ( The rheological behavior of the suspensions was characterized by using a rheometer CVO 120 HR from Bohlin instruments. The viscosity was calculated by measuring the shear stress as a function of the shear rate in a searle system. The shear rate was varied between 10 The energy transfer from the mill to the product can roughly be divided into two levels. On the first level the energy is transferred from the rotor to the grinding media and on the second level from the grinding media to the product. The mill and suspension related energy transfer coefficients act on the first level, thus were not influenced by mechanical product properties. The influence of the product material properties and the amount of product between colliding grinding media were summarized in the product related energy transfer coefficient and act on the second level. The energy transfer from the mill to the system of grinding media and fluid phase is influenced by the friction between mill and grinding media as well as between mill and fluid phase. This energy transfer is dependent on the mill geometry and the adopted fluid phase. Wet stirred media mills are always operated with a fluid phase, thus the liquid (here water) was used to measure the minimum power consumption of the mill, to reflect its influence on the friction behavior between grinding media and mill. As known from Kwadés stress model the power consumption of the mill can be expressed by the sum of the stress frequency SF and the median stress energy of the grinding media The median stress energies were calculated following Stenders approach ( The energy transfer coefficients can roughly be estimated by the ratio of the rotor surface area A Hennart introduced an energy dissipation factor to the stress number which recognized the energy dissipation due to the energy transfer between rotor and grinding media. He found, that this factor is proportional to the rotor surface area as well ( In general a lot of different possible formulations are used for different products, which influence the rheological behavior of the suspension. Besides different additives, especially polymers, the solids concentration is one of the most often viscosity influencing value. The solids content for grinding alumina was varied from different researchers, like Mende who used the disc mill PML1 for his solids content variation in the range of c  The viscosity inside the mill differs due to the high shear rates significantly from the measured ones in a rheometer. Thus the acting viscosity was calculated using the general connection between shear rate, surface, power consumption and viscosity. The connection between viscosity The ratio of velocity difference To get information about the viscosity inside the mill the usage of the rheological data and Eq. The calculated viscosities are also depicted in Changes in rheological behavior occur due to the interaction between the particle surfaces, thus are influenced by their size and concentration. To recognize both, the ratio of overall particle surface (= f (particle size, solids mass)) to the water volume (= f(solids concentration)) was derived. With increasing total particles surface more water is bonded to the layers near the particles surface, the so called electrochemical double layers. The pH-values of all suspensions were kept constant during the experiments with alumina by the addition of nitric acid. Thus, the dissociated amounts of ions were comparable. At least the amount of free flow able water between the particles lead to lower or higher viscosities due to changing particle-particle distances. Therefore, the two fitting parameters C and D (Eq.     The exponent D starts with a constant value at around 0.5 until a surface to water ratio of 6 If the rheological values and the mill relating variables of Eq. By the addition of solids the power consumption increases, as The influence of the solids concentration is not significant in relation to its viscosity. But the energy transfer coefficient of the suspension shows a strong influence due to the interaction between grinding media and suspension, as. Another example of the suspensions influence on the energy transfer coefficient is shown in the grinding of organic materials. Especially for hydrophobic organic compounds an electrostatic stabilization is most times not possible as Flach and Konnerth pointed out within their investigations of the model compound pyrene ( Besides the energy dissipation due to friction, mill geometry and suspension reasons a certain part of energy is also dissipated into elastic deformation of grinding media ( So the product related energy transfer coefficient can be roughly estimated by the Younǵs modulus ration between grinding media and product. It gets more precise by taking the solids content in account. The knowledge of the different energy dissipation mechanism in a wet operated stirred media mill and the quantification of them leads to the possibility to estimate the energy which is transferred to the product. This product relating energy is as it is often proposed beneath 1% of the introduced energy for fine grinding. The product relating energy is not equal to the breakage releasing energy, because it does not take into account the breakage behavior of the material. The breakage behavior of the material is dependent on the stress energy provided by the set of parameters and its material properties. If the stress energy is low several stress events are necessary to cause particle fracture, whereas to high stress energies lead to a higher amount of energy dissipation. The enhanced stress model of Breitung-Faes offers the possibility to estimate optimum stress energy in dependency of material properties and current particles size ( If only the values around the optimum stress energy range are expressed as particles size as function of the product relating energy, an optimum grinding curve for the chosen material occurs. The higher or lower the ratios are, the less energy efficient is the process. These relations are shown in The ceramic material shows especially for to low stress energy great differences to the optimum curve, due to less plastic deformation especially in the beginning of grinding experiments. As shown in ( The product relating specific energy can be determined by min. 3 experiments at optimum stress conditions for different product partible sizes. This optimum grinding curve can be adopted universal for different mill geometries and sizes, thus one experiment in the desired process mill is advised due to hard prediction of the energy transfer coefficients of the suspension. The other energy transfer coefficients can be figured out by the geometrical dimension of the mill and material parameters of grinding media and product. With their knowledge a back-calculation to the specific energy is possible. Wet grinding in stirred media mills is a suitable way of fine particle production in many areas of industry. Often processes and formulations are developed in lab scale, thus a transfer or scale up to pilot or production scale is an ongoing challenge. In this research work the different energy dissipation mechanisms are discussed which occur by the energy transfer from the stirrer of the mill to the grinding media and at least to the product. The energy dissipation is influenced by the mill geometry itself, the product formulation and deformation behavior in relation to the deformation behavior or the grinding media, the flow behavior of the suspensions which are caused by rheological effects or flowing conditions due to special rotor geometries. The mill and product related energy transfer coefficients can be estimated by the knowledge of the mill geometry and the Younǵs moduli of product and grinding media as well as the solids content. The energy transfer coefficient caused by the flow behavior of the suspensions is influenced by diverse effects. These are besides the rheological flow behavior the flow regimes caused by special rotor geometries. Only for the rheological flow behavior lots of different influences can be imagined due to diverse formulation possibilities of suspensions. Different formulations and their influences are discussed here. Thus it can be concluded, that the influence of the formulation on the energy efficiency have to be evaluated experimentally for the individual suspension. The energy transfer coefficient due to special flow regimes in a mill might be dependent on the grinding media diameter, so a determination of it for different grinding media sizes is recommended for these mill geometries. By the knowledge of the different energy transfer coefficients an estimation of grinding time or specific energy from the product relating energy is possible with only few experiments. The mill independent optimum grinding curve of the material has to be developed by min. three experiments before transferring the process. With the knowledge of the energy transfer coefficients the back calculation of grinding time or specific energy is possible, whereas one experiment in the selected mill is advised for mills with a centrifugal separation system or for suspension which show e.g. temperature sensitive rheological behavior. The authors thank gratefully A. Kwade for his scientific input and H. Seeland for his support regarding the experimental work. See See The roughness changes the curvature of the grinding by the adoption of new grinding media under different defined operation conditions and times in the pin mill. The grinding media were treated once in the pure liquid, here water and once in stabilized alumina suspension. After certain grinding times (10 and 60 Roughness values as well as the visual graphics in