The chemical oxidation of the arsenopyrite and pyrite gold-bearing concentrates with the microbially-produced Fe3+ solution was investigated. During the chemical stage, the most easily oxidized sulfidic elements were shown to be removed from the concentrates. After chemical leaching of the arsenopyrite concentrate, the oxidation levels for sulfidic iron and arsenic were 64.3% and 31.1%, respectively; for the pyrite concentrate, the oxidation levels of sulfidic iron and sulfur were 21.2 and 25.8%, respectively. Biooxidation of the arsenopyrite and pyrite gold-bearing concentrates has been carried out in the onestage (control) and two-stage (experimental) variants in reactors in feed batch mode. An activity of biooxidation of sulphidic concentrates without preliminary oxidation by Fe3+ solution (one-stage process) during the control experiments and after preliminary oxidation of Fe3+ solution (two-stage process) in experimental variants was studied. At 4days residence time, the oxidation level for sulfidic arsenic from the arsenopyrite concentrate was 38.4% in the control process and 92.8% in the experimental one; gold recovery by cyanidation was 67.76% and 92.95%, respectively. At 8days residence time, the results of the control process were lower, than of experimental process after 4days of oxidation: the oxidation level of sulfidic arsenic was 59.7%; gold recovery was 82.38%. In the control variant, the time of biooxidation of the pyrite concentrate was 36days; in the experimental variant, it was 5days. The oxidation levels for sulfidic iron and sulfur were 40.3 and 55.7%, respectively; gold recovery by cyanidation was 76.9%. The results obtained demonstrate that two-stage bacterial–chemical processes are promising for intensification of the biohydrometallurgical processing of refractory sulfidic concentrates containing not only nonferrous metals, but noble metals as well.Intensification of biological oxidation of sulfidic minerals is essential for development of hydrometallurgy. To achieve this goal, both search for new promising microbial communities ( One of approaches to intensified leaching of non-ferrous metals involves oxidation of sulfidic minerals (MS) by Fe The BRISA technology was proposed for copper recovery from sulfides ( The Rio Tinto Research and Technology development company has carried out trials on leaching of copper ores in Australia ( This technology, however, did not involve the capacity of bacteria used to oxidize, apart from iron (reaction Consumption of sulfuric acid was therefore high, 40 We proposed a new variant of two-stage bacterial leaching of copper-zinc concentrate containing 15.25% zinc as sphalerite and 1.5% copper as chalcopyrite ( The leaching was carried out in a continuous mode. At the first stage, the solid phase was chemically leached with the ferric iron solution (∼ For a two-stage process, a moderately thermophilic microbial association may be used. We have previously proposed a two-stage bacterial–chemical technology for leaching copper from copper concentrates involving moderately thermophilic chemolithotrophic microorganisms ( Thus, the separation of the chemical and biological stages resulted in significantly intensified leaching of nonferrous metal from sulfidic raw material. However, two-stage bacterial–chemical oxidation has not been used for gold recovery from sulfidic raw materials. Presently, biotechnologies for gold recovery from sulfidic refractory ores attract much attention ( BIOX There were attempts to replace biooxidation of refractory sulphidic gold-bearing concentrates with chemical oxidation by ozone and Fe The goal of the present work was to investigate the processes of chemical oxidation of arsenopyrite and pyrite concentrates and biological oxidation with and without preliminary oxidation by Fe Two types of gold-bearing sulfidic concentrates were used in the present work. The first one was the industrial arsenopyrite flotation concentrate obtained from the ore of the Olympiadinskoe deposit (Russia). The 80% class fineness was 0.044 The microbial association predominant in the process of biological oxidation in the industrial bioreactors of the Polyus Gold factory was used for biooxidation experiments and for generation of ferric iron for subsequent chemical leaching experiments. The association included strains of various Ferrous iron biooxidation was carried out in 5.0-L vessel with 4 Before chemical oxidation or biooxidation the concentrates were treated with diluted sulfuric acid in 2-L reactor (440 Chemical leaching was carried out in a 2.0-L reactor containing 1 The leaching was carried out cyclically. In each cycle, the concentrate was loaded to 20% (w/v) of the solid phase (acid treated concentrate) and mixed with the Fe Biooxidation was carried out in 2.0-L reactors containing 1 Enumeration of microorganisms was carried out by direct count under an Amplival (Carl Zeiss, Germany) phase-contrast microscope. The values of рН and Eh were measured with a рН-150М pH meter-millivoltmeter (Belarus). The concentrations of Fe The rates of Fe The overall concentration of As Sorption cyanidation was carried out at the following conditions: pulp density 30% (w/v), pH 10.2–10.5 (adjusted with NaOH), cyanide (NaCN) concentration 1.0 Increasing of the pH values and Fe It is possible the direct solubilization of the pyrrhotite by the reaction: The rate of chemical leaching increases significantly at elevated temperatures (70–80 The above reactions can be used to estimate the efficiency of chemical leaching. The changes in Fe The effect of temperature on the average rates of Fe The rate of Fe Our previous work also demonstrated the effect of temperature on the rate of chemical leaching, especially in the beginning of the process ( The process of oxidation of the pyrite concentrate is described by the following reactions: The rates of Fe The data presented demonstrate that at the beginning of chemical leaching of the pyrite concentrate, both the rate of Fe Chemical leaching of the pyrite concentrate exhibited certain peculiarities. The rates of Fe Chemical analysis of the residue obtained after chemical leaching of the concentrates are presented in These data demonstrate that the concentrates under study differed significantly in the oxidation level of sulfidic iron (which was present in all oxidized concentrates). For example, the level of iron oxidation in the arsenopyrite concentrate was 64.3%, while in the pyrite one it was only 21.2%. This difference may be due to the fact that the major sulfidic minerals of the first concentrate, pyrrhotite and arsenopyrite, have an electrode potential of 0.45 and 0.5 Thus, the most easily oxidizable components of the sulfidic concentrates under study can be removed at the stage of chemical leaching with a Fe To study the effect of chemical leaching of gold-bearing concentrates on their subsequent biooxidation, oxidation of the original concentrate (control) and the chemically leached one (experiment) was compared under a feed-batch mode. Biooxidation was carried out sequentially in two reactors. The original concentrate was introduced into the first reactor, and the oxidized concentrate was removed from the second reactor. The total leaching time was determined from the following equation: The pulp volume in our experiments was 1 Key parameters of biooxidation of control and experimental samples of the concentrate are presented in Essential differences in the fate of compounds of the liquid phase in control and experimental processes were revealed. The difference in arsenic concentration in the first reactor, and also the difference of the quantity of sulfuric acid necessary for the рН maintenance during the biooxidation have been registered. It is known that during bacterial oxidation of Fe Concentration of total iron in a liquid phase of pulp during biooxidation of control concentrate both in the first and in the second reactor was significantly higher than during biooxidation of the chemically leached concentrate. It may be explained by the fact that main quantity of iron (64.3%) from experimental concentrate was leached during chemical stage. Besides, ion Fe Decrease in concentration of total iron in the second reactor where concentration of arsenic in medium was higher comparing to the first apparatus was also an evident that reactions During the biooxidation of the chemically leached concentrate more than 92% of Fe The number of The results of analyses of the residues (solid phase) obtained after biooxidation of the arsenopyrite concentrate are presented in The calculated oxidation levels for the major sulfidic elements provided an indication of the efficiency of biooxidation in the reactors. The data of In the case of biooxidation of the concentrate after chemical leaching in the two-stage mode (experiment), high oxidation levels for iron and arsenic were already achieved in the first reactor. Thus, the oxidation level was 79.3% for iron and 92.8% for arsenic. In the second reactor, the oxidation levels for iron and arsenic increased only by 9.9% and 4.4%, respectively. This is an indication of complete oxidation of pyrrhotite and almost complete oxidation of arsenopyrite in the first reactor (4 The residue yields for one-stage (8 The data on sorption cyanidation of gold from the residues ( The data suggest that after two-stage biooxidation of the concentrate, an almost maximal degree of gold recovery (92.95%) was achieved in the first reactor. Biooxidation of the concentrate in a one-stage process resulted in 67.76% gold recovery. Cyanidation of the original concentrate yielded 57% gold recovery. Cyanidation of the residue from the second reactor resulted in a significant increase for the one-stage process (from 67.76 to 82.38%) and in an insignificant increase for the two-stage process (from 92.95 to 94.06%). Biooxidation of the concentrate in the one-stage process for 8 Thus, the possibility was demonstrated to intensify the process of biooxidation of the arsenopyrite concentrate by carrying it up in two sequential stages. The first stage (2 Biooxidation of the pyrite concentrate was initially also studied in the traditional one-stage process. Prior to the onset of biooxidation, 14-day adaptation of the microbial culture was required. The process of biooxidation took 36 The analysis of a liquid phase in control process of pyrite concentrate biooxidation has shown the accumulation of Fe Biooxidation of the pyrite concentrate after chemical leaching was carried out in one reactor. The analysis of the liquid phase during the experimental process of pyrite concentrate biooxidation has shown the accumulation of Fe Results of the analysis of the residue obtained after one- and two-stage biooxidation are presented in Analysis of the results demonstrates that the traditional one-stage biooxidation process was not promising for this kind of raw materials. The introduction of stage of chemical oxidation enabled more efficient microbial oxidation of the pyrite material. The results on cyanidation of the original pyrite concentrate and after one- and two-stage biooxidation are presented in These data demonstrate that after two-stage biooxidation of the pyrite concentrate for 5 days gold recovery by cyanidation (76.9%) was higher than from one-stage biooxidation for 36 days (73.1%). After a stage of chemical leaching of pyrite concentrate gold extraction was only 21.7%. According to the results of Our results demonstrate that the pyrite concentrate is much more difficult as a gold-bearing material than the arsenopyrite one. However, the technology of two-stage bacterial–chemical oxidation for only 5 Specific rates of oxidation for the major sulfidic elements in the arsenopyrite and pyrite concentrates under the one-stage and two-stage processes are presented in The values of specific rates of oxidation for the major elements from the arsenopyrite and pyrite concentrates indicate much higher oxidation rates in the two-stage process compared to the one-stage one. For example, for the pyrite concentrate, specific oxidation rates for sulfur and iron were 7.4 and 6.9 times higher, respectively, than in the one-stage process. Based on our previous results ( The effect of chemical leaching (oxidation) of gold-bearing sulfidic concentrates (the first stage) on subsequent biooxidation (the second stage) has not been previously studied. Chemical leaching in our work is offered as a stage of short-term preprocessings of energetic substratum for its subsequent biooxidation at the second stage of process. It allows simple enough, cheap and harmless way to achieve higher efficiency subsequent biooxidation. Optimal parameters of two-stage bacterial–chemical processes have been defined. Moreover, traditional one-stage processes (control) were compared to the proposed two-stage processes (experiment) for the gold-bearing sulfidic concentrates under study in this article. These results demonstrate that two-stage bacterial–chemical processes are a promising approach for the intensification of biohydrometallurgical processing of refractory sulfidic concentrates containing not only nonferrous metals, but noble metals as well. The work was supported by the grant from the