As high grade deposits become depleted, the mining industry is challenged by mining lower grades that require the use of non-selective bulk mining methods. Bulk ore sorting can reduce the dilution of the mined ore thereby preventing costly processing of low grade waste while improving the quality of material reporting to the processing plant. X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) is one of the sensing technologies used for bulk ore sorting. The grade of the bulk material is predicted based on XRF measurement that is correlated to a grade using a calibrated algorithm. The effectiveness of XRF bulk sorting depends on the accuracy of the grade classification of the scanned material. False classification is attributed to poor performance of the sorting algorithm to correlate the measurements with the assay grades.
                  The paper presents an approach to analyze XRF measurements that reduce misclassification of material. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) was applied as the tool in classification of bulk materials. The performance of this approach was compared to conventional sorting algorithm, namely, simple linear regression (SLR), where XRF responses was linearly correlated to the assay grades. The ROC approach was found to result in more accurate classification and enhanced economics performance of the bulk ore sorting system.The profitability of mining operation is challenged by various factors including low commodity prices, depletion of grades, increasing depth of the ore deposits and increasing complexity of ore mineralogy ( In the simplest sense, bulk ore sorting system constitutes a sensor, a processor and a sorter: online sensor analysis is conducted on bulk materials for a plant ore stream; the data of the sensor is collected and processed where the sensor signal is converted to a metal grade prediction; the response is compared to a cut-off threshold; based on the comparison, the material is dispatched to a product stream for further processing or a waste stream for rejection ( The successful development of a sorting system requires the identification of a suitable sensor ( One concern for the XRF is that it is a surface measurement and not a bulk measurement; therefore, its accuracy depends on how well particle surfaces represent the bulk grades ( This paper presents an approach that applies the “Receiver Operating Characteristic” (ROC) for ore classification. The results are compared to conventional sorting algorithm, namely, simple linear regression (SLR). A bench-scale method, including artificially creating a set of ore materials and measuring by a lab XRF unit, was used in simulating the XRF-based bulk sorting principles ( A total of 144 samples were then artificially created by combining and blending different portions of the brassy and grey particles. The objective was to create samples that represent bulk materials with significant variation. Each sample weighed about 250 g and had similar particle size distribution to the original SAG feed (by controlling the particles’ weight of different sizes that combined the sample and matching it to the size distribution of the SAG feed). The −4.75 mm fines were not added to the samples as this material was not classified and would therefore hide the variation in sample composition that was targeted. The grades of the samples ranged from 0.054% to 2.53% copper. XRF sensing testing was performed using a handheld XRF (Olympus INNOV-X Alpha 6000) unit equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer, incorporating components including a battery-operated miniature X-ray tube, a high-resolution detector, high speed data acquisition circuitry, and a COMPAG IPAQ pocket PC® handheld computer ( Before performing tests, it is necessary to calibrate the instrument using a standard (Alloy 316). Calibration was performed each time a series of measurements were made and was repeated if operating for more than 4 h. Each bulk of the samples was placed in a transparent plastic bag. The content was then scanned from below through the sampling window. Fine particles were not added to the samples, as the fines would settle in the sample bags that would have biased the sensor response. The scanning spot size was estimated by the manufacturer as 10 mm diameter which implies an area of analysis of 0.8 cm For each scan, the measured elemental contents were reported in ppm. The sample bag was then shaken to mix the sample prior to re-scanning. Each sample was scanned several ( After the measurements, the sample was pulverized to −200 μm and scanned four times for 30 s time intervals using the XRF and the average cupper grade was reported as the sample copper grade. Ten of the samples were assayed using Inductively Coupled Plasma Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-ES) to obtain the volumetric grade. The results of the XRF grade and ICP grade are presented in The ability of the sorter to sort materials is based on the ability to correlate metal grades to sensor responses. Simple linear regression (SLR) is a common approach to model and predict metal grades using XRF data ( One fundamental concern with the linear regression approaches was around the assumption that volume grades were linearly correlated to the XRF surface measurements. As well known, the metal distribution on the ore surface would not always reflect in the volume scale, depending on intrinsic characteristics of the ore such as the ore mineralogy and the grain size etc. For example, a rock could be detected with no copper on the surface while the unliberated chalcopyrite could be enclosed by the gangue minerals volumetrically. In other words, the linear regression approach is completely empirical and the reliability of such approach should be doubted, even though successful applications of these approaches have been reported. Another important fact is that the accuracy of grade value predictions is not the most significant concern for the sorting. The more meaningful index should be the accuracy of actual separation. For example, at the cut-off grade as 0.25% In this study, simple linear regression was used for the classification of bulk ore sorting. The model accuracy was investigated for various Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis is a technique for binary classification problems. It has been used for many decades in a wide range of fields including signal detection theory, psychology, medicine, radiology and biometrics etc. and is increasingly used in machine learning and data mining research recently ( Given a classifier and instance, there are four possible outcomes. If the instance is positive and it is classified as positive, it is counted as a True Positive ( Some metrics were used to assess classification performance of a sorting process. Sensitivity, also called true positive rate ( A graph called ‘ROC space’ could be constructed as shown in At different cut-off thresholds, To conclude, ROC analysis can be used as a powerful technique for binary classification cases. There are two main purposes by use of ROC: (1) choice of an operating point for a given classifier; (2) evaluation of classifiers’ performance and comparison of different classifiers used for the same task. In this study, Receiver Operating Characteristic was used as the alternative to the simple linear regression approach, by which the XRF responses were directly analyzed and samples were classified into binary categories as concentrate or waste. An optimum operating point was determined where the sum of sensitivity and specificity was maximized. An Excel add-on program called XLSTAT was used in conducting these analysis ( To evaluate and compare the sorting effectiveness of different classification approaches and at different cut-off thresholds, a more realistic way would be in the economics perspective. In industrial practice, the economic performance could be evaluated as profit margin of ores that were mined, in terms of Net Smelter Return (NSR), unit as In the ideal case of ore sorting, all the samples would be classified into For SLR and ROC approach, the cut-off threshold would be the same value at determined 0.25% In this study, at different At different The table indicates the fit of the predicted versus measured copper grades by the coefficient of determination R ROC analysis was applied in evaluating the classification performance of the SLR approach. Classification results using SLR approach at different Results also showed that the cut-off threshold would affect the classification performance significantly. As shown in For the SLR approach, the cut-off threshold was set equal to 0.25% An alternative to the SLR approach is by use of Receiver Operating Characteristic analysis. As demonstrated in The reliability of the ROC in determining the optimum operating point was evaluated. 144 samples were divided randomly into two data sets: 90 in the training dataset; 54 in the validation dataset. ROC analysis was conducted for the training and validation datasets respectively. As shown in In this study, the SLR and ROC approaches were compared in terms of classification and sorting performance with the 144 ore samples. Classification results using these two approaches were shown in To sum, in classifying the samples, SLR tends to be more specific and precise while the ROC approach was more sensitive and accurate. In terms of economics, these two approaches were also evaluated and compared, as shown in As shown in As To note, compared to SLR approach, ore dilution with the ROC approach was also increased since it was unlikely to reduce ore loss and ore dilution at the same time. As a consequence, the grade of sorting concentrate product would drop. Grades of the concentrate sorted by ROC approach were 0.53%, 0.62% and 0.60% respectively at Bulk ore sorting is considered beneficial to improve the profitability of the mining industry. XRF was one of the sensing technology that could be applied owing to its quantitative responses to element concentrations and its fast measurement speed. The effectiveness of XRF bulk sorting depends on the accuracy of the grade classification of the scanned material. False classification is attributed to the poor performance of the sorting algorithm to correlate the measurements with the assay grades. The paper presents an approach to analyze XRF measurements that reduce the misclassification of material. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis was applied in classification of ore samples. The classification and economics performance of this approach was compared to conventional sorting algorithm, namely, simple linear regression (SLR), where XRF responses were linearly correlated to the assay grades. The ROC approach was found to result in more accurate classification and enhanced economics performance of the bulk ore sorting system. At However, there are several limitations in this research. First, only test results of one ore was used in comparing the SLR and ROC performance; and second, the tests were conducted at bench-scale where a lab XRF unit was used in simulating the XRF-based bulk ore sorting principles. It was suggested that more ores of different mineralogy and grain sizes should be tested to further conclude the ROC approach as widely applicable or not. In addition, ROC approach should be further implemented for data processing in pilot or full- scale sensor-based system so that the applicability of ROC can be validated in actual industrial practices. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The Authors gratefully acknowledge