A proteomic screening approach was employed to achieve a better understanding of the changes that occur in protein expression patterns associated with skeletal deformities in both diploid and triploid rainbow trout larvae. Triploidy was induced through the application of heat shock of 28°C for 10min to eggs 10-min post fertilization in an aquarium equipped with a heater. Percentage of skeletal deformity in heat-shocked larvae (2.88±0.30, mean±S.E.) was significantly (P<0.05) greater than that of the diploids (0.55±0.24). At five days after hatching, proteins of normal and deformed specimens of deyolked larvae were subjected to proteomic analysis using two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. Among the identified protein spots from diploids, creatine kinase was found to be increased in larvae with skeletal deformities, while apolipoprotein A-I-2, apolipoprotein A-II and calmodulin were found to be decreased in deformed fish. Among the five protein spots that were identified in heat-shocked fish, apolipoprotein A-I-2, apolipoprotein A-II, parvalbumin, myosin light chain 1-1 and nucleoside diphosphate kinase were found to be decreased in deformed larvae. The identification of nine protein spots showing altered expression in deformed fish allows us to reach a preliminary view of the molecular mechanisms that are involved in the development of skeletal malformations in diploid and triploid fish.Due to rapid growth and easy accommodation to environmental conditions, rainbow trout ( One of the major goals of the aquaculture industry is to produce fish with an optimal growth performance and health status ( One of the main constraints for the commercial production of rainbow trout is the incidence of skeletal deformities in reared fish. Although triploids demonstrate the same production deformities as seen in diploids, the most significant finding is that triploids have a higher prevalence of malformations (see review by While interactions between nutritional, genetic and environmental factors are considered as the causes involved in the onset and development of skeletal deformities ( As triploids have fundamental differences in cell organization that affects their physiology in comparison to their diploid counterparts (as reviewed in This study has been performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the American Fisheries Society, American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists, and the American Institute of Fishery Research Biologists ( At 5 DAH, five individuals of normal and five individuals of deformed fish from each trough were collected for proteomic analysis and coded as: diploid normal larvae (DNL; n The larvae were deyolked before protein extraction. Yolk sacs were first ruptured with a fine needle and the deyolked larvae were washed in 40 Isoelectric focusing was performed using the IEF Cell (BioRad, USA). Each 17 Electrophoresis of reduced and alkylated samples was carried out on Protean II xi Cell (BioRad, USA) using 12% SDS-PAGE without stacking gels. The standard Laemmli buffer system was used and the running conditions were 16 The gels were scanned at a resolution of 300 Gel pieces were washed two times with 50% (v:v) aqueous acetonitrile containing 25 A 1 Positive-ion MALDI mass spectra were obtained using a Bruker ultraflex III in reflectron mode, equipped with a Nd:YAG smart beam laser. MS spectra were acquired over a range of 800–5000 For each spot the ten strongest precursors, with a S/N > Tandem mass spectral data were submitted to database searching using a locally-running copy of the Mascot program (Matrix Science Ltd., version 2.5.1), through the Bruker ProteinScape interface (version 2.1). Searches were performed against a subset of the 20,150,224 NCBInr database containing only Chordata sequences (61,390,244 sequences; 21,889,222,377 residues). Search criteria specified: Enzyme, Trypsin; Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications, Oxidation (M) and Deamidated (NQ); Peptide tolerance, 100 Data related to percentage of skeletal deformity (SD) were expressed as mean Based on red blood cell analysis, the overall triploidization success level was 87.1% and all sampled control fish were identified as diploid (data not shown). Percentage of SD in heat-shocked larvae (2.88 In this study, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE), MALDI-TOF/TOF MS, and database searching were used to compare protein expression profiles of normal phenotype and deformed phenotype in diploid and heat-shocked rainbow trout larvae. After manual revision of the results of automated spot detection and matching, over 500 protein spots with molecular masses between approximately 5–100 Among the identified protein spots from diploid samples ( Among the five protein spots that were identified in heat-shocked fish ( The only protein found to increase in abundance in diploid larvae with skeletal deformity in this study was creatine kinase (CK). CK is an enzyme catalyzing the conversion of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to adenosine triphosphate (ATP), utilizing phosphocreatine and producing creatine. CK plays a fundamental role in energy homeostasis and is typically found in tissues with high energy demand like cardiac and skeletal muscle, brain, retina and spermatozoa ( One of the proteins found to decrease in abundance in both diploid (spot 2) and heat-shocked (spot 9) larvae with skeletal deformities was apolipoprotein A-II precursor. Also, there was a decrease in the abundance of an apolipoprotein A-I-2 precursor in DDL (spot 4) and in HDL (spot 6) groups. Apolipoprotein A-I and apolipoprotein A-II are the major apolipoproteins of high density lipoprotein (HDL), which is known to play a role in reverse cholesterol transport from tissues to the liver and in lipid metabolism ( Another protein found to decrease in abundance due to deformity in diploid larvae was calmodulin (spot 3). Calmodulin is a highly conserved calcium-binding protein and is implicated in many cellular processes mediated by Ca The abundance of myosin light chain 1-1 (spot 8) was decreased in HDL. The structural unit of muscular fibers is the sarcomere which is mainly composed of myosin, actin, tropomyosin, troponins and myosin light chains. Another major muscle protein fraction includes sarcoplasmic enzymes that are involved in glycolysis and energy metabolism ( Another down-regulated protein in HDL was nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDPK), a ubiquitous enzyme responsible for nucleoside triphosphate synthesis. NDPK catalyzes the transfer of the γ-phosphate of a donor nucleoside triphosphate (NTP) to an acceptor nucleoside diphosphate (NDP). While ATP is commonly regarded as the preferred donor in vivo, NDPK also transfers the γ-phosphate from other donor NTPs ( In conclusion, we represented some changes that occur in protein expression patterns associated with skeletal deformities in both diploid and heat-shocked rainbow trout larvae. The identification of nine protein spots showing altered expression profile in deformed fish allows us to reach a preliminary view of the molecular mechanisms that are involved in the development of skeletal malformations in reared fish. However, validation studies using mRNA expression techniques (either RT-PCR or microarrays) or antibody-based assays (such as Western blotting) are required before these proteins could be used in the future as skeletal deformity indicators. Furthermore, these results could potentially be used to reveal the possible adverse effects of suboptimal rearing conditions on rainbow trout larvae which could be considered in reduction of skeletal deformities. This research was supported by