The present study is an effort to optimize the production of biodiesel from dairy scum and Hydnocarpus wightiana oil using Snail shell CaO nanocatalyst for transesterification. Response surface methodology is used to optimize the reaction parameter that affects the transesterification process for the biodiesel yield. The CaO nanocatalyst was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction, Scanning Electron Microscopy, Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy, Brunauer-Emmett-Teller, Fourier Transformer Infrared Spectroscopy, Thermo Gravimetric/Differential Thermal Analysis and Atomic Force Microscopy. The maximum biodiesel yield for Scum Oil Methyl Ester and Hydnocarpus wightiana Oil Methyl Ester was (96.929%) and (98.93%) at the optimized condition: Methanol to oil molar ratio 12.7:1 and 12.4:1, catalyst dosage of 0.866 wt.% and 0.892 wt.%, reaction temperature 58.56°C and 61.6°C and reaction time 119.684 min and 145.154 min respectively. A comprehensive kinetic study for the transesterification reaction was performed at different temperatures (50-65°C) for the methanolysis of SO and HWO catalyzed by CaO nanoparticles. A pseudo-first order kinetic reaction was established and the activation energy (Ea) and frequency factor (A) for SO and HWO to be 67.21kJmol-1 & 5.182×108 min-1 & 73.15 kJmol-1 & 4.59×109 min-1 respectively. Recovered CaO nanocatalyst is reused for 5 times with substantial loss in biodiesel yield.The gradual increase of greenhouse gas emission on environmental pollution with higher rate of petroleum consumption in the world has the harmful impact on human life. Currently due to global climate change and depletion of fossil fuel, scientific researchers have made greater contribution in search for renewable and environmental friendly sustainable energy sources such as biodiesel as a substitute for fossil fuel. Biodiesel is a long chain fatty acid-alcohol esters is synthesized by the transesterification derived from triglyceride of vegetable oils, animal fats, and from individual fatty acid waste with alcohol in presence of suitable homogeneous or heterogeneous catalyst. The main advantage of using biodiesel in conventional diesel engine is sustainable, biodegradable, non-toxic, eco-friendly and renewable with lesser emission of unburned hydrocarbons, CO Therefore, an extensive study has been done in production of biodiesel with heterogeneous catalyst to overcome the problem of economic and environmental limitation of the homogeneous process. An heterogeneous catalyst reaction offer many advantages such as rapid separation from the reaction mixture by mechanical filtration and can be reused for next transesterification, easily regenerated with less corrosion, less environmental hazard and being cheaper [ Many researchers found naturally available calcium from waste materials such as dolomite, coral, egg shell, shell of mollusk, oyster shell and pumice [ Taufiq et al. [ The production efficiency of biodiesel has greater influence on the process parameters such as methanol to oil molar ratio, catalyst concentration, reaction time, temperature, moisture and free fatty acid (FFA) content. Optimizing this parameters result in higher yield of biodiesel. Response surface methodology (RSM) combined with central composite design is a statistical method which widely used by many researchers to optimize the process parameters [ Kinetic modeling of transesterification reaction with respect to triglycerides (TG) is used for methanolysis reactions over heterogeneous catalyst have been studied by many researchers [ In the present research work, the diary wash water scum from milk diary industry waste and non-edible oil from The dairy wash water scum was collected from Karnataka milk federation (KMF), Mysuru milk union (MMU), Mysuru. The fresh scum was collected at first stage chamber before entry to screening chamber in order to avoid increase in the level of fatty acid and biological reaction. Scum is a semi solid and whitish yellow in colour. A known quantity of scum was taken into a beaker and heated for about 30 min at a temperature of 100 °C in order to evaporate the moisture present in the mixture. The liquid scum is allowed to settle for few min in which sediments and solid impurities will settle down and light impurities will float at the top surface, centrifuged to remove the unwanted solid wastes and suspended particles using fine steel coarse mesh. This process is repeated for second time and pure scum oil in anhydrous form is obtained. In this research work hydrothermal method were used for the synthesis of CaO NPs from waste snail shells as heterogeneous catalyst. The waste snail shell was collected from the Mangalore local market. These snail shells were washed thoroughly with warm water to remove flesh and unwanted materials adhered on the surface of the shell. This process is repeated for several times to make sure that all the impurities present on the shell is removed thoroughly. The clean and dry Snail shells were finely crushed using a blender, washed with nitric acid (6N) for 3–4 min and repeated thrice to remove the organic impurities. The snail shell is passed through 50 μm sieve mesh and rinsed with distilled water and then dried using hydrothermal treatment in hot air autoclave filled with water at 120 °C for 24 h. The dried powder Snail shell was calcined in an indigenous muffle furnace at 900 °C for 4 h. Above 850 °C, calcium carbonate of the snail shell will decompose into calcium oxide and carbon dioxide as shown in eq. The obtained calcium oxide was refluxed in distilled water at 80 °C for 8 h and dried in hot air oven at 120 °C for 12 h. The dried solid CaO particles were further crushed using agate mortar and dehydrated by calcination in muffle furnace at 860–900 °C for 3.5 h to convert hydroxide to oxide form. This synthesized nano CaO particles from snail shell is further stored under vacuum in air tight desiccator. The basic strength (H_) of the CaO nanocatalyst was measured by using Hammett indicators obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (India). The following Hammett indicators were used: Bromothymol blue (H_ = 7.4), phenolphthalein (H_ = 9.3), 2–4 Dinitroaniline (H_ = 15) and 4-nitroaniline (H_ = 18.4). In this process about 25 mg of the synthesized catalyst were taken in to a conical flask and shaken with 5 mL volume of methanol solution of Hammett indicators and allowed for equilibrium at 2 h and the colour change was observed. The basic strength of catalyst was determined to be stronger than the weakest indicator which exhibits a colour change and weaker than the strongest indicator which will produce no change in colour. When phenolphthalein (H_ = 9.3) was used as an indicator there was a change in colour from colorless to pink and for 2–4 Dinitroaniline (H_ = 15) the change was observed from yellow to mauve, but for 4-nitroaniline (H_ = 18.4) failed to change the colour. Therefore the calcium oxide catalyst basic strength was found to be 15 < H_ < 18.4 and is considered as a strong base for transesterification reaction. Similar results were reported by P.L.Boey et al. [ The average crystalline size and the crystal structures of the snail shell CaO nano catalyst was analyzed using X-ray diffraction pattern. The powder CaO NPs were analyzed by Bruker D8 advance X-ray diffractometer using Cu-K The moisture content, high free fatty acids and traces of impurities will affect the production of biodiesel yield. Initially the oil is pretreated by heating at 60 °C for about an hour to remove moisture present in it and filtered to remove the suspended particles. Also when high free fatty acid react with base solid catalyst, saponification is produced which causes difficult in biodiesel separation from glycerin and water [ Where V = volume of titration solution (mL), N = normality of KOH solution, W = weight of oil sample (g), 56 = equivalent molecular mass of KOH. The FFA content for SO is 9.36% and HWO is 7.57% which is (>2% w/w) far behind the limit for transesterification reaction. Hence two stage acid – alkaline transesterification was used for the production of SOME and HWOME [ Acid esterification reaction was carried for high FFA SO and HWO in 500 mL, 3 neck flat bottom flask with a reflex condenser, thermostat, sampling outlet and mechanical stirrer.100 mL of preheated oil of both the samples is taken in a separate flask and placed on a mechanical stirrer at a speed of 600 rpm. A mixture of known amount of 1% v/v H Transesterification of esterified SO and HWO was carried out using CaO nano catalyst for the production of biodiesel. Transesterification reaction process was done in 500 mL, 3 neck round bottom flask equipped with reflux condenser, thermostat and oil sampling outlet with magnetic stirrer. 100 mL esterified samples is preheated to 55 °C, added into the flask and agitated at constant speed of 600 rpm. A desired amount of CaO NPs catalyst and methanol is added to the reaction mixture and allowed to react for about 90 min, with a temperature of 65 °C. After completion of the reaction, a solid catalyst was filtered off under vacuum which is then transferred to the separating funnel and allowed to stand overnight for phase separation. The different layers are formed, top layer consists of FAME, middle one with glycerol and bottom layer contains traces of catalyst. The filtered biodiesel was purified with distillation and using citric acid decalcification is done to remove excess methanol and traces of CaO NPs present [ The quantity of fatty acid methyl ester content of biodiesel sample of SO and HWO and its composition were characterized by gas chromatography (GC) analysis. AGILENT GC-6890 model equipped with a flame ionization detector (FID) and capillary column HP-Innowax of length, internal diameter and plate thickness as (30 mm × 0.25 mm and 0.2 μm) respectively. In this study high purity nitrogen gas is used as carrier gas and methyl heptadecanoate as internal standard. The column temperature was programmed for the biodiesel samples at 60 °C for 2 min and ramped with the rate of 10 °C/min to 250 °C for 15 min. Finally the oven temperature is maintained at 250 °C and kept for 15 min. The flame ionization detector temperature is maintained at 300 °C with injection volume of 0.1 μL. The percentage of FAME content was calculated as shown in eqs. In the present investigation, transesterification experiments of SO and HWO was studied based on the preliminary results. Parametric variables that affect the biodiesel synthesis was developed using analysis of variants and optimized using response surface methodology (RSM). Accordingly, in this experimental work central composite design (CCD) was selected to study the effect of predetermined four independent variables and the dependent variable as methyl ester yield which is measured as the response. The variables to be optimized that affects transesterification process are methanol to oil molar ratio (A), catalyst amount (B), temperature (C) and reaction time (D) on the response (biodiesel yield). The range and levels of independent variables with actual and coded from for transesterification of SO and HWO were listed in The experimental data obtained from transesterification process using CCD were analyzed by response regression analysis using design expert version 10.0.4(star-Ease Inc., USA). Statistical analysis gives an empirical regression model of second order polynomial equation Y is the response factor (FAME contents) β β β β k = 4 is the number of factors studied and optimized in the experiment, X e = is the random error. In this study the recovered snail shell CaO NPs catalyst is tested for its stability over repeated usage in the reaction. Transesterification reaction setup is maintained same as previous reaction process and the recovered catalyst were filtered using the filter paper from the conical flask, this catalyst is treated with methanol to remove any sediments present and calcined in muffled furnace at 800 °C for 5–6 h. Now the recovered catalyst was reused at the obtained optimum condition from RSM. This reusage of catalyst was repeated for 5 cycles. In the present investigation kinetic study of transesterification of SO and HWO methanolysis comprises reaction between triglycerides and methanol over Cao NPs as catalyst. From the literature, many researchers have adopted three parametric consecutive reversible reactions [ The three consecutive reversible reactions for transesterification of SO and HWO are illustrated in the following reactions as shown in eq. Some of the assumptions made to develop kinetic model to simplify studying methanolysis of transesterification reaction kinetics. Due to high methanol to oil molar ratio, concentration of methanol is neglected during reaction and pseudo first order reaction can be considered [ The CaO NPs will not dissolve in methanol hence the effect of homogeneous catalyst is negligible. The effect of glycerol production during chemical reaction is negligible The chemical reaction occurred in the oil phase. Methanolysis reaction is not influenced by internal diffusion rate by catalyst particles due to its small surface area and low porosity. The rate equation of three step reversible transesterification reaction can be written as shown in eq. The reversible transesterification reaction of eq. The rate constant (K) is calculated by plotting the graph between –ln (1-X) versus t at different temperature, (Reaction conditions: Molar ratio (12.74) for SO and (12.4) for HWO, catalyst concentration (0.866) for SO and (0.892) for HWO). The activation energies [E Where, K: is the reaction constant, A: is the pre-exponential factor (or) Arrhenius constant, E X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) is a rapid technique primarily used to examine the degree of crystallization i.e., size, composition and crystal structure of pure snail shell CaO NPs. The FT-IR spectrum of synthesised CaO NPs samples is presented in The nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms and BET surface area, average pore sizes and total pore volume of the synthesised nano CaO catalyst calcined at 900 °C were illustrated in The SEM images and surface morphology analysis of snail shell CaO NPs are shown in A thermogravimetric analysis were used to determine the thermal stability of CaO nanocatalyst as a function of increasing time (with constant temperature) or increasing temperature (with constant heat rate). The TG/DTA curves for nano CaO catalyst were displayed in The atomic force microscopy analysis confirmed the formation of CaO NPs. The AFM image clearly shows the surface morphology of the well-dispersed CaO NPs. According to the complete design matrix based on CCD was employed to study the optimum combination of the different operating parameters (methanol/oil molar ratio, catalyst concentration, reaction time and temperature) in order to maximize the biodiesel production. The results in Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to determine the adequacy and fitness of the quadratic model were presented in The interactive effect of the independent variables on the percentage of response variables were investigated by plotting surface curves in three dimensions (3D), while keeping other variables at their central (0) level. The 3D plots are a graphically representation of the biodiesel yield obtained from eqs.   The simultaneous dependence of the percentage to FAME yield on the interaction between reaction time (D) and catalysts dosage (B) was studied at constant methanol/oil molar ratio and temperature (12:1 and 60 °C), while varying catalyst loading and reaction time from −1 to +1. From  Reaction temperature (C) and time (D) has the significant interaction on the yield of biodiesel in the transesterification reaction. The conversion of oil into methyl ester depends strongly on reaction time and temperature [ The optimization of reacting variables such as methanol/oil molar ratio (A), catalyst loading (B), reaction temperature (C) and reaction time (D) was performed using numerical optimization technique in the design expert 10.0.4 software to predict maximum biodiesel yield. The optimum process variables were set in a range between minimum to maximum levels which coded −1 to +1 to obtain maximum response for the synthesis of biodiesel as shown in The reusability of calcium based nano catalyst is one of the most important tests required to assess its stability and economic feasibility for biodiesel synthesis in large industrial application. After first run, the catalyst was separated from reaction mixture by centrifuging and filtration method, washed with methanol, dried at 85 °C for 12 h in the oven and subsequently calcined at 900 °C for 2 h and reused. Transesterification process was carried out at optimum reaction condition to investigate the catalyst reusability and results as shown in The kinetics of transesterification reaction of scum oil and The quality of prepared biodiesel such as scum oil methyl ester and In this research work, the characteristic of synthesised snail shell CaO NPs were studied by spectrographic analysis and the results of XRD, FT-IR, SEM, EDX, BET TG/DTA and AFM shows significant use of heterogeneous CaO nanocatalyst with particle size of 40 nm and surface area of 9.37 m The authors would like to express their grateful to Centre for Materials Science, Institute of Excellence, Vijnana Bhavan, University of Mysore, Karnataka, India for assistance with instruments (XRD, FT-IR, SEM, EDX, BET, TG/DTA and AFM) facility and the authors also extend their sincere gratitude to Centre for Post Graduate studies, Visvesvaraya Technological University, Mysuru, Karnataka, India for providing research facility to carry out the present research study. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at