The sulfate manganese extraction of the system MnSO4–H2SO4–H2O–D2EHPA–isoparaffin was studied by a thermodynamic model based on balance equations of mass and charge. The activity coefficients of all solutes in the aqueous phase were calculated by modified Davies's equation. By applying this model, the concentrations of solutes in the equilibrium were calculated from the values of the total concentration of manganese in solution and pH. The extracted species was determined to be MnH0.2A2.2 (where HA is D2EHPA) and the equilibrium constant of the extraction was found to be of 5.18×10−4 from the calculation of nonlinear regression realized with the experimental data. The values of distribution coefficients predicted by the model for manganese extraction were in good agreement with the experimental results.Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA or HA) has been used successfully to extract many divalent metal ions from sulfate media. Particularly the extraction of Mn In the specific case of this work, the objective is to obtain a thermodynamic model for extraction of Mn(II) in sulfuric acid media by D2EHPA diluted in Isoparaffin (17/21). The methodology for the development of the model used is similar to that discussed by In the development of thermodynamic models for solvent extraction, the non-ideality of the solute must be considered. Many equations that explain the non-ideality of these solutes for high values of ionic strength have been developed semi empirically and have been proposed in the literature ( Assuming that D2EHPA exists as a dimer (H The distribution ratio of metal ( In sulfuric solutions several species of Mn(II) can be formed. In the concentrations of hydrometallurgical tests, the ionic strength has strong influence on activity coefficients of the solutes. To calculate the activity coefficients of the solutes, the complex formation reaction between oppositely charges ions are considered. The reactions of the formation of these species considered in this study are presented in Numerous models have been developed for the calculation of activity coefficients of ions. The more traditional model Debye–Hückel, cannot be applicable to the cases of concentrated solutions as the ones usually used in the case of hydrometallurgy. This model is valid up to ionic strength ( Unfortunately, its mathematical formulation is much too intricate to be implemented in a numerical model. The model proposed by Where The parameter The equilibrium constant for the reaction of extraction ( On applying logarithm on both sides of the Eq. The concentration of H So, on excluding the last term of Eq. Solutions of manganese sulfate were prepared by dissolution of MnSO Equal aliquots (25 Concentrations of divalent metal in the aqueous phases ([Mn Two unknowns ( Therefore, on the nonlinear regression of the experimental data, the species of Mn(II) extracted in to the organic phase can be represented as MnH In  The chemical species after extraction with D2EHPA are thirteen (Mn The studies show that the metal species extracted is MnH The concentrations and activity coefficients of the species in solution before extraction are calculated from pH and total concentration of manganese using the modified Davies equation. The dominant species at low pH is MnHSO The thermodynamic data calculated by the proposed model have a satisfactory fit when compared to those obtained experimentally.