Heap leaching has become a widely used method of extracting metals from low grade ores. The simplicity of heap leach process design and low capital and operating costs are the main drivers. However, heap leaching in general has the drawbacks of low recoveries and long extraction times. In this regard, rock permeability is a key requirement for this technology to be viable. The aim of this study is to investigate whether heap leaching efficiency can be improved by introducing micro fractures and cracks into the ore by the application of high power microwave energy, which has already been shown to enhance comminution.
                  This paper presents the effect of microwave pre-treatment on copper extraction during leaching. The study shows that for a low grade ore containing finely disseminated sulphide mineral phases, the pre-treatment of ore particles in a high intensity microwave field increases the copper extraction over that for un-treated ore particles. It is suggested that microwave pre-treatment increases the internal surface area of the ore particles by creating fractures along grain boundaries, so exposing locked Cu-bearing mineral phases to the leach solution. It is proposed that leaching of exposed mineral phases will enhance the extraction of copper as compared to leaching of untreated ore particles. Further, the addition of wetting agents increases the copper extraction, as compared to samples of microwave pre-treated ore particles leached without wetting agents. The influence of microwave pre-treatment on the recovery vs. residence time of heap leaching of a low grade ore, with finely disseminated sulphide mineral phases, is discussed.The demand for copper is steadily growing and therefore the mineral industry is increasingly faced with the need to process larger amounts of low grade ore to keep up with the demand. The extraction of copper from a low grade ore with finely disseminated sulphide mineral phases is a particular challenge, in that the low copper grade does not warrant upgrading by means of comminution and concentration to produce a smelter-grade product or a concentrate suitable for pressure leaching ( In heap leach applications, the major technical challenge is to expose the mineral grains within the ore to the lixiviant, be it acid, ferric ions or bacteria and oxygen. One possible approach to improving recovery in the heap is to introduce fractures into large ore particles, so increasing the surface area available for lixiviant attack. Extensive cracking can be induced in a number of ways; for example by applying sufficient pressure to crack the rock matrix or by inducing extensive thermal stresses that induce differential expansion of the mineral phase within the rock. Thermal stresses can cause the development of a network of cracks and micro fractures ( Since the late 1980s, microwave heating of ores has been proposed as a means of, firstly, reducing the net comminution energy, and secondly, enhancing the liberation of value mineral phases ( Selective heating is one of the unique features of microwave energy. Research has shown that many minerals of value, such as galena, ilmenite, magnetite, and chalcopyrite absorb microwave energy and are heated to different extents. In contrast, most gangue minerals, such as quartz, calcite, and feldspar, are at room temperature transparent to microwave irradiation and therefore are not heated. The transparent mineral phases are heated through conduction ( Heap leach operations are characterised by a relatively simple process design, low capital expenditure and low operating costs in comparison with milling operations. However, due to extended leach periods, low metal recovery and delayed initial cash flow at start-up are two major disadvantages of the heap leach operation. The motivation for microwave pre-treatment of ore in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy is to reduce the processing cost, to improve the extracted metal yield and to reduce processing time ( The investigation was conducted using a low grade ore with finely disseminated sulphide mineral phases from Chile, South America. The as-received sample was crushed and screened to the following size fractions: + The ore samples were irradiated in a The power supply was manufactured by Richardson Electronics and was capable of operating in a continuous mode or a pulsed mode. In the continuous mode, the maximum power output at the magnetron was 3 Due to the limited size of the applicator, only 50 to 200 Batches of 200 The + The leach solution used consisted of 14 The addition of fatty alcohol alkoxylate type wetting agents ( The surface tension of all solutions was measured using a tensiometer (SITA Messtechnik GmbH). The operating method of the tensiometer is the injection of bubbles through a capillary into the liquid and measurement of the differential pressure for different bubble lifetimes. With a predetermined calibration curve, the concentration of the wetting agent in the solution was calculated. A key indicator of the performance of the microwave applicator, at least for the purposes of this study, is the ratio of electromagnetic power delivered to the applicator to the power reflected out of the cavity. This ratio was determined for continuous and pulsed-mode operations with the virtual reaction volume filled with an ore sample. The data for different field conditions are shown in As a rough measure, macroscopic fracturing of the particles occurred after approximately 0.23 Rolling bottle batch leach tests were performed in order to evaluate the influence of the microwave pre-treatment on the copper yield from particles of the size fraction + The influence of the power applied is presented in The influence of pulse frequency, ranging from 0.5 The influence of the pulse duration, at the optimum pulse frequency of 2  From the data presented in Column leach tests were performed in order to determine the copper leach behaviour, under constant conditions, as a function of the microwave pre-treatment conditions discussed in The copper yield for two different particle size fractions is shown in The enhancement in copper yield as a result of the microwave pre-treatment is presented in The initial enhancement of copper yield of the leach is potentially due to the creation of macro fractures in the ore particles as a result of the microwave pre-treatment and therefore due to increased surface area and porosity of the particles, making more copper available to the lixiviant for leaching. However, due to the hydrophobic nature of the fractures, the penetration of the lixiviant into the fractures is limited. The addition of wetting agents to the lixiviant may increase the penetration into the fractures. Column leach tests were performed in order to determine the increase of the copper yield as a function of three wetting agents added to the leach solution. The effect of three wetting agents, identified as EVD 61549, EVD 65062 and EVD 57476 on the surface tension was investigated, as shown in The influence of the addition of EVD 61549 and EVD 57476 on the microwave pre-treated and un-treated + The adsorption of the surfactants on the mineral phases is reported in In It is hypothesised that the increase in copper yield is due to the adsorption of the wetting agents on the particle surface, resulting in better wetting of the mineral surfaces. With microwave treatment of the particle, new surfaces are created by inducing micro fractures in the mineral matrix — when the wetting agent adsorbs onto the surfaces in these newly created fractures, leach solution can enter these fractures easily, due to lowering of the hydrophobicity of the surfaces. One of the characteristic features of wetting agent molecules is their tendency to adsorb at interfaces, mostly in an orientated fashion; this orientation determines how the hydrophobicity of the surface is affected. Thus the adsorption process determines whether the surface-electrolyte solution interface becomes more hydrophilic or hydrophobic ( The enhancement in copper yield from the ore, based on the data presented in The pre-treatment of a low grade copper ore, containing finely disseminated sulphide mineral phases, with pulsed microwaves has a positive effect on copper extraction during a subsequent acidic ferric leach. The optimised microwave pre-treatment conditions found were used to determine the improvement in copper yield for continuous column leaches. It is hypothesised that the increase in copper yield with microwave pre-treatment of the particles is as a result of an increase in porosity of the ore particles, exposing locked Cu-bearing minerals to the leach solution, resulting in the enhancement of the copper recovery. As shown by It was shown that the larger particle size fractions are more susceptible to microwave pre-treatment than finer particle size fractions, due to an increase the volume percent of microwave absorbing phase in larger particles. The pulsed microwave frequency and power also showed a strong effect on the copper extracted during a diagnostic leach. This is in good agreement with work done by In order to increase the copper yield further, the influence of wetting agents on the microwave pre-treated material was investigated. The addition of various wetting agents showed that the copper yield could indeed be increased further. With microwave pre-treatment, the porosity of the ore particles is increased by inducing macro- and micro-fracturing in the particle, the result being that there is a substantial increase in the internal surface area of the ore particles. A further increase in copper yield can be achieved by using the ability of a wetting agent to adsorb on the surface of the particles. In cases where the absorption of the wetting agent was sufficient to reduce the hydrophobicity of the particles, a significant increase in the copper yield was found. Based on the experimental evidence from the diagnostic column leaches, the pre-treatment of a low grade ore with finely disseminated sulphide mineral phases by microwave irradiation has the potential to increase the copper recovery. The initial increase in the copper yield has significant implications on the economics of a heap leach operation at start-up; while the absolute increase in metal recovery further improves the economics of heap leaching of low grade disseminate ores. The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge the collaborative work with BASF SE, 67056, Ludwigshafen, Germany on this study. Furthermore we wish to acknowledge IME Process Metallurgy and Metal Recycling, RWTH Aachen University, Germany for their assistance in executing part of the experimental work, the Mineralogy Department at Anglo American Technical Services for the QEMSCAN analysis and