Flighted rotary dryers are used extensively in industrial applications for the drying of granular materials, and the understanding of the unloading characteristics of the flights within these units is critical to understanding their behaviour. This paper presents the development of a geometrical derived model for the unloading profile of a generic two-section flight. This model is then validated using experimental data from a flight unloading apparatus. The model is shown to be able to accurately reproduce the observed unloading profiles, however the results are shown to be highly sensitive to the material surface angle used in the model. High-speed photography is used to observe the surface of the granular material during unloading and measurements of key properties are made. Observation of these high-speed images shows that the unloading of the flight is discontinuous, and that there are significant fluctuations in the behaviour of the discharging solids.The drying of particulate solids is of great importance to a number of industries, such as sugar, grains, minerals processing and pharmaceuticals to name a few. One of the most common methods for drying large quantities of particulate solids is the use of flighted rotary dryers. In a flighted rotary dryer, solids are lifted by flights attached to the internal wall of a rotating cylinder, which lift the solids in the upper portion of the drum where they are released to form falling curtains of solids. In order to accurately predict the transport of solids and the drying that occurs within a rotary dryer, it is necessary to understand the behaviour of the solid material within a flight and the way in which the material is discharged. There are numerous mechanistic models for flighted rotary dryers in the literature that require this information to determine both the residence times and the material flow rates (Sheehan, Britton and Schneider Hodgson and Keast Baker Kelly Sherritt et al. Wang et al. Flight discharge rate based on cross-sectional area of solids Revol et al. All methods to model flight unloading to date have assumed that the material surface is free flowing and defined by a single characteristic angle of repose. However, studies in the physics of the flow behaviour granular solids have demonstrated that these materials often fluctuate between a stable and an avalanching state. Bagnold Despite the importance of the flight unloading process on the behaviour of flighted rotary dryers and modelling these devices, no experiments have been performed to directly measure the unloading rate of full-scale flights. Furthermore, no observations have been made of the behaviour of the material surface during the unloading process. In this work, the authors present the derivation of a geometric flight unloading model for two-stage flights in order to predict both the flight holdup and solids discharge rate. The predictions of this model are then compared to experimental results from full-scale flight discharge experiments. Both mass unloading rate and free surface photography are used to validate the model and to determine the reliability of commonly held assumptions of flight unloading. Physical studies into the flow behaviour of granular solids In a generic two-section flight with straight edges and no serrations, the material should form a cross-section such as that shown in In most situations, flight are attached perpendicularly to the wall, i.e. It can be observed that the unloading of a two-section flight can be described by geometric phases defined by the intersection of the material free surface with the wall of the drum and the base of the flight, as illustrated in These transitions between different phases of unloading result in sudden changes in the unloading behaviour of the flight, which appear as peaks in the unloading profile of the flight. This results in discontinuities in the derivative of the unloading rate, thus it is difficult, if not impossible, to develop a single equation for the unloading profile. Thus, it is necessary to develop a separate equation to describe each phase of unloading. In the derivation that follows the points in the rotation of a flight where these transitions occur are clearly defined. Then, a set of equations needed to calculate the holdup within the flight during each phase of unloading are presented. The first transition point ( Calculation of the transition point, In the second phase the flight continues to unload until it eventually reaches the point where the flight cannot contain any solids. This will occur when the inclination of the flight tip (segment Calculation of the end point, Before a geometric model of the holdup of a flight in each phase of unloading can be developed, it is first necessary to define two additional variables, as shown in Calculation of the flight tip radius. Calculation of flight tip angle. As the flight enters the upper half of the dryer the flight tip coincides with the 3 o'clock position ( Now that Calculation of the flight holdup, The second phase of unloading occurs when the material surface reaches the base of the current flight at Calculation of the flight holdup between This phase of unloading will continue until the flight can no longer hold any solid material, at The geometric model for the unloading profile of a flight is dependent upon a number of assumptions, which are addressed in this section. Firstly, it is assumed that the forces holding the bulk material into the flight exceed the internal forces of the bulk solids, and thus that material will flow off the surface of the material, rather than the material moving as a bulk. This is especially true for the last phase of unloading (between The model also assumes that the material is free flowing, and that it will flow continuously as soon as the inclination of the material surface reaches the mean surface angle of the material. Whilst it is known that this is not the case, and that the unloading occurs discontinuously, it is hoped that this will be a sufficient approximation of the behaviour of the real system. Additionally, if the material is cohesive then the material will be discharged in clumps as the bulk material undergoes failure and breaks away from the bulk, similar to an extreme form of the avalanching behaviour of less cohesive solids. This type of behaviour (clumping) is quite common in industrial dryers as wet solids are cohesive by nature. These solids are difficult to model and even Discrete Element Modelling (DEM) approaches can be problematic. This work can be considered a means to approximate or average the flow of materials off flights. It is also assumed that the mean surface angle adequately describes the behaviour of the material across the entire rotation of the flight, and that the inclination of the material surface remains constant. The validity of this assumption will be discussed in what follows. In order to experimentally measure the unloading profile of a flight, a pilot-scale apparatus was designed and constructed at James Cook University to experimentally measure the unloading profile of different flight designs. The apparatus consisted of a rotating shaft powered by a stepper motor to which a flight could be attached. Beneath the shaft, a collection tray was mounted on four 50 Three different sized flights were used to study the unloading profile for different flight geometries. The first flight design was a full-scale section of flight similar to that used in CSR's Invicta Sugar Mill Dryer Number 2 (referred to as Three different solid materials were employed to test the effects of solids properties on the unloading. Properties of the solid materials were measured, and are given in Given the large number of variables involved, and the aim being to validate the model rather than determine the effects of variables, a full factorial experiment was not explored. For each experiment, the flight unloading apparatus was filled at approximately the 3 o'clock position with the required solid material and levelled off to ensure consistent loading. The flight was then rotated at a controlled rotational velocity and allowed to unload completely into the collection tray beneath the flight. The mass collected in the tray was measured continuously using load cells (100 In order to use the geometric unloading model developed above, it is necessary to know the mean surface angle of the solid material as the flight unloads. In order to measure this, high-speed camera images of the flight during the experiments were used. For the experiments conducted to validate the geometric unloading model, the flight geometry is known from the choice of flight design, the rotational velocity is set using the stepper motor and the bulk density of material within the flight has been shown to be the consolidated bulk density of the material (see As can be seen from Looking in more detail, it can be seen that the model predictions for the accumulated mass show a very similarly shaped curve to the experimentally measured mass in the later parts of the experiments, however there are some significant differences in the early stages of the unloading profile. The most significant deviation occurs at the very beginning of the unloading profile, where it can be seen that the experimentally measured results show an almost step increase in mass, whilst the model predictions show a smooth curve. This can be attributed to the fact that the model predicts that the material will begin to flow at the mean surface angle, whereas in reality the material surface remains stable until it reaches the maximum stability angle of the solid. At this point, unloading begins with a large avalanche which discharges a large amount of mass very rapidly (see Silbert et al.  High-speed camera images show that the flow of material leaving the flight fluctuated during unloading, with this effect being most pronounced at higher rotational velocities. The existence of these fluctuations in the mass flow rate leaving the flight suggest that many of the fluctuations observed in the data recorded by the load cells may be due to discontinuous unloading of solids. Observation of the high-speed camera images suggest that the frequency of these fluctuations occur at approximately 1 From observation of the data collected for different materials and different rotational velocities, it can be seen that the frequency of the fluctuations remains approximately constant (i.e. approximately 1 If this were the case, one would expect there to be a critical rotational velocity, below which the avalanches form and discharge before the flight rotates far enough for the next avalanche to being forming. Under these circumstances, the material surface angle will fluctuate between the materials angle of repose and maximum angle of stability. Above this rotational velocity however, the avalanches will not be able to leave the flight fast enough and material will begin to be held up in the flight beyond the point where it is expected to discharge. Using the same apparatus used in this research with mono-sized glass beads as the solid material, Newey The alternation between a stable surface and avalanching flow make the measurement of the surface angle difficult, as there is often not a straight material surface to measure. In these situations, the surface angle was measured from peak to peak of the waveform. More importantly, these variations show that the material does not flow freely from the flight, and that the material surface is not characterised by a single surface angle. These are two of the assumptions made in developing this and other geometric models of flight unloading. However, given the accuracy of the model predictions compared to the experimental results, even at high rotational velocities, it can be concluded that the approach taken in this paper is a good approximation to the real system. However, care must be taken both at high rotational velocities and when dealing with cohesive solids. This also raises questions about the best method for measuring the average surface angle of the solids for use in the geometric unloading model. From the results presented in this paper, it can be seen that neither the angle of repose of the solids nor the maximum stability angle are sufficient to describe the average surface angle of the solids. The experimental data suggests that the average surface angle is highly dependent on the rotational velocity of the system and that at higher rotational velocities the average surface angle may in fact be greater than the maximum stability angle. Thus, in order to gain accurate measurements of the average surface angle, it may be necessary to use an apparatus similar to that used in this study, rather than simpler bench scale tests or rotating drum tests, as these may not accurately represent the behaviour of the system. It is also important to note that the solids properties such as angle of repose and maximum angle of stability are heavily dependent on the stress state of the solids (Krantz A geometrically based model for the unloading profile of a generic two-section flight has been developed and validated using experimental data at full and half scale. The model shows good agreement with the experimental results across the range of conditions studied. However, the accuracy of the model is highly dependent on the accurate measurement of the mean surface angle of the solids. Analysis of high-speed photographic images of the material within the flight during the unloading process has shown that under some circumstance the unloading process is discontinuous, and that the surface angle of the solids is not constant throughout the unloading process. This contradicts two of the key assumptions made during the development of the model, however the agreement between the model predictions and experimental results indicate that these assumptions are adequate under the conditions studied.