This paper investigates the recovery of rare earth elements (REEs, mainly lanthanum and cerium) from spent fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) catalysts via the hydrometallurgical processes of leaching and liquid-to-liquid extraction. The maximum leaching efficiency (99.3% for REEs) was achieved under the following conditions: 2mol/L HCl, a solid-to-liquid (S/L) ratio of 1:10, leaching at 60°C for 2h, and 2h of roasting at 750°C prior to leaching. Because the main impurity element in the leachate was aluminum, the extractions of REEs and aluminum using di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and 2-ethylhexylphosphonic mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (HEHEHP) under different conditions were compared. The results indicated that D2EHPA and HEHEHP exhibited large extraction differences for REEs but small extraction capacity differences for aluminum. Based on the analysis of the experiments, the optimum extraction conditions for REEs were determined to be 0.5mol/L D2EHPA, equilibrium pH=2.5, ambient temperature and then stripping with 2mol/L HCl. The overall REEs recovery efficiency was 62.88%.Rare earth elements (REEs) play an increasingly important role in the global economy and ‘green technology’. The European Union and some developed countries, such as the United States and Japan, have even placed REEs among the list of ‘critical’ and ‘strategic’ elements ( Numerous laboratory-scale studies have been published regarding the recovery of REEs from various pre-consumer scrap, industrial residues and REE-containing end-of-life products ( Currently, rare earth catalytic materials play an important role in the petroleum chemical industry (  Although REE recovery from spent catalysts is of commercial value, only a few articles have been reported on this topic. The aim of this research was to investigate a hydrometallurgical process to recover REEs, mainly La and Ce, from spent FCC catalysts via acid leaching and liquid-liquid extraction. The factors evaluated in the optimization of the leaching parameters included the acid types, leaching time, temperature and solid-to-liquid (S/L) ratio. Moreover, the effect of the organic impurities adsorbed under the FCC operating conditions and the roasting temperature before leaching were analyzed. Regarding solvent extraction, 2-ethylhexylphosphonic mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (HEHEHP) and di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) were chosen as extractants to compare the extraction behavior from the complex composition of the leaching liquor with low concentrations of REEs and a high aluminum (Al) content. The effective factors of extractants concentration and pH were investigated for both REEs and Al extraction. The study mainly focused on the leaching and extraction of REEs from spent FCC catalysts; the complete study, including the subsequent process, is not discussed in detail here. The spent FCC catalyst in this study was collected from an oil-refining factory in southern China. The catalyst sample was dried at 105 The initial catalyst was characterized by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis to determine the chemical composition. The organic matter adsorbed in the spent FCC catalyst was observed via thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The optimal roasting temperature for removal of the organic matter was acquired from the TGA result. The REE leaching experiments were performed with hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid and nitric acid to compare the leaching efficiencies. Then, the factors affecting the leaching of REEs were studied including leaching time, temperature, S/L value, and roasting temperature. Leaching was conducted in glass bottles using thermostatic water bath oscillators. The samples were then filtered, and the solution was diluted to 1:100 with distilled water for inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) analysis. For the extraction, two common REE extractants, D2EHPA and HEHEHP, were used to compare the extraction behavior and the extraction efficiencies of La, Ce and impurity metal Al under different extracting conditions. With ammonium hydroxide and 2 Eq. Each leaching and extraction experiment was conducted three times. The final result was the average of the three obtained values, and the error bar represents ±  As a petroleum refining catalyst, FCC inevitably adsorbs various alkanes, naphthenic hydrocarbons and aromatic hydrocarbons of petroleum when used industrially. The TGA result is shown in Compared to organic acids (acetic acid, citric acid and methanesulfonic acid), inorganic acids exhibited a greater leaching effect for REEs ( As shown in Based on reports regarding the reasons behind catalyst deactivation, deactivation can be classified into carbon deposition deactivation, hydrothermal deactivation, and poisoning deactivation, among other types. Through a comprehensive analysis of the TGA curve ( To compare the leaching efficiency of different inorganic acids, sulfuric acid, nitric acid, and hydrochloric acid of variable concentrations were chosen to dissolve the spent FCC catalyst. The results are shown in In Based on the results from  The effect of the S/L ratio was investigated as shown in The roasting temperature was investigated by varying the temperature from 550 Several methods, such as solvent extraction, co-precipitation, and ion exchange, have been used to separate and purify REEs ( The extractants used in this study, D2EHPA and HEHEHP, are both organophosphorus acid extracting agents. A commonly used mechanism for trivalent REE extraction is cation exchange (Eq. Extraction tests were performed on hydrochloric acid leachate. The components are listed in The effect of the equilibrium pH on the extraction efficiency of La, Ce and Al and their separate factors were presented in After extraction, the D2EHPA-kerosene solution rich in REEs was stripped by 2 The recovery of REEs from a spent FCC catalyst containing 27.28