This article is a systematic review of the recent published literature on the biomechanics of volar locking plate fixation of distal radius fractures.
                  PUBMED/MEDLINE and EMBASE databases were searched on 13th Sep 2018. Biomechanical papers on volar locking plate fixation of distal radius fractures since 2010 were included. Papers were analysed and included studies were appraised by the author using the validated quality assessment GRADE tool.
                  The search revealed 456 papers between January 2010 and the present day whose abstracts were reviewed for relevance and 21 papers were included for full paper review.
                  The aim of this systematic review was to evaluate the evidence to determine the surgical techniques and strategies that are associated with the best biomechanical outcomes of volar plating for distal radius fractures. Review of the literature revealed that it was not necessary to fill all available distal locking screws, there was little evidence to support the use of 2 rows of screws distally over 1 row. Screws of 75% length of the distal cortex are sufficient to withstand standard postoperative regimes in extrarticular fractures. The was a paucity of evidence to conclude multidirectional locking plates were superior to fixed angle plates or that one brand of plate was superior to another.Distal radius fractures are extremely common accounting for up to 15% of extremity fractures. The popularity of volar locking plates in the treatment of these fractures has grown enormously since their introduction over a decade ago.1st generation plates resembled a blade plate. Their design gave no capacity to adjust the angle or length of blade component and were technically challenging to use. Second generation plates improved the plate - screw locking interface but had symmetrical distal screw angulation. 3rd and subsequently 4th generation plates introduced the concept of variable angled screws allowing adaptation of plate position for subchondral placement of screws whilst theoretically minimizing the risk of screw perforation into the radio-carpal joint. They also aided the capture of variable fracture fragments. We performed a systematic review of recent literature to summarise biomechnical evidence on volar plate fixation of distal radius fractures using modern implants. The aim of this was to evaluate the evidence to determine the surgical techniques and strategies that are associated with the best biomechanical outcomes of volar plating for distal radius fractures. A systematic review of the literature was conducted according to PRISMA guidelines. PubMed and EMBASE databases were searched using the terms ‘volar plate fixation’ or ‘volar plating’ and ‘distal radius fracture’ or ‘wrist fracture.’ The searches were performed independently by each author in January 2016 and repeated in March 2016. All original biomechanical papers on volar plate fixation of adult distal radius fractures in English from 1st Jan 2010 were considered. Abstracts and titles were analysed for relevance independently by 2 authors. All types of distal radius fractures were included (intra and extra-articular fracture models) in both cadaveric and sawbone models. Construct stability was assessed using biomechanical models to assess fixation stiffness and load to failure (loss of articular congruity) when this was included. All implants and plates were included for analysis as many papers compared modern and older previously used implants. The included publications were checked manually for additional references that potentially met the inclusion criteria. Studies were not blinded for author, affiliation or source. Exclusion criteria were clinical studies, none English language studies. The studies included were appraised and assessed using the GRADE assessment tool. After application of the search strategy 21 papers were eligible for inclusion from the 137 reports initially identified. Papers were assessed using the GRADE approach. This grading system classifies recommendations as strong (Grade 1) or weak (Grade 2) according to the degree of confidence in estimates of benefits, risks and burden. The system also qualifies the quality of evidence as high (Grade A), moderate (Grade B) or low (Grade C) according to the factors that include precision of estimates, consistency of results and direction of evidence.  3 papers were identified comparing smooth pegs with locking screws or threaded pegs. Yao et al. compared extra articular fractures in 7 cadaveric radii fixed with either smooth or threaded pegs in the distal row and showed no difference in construct stiffness or load to failure between the 2 groups. The specimens were not tested under torsion however and stiffness has been shown to be reduced in sawbone models fixed with only smooth pegs. Mehling and Weninger compared biomechanical stiffness under both torsional and compression forces.  Wall et al. compared 5 different groups in a sawbone extra-articular wedge osteotomy models;- bicortical, unicorticol locked screws (100%/abutting dorsal cortex, 75% and 50%) and unicorticol pegs (100%).  Mehling et al. compared 4 different screw placement options in the distal fragment fixation (4 locking screws, 4 locking screws alternately in distal and proximal rows, 3 locking screws in proximal row and 7 locking screws) of cadaveric segmental extra-articular fractures. Moss et al. showed similar results when comparing 4 v 7 distal locking screws in the cadaveric C2-AO fractured wrists.  Drobetz et al. also challenged these findings when he compared fixed angle single row plates with variable angle multi row plates in synthetic extra articular fracture models. In another paper Drobetz did however show a significant increase in load to failure rigidity with increasing total number of screws and screw projection area in the distal row. Iba et al. compared the use of radial styloid targeted screws in a cadaveric intra-articular fracture model.  Stanbury investigated this in a paper comparing variable angle and fixed angle plates used to fix AO-C3 synthetic fractures. Rausch agreed that polyaxial two column plates produced a more stable construct with significantly lower loss of reduction than the fixed angle device in cadaveric intra-articular fracture models. Hart et al. then looked to see if the use of variable angled plates could compensate for suboptimal position by moving the plates 3 mm from its intended ideal placement in sawbone intra-articular fractures. Marshall compared titanium and stainless steel plates in a similar fixed angle plate in the fixation of AO-C3 cadaveric fracture models.  No biomechanical or clinical papers have recommended the use of all available distal locking holes. Moss et al. showed that the use of 4-screw distal constructs in AO type C2 fractures exceeded the physiological forces exerted on the distal radius during standard rehabilitation (54 N) by at least 2 fold. Insignificant biomechanical differences in construct stability have been shown in the comparison of 7 v 4 screw configurations in the distal fragment and the use of more than 4 screws in the distal fragment in the clinical setting has not been shown to be advantageous. Greater stability has been shown with 4 distal screws instead of 3. The additional row of distal screws is designed to provide a ‘three dimensional scaffold for optimum subchondral support.’ Manufacturers recommend placing the most distal screws parallel to the joint and the second row of screws in the second row at a steeper angle to create a gable construct. The metaphyseal area of bone this second row of screws passes however provides little resistance to loss of reduction and Weninger et al. concluded that using two distal screw rows cannot be recommended. These findings are supported with a comparative clinical study by Neuhaus who showed no difference in postoperative radiographic alignment of 34 pairs of fractures fixed with either a single row or 2 rows matched for fracture type, dorsal comminution, ulna fracture, mechanism of injury, and age (±8 y). Koh et al. evaluated 10 different plate fixation designs (including single and multi row plates) and found that all provided adequate stability for fracture healing and early mobilisation in extra articular cadaveric fractures. Bicortical distal screws also aid construct stability however risk extensor tendon rupture if the dorsal cortex is penetrated. The trapezoidal shape of the dorsal cortex also makes detection of screw penetration difficult even with the use of fluoroscopy intraoperatively. Joseph et al.'s paper described the use of a novel dorsal horizon or skyline view to detect dorsal penetration and 27% of patients had screws changed intra-operatively with the use of this view. Biomechanical studies have supported the use of unicorticol screws demonstrating that 75% distal screw length provides similar primary stability as 100% unicorticol screw length. Recent biomechanical studies would seem to suggest a stronger construct stability with the use of screws in comparison to pegs as they improve stiffness under both torsional and compressive forces in extra-articular fractures. Most of the published biomechanical work has used an extra-articular fracture models and thus far the increase in construct stability using screws has not been proven in a clinical study. Boretto et al. failed to show any difference in follow up radiographic parameters when comparing 14 v 13 patients with C2 and C3 AO radius fractures fixed with either pegs or screws. The additional costs associated with locking screws has questioned the routine use of locking shaft screws. Bicorticol none locking shaft screws may be sufficient for a stable fixation and the shaft area is also associated with a lower risk of extensor tendon irritation with dorsal cortex penetration. Lutsky et al.'s case series included 51 patients who underwent fixation with the use of none locking shaft screws. Asadollahi et al. performed a systematic review of tendon injuries following volar plate fixation. After review of 21 studies they concluded that placement of the plate ‘proximal,’ to the watershed line and removal of the plate in those that are symptomatic can reduce the risk of attritional rupture. Zenke et al. investigated 6 EPL rupture cases in a series of 286 patients. Although no obvious cause was found in half the cases, protrusion of screw tips and malreduced dorsal fragments were associated risks of this rare complication. In conclusion multi-row volar locking distal radius plates do not seem to offer biomechanical advantages over single row fixed angle plates and further biomechanical and clinical studies are necessary to determine the optimal number and position of screws to achieve consistent reproducible good results especially in more complex intrarticular fractures. The variability in biomechanical papers discussed in this paper has highlighted the difficulty in strong recommendations for the treatment of this spectrum of injuries. Each distal radius fracture is unique and no specific locking screw configuration is appropriate for all fractures. All the authors declare that, none of them have any conflicts of interest. The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at