Separability curves (mineral recovery versus yield) have been used to characterize the copper flotation process both at batch laboratory scale and industrial plant scale (rougher banks). Then, to approach the scale-up problem the rougher bank operation and the batch were compared using the corresponding separability curves. Comparison was made at the maximum separation efficiency point in both operations. Thus, a time factor was established for optimal technical separation. The time factor can then be used for kinetic scale-up models, together with the ratio between minerals recovery in both operating scales. Experience from several tests recorded over a period of 10 months in an industrial concentrator showed a good consistency for scaling-up the rougher flotation recovery from batch tests within a 1% absolute error range.
                  The effect of particle size and air flowrate in laboratory batch tests was evaluated in the space of separability curves, regarding their effect on recovery at the optimum separability point. Also, the effect of pulp level and particle size on the bank flotation kinetics was evaluated in an industrial flotation circuit. Thus, estimation of recovery changes due to variations in mineral characteristics and operating conditions was explored.The flotation scale-up problem is complex because the mineral characteristics (grade, size, mineralogy), cell characteristics (geometry, power consumption, energy dissipation, bubble and particle size distribution), reagent conditioning and operating conditions (air flowrate, pulp level, froth transport and discharge facilities) are different and variable in batch and plant operation. Time scale up factors for flotation kinetics prediction are generally derived by comparison of industrial flotation banks and laboratory batch cell recovery. However, in plant practice it is common to find very low mineral recoveries in the last cells of the rougher banks. Thus, a direct time comparison between the overall bank performance and the batch operation, at the same recovery, can introduce large errors. A better approach was to simulate the bank performance in order to estimate the flotation rate constant and recovery at infinite times, and then to compare these parameters with those estimated from batch flotation ( Separability curves represent the evolution of the mineral separation of a particular flotation process in terms of the concentrate mineral recovery and the process yield defined as the ratio between concentrate and feed mass flowrates. Also, considering the Separability curves depend on feed characteristics and mineral conditioning as well as on characteristics and operation of flotation cells. Thus, assuming a standard batch test gives the best flotation separation for a non-perfectly liberated mineral, the batch separability curve can be used as an ideal target for plant operation. In this approach the combined effect of the concentrate grade and recovery can be observed at the optimal separability point. The particle collection rate is based on fundamental particle-bubble collision and/or cavitation and adhesion processes ( The simplest The mineral recovery in a batch flotation test can be estimated from Eqs. For Experimental work was developed at laboratory and plant scale at División Salvador, Codelco-Chile. Batch flotation was developed at the Metallurgical Laboratory, using two standard Wemco cells of 2.7 (L) and 5.3 (L). Two kinds of tests were considered: (a) predictive monthly tests using ore samples, and (b) special tests to study the effect of different variables, such as particle size and air rate on batch performance. Plant testing was developed in the rougher flotation circuit, consisting of five parallel flotation banks. Each bank provided with nine self-aerated Wemco cells of 42.5 m  Data from the same experience in An alternative way of representing the batch process is the separability curve. In this approach the maximum technical separability point corresponds to the point of tangency of the feed grade line, as it is shown in The change of air flowrate was evaluated regarding their effect on recovery for the optimum separability point. Thus, estimation of recovery changes due to variations in mineral characteristics and operating conditions was explored. Among other variables, separability curves strongly depend on particle size, or otherwise on mineral liberation. For example, The effect of pulp level was observed from a kinetic study performed in two parallel rougher flotation banks. Sampling and overall mass balances per size class were developed by local sampling (around three cells) along the bank. The pulp level was increased in one rougher bank and the performance was compared with the rougher bank operating in parallel under normal conditions. Results showed a moderate increase of 2.7% in the final copper recovery, as it is shown in  In summary, feed characteristics and their conditioning as well as experimental operating conditions, both at laboratory and plant scale, can significantly affect the comparison for scale up purposes. The following two dimensionless variables, from Eqs. The proposed method was tested by comparing the average monthly rougher recovery with the recovery of monthly batch tests. Both operations were firstly characterized by their corresponding separability curves and then compared at the optimal separability point. Here, optimal technical separation refers to the point where the concentrate incremental grade, tangent to the curve, is equal to the feed grade.  Separability curves for the rougher flotation circuit was based on the average recovery calculated from daily recorded data (three shifts) on feed, concentrate and tailings grade, as well as average feed tonnage and pulp density. The data was processed in a rougher flotation simulator to generate the corresponding separability curves. The simulator was previously validated from kinetic flotation sampling developed on the same rougher banks. An example of average monthly data and their standard deviation is presented in  On the other hand, it was found that the scale-up factor corresponding to the ratio between plant and laboratory recoveries, Eq. In summary, using Eqs.  A standard comparison between laboratory batch flotation tests and industrial rougher flotation performance, based on separability curves, was developed and evaluated in order to estimate scale-up factors. This approach is more robust and less sensitive to the laboratory and rougher flotation operation, particularly the last cells in the rougher bank. Experience from several tests recorded over a period of 10 months in an industrial concentrator showed a good consistency for scaling-up the rougher flotation recovery from batch tests within a 1% absolute error range. The significant effect of changing operation variables such as particle size and air flowrate at laboratory scale was evaluated for predictive purposes. It was also found that maximization of the rougher flotation recovery, by increasing pulp level, is critically limited by the quality of the pulp level control system. The authors are grateful to El Salvador Division of Codelco-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by CONICYT, project Fondecyt 1020215, and Santa Marı&#x0301;a University, project 270122.