Teeth consist of two major tissues, enamel and dentin, which are formed during development by epithelial and mesenchymal cells, respectively. Rodent incisors are useful experimental models for studying the molecular mechanisms of tooth formation because they are simultaneously growing in not only embryos but also adults. Members of the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) family regulate epithelial-mesenchymal interactions through an essential coactivator, Smad4. In the present study, we established Smad4 conditional knockout (cKO) mice and examined phenotypes in adult incisors. Smad4 cKO mice died with severe anemia within one month. Phosphorylated Smad1/5/9 and Smad2/3 were detected in epithelial cells in both control and Smad4 cKO mice. Disorganized and hypoplastic epithelial cells, such as ameloblasts, were observed in Smad4 cKO mice. Moreover, alkaline phosphatase expression and iron accumulation were reduced in dental epithelial cells in Smad4 cKO mice. These findings suggest that TGF-β family signaling through Smad4 is required for the differentiation and functions of dental epithelial cells in adult mouse incisors.Teeth consist of two major different tissues called enamel and dentin. Enamel is the most highly mineralized tissue in vertebrates and covers the outer layer of dentin. Enamel and dentin are formed during tooth development by ameloblasts and odontoblasts, respectively [ Rodent incisors are useful experimental models for studying the molecular mechanisms of tooth development because they are simultaneously growing in not only embryos but also adults [ Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) family signaling is a key regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, including those occurring during tooth development [ The Smad4-null phenotype is embryonic lethal in mice at an early stage before the tooth formation [  Lower mandibles were scanned using a μCT scanner (CosmoScan GX; Rigaku Co., Tokyo, Japan) to produce images with an isotropic voxel spacing of 60 μm, with the following X-ray settings: of 90 kVp, 88 μA, high-resolution mode, 4 min. The 3D images of the mandibles were reconstructed from the scan slice data. Lower mandibles were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and decalcified with Osteosoft (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Sagittal and coronal paraffin sections (4 μm thick) were cut. Sections were analyzed with Azan and hematoxylin-eosin staining. To evaluate the iron transport ability, sections were stained with Berlin blue. For immunohistochemical analysis, sections were stained with antibodies specific for Smad4 (rabbit monoclonal; Abcam Inc., Cambridge, UK), phosphorylated Smad1/5/9 (rabbit polyclonal; Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA), phosphorylated Smad2/3 (rabbit polyclonal; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, TX, USA) or bone-specific ALP (rabbit polyclonal; Takara Bio. Inc., Shiga, Japan). The primary antibodies were visualized using a horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Nichirei Bio., Tokyo, Japan) and a DAB Peroxidase (HRP) Substrate Kit (Vector laboratories, CA, USA). Colons were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and used to generate paraffin sections. Sections were analyzed using a BioRevo BZ-9000 microscope (Keyence Co., Osaka, Japan). Comparisons were made using an unpaired ANOVA with the Tukey-Kramer post hoc test. The statistical significance is indicated as follows: **, p < 0.01. cKO of the To examine the role of TGF-β family signaling in adult incisors, we established a We prepared longitudinal sections of incisors from control and Smad4 cKO mice to examine the differentiation process of dental epithelial cells ( We examined the localization of the Smad4 protein and its partners, such as phosphorylated Smad1/5/9 and Smad2/3 proteins, by immunohistochemical analysis ( Functional changes in dental epithelial cells in Smad4 cKO mouse incisors. We examined the functional changes in dental epithelial cells in Smad4 cKO mice. ALP is an enzyme highly expressed in dental epithelial cells, such as mature ameloblasts and cells of the SI layer and papillary layer (panels a-d in Smad4 cKO mice died within a month for unknown reasons, but the lethal phenotype of Smad4 In the present study, we used Smad4 cKO mice to examine the potential role of TGF-β family signaling in adult mouse incisors because Smad4 is an essential coactivator of intracellular signaling of TGF-β family ligands. Global Smad4 KO is embryonic lethal in mice [ As previously reported by Pan et al. [ Smad4 is an essential coactivator of transcriptional activity in TGF-β family signaling. Osteogenic ligands in the TGF-β family activate a Smad1/5/9-dependent pathway, although nonosteogenic ligands activate a Smad2/3-dependent pathway. Smad4 forms complexes with Smad1/5/9 and Smad2/3 to activate each downstream signaling pathway. TGF-β family signaling through Smad4 plays important roles in crown formation during embryonic tooth development [  We would like to thank members of the Division of Biomedical Sciences, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University and the Division of Orthodontics, Department of Human Development and Fostering, Meikai University School of Dentistry for their helpful discussion and excellent technical assistance. We are grateful to Dr. Xi Deng for kindly providing This work was supported in part by T. K. received research grants from Daiichi-Sankyo, Co., Ltd. The other authors have nothing to disclose.