Vibrations as a result of blasting practices in mining engineering are complex phenomena controlled by many variables. Ground vibrations from blasting have been a continuous problem for the mining and construction industries, the public living near the mining activities and the regulatory agencies responsible for setting safety and environmental standards. Questions frequently arise about blast vibration effects and specifically about whether vibrations can or could have caused cracking and other damage in homes and other structures. The answer depends primarily on vibration levels and frequencies and to a lesser degree on site and structure specific factors. All blast vibration complaints are due to how much complainant’s houses shake, not how much the ground shakes. The three factors of ground vibrations that determine the degree of shaking are ground vibration amplitude (peak particle velocity; PPV), its duration and its frequency. Reidarman and Nyberg This paper investigates the issue of ground vibration complaints at Kayad village due to the blasting at Kayad underground mine and its possible solutions. The study was conducted through systematic steps by changing blast design viz. amount of explosives in a blast round or in a delay, number of holes, position and timing of deck, firing sequence, hole diameter and length and detonation of explosives by different initiating devices. The study has been carried out at a Kayad underground mine. It is a lead-zinc mine of Hindustan Zinc Limited and is located at Kayad village in Ajmer district of Rajasthan state in India. The mine is located on the Eastern fringe of Kayad village. The deposit lies between latitude N26°31′30″ and longitude E74°41′ and 74 There are three lenses – the Main lens, K1A lens and S1 lens. The earlier three lenses viz. K1, K2 and K3 have been re-correlated as one single lens on account of the positive intersections encountered in the drilling in the vacant spaces between these lenses. The main host rock is Quartz mica schist with some mineralization also occurring in calc silicate. Main lens has been dissected at many places by pegmatite. The lenses lie parallel to the axial plane foliation/cleavage/fracture of the fold system or shear fractures governed by the lithological variations. The main lens has been explored to variable depths and maximum upto 50 mRL while K1A and S1 go upto 350 mRL. The main lens ranges in average width from 5 Different countries have set their own standards on the basis of their extensive field investigations carried out in their mines for several years. There is a plethora of standards available world-over based on various aspects of ground vibrations e.g. amplitude, peak particle velocity, frequency, acceleration, etc. These parameters are used either as a single criterion or in combination; sometimes frequency is combined with amplitude and velocity. Peak particle velocity has been traditionally used in practice for the measurement of blast damage to structures. United States Bureau of Mine (USBM) published RI 8507 Blast vibration monitoring was carried out at three to four locations in Kayad village due to blasting at Kayad underground mine. Development face blasts were performed at different locations in the mine. The number of holes detonated in a blast round for development blasting, varied from 17 to 78. In case of slot raise and ring blasting, the number of holes generally varied between two and thirteen. The total explosives weight detonated in blast around varied from 70 to 310 The blast vibration generated due to development faces, slot raise and ring blasts have been taken for analyses. In all the cases the monitoring of blast vibration were performed for vertical depth of 30–185 The recorded frequencies of vibrations were in the range of 30.1–246 Recorded blast vibration data were analyzed at a regular interval. The vibration data recorded due to development face blasts and production blasts (slot raise and ring) have been taken for analyses and generalized prediction equation has been established and it is given as Experimental blasts were conducted with different blast design to optimise blast design parameters and to control ground vibration at lowest possible levels. The delay interval provided between all the holes were modified in view of the recorded magnitude of vibration in the village. Initially, the blast were conducted with delay intervals of 15 The optimised blast design for development face after modification of design in different stages at Kayad mine is presented in Initially, electronic delay detonators were extensively used to control blast induced vibration and noise. But as the mine progressed deeper, the NONEL initiation system was used due to cost advantages. The impact of two types of initiation system namely shock tube (NONEL) and electronic delay initiation system on generation of blast induced vibration has been analyzed. The vibration data recorded on the surface in the village due to detonation of 500 blasts which were conducted by electronic delay detonators and similarly the recorded vibration data due to detonation of 500 blasts due to Nonel initiation system have been analysed. The recorded blast vibration data are plotted against their scaled distances for both the detonation systems i.e. electronic delay detonators and NONEL initiation system and is presented in The slot raise blasts commented after sufficient development blasts were performed in North and South decline faces. The numbers of holes and deck charging were modified to get desired pull from the slot raise blast. The maximum pull of 2.7 The ring blasts were ultimately planned after sufficient opening of the stope by slot raise blasting. Initially, the ring blasting started with emulsion cartridge explosives of 150 The main parameter involved in the blast vibration phenomena has been be summarized in Blast waveform analyses were carried out to get the optimal interval between the blast holes and between the explosives decks within the blast holes with the help of seed waveform and linear superimposition of waves techniques. It has been found that the delay interval of 20–80 ms, the increase at an interval of 20 Furthermore, two methodologies were adopted for providing decks and its detonations. The first one is by detonating hole one by one i.e. from bottom deck to top deck at an interval of 20 The in-the-hole continuous velocity of detonation of emulsion explosives was also recorded for four holes of Ring (R-1) at 325mRL of S-1 Stope. Out of four holes, three were deck charged. The amount of explosives detonated in 1st hole was 26 The fragmentation results of ring blast of S-2 Stope (Ring 5) were photographed for its fragment size analysis. The detailed fragment size analyses were carried out. The average mean size of the block is 0.643 Kayad underground mine is successfully producing the minerals in close proximity to the inhabitant area by adopting state of the art blasting practices as discussed in the text. The blast vibrations recorded in the village were well within the acceptable limits and there is no complain from the residents. The development face blast with delay intervals of 25 The delay interval between the holes of 40 The authors are thankful to the mine officials for providing necessary facilities during field investigations. The permission of Director, CSIR – Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, Dhanbad, India to publish this paper is thankfully acknowledged.