Pre-mullite powder has been synthesized by sol–gel process followed by calcination. Aluminium nitrate and tetraethyl ortosilicate (TEOS) were used as the starting materials. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis showed that calcined pre-mullite powder is completely amorphous. The powders were wet milled in planetary ball-mill within various time intervals. The particle size distribution of ground samples has been determined using particle size analyzer (PSA). The powder samples morphology was investigated with Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Comminution kinetics of calcined pre-mullite gel is modeled using a classical batch grinding equation based on selection and breakage functions. The analytical solution of the batch grinding equation, as well as parameters of grinding kinetics was obtained through Nakajima and Tanaka approach. Analysis of experimental data resulted with model suitable for prediction of particle size distribution of calcined amorphous gel comminuted in planetary ball mill. Model is suitable if the duration of grinding is no longer than 128min. Obtained product size distribution, for shorter grinding duration (≤128min) is consistent with massive fracture mechanism. For longer grinding periods (≥256min) changes of breakage mechanism indicated parallel fracture and attrition mechanism. The parameters of grinding kinetics obtained by the linear regression analysis were used to reproduce the product size distributions. The good agreement between experimental and calculated size distributions confirms the applicability of the applied rate equation to the description of grinding of calcined amorphous gel.Mullite is a solid solution with a general formula Al Aluminum nitrate and tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) were used to prepare diphasic mullite gel with alumina/silica molar ratio close to 3/2. The gel was prepared by dissolving Al(NO Calcined gel samples were grinded in planetary ball mill Fritsch GmbH, Pulverisette 6 using 250 The particle size distribution of ground samples has been determined using particle size analyzer Coulter Counter ZM, (Coulter Electronics Ltd., Luton, UK). Samples were dispersed in 1 The powder samples morphology was investigated with Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) TESCAN, VEGA TSS 136LS. Prior to scan, powders were applied to the adhesive graphite tape. X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) has been performed on computer controlled diffractometer Philips 1830 with CuKα radiation. Data were collected between 5 and 70° 2 Grinding kinetics is commonly described using population balances. Partial integro-differential equation for size-continuous time-continuous model, assuming well mixed batch process can be written in form  Assuming that the product of selection and breakage function is of the following form: Nakajima and Tanaka Absence of X-ray diffraction peaks and the presence of a distinct amorphous “hump” in the X-ray diffraction pattern, indicate that the formed gel, even after calcinations at 700  For a detailed view of the size and morphology of the particles, SEM investigation of the powders was carried out. Analysis of grinding data was performed according to Eq. As can be seen in Regression analysis of data corresponding to grinding intervals of 16, 32, 64 and 128 The intercepts of straight lines in Furthermore, model parameter Grinding kinetics analysis of experimental data resulted with model suitable for prediction of particle size distribution during grinding of calcined pre-mullite gel in planetary ball mill: Particle size distribution was calculated according to Eq. Sum of squared errors ( As expected, sum of squared errors confirmed that for grinding time of 256 and 512 In order to understand the described grinding behavior, the dominant mechanism of comminution of investigated material should be discussed. The attrition, compression and impact fracture are identified as main breakage mechanisms The kinetics of comminution of calcined pre-mullite gel in planetary ball-mill was investigated. The grinding kinetics approach was successfully applied to the analysis of product size distribution. A classical batch grinding equation was used for the modeling of comminution process, the analytical solution equation, as well as parameters of grinding kinetics were obtained through Nakajima and Tanaka approach. Grinding kinetics analysis of experimental data resulted with model suitable for prediction of particle size distribution grinding of calcined amorphous gel in planetary ball mill if the duration of grinding is no longer than 128 The parameters of grinding kinetics obtained by the linear regression analysis were used to reproduce the product size distributions and the good agreement between experimental and calculated size distributions was found. Obtained product size distribution for shorter grinding duration (≤ The financial support of the