Pure Fe, Cr and Al powders were used to mix with an additive to prepare a powder-mixed paste. Fe–25Cr–5Al honeycombs were fabricated by extruding the powder-mixed paste, then dried and sintered. The volume shrinkage and the apparent density of extruded honeycombs after drying and sintering were measured. The effect of sintering temperature and time on the volume shrinkage, the apparent density and the structure of honeycombs had been studied. The results show that the volume shrinkage and the apparent density of metallic honeycombs increase with temperature, the volume shrinkage ranging from 25% to 53%, and the apparent density ranging from 1.0g/cm3 to 1.7g/cm3. When sintering at 1250°C, the volume shrinkage and the apparent density of metallic honeycombs increase with time, reach a maximum at 35–40min, then decrease. The structure of sintered honeycombs consists of α-Fe, Fe–Cr–Al compounds and Al2O3.Metallic honeycomb is named by their linear cellular structure. Metallic honeycombs not only have important metal properties such as good heat conductivity, electrical conductivity, high strength, toughness, but also have structural characteristics such as large surface area, clear cross-section, light weight, heat sink and filtration. Due to their excellent properties, they are becoming more prevalent in a wide range of applications. Some of these applications include metal supports for exhaust gas catalyst, heat exchangers, fuel cells, heat collectors, load-bearing structures, transportation and aerospace components where the beneficial properties of metals are needed to coincide with low-apparent density structures For the traditional metallic honeycomb processing, a metal strip is formed on special rollers into a corrugated sheet and then coiled up, along with a flat metal sheet Due to their excellent oxidation resistance, FeCrAl alloys are being used in various applications up to temperature as high as 1200 The raw materials used in the fabrication of the metal honeycombs are chiefly metal powders such as iron, chromium and aluminum powder, the iron powder with average particle sizes below 400 First, the three metal powders were mechanically mixed in Fe–25 With Archimedes method, the volume and the apparent density of sintered honeycombs were determined. The structural evolution of honeycombs had been analyzed in sintering process by XRD, SEM/EDS. The extruded honeycomb was dried in a chamber for 2 The dried samples were baked at 200     As described by Huang The microstructure of the samples at different time and temperature sintering, observed by SEM operating in BSE is shown in The oxidation resistance of FeCrAl alloys depends on the formation of alumina scales on the alloy surface. The mechanism of Al Fe–25Cr–5Al honeycombs were fabricated by extruding a paste which was mixed with pure Fe, Cr, Al mixture powders and an additive, and drying in a chamber and sintering in an atmosphere furnace with H The drying procedure is able to remove H At same sintering time, the volume shrinkage and the apparent density of sintered honeycombs increase with sintering temperature from 1230 When sintering at 1250 The sintering structure consists of α-Fe, Fe–Cr–Al compounds, and Al The authors would like to thank the Yunnan Nature Science Foundation of China and Kunming Institute of Precious Metal for the financial support. The authors would like to acknowledge Yunnan Key Laboratory of New Material Producing and Processing for technical analysis.