To establish the movement relationship for the roof breaking under shallow mining conditions, the mechanical model of the roof rock beam was built, then the structure instability process of the roof rock beam was analyzed. The changing criterion of the vertical displacement was established and the relationship between the deflection and the rotary motion of roof block was determined. Regarding a mining face in Shangwan Mine, the responsing laws of the deflection and horizontal thrust of the roof rock beam were obtained through FLAC3D numerical analysis. The results show that the structure instability of the cracked roof rock beam depends on the interaction between the vertical load and the horizontal thrust. For the roof rock beam, when the vertical load keeps constant, the horizontal thrust fluctuating rises with increasing deflection. The horizontal thrust increases constantly with the deeper buried depth and the smaller span.The breaking instability of the roof in shallow mining shows particularity, the mining pressure behaves abnormally especially when the working face is too long, which often results in step sinking, bracket damage, and so on. In the high yield and efficient mining for the large coal field, it is a key problem to research on the deformation and breaking law, and controlling countermeasure for the roof stability under shallow mining. Considering the stratified depositing feature of coal-bearing strata, the stratified roof is often regarded as the elastic rock beam or block beam by scholars. Hou et al. regarded the stratified cracked roof as beam-type elastic component, and studied the static bifurcation behavior and the mechanism of bending catastrophe phenomena separately using stability theory of elastic systems Under the shallow mining conditions, Zhao and Song thought that the small angle of rotation and the horizontal thrust of the block with different fragmentations increases slightly with the length of mining face and the angle of rotation In the mining process analysis, the cracked roof is usually simplified as a simple-supported beam, which often leads to defects if ignoring the effect of the deflection and the horizontal thrust. In addition, current research rarely involved the bending instability process of the roof rock beam under the combined effect of the vertical and horizontal loads. It is difficult to judge the deflection effects on the structure stability of the beam pre-and-post breaking. In this paper, considering a mining face at Shangwan Mine of Inner Mongolia in China as the background, a modified model of Euler beam was used to analyze the bending instability process of the cracked roof rock beam under shallow mining conditions. Applying the stability theory of elastic systems, the relationship between the deflection of roof rock beam and the state of block rotary motion in voussoir beam was established, which would provide the theoretical reference for the roof management in mining practice. Taking the main roof of a mining face at Shangwan Mine as the investigated object, the comprehensive mechanized longwall mining method is used with double drums coal cutter which type is JOY 7LS7/lws630 and shield type hydraulic support which type is ZY18000/32/70. The mining face is advanced in inclined back type as shown in The main roof before being fractured can be regarded as a fixed beam at two ends. The span Based on the maximum shear stress value, During loading, a vertical tension fracture develops at the midspan of the cracked roof rock beam, and the roof beam is broken into two blocks. The voussoir beam is formed with the rotation of two blocks, the cracked roof rock beam of simple-supported structure is the previous configuration of the voussoir beam, and vertical deflection and lateral thrust of the cracked roof affects the stability of the voussoir beam. Thus it is essential to analyze the mechanical behavior of the cracked roof rock beam converting to the voussoir beam. With the working face advancing, the cracks formed at both ends of the main roof beam when the beam reached the limit span, as shown in Since almost no tensile resistance exists in the cracks, the cracked roof in unit width can be regarded as a no-tension beam. As shown in In general, rock failure is an instability phenomenon driven by the energy The total potential energy The work was done by Hence, the total potential energy If Eq. The first and second partial derivative of the total potential energy As a mechanic system of the roof rock beam, the external force The bifurcation set formula of the system equilibrium state is obtained from Eqs. With gradual deflection of the roof rock beam, the increasing of the horizontal thrust Only when In this condition, the structure is unstable and the deflection Based on the nonlinear mechanic characteristic, the change of the horizontal thrust In the Euler model for the cracked roof rock beam, considering the actual situation of the load Supposing the horizontal thrust In the curve Point The load In the curve The deflection A voussoir beam model is considered after instability of the cracked roof rock beam, with a span of Hence, for the sake of simplicity, the included angle The relation of the deflection The angle Instability of the hinged beam structure with these determination variables Sliding instability. Since the initial rotating angle Rotating instability. When the initial rotating angle Sudden-jump instability. In the initial stage, buckling of the cracked roof beam occurs and the vertical displacement increases sharply, and then The sudden-jump instability characteristics and the affecting factors of the cracked rock beam can be discussed by using Eqs. Each point on the deflection curves in Considering an example of the mining face buried in 200 m depth, the effects of thickness/span ratio It can be known that the deflection of the thin roof is obviously larger than that of the thick one. The thick and hard roof often produces the brittle broken during the mining process, i.e., instability type belongs to the strength failure. While the thin and mid-hard or soft roof often produces large deflection and buckling broken, i.e., instability type belongs to the structure failure. For the shallow mining, sudden-jump instability of structural buckling tends to occur in the thin and soft roof. The movement of the broken block is affected by the thickness/span ratio Whether the three hinged arch structure of broken blocks can be formed depends on the parameters The mechanical model for the roof rock beam can be simulated and verified by FLAC3D numerical analysis. Regarding a mining engineering with depth of 160–200 m at Shangwan Mine as an example, the computational model is built based on the mining conditions with the immediate roof of 9 m thick sandy shale, 5 m thick coal seam, and 4–7 m thick sandstone main roof. The unit weight of the overlying rock is 25 kN/m The physical and mechanical parameters of the model are available in The uniformly distributed load of 4.0–5.0 MPa was applied at the roof rock beam top to simulate its instability at a buried depth of 160–200 m. The buried depth and thickness of the simulated rock beam was 160 and 4 m, respectively. The relationship curves of the horizontal thrust Obvious differences are observed among the curves for different beam spans. With the decrease of the beam span, As seen from With fixed values of depth, span and Young’s modulus, the deflection of the roof increases more obviously with decreasing thickness of the roof. The deflection increases sharply when the roof thickness decreases from 5 to 4 m (see The roof rock beam structure of the underground space is easy to produce buckling instability and strong destructive disaster under the action of the horizontal thrust The structural model of Euler beam for the cracked roof rock beam, satisfying the condition that the mining face length is far greater than the advancing distance, can be applied in the stability analysis of the main roof under shallow mining conditions. However, considering the vertical force alone will lead to defects of the mechanical model, so the horizontal thrust is added in the modified model to reflect the instability process of the roof rock beam. The roof structure determines the characteristics of ground pressure and mining safety, the control of it was the purpose of working face support It is insufficient to determine the potential energy of the cracked roof rock beam structure simply by considering the vertical concentrated force alone The structure is in the stable state before arriving at the critical point, the potential energy of the structure is constantly accumulated and its deflection is gradually changed. When arriving at the critical point, the structure occurs stability bifurcation, and vertical displacement appears sudden-jump, which results in the structure losing stability and being broken. The present roof control theory of the longwall mining face seldom relates to the cracking and subsidence process of the main roof, while the deflection of the roof rock beam before cracking at the midspan directly influences the movement of the broken blocks Based on the interaction of vertical load and horizontal thrust, the mechanical model of the cracked roof rock beam was built under shallow mining condition. Using the stability theory of elastic system, the equilibrium path and bifurcation condition, the critical load causing structural buckling instability, the deflection and the sudden-jump value of vertical displacement were gained. By establishing the mechanical model and numerical model, the deflected process of the cracked roof rock beam was analyzed, and the evolution law of the horizontal thrust and the influencing factors of that were discussed. The thickness span ratio and elastic modulus are affecting factors of the roof deflection and the initial rotation of broken block. The instability of broken block is affected by the deflection and deformation of the cracked roof rock beam, and the sudden-jump value of displacement cannot be ignored. The relation between the roof deformation and rotary movement of the block should be established under shallow mining condition, thus the stability analysis method of the cracked roof rock beam is improved. This work was financially supported by the