Background
                  Milk, dairy products and milk-based infant formulas (MIF) are major sources of calcium in humans’ diet, especially in certain groups of population. The knowledge of the amount of this essential mineral in such complex matrices is a major concern to several areas such as health, quality control and research.
               
                  Scope and approach
                  Through years, laboratory methods for calcium measurement have evolved into instrumental techniques, which brought to significant enhancements in analytical performances and sample throughput. Standardization bodies encourage keeping updated methods of analysis for nutrients. In this review, we gather knowledge on both the conventional and the promising analytical approaches of calcium measurement, highlighting their advantages and limitations.
               
                  Key findings and conclusions
                  A wide array of techniques is available for calcium measurement and official international bodies have standardized several procedures. Classic sample pre-treatments, consisting in ashing or wet digestion, were joined by other effective and green-friendly solutions such as slurry sampling or direct solid sampling, when made feasible by the subsequent detection technique. Atomic spectrometry methods, complying with several standardized acceptability criteria, are nowadays largely used. In particular, flame atomic absorption spectrometry is well established together with inductively coupled plasma techniques, the latter being advantaged in terms of sensitiveness and multi-analyte capability. More recently, the interest in other approaches, such as instrumental neutron activation analysis and infrared techniques, has increased. X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy are suitable alternatives for routine at-line applications.Direct analysis Ease of use and low cost Short response time (tens of s) No sample preparation Wide linear dynamic range Routine application Continuous monitoring High sensitivity (limit of detection 10 Single-element technique Matrix effects, sensor-dependent day-to-day reproducibility and stability Fast and less expensive than ICP techniques Simple to operate Good analytical performances Cost-saving in comparison to ICP techniques One analyte at a time Poor sensitivity for trace minerals Cost of lanthanum as releasing agent Time required for sample mineralization Destructive technique Multi-mineral analysis Simpler to operate and less expensive than ICP-MS Low detection limits and high accuracy Rapid analyses over wide concentration ranges Complex matrices can cause blockage of cones, deposition of organic matter in the injector tube of the torch and interferences Time required for traditional mineralization of sample Destructive technique Wider linear dynamic range, lower detection limits and faster analyses in comparison to FAAS Multi-mineral technique Simpler spectra than ICP-OES Nitrogen-based plasma (green technology) Reduced running costs in comparison to ICP-OES No flammable or toxic gases Lower consumable costs in comparison to FAAS and ICP-OES Time required for sample mineralization Destructive technique Fast multi-mineral analysis Ultra-trace detection capability Steady improvements in cost reduction and simpler use Higher sensitivity in comparison to ICP-OES High cost of analysis Blockage of cones, deposition of organic matter in the injector tube of the torch and interferences Time required for sample mineralization Destructive technique Direct analysis Multi-mineral technique No sample pre-treatment No contamination from reagents Sensitive technique Analysis of reference standard materials Non-destructive technique Necessity of a nuclear reactor and a radiochemical laboratory Long turn-around time Labour intensive High cost of analysis Direct analysis Multi-mineral technique Rapid screening measure (1 min) Minimal sample preparation High sample throughputs Accurate quantitation At-line measures Ease of use Non-destructive technique Cost of instrument Poor sensitivity for determination of trace elements (ED-XRF) Dependence to reference methods for equipment and method calibration, validation and monitoring Real-time technique Multi-mineral technique Rapid measure (1–3 min) Environmental-friendly technique Minimal sample preparation Ease of use and safe for the operator Lower cost in comparison to other OES methods At-line measures Difficulty of plasma formation and decrease in atomic emission intensity in liquid samples Low sensitivity and repeatability with liquid samples Matrix-dependent interaction between laser and sample (matrix-effect) Reduced sensitivity and accuracy by laser source signal fluctuation Destructive technique Calcium, an essential mineral for humans supplied through the diet, is mainly present in bone and teeth being involved in several biological processes ( Minerals represent a small fraction of bovine milk (approximately 7–9 g L Overall, calcium content in milk and dairy products ( Several collaboratively studied and validated methods to measure calcium in bovine milk, in dairy products as well as in MIF are available ( Milk, dairy products and MIF are complex matrices, and their mineral determination is a challenging task due to difficulties to achieve representative mineral dispersions matching the selected detection technique. Several sample preparation procedures for mineral determination have been developed and improved over the past decades, with the objectives to reduce overall analysis time, cost and to improve analytical performances ( The understanding of calcium partitioning between aqueous and colloidal phases is of utmost importance. Typically, to monitor the calcium content in the aqueous phase, three sample treatment procedures are mainly described in the literature, namely ultrafiltration, ultracentrifugation and rennet coagulation of milk ( For the recovery of calcium in the soluble phase it is necessary to recover the whey and filter it before the determination. This method is rapid and simple, but the aqueous phase obtained may contain serum proteins and casein micelles, which bind minerals, including calcium ( Traditional analytical techniques for total calcium determination imply a preliminar decomposition of the organic matrix and the dissolution of the minerals ( Another common pretreatment is based on the sample acid digestion carried out by heating to obtain a homogeneous mineral dissolution. Wet acid digestion methods employ one or more concentrated acids. Nitric acid is typically preferred because of its oxidant activity and the availability at high purity. The complete oxidation of a sample through HNO In recent decades, sample preparation procedures based on closed pressurized devices, either microwave-assisted or conventionally heated, have been reported in the literature. Undoubtedly, microwave-assisted wet digestion (MAWD) proved to be a simple, clean and rapid digestion procedure. Anyway, the presence of a security system to avoid explosions due to the pressure exceeding the safety level and an exhaust system are necessary. These requirements make the system rather expensive. In a study undertaken to compare different sampling procedures (i.e., dry ashing, wet-digestion by high-pressure ashing system and MAWD system) MAWD allowed the best agreement between measured and certified calcium levels in reference samples of whole milk powder (WMP) (NIST 84359) and SMP (BCR-063) with recovery rates of 99.6% and 97.8%, respectively ( A relatively new instument innovation introduced on the market is a reflux system device, consisting of a cold finger inserted in the digestion vessel heated with conventional heating. This solution is preferred over open systems offering reduced risk of analyte loss. Sample preparation through such device was adopted to determine calcium and other minerals in milk powders and MIF (n = 4) by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) ( Despite less used than MAWD, digestion is efficiently carried out also by focused microwave-induced combustion (FMIC), a green digestion method using oxygen as an oxidant with diluted acid and ammonium nitrate as igniter. Through FMIC, samples are combusted in vessels under pressurized oxygen, and ignition step is performed under microwave radiation. The advantages consist in high efficiency of sample oxidation, low blank values due to oxygen purity, low reagent consumption and use of diluted acids for analyte absorption. In addition, this system allows minimization of spectral interferences on mineral measure by ICP techniques ( Currently, sample preparation strategies are moving towards greener approaches. One trend is based on the reduction of acid volumes for sample digestion. In addition, the use of diluted acid solutions, leading to safer digestion conditions, lower residual acidities and, consequently, smaller residue amounts and reduction in costs, has been suggested. A green approach in sample digestion is based on the simultaneous use of diluted HNO The direct analysis of solid samples or suspensions is gaining importance, as it offers reduced times, high sensitivity, reduced sample amount, overcoming the use of acids and other aggressive reagents. Advantages and challenges of solid sampling for mineral determination have been recently highlighted in the literature ( A successful alternative to circumvent time-consuming mineralization protocols, offering the advantage of direct solid or liquid sampling, is slurry sampling. Minerals in organic matrices can be dissolved by simply using reagents at room temperature, thus providing solutions or slurries of samples. A variety of solvents and stabilizers such as HNO A further option coupled to slurry preparation is the ultrasound-assisted extraction. The mechanism of this technique has been overviewed and described as a green alternative to conventional approaches adopted for mineral extraction ( A variety of techniques are available for calcium determination in milk, dairy products and MIF. A list of those currently adopted is detailed in Complexometric titration is one of the oldest techniques adopted for calcium determination in the analysis of milk ( Basic principles of atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS), instrumentation components, as well as applications in the food analysis, have been overviewed in the literature ( FAAS is a popular technique applied extensively for measuring minerals in different food matrices, due to its relative simplicity ( High-resolution continuum source FAAS (HR-CS FAAS) is a variant of FAAS with multi-analyte capabilities, characterized by specific instrumental solutions, such as high intensity xenon short-arc lamp and bidimensional detector ( Among instrumental techniques used for measuring calcium in milk, dairy products and MIF, FAAS has been adopted and internationally validated by regulatory bodies (AOAC, CEN, ISO/IDF) (EN 15505, 2008; ISO 8070 | IDF 119, 2007) ( In atomic emission spectrometry (AES), analyte atoms in solution are aspirated into an excitation area, where they are desolvated, vaporized and free atoms are created under high temperature by different atomization sources (mostly flame or plasma). The excited atoms from high-energy levels decay back to lower levels by emitting light. The analyte concentration is determined by the spectrometric measurement of the emitted photons. Although flame AES is consolidated for the determination of alkali metals in solutions, this technique is affected by chemical, matrix or spectral interferences ( Digital image-based flame AES (DIB-FES), a variant of traditional FES, is based on the use of a video camera along with digital image analysis to obtain an analytical signal. A procedure based on DIB-FES in combination with chemometry was developed for the determination of calcium in milk powder ( ICP-OES is a powerful and versatile analytical approach well established since 1980s, currently widespread for routine analysis of minerals in milk, dairy products and MIF ( Several studies demonstrated the feasibility of ICP-OES-based procedures to measure calcium and micro-minerals in complex matrices such as milk, dairy products and MIF ( In OES an alternative to ICP technology is microwave-induced plasma (MIP). This excitation source is in line with the principles of green analytical chemistry. By MIP-OES, an electrical field coupled with microwave energy produces stable plasma using nitrogen gas ( A description of ICP mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) principles (including its applications for mineral analysis in foods and beverages) has been reported in the literature ( In the context of the first French Total Diet Study for infants and toddlers, undertaken by the French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety (ANSES), an ICP-MS method enabling the simultaneous determination of macro- and micro-minerals in foodstuffs was developed and validated ( Recently, ICP-MS has been collaboratively applied to develop Standard ISO 21424 | IDF 243 (2018)/AOAC Official method , 2015.06. Twelve macro- and micro-minerals were measured in a variety of dairy products, MIF and adult nutritionals. Samples underwent MAWD in presence of a HNO Instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) is a non-desctructive spectrometry technique applied to multi-analyte determination in milk, dairy products and MIF. This approach is based on the conversion of stable nuclei to radioactive nuclei via nuclear reactions and the subsequent measurement of the reaction products through an equipment at high energy resolution ( X-ray fluorescence is a comparative technique requiring a calibration approach to perform quantitative measurements. The principle of XRF consists in submitting the sample to a beam of X-rays, which results in the emission of secondary (fluorescent) X-rays, specific for each mineral, from the sample surface ( Nowadays, user-friendly benchtop and portable ED-XRF analyzers are successfully applied for at-line analysis of mineral content in milk powders ( A variant of ED-XRF system is the total reflection X-ray (TXRF) spectrometry. In this case, the primary beam strikes the sample at a very low incident angle leading to improvement of detection limits. TXRF can be successfully applied as a screening tool for chemical composition and quality control in the analysis of milk. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy is a form of emission spectroscopy technique triggering growing attention for the assessment of multi-mineral composition in biological samples. Generally, in LIBS a small amount of sample (few μg) is vaporized and excited by a high-energy pulsed laser beam. The excited atomic and ion species turn to their ground state emitting light signals with specific wavelenghts, which are measured by a spectrophotometer (  Infrared (IR) technologies are widely used in dairy industry for milk standardization, payment and phenotyping as well as to determine quality features in dairy products. The basis of infrared spectroscopy as well as applications to dairy foods have been reviewed (De Marchi, Penasa, Zidi, & Manuelian, 2014). In the last years, traditional applications of IR technologies, focused on the determination of major components in milk, paved the way also for the evaluation of other traits, such as the mineral content. Infrared technologies are a predictive approach based on the coupling with statistical programs for spectra interpretation (spectral chemometric analysis). The spectra regions of interest at dairy industry level are both the near infrared (NIR) and mid-infrared (MIR). One criterion widely used to determine the proficiency of predictive models is the ratio performance deviation (RPD). It is a nondimensional statistic parameter useful for quick assessment of infrared calibrations. In the analysis of difficult matrices such as cheese, a threshold range of RPD between 2.4 and 3.0 is considered as adequate for a rough screening (  Potentiometry is a simple electrochemical technique applied in research laboratories for the determination of free calcium ion activity in milk and dairy products ( Other approaches for calcium determination based on gravimetry, capillary electrophoresis, coulometry, voltammetry, ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometry and spectrofluorimetry are described in the literature ( Routine analysis, product screening, fundamental research, suitability of processing conditions as well as compliance with declared nutritional labels are purposes making the determination of calcium in milk, dairy products and MIF a topic of primary interest. Most of research efforts are addressed to improve sample preparation, which, in case of complex matrices such as milk and derivatives, represents the bottleneck of these methods. In particular, the target is the minimization of pre-treatment steps and the development of automation and mechanization of techniques in view of further improve analytical performances. Several analytical techniques are available, including potentiometry by ISE being cost-efficient and time-saving. FAAS is a well-established tool also due to the relatively low costs of instruments and their maintenance. Anyway, the sequential mode of operation has led laboratories to substitute FAAS apparatus with ICP-based techniques. Currently, the appeal of other approaches is triggering more and more attention due to a variety of factors including, among the others, instrumental innovations, cost reduction and the improvement of performances following combination with chemometric methods. Calcium content is a trait of major relevance from a nutritional and technological point of view. It should be worth introducing both in schemes of milk quality payment and in breeding strategies. To this purpose, the availability of an analytical tool fulfilling expectations for routine determinations is a pre-requisite. In this scenery, XRF is demonstrating its effectiveness to fulfill requirements of dairy industry and MIF manufacturers. This technique might become more prevalent in use in the coming years for The preparation of this article was not subjected to any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.