Mineralized turkey leg tendon (MTLT) is an attractive model of mineralized collagen fibers, which are also present in bone. Its longitudinal structure is advantageous for the relative simplicity in modeling, yet its anisotropic elastic properties remain unknown. The aim of this study was to quantify the extent of elastic anisotropy of mineralized collagen fibers by using nano- and microindentation to probe a number on MTLT samples in two orthogonal directions. The large dataset allowed the quantification of the extent of anisotropy, depending on the final indentation depth and on the hydration state of the sample.
                  Anisotropy was observed to increase with the sample re-hydration process. Artifacts of indentation in a transverse direction to the main axis of the mineralized tendons in re-hydrated condition were observed. The indentation size effect, that is, the increase of the measured elastic properties with decreasing sampling volume, reported previously on variety of materials, was also observed in MTLT. Indentation work was quantified for both directions of indentation in dried and re-hydrated conditions.
                  As hypothesized, MTLT showed a higher extent of anisotropy compared to cortical and trabecular bone, presumably due to the alignment of mineralized collagen fibers in this tissue.Mineralized turkey leg tendon (MTLT) is a tissue containing longitudinally arranged collagen fibers that normally mineralize over time, which makes them attractive models to study mechanisms of mineralization ( Two distinct morphologies of MTLT are shown in Indentation is a technique used for quantifying the elastic properties of inhomogeneous materials at the micro- and nanolevel. It could be considered as a non-destructive technique that often does not require complicated sample preparation or mounting and can be performed multiple times on the same sample. In this technique the indentation modulus of rate-independent, elasto-plastic materials can be evaluated on the basis of the elastic contact theory ( According to the conventional plasticity theory, the measurement of the indentation modulus should be independent of indentation depth, but the so called indentation size effect, which describes the increase of indentation modulus with decreasing sampling volume, was reported before ( The aim of this study was to measure the elastic properties of mineralized turkey leg tendons in two orthogonal directions. Availability of such data set is limited in literature, to the authors’ knowledge, but could be very useful for the attempts to understand mechanical behavior of uniaxial mineralized collagen fibril arrays ( Highly mineralized parts of ten digital flexor tendons of domestic turkeys ( The morphology of MTLT was observed using two imaging techniques: quantitative backscattered electron imaging (qBEI) and scanning probe microscopy mode of the indenter. qBEI images were captured using a digital scanning electron microscope with a four-quadrant semiconductor backscattered electron detector (DSM 962, Zeiss), at a working distance of 15 mm. The probe current was adjusted to 110±0.4 pA and the electron beam energy used was 20 keV ( Regions of interest for indentation were selected within the tissue previously imaged with qBEI. In each section of a tendon, 6–10 400x qBEI images containing both circumferential and interstitial zones were taken, defining the regions of interest for indentation. In each of these, 30–60 single indents were placed using a light microscope of the indenter to position indents avoiding lacunae, micropores or surface preparation defects. Over 3000 indentations with 2500 nm (dried and physiological conditions of indentation) and over 2000 indents of approximately 900–1000 nm in depth (dried conditions) were performed in site matched zones of the 49 specimens. The difference between what we refer to as microindentation (final indentation depth of about 2.5 μm) and nanoindentation (about 900 nm) for MTLT is barely a factor of 3 in depth. Nevertheless, in microindentation, greater influence of microporosity is expected, as the size of an indent may cover more than one fiber. Additionally, the micropores are partially invisible when choosing the indentation sites. In nanoindentation, the influence of microporosity is minimized, as the resulting deformed volume is smaller than a fiber and all indents were inspected for a visible influence of surface defects (also micropores visible with the scanning probe microscopy). MTLT was considered to be a linear viscoelastic material under small strains, an assumption based on previous macroscopic tensile tests (unpublished data) and its similarity of mineralization to bone. Two machines were used: the Nano-Hardness Tester, CSM Instruments, Peseux, Switzerland (for microindentation) and the TriboIndenter, Hysitron, USA (for nanoindentation). In this study MTLT samples were indented in two orthogonal directions (axial and transverse) to the main axis of a tendon. Indentations were performed in both dried and physiological conditions to evaluate re-hydration effects on MTLT’s stiffness. Microindentation in physiological conditions was performed in a specially designed fluid cell, using Hank’s Balanced Salts Solution (HBSS; VWR, Vienna, Austria) as a re-hydration medium. Samples were re-hydrated for at least 1 h before indentation. In all cases, a Berkovich indenter was used and measurements were conducted in a load control. The indentation protocol involved trapezoidal loading/unloading at a constant rate of 120 mN/s, with 60 s holding time at maximum load to minimize the viscoelastic and/or viscoplastic effects. In microindentation, this load controlled protocol was performed until the displacement limit of 2500 nm, and, in nanoindentation, until the load limit of 9000 μN. As no protocols for indentation of mineralized tendons were available in the literature, the two indentation depths were chosen based on previous experiments on mineralized tissues (mainly cortical and trabecular bone): for microindentation — ( Because this study was not focused on time dependence, a homogeneous loading rate was used in all indentations. MTLT was considered to have a no more rate-dependent behavior than other mineralized tissues on which nano- and microindentations have previously been successfully performed ( All indents located close to scratches or other surface defects (including pores) were discarded as outliers. Earlier studies on mineralization of the two zones of morphology had shown low heterogeneity of mineralization within a zone ( The work of indentation was calculated for the microindentation experiments. Application of the force to the indenter and the resulting displacement represents the work done on the system, and is manifested as plastic and elastic strains in the specimen ( An iterative scheme proposed by A higher indentation modulus was measured in the circumferential zone, as compared to interstitial one, using microindentation in axial and transverse directions (see On average, the indentation modulus decreased by 5.4% in physiological conditions with respect to the dried ones, when measured in the axial direction. In the transverse direction the averaged measured stiffness decrease was 55.6%, but is likely overestimated due to swelling artifacts. The total work, as well as the plastic and elastic work of microindentation, were calculated for measurements in dried and physiological conditions and showed similar trends as indentation moduli for the same cases. Plastic work is shown in Ratios of the elastic over plastic work To compare with the results of microindentation in dried conditions, indents with the final depth of 900–1000 nm were performed on the same samples and in the same regions of interest. In nanoindentation, as in microindentation, the circumferential zone was stiffer in the axial and transverse directions than the interstitial zone, but only the difference in the axial moduli was significant ( The indentations were performed in load control and resulted in different final indentation depths (depending on the local stiffness of the tested area). The average final indentation depth Indentation moduli measured with nanoindentation were higher than the ones measured with microindentation (see microindentation in two directions: nanoindentation in two directions: The goal of this study was to quantify the extent of elastic anisotropy in MTLT using two-directional indentation. It was assumed that the anisotropy in this tissue would be higher than that measured in bone, because of the simple, uniaxial arrangement of the mineralized collagen fibers. In cortical and trabecular bone the fiber arrangement is much more complex, with ranges in average anisotropy extent lower than those seen in MTLT. The elastic anisotropy extent of a mineralized collagen fibril array had been predicted with a mean field micromechanical homogenization scheme by The anisotropy ratio measured in re-hydrated conditions (4.20–4.50) was outside of the range predicted by the simulations by The circumferential zone of MTLT showed higher anisotropy, in both micro- and nanoindentation than that of the interstitial zone. This could be caused by the slightly different composition of the two types of morphology. In the fibril-array model proposed by The higher anisotropy of the indentation moduli results from the microindentation rather than from nanoindentation (see The extent of mineralization of the MTLT was shown to be similar to that of human bone ( The differences in the total indentation work measured in axial or transverse directions seem to be mainly influenced by the changing plastic work (see The ratios of elastic and plastic work The measurements performed here are indentations in a porous media and in this sense fulfill the conditions of the half-space indentation in a homogenized sense, nevertheless the nano- and microindentation are valid methods for evaluating the average elastic properties of mineralized tissues ( This research was supported by grant no