The main objective of this work is to demonstrate the viability of solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF) process to degrade pesticides in urban wastewater matrix, selecting the herbicide bentazon as a model molecule. In order to provide a correct assessment of the role of the different oxidants and catalysts involved, bentazon was comparatively treated by anodic oxidation with electrogenerated H2O2 (AO-H2O2), electro-Fenton (EF) and UVA-assisted EF (i.e., PEF) processes as well, either in sulfate or chloride media. Trials were made in a stirred tank reactor with an air-diffusion cathode and a boron-doped diamond (BDD), RuO2-based or Pt anode. In chlorinated matrices, the herbicide disappeared more rapidly using a RuO2-based anode because of the generated active chlorine. The best mineralization performance was always obtained using BDD due to its higher oxidation power, which allowed the complete destruction of refractory chloroderivatives. A concentration of 0.50 mM Fe2+ was found optimal to catalyze Fenton's reaction, largely enhancing the mineralization process under the action of OH. Among photo-assisted treatments, sunlight was proven superior to a UVA lamp to promote the photolysis of intermediates, owing to its greater UV irradiance and contribution of visible photons, although PEF also allowed achieving a large mineralization. In all cases, bentazon decay obeyed a pseudo-first-order kinetics. SPEF treatment in urban wastewater using BDD at only 16.6 mA cm−2 yielded 63.2% mineralization. A thorough, original reaction pathway for bentazon degradation is proposed, including seven non-chlorinated aromatics, sixteen chloroaromatics and two chloroaliphatics identified by GC-MS, most of them not previously reported in literature. Ion-exclusion HPLC allowed the detection of seven short-chain linear carboxylic acids.The pollution of hydric resources resulting from anthropogenic activities is of great concern nowadays because it impedes a sustainable development, showing dramatic impact on ecosystems ( Recently, EAOPs are receiving great attention for wastewater treatment due to their simplicity and high performance to destroy organic pollutants ( Non-active anodes like boron-doped diamond (BDD) tend to be more effective than active ones like Pt and dimensionally stable anodes (DSA The oxidation ability of AO can be enhanced by promoting the simultaneous electrogeneration of H From the AO-H The aim of this work is to study the influence of the electrolytic conditions in various EAOPs to clarify the role of artificial UVA radiation and sunlight during the PEF and SPEF degradation of bentazon, respectively. AO-H Bentazon (≥99% purity, Pestanal The urban wastewater sample was obtained from the secondary effluent of a municipal wastewater treatment plant (Gavà-Viladecans, northeastern Spain). Its pH and conductivity were 8.1 and 1.73 mS cm Solutions of 130 mL were electrolyzed in an undivided tank reactor, open to atmosphere and jacketed to circulate thermostated water at 30 °C. All electrolyses were carried out under vigorous stirring with a magnetic follower at 700 rpm. An air-diffusion cathode made of carbon cloth coated with carbon-PTFE supplied by E-TEK was mounted as earlier reported ( Synthetic solutions with the following salts as electrolytes were tested: (i) 0.050 M Na The AO-H A Crison GLP 22 pH-meter and a Methrom 664 conductometer were employed to measure the pH and conductivity, respectively. All samples, once withdrawn from treated solutions, were filtered with Whatman 0.45 μm PTFE filters. The solution TOC was immediately determined on a Shimadzu VCSN TOC analyzer, with L.O.D. = 0.213 mg L Trials to assess the mineralization and concentration decays of bentazon were made in duplicate, and average values are given below. Figures also depict the error bars with 95% confidence interval. The concentrations of NH First, the ability of different anodes to electrogenerate M( To better understand the role of the generated oxidizing agents, another series of trials was carried out with the BDD anode, using three different media prepared with ultrapure water. The EF treatment of 0.208 mM bentazon solutions was studied in 0.050 M Na  Then, the influence of the heterogeneous M( The first study about the PEF process was focused on the treatment of the 0.208 mM herbicide solutions in 0.050 M Na  A very different behavior can be observed in The treatment of 0.208 mM bentazon solutions in 0.050 M Na SPEF with BDD anode was further employed to treat 0.208 mM bentazon spiked into 0.025 M Na At the end of the PEF treatment of the 0.208 mM bentazon solution in 0.050 M Na From these findings, the theoretical total mineralization reaction of bentazon, with a number of carbon atoms ( Taking into account the experimental TOC abatement (△TOC, in mg L   The above aromatic derivatives are expected to yield short-chain linear carboxylic acids from the cleavage of the benzene moiety (  The non-active BDD anode showed its superiority over active RuO Financial support from project