The Reflux Classifier (RC) is a fluidized bed separator capable of operating at high hydraulic loadings due to the presence of parallel inclined plates within the system. When the fluidized suspension passes up through the inclined channels formed by the plates, faster settling particles segregate onto the inclined surfaces, and slide back down to the zone below, while slower settling particles pass on through. The parallel inclined plates provide for a much higher sedimentation area. This arrangement is suitable for both hydrosizing and gravity separation. At MEGS01, the results obtained for a pilot-scale study of the RC were reported [Galvin, K.P., Doroodchi, E., Callen, A.M., Lambert, N., Pratten, S.J., 2002. Pilot plant trial of the reflux classifier. Minerals Engineering, 15, 19–25]. Since then Ludowici MPE, in association with the University of Newcastle have developed the technology at the full-scale. The purpose of this paper is to provide details on the performance of the full-scale RC in the gravity separation of a coal and mineral matter feed in the size range of 0.25–2.0 mm. Historically, this feed has been processed using spirals, however, there is a strong trend now in Australia to employ fluidized bed devices, thus allowing significant changes to be made to the cut-point. The performance of the full-scale RC is described in terms of the partition curves for individual size fractions, and in terms of the yield–ash condition on the feed washability curve. It is concluded that the separation performance is equivalent to that obtained at the pilot scale.There is increasing interest in using fluidized bed technology to effect gravity separations in not only the minerals industry but also coal preparation. These devices are generally robust in their operation, providing a stable response to large changes in the solids throughput, including a sudden loss or arrival of feed. A pressure transducer senses the effect of the high-gravity particles, resulting in their discharge when the suspension density exceeds that of the set point. In the absence of high-density particles, or a loss of feed altogether, the underflow valve closes, while the fluidization water maintains a suspension within the vessel. Excess suspension reports to the overflow. Ludowici MPE, in association with the University of Newcastle, have undertaken the development of a new fluidized bed device known as the Reflux Classifier (RC). A comprehensive pilot-scale trial ( The high throughput achieved by the RC is a consequence of the incorporation of parallel inclined plates within the fluidized bed. A schematic representation is shown in The purpose of this paper is to report on the results of a major campaign of the full-scale RC, the main focus being the separation efficiency of the device, the consistency of its operation, and its response to changes in the operating conditions. Following the pilot-scale trial, a full-scale RC with a cross-section of 1.8 m Prior to the commencement of the full-scale trial it was anticipated that a feed rate to the RC of about 120 tph of −2 mm particles might be possible. This estimate was based on the preparation of the −2 mm particles at the time, and plans for a plant upgrade from 600 to 900 tph. Unfortunately the upgrade did not occur and hence the available feed rate was lower than expected. There was a further loss in the feed rate available when a screen was incorporated to remove most of the −0.150 mm particles. Consequently, the maximum available solids feed rate was 60 tph, about 10% of the solids rate to the plant. Clearly, it was not possible to investigate the range of throughputs studied using the pilot-scale device, though the final loading to the full-scale RC was significant. Normally, the nominal −2 mm feed reported to a 3 m diameter Teetered Bed Separator, however, during the trial the entire feed was diverted to the RC. The campaign, referred to here, involved remarkably uniform conditions compared to those typical at the plant. The one seam was used throughout the day, with the plant feed rate close to the 600 tph maximum, except towards the end of the day when the feed rate dropped to about 400 tph. The uniform nature of the feed made it possible to determine the consistency of the separation, and the effects of changes in the density set point, fluidization rate, and feed rate. The standard operating conditions used involved a fluidization rate of 15 L/s, equivalent to a superficial velocity of 4.4 mm/s, and a set point relative density (RD) of 1.55. In addition to the fluidization water, 3.5 L/s of water was added with the feed, to insure the concentrated feed did not block the supply pipe from the plant. The RD in the vessel was determined using two solid-state transducers located 0.4 and 0.9 m above the upper part of the fluidization plate. The probe positions were designed to ensure an adequate bed level within the vessel. This arrangement was very different to that used in the pilot-scale device, where the transducers were positioned below the lower set of inclined plates, thus producing a much lower bed height. It follows that a given set point used in the full-scale device cannot be compared directly with that used in the pilot-scale device. Rather, it is necessary to examine a correlation between the actual cut-point and the set point used. Samples of the feed, overflow, and underflow were taken to quantify the separations. The primary focus was on the −2 A summary of the raw ash results obtained from the campaign is provided in The operating conditions of the RC are defined by the RD of the set point, and the fluidization rate used. The standard conditions based on a fluidization rate of 15 L/s and an RD of 1.55 were applied for the first 4 h. Under these standard conditions, the product ash varied slightly from 7.0% to 9.5%, while the reject ash varied slightly from 76% to 78%. The set point was then varied over the range of 1.22–1.65 in order to examine the potential for targeting higher and lower product ashes. It is noted that the plant feed rate remained close to the maximum of 600 tph, and then decreased to about 400 tph in the final three runs. During these last three runs the fluidization rate was varied from 12 to 19 L/s, before returning to the standard set of conditions of 15 L/s. Interestingly, the results from the final run are consistent with those during the first 4 h, demonstrating the consistent response of the RC.  Some discussion of the method used to obtain For the RD of 1.55 in The results in The effects of the fluidization rate on the product ash, product yield, and combustible yield are shown in A full washability analysis was conducted on run G7, and the data used in the mass balance program.  Although the analysis was based mainly on the −2 Following the pilot-scale investigations of the RC, a full-scale study was undertaken in order to examine the separation performance at the much larger scale. Because of the limitations in the feed available, it was not possible to examine the very high throughputs trialed in the earlier study, however, the throughputs used were still significant, when compared to those used in more conventional fluidized devices. The separations produced were found to be equivalent to those obtained in the pilot-scale study, in terms of a very similar variation in the The authors thank ACARP for its support of this work on the Reflux Classifier.