Tensile and room temperature Charpy V-notch impact tests were used to evaluate the variations in the as-cast mechanical properties of a low-carbon steel produced via shell mould investment casting and containing combinations of vanadium, niobium and titanium. Tensile results indicate that the yield strength and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) have increased up to respectively 615MPa and 770MPa due to the fine-scale microalloy precipitates in the microalloyed samples. Room temperature impact test results show that while addition of vanadium individually has not changed the impact energy, Nb has decreased it considerably. However, examination of fracture surfaces reveals that all microalloyed samples have failed by transgranular cleavage. Based on the transmission electron microscope (TEM) studies, it seems that carbonitrides being greater than 50nm in size and formed along prior austenite grain boundaries before γ transformation are responsible for the observed reduction in impact energies and brittle fracture. In comparison to sand mould casting, the yield and UTS obtained from investment casting are superior. Furthermore, although the impact energies of Nb-containing alloys are approximately the same as those obtained from sand moulds, the impact energy of the alloy containing only vanadium has improved considerably.Microalloyed cast steels are basically C–Mn steels which contain conventional microalloying elements such as vanadium, niobium and titanium In contrast to the heat-treated grades, few attempts have been made to characterize mechanical and microstructural properties of as-cast microalloyed steels. Composition control and achievement of consistent as-cast microstructures would be essential to obtain the desirable properties in the as-cast microalloyed steels without the addition of heat treatment costs. Therefore, it would be valuable to develop low-cost cast microalloyed steels in the as-cast condition that can be effective substitutes for some steel or cast iron parts with good combinations of properties in many industrial applications. In a study conducted by the authors Apart from composition, the method of casting is another important factor which influences final properties of as-cast products due to its prominent effect on solidification behavior. Some microstructural factors; such as austenite transformation products, types of precipitates, and their size and distribution; which directly affect mechanical properties are strongly related to the solidification behavior. Among various methods, investment casting has its own importance since compared to sand mould casting it produces more uniform castings with closer dimensional tolerances, superior surface quality and improved mechanical properties. Moreover, some parts with intricate shapes should only be produced through this method. Therefore, it seems essential to study the effects of microalloying elements on the microstructural and mechanical properties of the parts produced via investment casting in order to extend the knowledge about as-cast properties and evaluate the consequence of this casting method on the properties. A 100 All heats were poured at 1600 Metallographic samples prepared using standard polishing techniques were etched with 2% Nital and studied under an Olympus PMG3 optical microscope. An Omnimet image analyzer was used to measure the area fraction of pearlite. Since ferrite grains were not equiaxed in the as-cast microstructures, ferrite mean free path was used to characterize the fineness of ferrite phase by using the following equation Microstructural and fractographic examinations of the etched and impact specimens were carried out in a CamScan scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an Oxford instruments energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analyzer to allow a better understanding of the microstructures and micromechanisms of fracture in different alloys. For transmission electron microscope (TEM) studies, slices of about 400 To evaluate mechanical properties, tensile and standard room temperature Charpy V-notch (CVN) tests were conducted. Three tensile specimens machined according to ASTM-E8 Optical microscopy studies revealed a significant change in the microstructure of Nb-containing alloys in comparison to the base and V-containing heats. As shown in The difference in the microstructures of alloy V and alloys N, NV and TNV can be attributed to the behavior of free Nb atoms in austenite which has been recognized as “non-equilibrium segregation” or “quenched–induced segregation” However, it is noteworthy that the presence of niobium independently does not guarantee the enhancement of hardenability. The most important factor which is a prerequisite for the effectiveness of niobium is adequate cooling rate. Karlsson et al. The results obtained from tensile test are reported in  Although formation of bainite in the Nb-containing alloys can partially contribute to enhancing the yield and UTS, it seems that there is another microstructural feature which plays a dominant role in the strengthening due to the fact that the yield and UTS of alloy V, with ferritic–pearlitic microstructure, are approximately equal to those in alloy N. TEM observations carried out to study fine-scale precipitates having been formed in the ferritic matrix, revealed carbonitrides being 10 As shown in The results shown in Previous studies on Ti-bearing microalloyed ferrittic–pearlitic steels have pointed out that formation of coarse brittle TiN particles is responsible for the brittleness of these alloys due to their strong bond to matrix which makes them potent cleavage initiators TEM observations revealed carbonitrides which were larger in size than fine-scale precipitates (⩾50 Based on the earlier studies, The presence of coarse carbonitrides formed along prior austenite grain boundaries also can justify another significant point which was revealed by closer inspection of the fractographs. As pointed out by Honeycombe  The presence of microalloying elements significantly enhances the strength of as-cast microalloyed steels due to the formation of fine carbonitrides. TEM observations have revealed the formation of fine-scale carbonitrides with Baker–Nutting orientation relationship in the ferritic matrix. Addition of niobium leads to a change in microstructure from ferritic–pearlitic, in the alloy containing only vanadium, to upper bainitic constituent. The ability of niobium in increasing the hardenability due to the non-equilibrium segregation along with appropriate cooling rate in investment casting is the main reason for the formation of bainitic microstructure. The results obtained from room temperature impact tests show that while addition of vanadium individually has not changed the impact energy, Nb has decreased it considerably. However, examination of fracture surfaces revealed that all microalloyed samples failed by transgranular cleavage. Based on the TEM studies, it seems that carbonitrides being greater than 50 In comparison to sand mould casting, the yield and UTS obtained from investment casting are superior. This behavior can be attributed to the faster cooling rate in investment casting. Faster cooling rate has led to the formation of bainite in the Nb-containing alloys and finer ferrite grains along with more pearlite contents in the microstructure of alloys B and V. The impact energy of alloy V has improved considerably by varying the method from sand mould to investment casting. Furthermore, the impact energies of Nb-containing alloys produced via investment casting, despite their superior strength, are approximately the same as those obtained from sand moulds.