Previous experimental studies in the Mo-TiC-ZrC-C (TZM) alloy have shown the existence of secondary phases around the composition TiC, ZrC, TiO2, ZrO2 and ZrTiO4. No research about the interface of secondary phases and Mo matrix was indicated. We characterized the different secondary phases influence on the structure and mechanical properties by the mismatch and electron density. And discovered that ZrTiO4 has largest lattice misfit and electron density, contributing to better strengthening and toughening of TZM alloy. The ZrTiO4 interface bonding strength is superior to the other secondary phases. This new understanding opens opportunities for designing high strengthening-toughening Mo alloy.Mo-Ti-Zr alloy (Mo-0.5–0.8 Ti-0.08–0.1 Zr-0.04–0.06C, wt%) (TZM) has been widely used in aerospace fields because of its high melting point, large elastic modulus, small thermal expansion coefficient, good thermal conductivity, strong corrosion resistance, and excellent high-temperature mechanical properties [ The minority of Zr solves in to the Mo matrix while the majority forms ZrO Incoherent interface in the Zr/Mo with discontinuous slip systems is more effective to block dislocation motion than the Zr/Ti with continuous ones, resulting in a higher dislocation storage ability [ In this study, a novel Mo-TiC-ZrC-C alloy was prepared by changing the alloying methods of Ti, Zr and C elements. The properties of TZM alloy were greatly improved. The relationship between the interface of strengthening phases and properties was studied, and the toughening principle of Mo-TiC-ZrC-C molybdenum alloy was clarified. The results are beneficial to the development of molybdenum alloy and will be helpful to the application. This study utilizes mismatch theory and solid state electron theory to study the precipitation interface of the novel Mo-TiC-ZrC-C alloy. There are three alloy components. One alloy (Mo-0.11ZrC-0.06C, wt%) contains C with a Fructose. The second alloy (Mo-0.63TiC-0.06C, wt%). The third alloy (Mo-0.63TiC-0.11ZrC-0.06C, wt%). The detailed characterization was undertaken using Bramffit mismatch theory [ The Mo-TiC-C, Mo-ZrC-C and Mo-TiC-ZrC-C alloys were prepared and processed by powder metallurgy through mixing (2 h, argon protection), ball milling (2 h, ball material ratio 2,1，argon protection), cold isostatic pressing (180 MPa, 10 min), sintering with hydrogen (1950 °C, 40 h) and Hot-warm-cold rolling. The plate was annealed in hydrogen at 950 °C for 1 h. The raw material Mo powder (3–5 μm, 0.17 wt% O, Jinduicheng co., LTD.). TiC and ZrC powder (~30 nm, Ji ‘nan eight five scientific research metal). The oxygen element mainly comes from the raw material molybdenum powder. The tensile strength of the Mo-TiC-C, Mo-ZrC-C and Mo-TiC-ZrC-C samples was measured on small tensile standard sample (ASTM E8) using a universal testing machine (Instron 8801, USA) with a strain rate of 0.5 mm/min at room temperature. The microstructure of polished and (K   The Mo-TiC-ZrC-C alloy show highest tensile strength in the three rolled alloys. The Mo-ZrC-C alloy show slighter higher tensile strength and better elongation compared to the Mo-TiC-C alloy. As shown in  The fracture morphology of Mo-TiC-ZrC-C, Mo-TiC-C and Mo-ZrC-C alloy is intergranular and transgranular mixed fracture. ZrTiO Based on the two-dimensional mismatch theory of Bramffit [ The surfaces (100), (110) and (111) orientation relationship between TiC/ZrC/TiO The interface mismatch between ZrO The precipitation of particles with slight mismatching will produce a stress field and hinder the movement of sliding dislocation in the matrix. For large mismatched particles, the method of Where, According to “solid and molecular empirical electron theory” (EET) [ Electron density can be calculated using Type Electron density difference can be calculated by In the above formula, The electron density and characteristic parameter Characteristic parameter As shown in There is a secondary phase of ZrC and ZrO Under supervision by Prof. Ping Hu, Bo-liang HU, Shi-Lei Li, Hai-rui Xing, Jia-yu Han, and Song-wei Ge performed sample preparation and Characterization. Jing-bo Fu and Tian Chang performed data analysis. Bo-liang HU and Yu-tong SU performed calculations. Bo-liang HU, Kuai-she Wang and Ping HU developed mechanics modelling and analysis. All authors read and contributed to the manuscript. None. This work was supported by the