Containing 10.2 Mt Li, Salar de Uyuni is known to be the richest resource of Li in the world. A high Mg/Li mass ratio of 21.2:1 of the Uyuni salar brine used in this study is a significant factor hindering the effective lithium recovery. Stabcal modelling was first conducted to study the conditions and chemical speciation of various species involved in the selective precipitation of Mg and Ca oxalate. Along with the addition of oxalic acid, the effect of pH was then studied in order to determine optimal conditions to selectively remove Ca and achieve high Mg yield subsequently. At an Oxalate/Ca molar ratio of 6.82:1 and pH <1, ~80% of Ca could be removed from brine without co-precipitation of Mg oxalate. A NaOH/Mg/Oxalate molar ratios of 1.95:1:1 to 3.21:1:1.62 in the range of pH3–5.5 was used for the Mg precipitation. A recovery of >95% Mg was obtained (precipitate containing mostly Mg oxalate) together with the K and Li losses of up to 35% from the original brine. Washing would remove Li, K contaminants and the co-precipitated sodium sulphate and oxalate. Their absence from the final precipitate was confirmed by XRD analysis. The high purity (99.5% grade) Mg precipitate obtained could be used as a precursor for MgO production.Magnesium and its compounds have been used in many applications such as insulation, agriculture, construction, in chemical and other industries ( Calcined, dead-burned and fused magnesia are produced from magnesite whereas chemical grade Mg(OH)   Phosphate has also been used to precipitate Mg from synthetic solutions ( NaOH has been widely used to precipitate Mg(OH) In many studies, magnesium could be recovered from mother liquors as magnesium chloride salts. Solvent extraction and ion-exchange were also applied to recover Mg from mother liquors and brines. As shown in Salar de Uyuni brine (200 The composition of the original brine before treatment and its components after calcium and magnesium precipitation were analysed by ICP-MS (Agilent A5500) and IC (Metrohm 883 Basic IC Plus). The mineralogy of products obtained from precipitation was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis (Cu-tube60kv 50 A weighed volume of 1 or 2 The investigation was first based on the Stabcal simulation (software from  The precipitation of Mg oxalate ( For Stage 2 of the precipitation when both oxalic acid and NaOH are added, the Stabcal simulation of this process shows that at Oxalate/Mg molar ratio of 1:1 ( Stabcal simulation therefore identifies favourable conditions for selective Ca removal at pH < The precipitation of Ca oxalate can be represented by the reaction: The precipitation of calcium oxalate (as CaC The precipitation of Mg oxalate can be represented by the following reaction:  The effect of pH on the precipitation of Mg oxalate at Oxalate/Mg molar ratio of 1.62:1 is shown in During the precipitation of Mg oxalate, Na, Li and K losses were experienced in all experiments. The compositions of different Mg oxalate precipitates recovered at different conditions and their final products after washing are tabulated in By mass balancing the Li and K contents in both the residual liquors and samples taken, the losses of Li and K could be calculated (  The carefully washed Mg oxalate products were then subjected to TGA–DTA analysis and the typical curve obtained is shown in Despite being the richest Li resource (10.2 Mt) Uyuni salar brine containing a high Mg concentration (Mg/Li mass ratio ~ This work was supported by a grant from the