Millennial-scale oscillations of late Wisconsinan ice front are responsible for the bulk of Pleistocene sediments in Ohio. Illinoian deposits crop out in a narrow band or in deeply dissected valleys in eastern and central Ohio, whereas extensive Illinoian sediments occur in southwestern Ohio where pre-Illinoian deposits are also exposed.The article of Information on the general geology of Ohio is useful in understanding its glaciation. The Portage Escarpment ( There is no evidence of Tertiary glaciations in Ohio, but there are sands of questionable origin on high divides south of the glacial boundary near Dresden (D, Magnetically reversed lacustrine sediments, Minford Silt, in abandoned valleys of the Teays drainage system provide evidence of an Early Pleistocene glaciation in at least the northern half of Ohio. The Minford Silts are older than 780,000 years ( Attempts have been made to integrate many buried valleys in Ohio into the Teays drainage ( Little work has been done in the pre-Illinoian area beyond the Illinoian limit ( Sites exposing sediments from the early part of the Middle Pleistocene are not easily identified ( The most areally extensive unit found at MG is the Millbrook Till and its equivalents ( Other Illinoian units overlie the Millbrook Till and its equivalents ( Several problems exist in defining and correlating units of the Middle Pleistocene, more specifically those of the Illinoian Stage. Dating of advances of this stage is not well constrained, relying on established observational criteria summarised in ( The normal geological processes including pedogenesis that operate on landscapes began during the Sangamonian Stage interglacial and continued through climate oscillations of Early and Middle Wisconsinan time. Calculation of ice volumes based on sea-level curves suggests that there was not enough ice during these parts of the Wisconsinan Stage to glaciate Ohio ( Additional evidence suggests that baselevels of streams were lower than present, and streams were well incised into Illinoian deposits. Parts of the Teays system may have been exhumed because wood dated at 28.39 The section at Garfield Heights (GH; Gravels are the oldest accessible unit at the site ( A bipartite loess sequence ( Laminated lacustrine silts and clays overlie the loess sequence. The lower part of these brownish-grey, platy, calcareous deposits consists of sandy zone containing snails and wood fragments interpreted as a colluvium ( The Wisconsinan limit in southwestern Ohio is defined by well-formed moraines especially in the area covered by the Scioto lobe ( The Late Wisconsinan glacial limit in the Miami and Scioto lobes is well constrained by radiocarbon dates ( The Late Wisconsinan limit in the Killbuck, Cuyahoga and Grand River lobes is less well defined in north-central and northeastern Ohio ( Dating of the Late Wisconsinan advance in northeastern Ohio is not well constrained because very little organic matter has been found in moraines at the limit. Based on dates from wood at the base of the lacustrine part of the section at GH, ice advanced onto the plateaux after 24,000 As ice retreated from northeastern Ohio at about 14.5 Several problems are apparent in our understanding of the Late Pleistocene glaciation of Ohio. The timing of the advance of ice to its limit in northeastern Ohio is not well constrained. Was the climate substantially different on the Allegheny Plateau compared to the lowlands of southwestern Ohio? The recessional moraine succession in western Ohio appears to have been driven by relative ablation rates ( Consideration of our knowledge of the glaciation of Ohio produces the logical conclusion that the sequence of events creating the Late Pleistocene landscape of Ohio is better understood than the results of earlier glaciations. The identification of Early Pleistocene deposits relies on the acquisition of orientated core samples from deep borings and the use of paleomagnetic analysis. Some outcrop analysis of lacustrine sediments may be of value in the deeply dissected, non-glaciated area of south-eastern Ohio. The stratigraphy of the Middle Pleistocene, especially the last glaciation, the Illinoian, is better understood in north-central and northeastern Ohio then in western Ohio. The timing of Late Wisconsin advances of ice during the Late Pleistocene is better constrained in western Ohio than in eastern Ohio suggesting some fundamental difference not only in topography but also in climate.