In underground excavations and tunneling, several methods used for excavating process. Drilling and blasting is one of these methods, which are globally used for rock excavation due to low investment and high flexibility against ground condition variations. However, negative effects of blasting to the peripheral rock mass around the excavation are inevitable. One of these blasting damages known as overbreak phenomenon and must be predicted and controlled. Many of prediction problems can solve by using multiple regression analysis, but in some issues like mining and tunneling engineering, there are many uncertainties in nature of problems, which engineers cannot overcome these difficulties only using statistical methods. Then, soft computing methods can be curing this difficulty. In this study, 270 datasets were used with adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) and ANFIS-particle swarm optimization (PSO) to develop the predictor models. Input variables for models construction were considered tunnel section area; perimeter holes powder factor, specific drilling and spacing to burden ratio of contour holes. Determination coefficient and root mean square values of ANFIS and ANFIS-PSO models were obtained 0.945, 0.077 and 0.961, 0.064 respectively. The results indicate that ANFIS-PSO model showed better performance for overbreak prediction than ANFIS model.Tunnels and underground excavations are an inseparable part of mining engineering. Versus to the mechanized excavating methods like tunnel boring machine (TBM); drilling and blasting as a traditional method can used for excavations with different shape and size and due to the high flexibility and low finance need, drilling and blasting method is the initial expecting excavation method ( Overbreak caused by geological, blasting or geometrical factors, or a combination ( Uncontrollable factors like the strength of rock mass, joints orientation that have important effect on the overbreak are fixed parameters ( Controllable factors like specific charge or drilling, contour holes spacing, burden and delays are adjustable and engineers can change them during the blasting rounds. Proper design and correct implementation of drilling and blasting pattern are very important for overbreak prevention. For instant, each hole must be drilled at own location which designed and marked out, specifically at contour holes section. Any deviation from designed pattern may be lead to getting away or approaching the holes ends and due to the explosive concentration increment or reduction cause to overbreak or underbreak ( If overbreak occurred, undesirable effects will be showed up. In other side, Safety reduction of working space, ore dilution in mining excavations and time-consuming duo to the creating unproductive works are such as these negative effects. It is obvious that overbreak must be predicted and then controlled. In present study, the proposed method for overbreak prediction is based on the combination of ANFIS and PSO algorithm. ANFIS-PSO was selected because ANFIS is the combination of ANN and Fuzzy logic and uses both of learning ability of ANN and inference ability of Fuzzy logic, then capability of ANFIS in prediction is more than ANN and Fuzzy logic when they use separately. Moreover, in recently years, PSO is used to increase the capability of ANFIS with adjusting the membership functions (MFs) parameters for decreasing prediction errors (e.g., Researchers who have worked on the overbreak prediction issue are mentioned in  Database including 270 datasets were obtained from the blasting operation of three case studies. Detailed information of these three case studies are presented in According to the pervious researches and available geological and blasting data from case studies, the input parameters have been adopted in some way, which is covering most of the overbreak influencing parameters. Therefore, tunnel section area considered as a semi-controllable parameter. And also, specific drilling, perimeter holes powder factor and spacing to burden ratio of contour holes considered as controllable parameters (contour holes design are very critical in overbreak occurrence). Because rock mass rating criteria consist of most of the geological causing factor of overbreak, RMR value considered as uncontrollable factors representative. The input and output parameters are shown in ANFIS is one of soft computing methods that is developed by    In present study, the initial fuzzy inference systems (FIS) were constructed using the grid partition algorithm in MATLAB neuro-fuzzy toolbox. In cases that numbers of input variables are fewer than six, grid partition method using is reasonable for the problem ( For ANFIS learning, back propagation (BP) learning algorithms have been used. BP algorithm used gradient decent (steepest decent) to identify the parameters in an adaptive network ( According to the The training and updating of model parameters is one of the important parts of ANFIS. The training in the premise part is more difficult than the consequence part, because in gradient based methods it must go through all layers that cause much calculation and complexity. The most of the training methods in the premise part are based on gradient decent and calculation of gradient in each step is very difficult and chain rule must be used also may causes local minimum. Therefore, slow convergence and trapping in local minimum are tow disadvantages of ANFIS ( PSO algorithm developed by To achieve the best results, the parameters of the ANFIS-PSO model, which consisted of number of particles in swarm (NoP), acceleration coefficients (C The first analysis was executed for NoP. This parameter has an important influence on the ANFIS-PSO performance. Large number of particle increase training time and cover large parts of search space. In this Study, series of sensitivity analysis were executed with different NoP to find the optimum values and then MSE values of each analysis were calculated. The results are shown in The second analysis was executed to determine optimum values of C The third sensitivity analysis was executed to determine optimum NoR in FIS. Large NoR increases the training time. Similar to the previous parameters, different NoR were considered in each analysis. The results of analysis are mentioned in The final sensitivity analysis was executed to determine optimum value of inertia weight. Inertia weight determines rate of previous velocity of each particle to its velocity at current time stage ( Finally, Based on the results of this section, information of final ANFIS-PSO model are given in Using Eqs. The RMSE, VAF and R To determine the most effective parameters on the overbreak phenomenon, sensitivity analysis was conducted using the cosine amplitude (CAM) method. In the CAM, all the data pairs are defined as a specific point in m-dimensional space. Thus, each of the parameters is directly connected to the outputs ( The r Overbreak phenomenon is a blasting damage in tunnels and underground excavation. According to the negative effect of this phenomenon like ore dilution in mining excavations, time consuming etc., its prediction and prevention are very important through excavation process. ANFIS method is one of the famous soft computing methods that have been used broadly in mining and tunneling problems that encountered with prediction. In this study, a new hybrid method by combination of ANFIS and PSO algorithm was used to create a predictive model for overbreak phenomenon. The models were developed based on the 270 datasets, which was obtained from the blasting operation from different case studies. Input parameters of predictive model were considered as amount of tunnel section area, specific drilling, Spacing to burden ratio of contour holes, perimeter holes powder factor and RMR. Many sensitivity analyses were performed to determine optimum values of ANFIS-PSO parameters. Performance of the proposed model was compared with ANFIS model results. According to the results, it is obvious that using PSO algorithm improved performance of the ANFIS method. Overbreak prediction model can practically be used to specify the potential of overbreak occurrence in the tunnel and underground excavation that used drilling and blasting method. Therefore, engineers by adjusting controllable parameters can minimize overbreak occurrences potential. We are grateful to Mohammad Farouq Hosseini, Mohammad Mohammadi, Kaushik Dey and V.M.S.R. Murthy for the use of their researches datasets in this paper. In addition, we are grateful to chief executive of Eastern Alborz Coal Corporation due to preparing the convenience condition for data gathering.