To maintain the integrity of the internal surfaces of the pipelines in oil and gas industry, chemicals, including corrosion inhibitors and biocides, are commonly dosed to prevent corrosion. Imidazoline and its derivatives are widely used corrosion inhibitors for the protection of oil pipelines, which have been shown effective in reducing general corrosion. As an effective biocide, free nitrous acid (FNA) is suitable to inhibit microbially influenced corrosion, induced by for example sulfate-reducing bacteria. In this paper, we hypothesize that the continuous addition of imidazoline and intermittent dosing of FNA, when used in combination, would yield effective control of both general and pitting corrosions. As a typical imidazoline derivative, N-b-hydroxyethyl oleyl imidazoline (HEI-17) was applied in conjunction with intermittent dosing of FNA in the experimental system, with the results compared with two control systems, one receiving HEI-17 only, and one receiving no chemical dosing. The corrosion properties were monitored with open circuit potential, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, linear polarization resistance, 3D optical profiling, and weight-loss measurement. Following a single dose of FNA, the general corrosion rates in the experimental reactor dropped up to 50% of that in the reactor receiving continuous HEI-17 dosing (0.27 ± 0.04 vs. 0.54 ± 0.08 mm/y), but gradually recovered to 93.4% of that in 2.5 months. After the FNA treatment, the pitting corrosion was decreased by 64.6% compared with continuous HEI-17 dosing reactor for a month from measuring the cumulative distribution of the pitting depth. HEI-17 treatment alone showed moderate pitting corrosion inhibition effect (approx. 27%), and the FNA treatment inhibited the formation of deep pits effectively. The combined application of HEI-17 and FNA has shown synergistic effects and high efficiency in mitigating MIC in the simulated water injection system. This treatment strategy has strong potential to be applied in the practical oilfield operations.Since most oilfields in the world are in the middle or late recovery periods, corrosion has become a skyrocketing problem in the secondary oil recovery, which normally involves water injection. Microbially influenced corrosion (MIC) refers to the corrosion caused or enhanced by microbial activities, which is believed to be responsible for about 40% of pipeline system failures in the oil industry, while the percentage could be much higher in water injection systems ( The corrosion inhibitors are chemicals that decrease or prevent corrosion when added in small concentrations, usually at 1%–20% in batch treatment or in the range of 10–1000 ppm continuously ( As widely used corrosion inhibitors in oilfields, imidazoline and its derivatives showed their advantages with high inhibition efficiency, easy production, and low toxicity ( As MIC could induce severe localized corrosion (i.e. pitting corrosion) due to the corrosive biofilm, biocides are usually applied as they could kill or remove the corrosive microbes ( Considering the complementary nature of the corrosion inhibitors and biocides, in practical oil production process, the pipelines’ corrosion is often mitigated through the simultaneous use of multiple chemicals, including both corrosion inhibitors and biocides ( As a typical imidazoline derivative, N-b-hydroxyethyl oleyl imidazoline (HEI-17) was selected to be applied with FNA in this study to investigate the combined effect on the corrosion behaviour of carbon steel. The hypothesis is that HEI-17 and FNA could show a synergetic effect on MIC control as HEI-17 could mitigate the general corrosion as a corrosion inhibitor and FNA has strong pitting corrosion inhibition efficiency. The corrosion properties were investigated by electrochemical measurements, including open circuit potential (OCP), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and linear polarization resistance (LPR). The general corrosion rate was calculated by weight-loss measurements, while the pitting corrosion was analyzed by 3D optical profiling. Three bioreactors were operated to simulate the water injection systems in oil production ( Each reactor was set up with an electrochemical cell. The working electrode was a square-shaped carbon steel coupon that was embedded in epoxy resin, with only one surface exposed (1  cm × 1  cm). A copper wire was soldered to the coupon for electrical connection. A saturated Ag/AgCl electrode and a platinum net were used as the reference electrode and the counter electrode, respectively. The reactors were seeded with 200 mL produced water collected from an oilfield at Mereenie, Northern Territory, Australia, and then topped up with synthetic seawater (recipe shown in section Water samples were taken before and after medium change during the batch mode before Day 30, and every 4 days during the continuous feeding mode, for the analysis of dissolved sulfur compounds, and lactate and acetate concentrations (Section The synthetic produced water was synthesized based on a widely-used seawater recipe for the feed medium, comprising (per L distilled water): NaCl 20.0 g, Na The synthetic produced water was sparged with pure nitrogen gas for 3 h to remove oxygen before use. To keep the system oxygen-free, one 5 L gas bag containing nitrogen gas was connected to the medium container. An electrochemical workstation (Bio-Logic SAS) was used to conduct the electrochemical tests, including OCP, EIS, and LPR. OCP represents the potential of the working electrode without affecting the electrochemistry on the electrode surface in electrical cells. Generally, metals with nobler OCP are more thermodynamically stable than materials with less noble OCP. The EIS and LPR measurements were conducted with small amplitude potential over OCP, so they were regarded as non-destructive methods for corrosion analysis ( Both LPR and EIS measurements were conducted after OCP reached steady state. The LPR measurement was carried out in the potential range from −0.02 V to +0.02 V vs. OCP at a sweep rate 0.166 mV/s to measure the polarization resistance (Rp), which is the slope of the polarization curve. The corrosion rate is revealed as it is inversely correlated with Rp. During EIS measurements, a small sinusoidal voltage with amplitude In an anaerobic chamber, the coupons were carefully sampled aseptically into 4 mL sterilized phosphate buffered saline (PBS, 1X, pH 7.4) in a 5 mL sterile bottle. Then the bottle was vortexed for 2 min to fully disperse the biofilm for the following ATP tests. The BacTiter-Glo™ Microbial Cell Viability Assay (Promega Corporation, G8231) was used to measure the ATP levels according to the manufacturers’ instructions. A volume of 300 μL of biofilm suspension was transferred to one of the wells in a 96-well flat bottom microplate (Greiner bio-one) to bind with 100 μL BacTiter-Glo™ Reagent. The luminescence of the well was measured by a multimode plate reader (CLARIOstar® Plus) after 90 s incubation at 37 °C. The luminescence was collected as relative light units, and converted to ATP concentrations (nM) using a calibration curve made with a known ATP standard (Promega Corporation, USA) ( The general corrosion rate was calculated from weight-loss measurements, which were conducted according to ASTM D-2688 ( Following the weight-loss measurements in Section To analyze dissolved inorganic sulfur species (sulfide, sulfate, thiosulfate and sulfite), 1.5 mL liquid sample from the reactors was filtered (0.22 μm) into 0.5 mL preserving solution of sulfide anti-oxidant buffer (SAOB) ( The organic carbon (lactate and acetate) concentrations are shown in In all the three reactors, the sulfate concentration decreased generally till Day 30 ( As shown in In The general corrosion rate in the Control reactor reached the highest level on Day 47, and remained at this level (approximately 1.05 mm/y) for the remaining period of the experiment. In comparison, the highest corrosion rate in the Control + HEI-17 reactor was reached on Day 60, and remained at this level (approximately 0.55 mm/y) for the remaining period of the experiment. The results indicate that HEI-17 not only reduced the steady state corrosion rate, but also slowed down the development of the corrosion. For the Experimental reactor, after the FNA treatment on Day 47, the general corrosion rate did not follow the trend of the Control + HEI-17 reactor, but rose much more slowly, reaching 93.4% of the general corrosion rate in the Control + HEI-17 reactor in 2.5 months. This should have been because of the biofilm removal and deactivation by FNA, which reduced the MIC of the coupon surfaces. The trends of the corrosion rate in the Control + HEI-17 and Experimental reactors resemble the trends of ATP ( The cumulative distribution of the corrosion depth in Experimental and Control reactors ( The 90%-ile corrosion-depth profile ( The observed inhibitory effects of FNA treatment on pitting corrosion are in line with the microbial measurement. As shown in  In  From Day 33 to Day 47 (right before FNA treatment), the Nyquist plots in Experimental were linear-shaped, which changed to arc-shaped right after the FNA treatment at Day 48, with a larger diameter than that at Day 47 ( The Nyquist plots in Experimental were relatively stable from Day 75 to Day 118, except Day 79 and Day 83, which were arc-shaped instead of linear-shaped lines ( To quantify the EIS results, two equivalent circuits ( The working electrode surface was impossibly smooth but with microscopic roughness, so the constant phase element (Q), a non-ideal capacitor, was used to fit the distributed capacitance instead of an ideal capacitor in the circuit shown as In The fitting results of the EIS plots in Experimental ( Before Day 24, the arc-shaped Nyquist plots (  The fitting results in the Control reactor ( Overall, the EIS results were generally consistent with the LPR measurements. The working electrode surface properties and the dominant reactions revealed by EIS analysis supported the general ( Compared with the Control reactor, continuous HEI-17 treatment showed strong general corrosion inhibition efficiency of approx. 70% according to the weight-loss measurements and LPR tests. Moderate pitting corrosion inhibition effect (up to 27%) was achieved with HEI-17 based on the measured cumulative distribution of the depth, which disappeared along with the biofilm development on the carbon steel coupons. These results are consistent with previous studies ( In our previous study, we demonstrated that intermittent dosing of FNA could significantly reduce the metal corrosion rate in water injection systems ( In this study, the effect of pulse dosing of FNA to further reduce corrosion in a simulated water injection system, continuously-dosed with HEI-17 as a corrosion inhibitor, was investigated. The combination of HEI-17 and FNA showed complementary effects with higher inhibitory efficiency in both pitting and general corrosion. FNA showed high compatibility by moderately enhancing HEI-17’s strong general corrosion inhibition and complementing its deficient pitting corrosion inhibition. Compared with sole HEI-17 treatment, the dosage of FNA enhanced the general corrosion inhibition efficiency moderately by up to 49% and improved the pitting corrosion inhibition efficiency by up to 69%. To determine whether HEI-17 and FNA had synergistic inhibitory effect on the carbon steel corrosion, the synergism parameter (S) was calculated, which was proposed to determine synergistic effect between two inhibitors ( The degree of surface coverage (θ) could be computed from the inhibition efficiency (η) ( The inhibition efficiency (η) was calculated by the following equation: In this study, two synergism parameters, Sg for general corrosion obtained by weight-loss measurements and Sp for pitting corrosion by 3D profiling, were calculated. The inhibition efficiencies of FNA were derived from a previous study ( The mechanism for the synergistic effects of HEI-17 and FNA on corrosion inhibition is hypothesized as follows. Steel is known to be able to adsorb imidazoline and its derivatives onto its surface ( In practice, corrosion inhibitors are usually dosed continuously in the range of 10–1000 ppm in oilfields ( The combined effect of imidazoline derivative (HEI-17) and FNA on carbon steel corrosion in a simulated water injection system was investigated in laboratory tests. The key findings are: Intermittent dosing of FNA produces corrosion inhibition effects complementary to those by continuous dosing of corrosion inhibitors such as imidazoline derivatives. When applied alone, imidazoline derivative HEI-17 has a strong inhibition effect on general corrosion and a moderate inhibition effect on pitting corrosion. The intermittent dosing of FNA substantially enhances the inhibition on pitting corrosion, and also moderately enhances the inhibition on general corrosion. FNA dosing appears to inactivate/remove biofilms on steel surfaces, and hence its application frequency is determined by the speed of biofilm recovery. This study suggests that the FNA dosing frequency should be once a month. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support provided by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at