This work concerns the analysis of model naphthenic acids and authentic naphthenic acids from the tailings ponds of the Athabasca tar sands. A first objective was to compare atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mass spectrometry (APCI–MS) with the previously studied electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI–MS) in this analysis. APCI–MS had a wider range of quantitation than ESI–MS, but its detection limit was poorer and model compounds showed greater variation in calibration sensitivity.
                  A second objective was fractionation of naphthenic acids from tailings pond water and analysis by the Microtox® toxicity assay. Fractionation on the basis of solubility gave fractions that did not differ significantly either in their congener distribution by ESI–MS or in their response to the Microtox assay. When partial separation was achieved by anion exchange chromatography, fractions with a higher proportion of multi-ring structures exhibited lower toxic potency. This finding is consistent with field observations that indicate that the toxic potency of tailings ponds water declines as the samples age—multi-ring structures are more highly branched and therefore more resistant to microbial degradation.The Alberta oil sands constitute the world's largest bitumen reserve, containing an estimated 1.7–2.5 trillion barrels of crude bitumen. Synthetic crude oil from this source provides over 30% of crude oil produced in Canada ( Oil sands comprise quartz sand, silt, clay and water, with bitumen trapped between the pore spaces of the sand ( NAs are released into the aqueous phase during alkaline hot water extraction, giving concentrations 80–120 The conjugate acids of NAs are sparingly soluble in water but dissolve easily in many organic solvents. Analysis is hampered by the large number of congeners, whose separation by LC or GC is presently impossible ( GC–EIMS analysis of NAs from different sources suggested that congeners with carbon number All chemicals were of highest purity commercially available. Commercial NA mixture was purchased from Fluka (Oakville, ON). Merichem Refined Naphthenic Acids was provided by Dr. A. Farwell, University of Waterloo. Authentic tailings pond water was obtained from Dr. M. D. MacKinnon, Syncrude Canada Inc. Dowex Despite the reported use of acetonitrile as solvent for NAs ( Negative ion APCI mass spectra were run using a Waters model ZQ-LC/MS 2000. The carrier phase of 50:50 mixture of 2-propanol and Milli-Q water was delivered by a Waters 600 gradient pump system with a Waters 600 controller (Waters, Milford, MA/Micromass, Manchester, UK). Instrument control and data acquisition employed a Compaq Workstation with Masslynx v.4.0 software on Microsoft Windows XP platform. The corona discharge needle current was 3 The solvent mixture was pumped continuously into the APCI probe at 0.3 ESI negative mode mass spectra were obtained using the previously optimized voltage setting of cone voltage=25 This was adapted from the scheme used by Farwell and Dixon (Farwell, personal communication, 2001), but using DCM instead of ethyl acetate. Although ethyl acetate is an excellent solvent for extraction of NAs, its tendency to hydrolyse to acetic acid interferes with the quantification of NAs. In a cold room below 5 The insoluble material was shaken for 1 Solid particles remaining in Fraction A were removed by vacuum filtration using disposable 0.22 Tailings pond water (4 Precisely weighed NAs were transferred to vials; moles of NA were calculated from the average molar mass obtained by ESI–MS; equimolar 1 Phosphate buffer (0.2 Dowex The extracts from anion exchange were analyzed with a Microbics M500 analyzer (Azur Environmental Corp., Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The ASTM nine-dilution Basic test was used for range-finding, followed by a dilution series with initial concentration 200 NAs were detected as deprotonated molecular ions under APCI negative conditions over the concentration range of 5 Under ESI negative ion conditions the calibration sensitivities of the six carboxylic acids varied by a factor of <2 ( According to The response of major ions in TPWNA under APCI conditions was linear from 25 TPWNA was analyzed by APCI-MS by infusing 500 The six model carboxylic acids were analyzed at 250  The The Microtox acute toxicity assay, which employs the luminescent marine organism NA mixtures were separated by anion exchange over the pH range 8–4, eluting NA fractions on the basis of pK Fractionation of TPWNA directly extracted from 5 Toxicity assessment of Fractions 1, 3, and 8 by the Microtox acute toxicity assay afforded EC APCI–MS gave a wider range of detection than ESI–MS, which might be useful for fingerprinting of NAs from different sources, but had a poorer detection limit than ESI–MS, with more variable response factors. APCI–MS also has higher operating costs in terms of higher solvent flow rate and more frequent instrument maintenance. Fractionation on the basis of solubility did not significantly affect either congener distribution by ESI–MS or toxic potency towards The Canadian Water Network and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada provided financial support, Dr. M.D. MacKinnon of Syncrude Canada Ltd. provided a sample of tailings pond water, and Dr. Andrea Farwell of the University of Waterloo provided one of the extracted NA samples. The LC–MS instrument was purchased with a Grant from the Canada Foundation for Innovation and the Ontario Innovation Trust.