The stability and electronic structures of B or/and N doped armchair (5,5) and zigzag (9,0) single-walled SiC nanotubes (SWSiCNTs) are investigated in detail by the first-principles theory. It is found that the ones with B and N atoms located at neighboring Si and C sites respectively are most energetically favorable both for armchair and zigzag SWSiCNTs, which means B and N atoms are prone to co-dope into the nanotubes by substitution for adjacent C and Si atoms. The energetic advantages of BN pair doped SWSiCNTs may be due to the charge compensation, just like the BN co-doped carbon nanotubes. Through B or/and N doping effects, the SWSiCNTs can be modified ranging from semiconductor to conductor dependent on chirality as well as doping atoms. These results are expected to give valuable information in building nanoscale electronic devices.Since the discovery of carbon nanotubes in 1991 Unlike carbon nanotubes, the SiC ones exhibit semiconductor behavior independently of its chirality The B and N atoms are good dopants for SWCNTs due to their similarity in atomic radius compared to the C atom. Consequently, it becomes easier to form states with one electron more or less than a regular C atom. The electronic structures of these materials could be significantly altered and some new applications might be created. Recently, Xu et al. Unlike carbon nanotubes In this study, we firstly investigate the stability and electronic properties of all B or/and N doped armchair (5, Our calculations were performed using a plane-wave pseudopotential formulation To discuss the stability of the doped SWSiCNTs, we have performed the calculation of the formation energy ( We first calculated the stable configurations and electronic structures for pristine armchair (5, The formation energy of B or/and N doped SWSiCNTs is listed in It is important to compare the relative stability of these defects. The results are listed in Considering the importance of electronic properties, we calculate the energy-band structures of pristine and B or/and N doped (5, Those results of B doped SWSiCNTs are shown in In In contrast with the single doping substitution, the results of B and N co-doping SWSiCNTs are shown in We perform the DFT calculations to study the formation energy and electronic properties of B or/and N doped SWSiCNTs. The calculation of formation energy indicates that B This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of china (Grant No. 60979008), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. ZXH 2010C003) and the Science Foundation of Civil Aviation University of China (Grant No. 07QD09S).