W nanoparticles derived from WO3 during heating in H2 were carburized at 900–1100K in pure, Ar and H2-diluted CH4 atmospheres. It was aimed to elucidate carburization behavior of pre-reduced W powders under various atmospheres and to establish optimal conditions for the synthesis of nanocrystalline WC. Weight measurements, XRD and SEM were used to characterize the products at various stages of the reaction. At 900K, carburization was limited to the formation of W2C owing to slow C diffusion. At 1000K, WC particles were obtained within ~75min using the diluted gas mixtures, while under pure CH4 atmosphere carburization reaction practically stopped due to pyrolytic carbon skin formed on particle surfaces where C supply was more than consumed. WC powders with particle size 40–65nm and grain size 15–25nm were synthesized at 1100K in a short time under the gas atmospheres studied.Tungsten carbide (WC) has high hardness, good corrosion resistance, a high modulus of elasticity and a high melting point. Because of these properties, it is used as a major constituent in wear resistant parts WC powders are produced from different precursors and by various methods. Carburization of W powders with solid carbon black is the conventional method for WC synthesis due to its ease of operation and low precursor costs Numerous methods have been developed for the synthesis of submicron WC particles including rapid carbothermal reduction process Gas–solid reaction (gas-phase carburization) has received considerable attention because it is an efficient way to increase the carburization rate at low temperatures owing to close contact of carbonaceous molecules with tungsten precursor particles. It was reported Here, we report comparative analyses of carburization of nanosized tungsten particles at relatively low temperatures (900–1100 The experimental setup employed for the present study essentially consists of a hot-wall furnace with SiC heating elements, a quartz tube (20 Carbide synthesis was carried out in a single run by reduction of WO Powder morphologies were examined by a JEOL 6335 Scanning Electron Microscope equipped with field emission gun (FEG–SEM). Phase analysis was carried out by a parafocusing Rigaku D/Max-2200 X-ray diffractometer with Cu radiation at a scanning rate of 2°/min. The crystallite size of the powders was calculated using the Scherrer formula:   XRD patterns of the products obtained at the temperatures under H In the case of the Ar–CH When pure CH Crystallite (grain) sizes of the reaction products were calculated from the X-ray diffraction peak profiles using Eq.   In order to better understand the process, equilibrium thermodynamic analysis in the reactant systems was carried out by the method of minimization of the Gibbs' free energy. The gaseous species considered for the analysis include H Kinetics of the carburization process essentially involves decomposition of CH With the above information as background, it is possible to suggest the optimum conditions leading to the formation of the single WC phase. Preferably, there are two requirements for the full conversion of W particles to WC; (i) an adequate amount of C supply from the gas phase and (ii) sufficient C diffusion into the particle. It is reasonable to suggest that mass transport rates by both means should be sufficient and equivalent for the formation of the pure WC phase. Poor C supply or sluggish C diffusion results in an incomplete carburization reaction as clearly observed at 900 Nanosized tungsten particles with mean particle sizes of 50–70 This work was supported by the