Polymetallic nodules on abyssal seafloor represent a major reservoir of valuable metals. Here we analysed fungal-mediated leaching of metals from nodules collected at ca. 5000 m depth in the Clarion-Clipperton Fracture Zone of the Pacific Ocean. The bioleaching efficiency of Aspergillus and a mixed cultures of A. niger and Trichoderma sp., at different growing conditions, were investigated and compared to chemical treatments using citric acid. 11 days of treatment with A. niger growing in optimal medium conditions, produced the best result with the extraction of more than 80% of Mn, Cu, Ni, and 70% and 30% of Co and Fe, respectively. Our findings suggest that biotechnological processes can be a sustainable approach in terms of carbon footprint reduction compared to chemical strategies. Results presented here provide the potential of fungal-mediated leaching and pave the way for the development of effective and eco-sustainable biotechnologies for the metal recovery from deep-sea nodules.The worldwide raw material demand has considerably increased in the last decades, following the rapidly economic growth of countries, like China, India, Brazil and Indonesia. According to the European Parliament Commission, which produced a list of critical elements, such economic grow may lead to a raw material shortage in the future ( Once collected polymetallic nodules have to be treated to dissolve metals contained therein. To do so, some studies have investigated pyro/hydrometallurgical processes to dissolve metals from polymetallic nodules, similarly to the techniques used for the land-based mining. These techniques include: sulfidation roasting process ( Considering the low sustainability of the current approaches, the biohydrometallurgical strategies, based on the ability of microorganisms to produce leaching agents, are gaining an increasing importance in the field of metal extraction from mineral ores. The main advantages are: the low operating cost (due to a lower energy demand), the reduced environmental impact and a general minimization of the acidic wastewater ( Several fungal species, like The citric acid, which has been identified as a better leaching agent than oxalic acid ( The present study aims at the development of innovative biotechnological processes to improve the metal leaching efficiency from deep-sea polymetallic nodules by using fungal taxa, able to produce citric acid as reducing agent. The polymetallic nodules used in this study were collected at ca. 5000 m water depth in the CCZ (Pacific Ocean), within the French Exclusive Economic Zone licencedby  Bioleaching experiments were carried out to investigate the ability of the fungi to extract metals from manganese nodules using the following experimental conditions: (i) Overall, the tests were carried out using grinded nodules with a known size ( For chemical leaching, 100 mL of 0.24 M citric acid solution were used for the leaching of 2.5% (w/v) of polymetallic nodules. This concentration was calculated using Eq.  Sub-samples (1 mL) were collected from each flask at regular intervals (at day 0, 4, 7, 9, 11 and 14) for the analysis of both the Fe concentration and its speciation which were carried out spectrophotometrically (Jasco Model, 7850). Fe Biovolume was converted into carbon content using the following equation (Eq. To assess both the environmental load and the possible benefit achieved by the implementation of an innovative bioleaching by In order to test the advantage of bioleaching experiments, compared to the abiotic and the chemical control, a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was carried out. When significant differences were observed, a SNK post hoc comparison test (  Since the valuable metals in the nodules are associated to manganese and iron oxide fractions, we preliminary investigated the temporal changes of Fe and Mn concentrations potentially released in solution in the different experimental conditions. This has been done to better understand metal leaching dynamics from polymetallic nodules. Fe concentration in the supernatant was very low (close to detection limit) in all treatments and abiotic controls (without fungi; data not shown). Conversely, Mn concentration in the supernatant grew over time in both treatments and controls (  The increase of glucose concentration (150 g L Time-course experiments carried out in optimal medium conditions revealed an exponentially increase of soluble Fe concentrations due to The comparison between glucose-limiting and optimal medium conditions provide evidence that leaching of the polymetallic nodules increases in relation with glucose concentrations and suggest that citric acid production by In particular, the higher glucose concentration is, the higher extraction yield is obtained, as a result of the glucose ability to reduce manganese oxides, following equation In particular, at the end of experiments, the total leaching yields by   The comparison between the The present study corroborates previous findings that deep-sea polymetallic nodules are an important source of Mn, Fe and metals of economic interest (e.g. Ni, Cu and Co) and provides evidence that  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.