Carbon nanotube (CNT) film electrodes were fabricated by a novel process involving the electrostatic spray deposition (ESD) of a CNT solution. Acid treated CNTs were dispersed in an aqueous solvent through sonication and then the CNT solution was electrostatically sprayed onto a metallic substrate by the ESD method. The CNT film electrodes showed well-entangled and interconnected porous structures with good adherence to the substrate. A specific capacitance of 108F/g was achieved for the electrodes in 1M H2SO4. In addition, the CNT film electrode showed good high rate capability.Recently, research into electrochemical capacitors (ECs) has received a great deal of attention, because of their potential use in high power energy storage devices Carbon-based ECs, which are frequently referred to as electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs), whose mechanism of energy storage primarily involves charge separation at the carbon/electrolyte interface Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which were first discovered in 1991 Since the as-produced CNTs in the form of soot are rather difficult to use directly for practical applications, much effort has been made to transform them into a macroscopic electrode form, especially for electrochemical applications such as ECs. Currently, two kinds of CNT electrodes are widely used; binder-free and binder-enriched. When they are mixed with polymeric binders, the CNTs are mechanically and electrically tight, however, the binder-enriched CNT film electrode may contain impurities which can degrade its electrochemical performance In order to prepare a binder-free electrode, the filtration method In this paper, we report on the preparation of a CNT film electrode by a novel fabrication method involving electrostatic spray deposition (ESD). Recently, the ESD technique has been used for preparing thin films of metal oxide, such as lithium manganese oxide and lithium cobalt oxide, which are used for the cathode materials of a lithium battery For these metal oxide thin films, metal salt solutions have traditionally been used as the precursor solutions. In this work, however, we employed a CNT suspension in aqueous media as the precursor solution, instead of a metal salt solution, to electrostatically deposit the CNT film onto a metallic substrate. This simplifies the preparation of the CNT film electrodes and has several advantages, viz. the preparation of a binder-free CNT film electrode with a uniform film surface morphology, easy control of the mass and thickness and a low operating temperature. In this paper, we report the synthesis and electrochemical characterization of a CNT film electrode prepared by the ESD technique for electrochemical capacitor applications. Two kinds of commercial multi-wall nanotubes (MWNTs) were obtained from ILJIN Nanotech Co., Ltd. (South Korea). The first kind of MWNTs, which are referred to as “CNT-A”, have a diameter of about 5 The second step involves the electrostatic spraying of a MWNT precursor solution onto the substrate. A schematic view of the ESD set-up used in this study is shown in The nominal area of the CNT film was 1  The relationship between the amount of sprayed solution, the film thickness and the mass of the deposited CNTs can be seen in The cyclic voltammograms of the CNT (CNT-A) film electrode shown in The specific capacitance of the CNT film electrode was calculated from the voltammetric charge by CV curve in The specific capacitance was 108 This result indicates that the MWNT film electrode prepared by the ESD technique has a high rate capability, which is comparable to that of CNTs directly grown on a graphite substrate (from 2 to 100   The volumetric capacitance of the CNT film electrode prepared with CNT-A was calculated from the estimated film thickness of 27.9 The binder-free CNT film electrode fabricated by the electrostatic spray deposition of a CNT solution possessed well-entangled and interconnected porous structures with good adherence to the substrate, and showed promising electrochemical properties as an electrode for EDLC applications. Its range of potential applications can be extended to nanotechnology devices, such as field emitter devices, sensitive chemical sensors and field effect transistors, because of its thickness uniformity and flat surface morphology. In the present study, we demonstrated a novel method of fabricating a binder-free CNT film electrode using the electrostatic spray deposition (ESD) technique. The CNT film electrode prepared by ESD showed well-entangled and interconnected porous structures on the nanometer scale with good adherence to the substrate. Its vertical section is characterized by good film thickness uniformity and a flat surface. The cyclic voltammograms of the CNT film electrode were mostly featureless in 1 This research was supported by the ERC program of MOST/KOSEF (Grant No. R11-2002-102-00000-0) and a grant from the Center for Advanced Materials Processing (CAMP) of the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea.