Peacock tail feathers with subtle periodic nanostructures exhibit diverse striking brilliancy, which can be applied as natural templates to fabricate artificial photonic crystals (PhCs) via a biomineralization method. Alumina photonic-crystal structures are successfully synthesized via an immersion and two-step calcination process. The lattice constants of the artificial PhCs are greatly reduced compared to their natural matrices. The lattice constants are tunable by modifying the final annealing conditions in the biomineralization process. The reflection spectra of the alumina photonic-crystal structures are measured, which is related to their material and structural parameters. This work suggests a facile fabrication process to construct alumina PhCs with a high-temperature resistance.Photonic-crystal (PhC) structures have aroused considerable interests in new generation optical and optoelectronic devices due to their ability to manipulate light propagation. Integrated optical circuits based on PhCs have been proposed for optical sensing and computation [ In nature, structural colors have been widely discovered in insects [ There is a strong demand to extend the biomineralization process to materials with high-temperature resistance such as alumina, SiC and other ceramics. Though previous literature described the biomineralization of alumina replicas from keratin fibers [ The male peacock ( The morphology of biomineralized barbules on the barbs were characterized by using a scanning electron microscope (S4800, Hitachi High-Technologies Co. Hitachi City, Japan) equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analyzer. The samples were sputtered with a thin Au layer on the surface to prevent charging. The microstructures of biomineralized alumina replicas were characterized by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D/max 2200 P C, Rigaku, Japan). The diffraction scanning scope ranged from 10 deg to 100 deg at a scanning speed of 6 deg/min using Cu-Kα radiation. The reflection spectra of the specimens were measured using a reflectivity measurement setup comprising of an optical microscope (Olympus BX-51, Olympus Co. Tokyo, Japan), a white light source (HL2000, Ideaoptics, Shanghai, China), and a spectrometer (USB2000+VIS-NIR, Ocean Optics, Florida, America). The resolution of the spectrometer is 1.5 nm with a range from 350 nm to 1000 nm. The barbules branched on the barb of a green peacock tail feather were trimmed using a diamond cutter. The biomineralization process was demonstrated using the peacock tail feathers as the biotemplates to produce alumina nanorods. As shown in   With the aim to develop high-temperature PhCs for sensor applications, we proposed a facile and efficient approach to obtain complex alumina PhCs via biomineralization of natural structures such as peacock tail feathers. After a precursor solution immersion and two-step annealing process, alumina replicas were obtained with well-organized photonic crystal structures. The lattice constants of the biomineralized alumina PhCs are greatly shrunk compared to the original green barbules. The ultrastructure of the alumina replica is tunable by modifying the second step annealing process. The reflection spectra of the alumina replica show double reflection bands with reflectivity peaks at wavelengths of 440 nm and 680 nm, respectively. The future work is to integrate the alumina replicas into high-temperature physical or chemical sensors as the transduction materials. This work is supported by the