The U.S. DOE Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) mandated attainment of a national production level of 36 billion gallons of biofuels (to be added to gasoline) by 2022, of which 21 billion gallons must be derived from renewable/sustainable feedstocks (e.g. lignocellulose). In order to attain these goals, the development of cost effective process technologies that can convert plant biomass to fermentable sugars must occur. An alternative route to production of bioethanol is the utilization of microorganisms that can both convert biomass to fermentable sugars and ferment the resultant sugars to ethanol in a process known as consolidated bioprocessing (CBP). Although various economic benefits and technology hurdles must be weighed in the course of choosing the CBP strategy to be pursued, we present arguments for developing the powerfully cellulolytic fungus, Trichoderma reesei, as an effective CBP microorganism.Biofuel production processes today are based on the fermentation of biomass sugars and must be improved to meet EISA goals [ Some options proposed to reduce the cost of the conversion of lignocellulose to ethanol, include: eliminating pretreatment, increasing cellulose hydrolysis yield, enhancing the enzyme activity to reduce its consumption, and improving the fermentation process both in yield and specificity. CBP combines simultaneous saccharification of lignocellulose with fermentation of the resulting sugars into a single process step mediated by a single microorganism or microbial consortium. Compared to other less highly integrated configurations, CBP is distinctive because it does not contain a separate and dedicated process step for cellulase production [ Although no natural microorganism possesses all properties of lignocellulose utilization and ethanol production desired for CBP, some bacteria and fungi exhibit some of the needed traits (see The primary requirements for the category II CBP strategy include functional production and secretion of a variety of exoglucanases and endoglucanases, growth on lignocellulose as sole carbon resource, and assimilation and fermentation of all sugars derived from lignocellulose. Selected bacteria, We will pursue Some of the difficulties and challenges to be encountered in the conversion of a candidate microorganism for category II CBP strategies are as follows:    Despite recent advances in engineering cellulases to be more efficient and less costly, the complete saccharification of pretreated lignocellulose still requires a very long time for digestion and high loadings of enzyme (30–50 The fundamental advantages of  Because of the above,  Nevertheless, Lignocellulosic biomass contains primarily five sugars of interest for fermentation: glucose, mannose, galactose, xylose, and arabinose. Therefore, in order to produce ethanol economically, a co-fermentative process is preferred. Although Although some fungi are able to produce ethanol, they produce other byproducts as well, such as acetic and lactic acids. For example, Some fungi, such as Our preliminary studies indicate that It is also important to consider that the primary end product of The key It is possible that high molar concentrations of ethanol could alter the cell membrane For successful CBP with   CBP has the potential to reduce the cost of the biological conversion of lignocellulose to ethanol significantly, and accumulating data are demonstrating its feasibility. Though some progress has been made in both categories I and II CBP development, the limited ability of the latter system for producing enzymes in sufficient quantity and quality for lignocellulose degradation remains a challenge. It was initially expected that this problem could be overcome by introduction of heterologous genes for various cellulolytic enzymes. However, there has been limited progress in producing some of these enzymes in active form and in sufficient quantities. In order to accelerate the category I CBP progress, alternative organisms for CBP must be considered. Cellulolytic fungi, such as Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as: • of special interest •• of outstanding interest This work was supported by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development (LDRD) Program at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.