Purpose
                  To assess the clinical results of using mesh plate in management of displaced comminuted fracture patella.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Between January 2014 and October 2015, nine patients with closed displaced comminuted fracture patella were fixed using mesh plate and 2mm mini screws.
               
                  Results
                  All fractures united after an average of 10 weeks. At final follow-up of an average 19.6 months, average postoperative Lysholm score was 89.1±4.9, and average Postoperative Böstman scale was 27.2±3.1. No hardware related complications were recorded.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Low profile mesh plate is a good option in management of comminuted fracture patella with good clinical outcome. This new surgical technique may be particularly useful in comminuted fractures when patellectomy would otherwise be considered.The patella is a crucial component of the extensor mechanism of the knee with one of the thickest articular cartilage in the human body (about 5.5 Tension-band wiring and cancellous screws have been the most commonly used techniques for the management of transverse patellar fractures with many options in tension band wiring configuration Fewer options are available for displaced comminuted patellar fractures including either cerclage wiring or patellectomy. Cerclage wiring doesn’t allow adequate reduction with increased risk of arthritis, nor stable fixation to allow early mobilization with a high incidence of cerclage breakage and loss of fixation A recent biomechanical study using synthetic patellar model have shown that a low profile plate is similar to tension band wiring in transverse fracture patella when comparing ultimate force for failure and even better when comparing gap prior to failure  Between Jan. 2014 and October 2015, nine patients with closed displaced comminuted fracture patella were included in the current study. Exclusion criteria included patients with open fractures, concomitant knee fractures, or meniscal or ligamentous injuries requiring repair. Comminution was defined as patellar articular surface of more than 3 parts or the body of the patella more than 4 parts. Displaced fracture was defined as an articular incongruity (step-off) of more than 2 All operations were done under spinal anaesthesia, the patients were positioned supine on a translucent orthopedic table, and a midthigh pneumatic tourniquet was used in all patients. A lateral parapatellar skin incision (8–10 A low profile 1.5 After fixation by screws, K-wires were removed and a cerclage using nonabsorbable suture (Ethibond No. 5) was passed all around the patella and through the patellar tendon in a Krakow fashion if the lower pole was comminuted. The fracture stability was then tested intraoperatively through full range of flexion and extension. The retinacula was closed using non-absorbable suture (Ethibond No.2). A well-padded long knee cast was then applied after wound closure. Full weight bearing was allowed as tolerated. The cast and the stitches were removed after 14 At final follow-up, radiographs were reviewed to record any loosening or hardware failure. Functional knee assessment was done using knee range of motion, Lysholm knee score, and The average time between injury and surgery was 3.2 The average operative time was 69 The average follow-up period was 19.6 months (range, 12 to 33). At final follow-up, average postoperative Lysholm score was 89.1 no patients needed repeat trip to the operation room, one patient developed superficial wound issues which was treated with daily dressings and was resolved, another patient developed deep venous thrombosis (DVT) 5 weeks postoperatively which was treated adequately, no hardware related complications. Plating of the patellar fractures is not a new concept, basket plates have been used in management of comminuted distal pole fractures for more than 25 years with good results The current study presents the clinical results of mesh plate as a low-profile plate in management of comminuted fracture patella. In our series, union was achieved in all patients at an average of 10 weeks. Full range of knee flexion/extension was achieved in all patients except one, who developed extension lag of 10 Partial patellectomy has been used in management of comminuted lower pole patella, or as an alternative to total patellectomy with excision of the comminuted segment and attaching the patellar tendon with its attached bony fragment to the rest of the patella. Several studies have reported the adverse effects of the resulting inferior position of patella (infra). These include: anterior knee pain, increased patellofemoral contact pressure, a decreased quadriceps lever arm, and extensor lag Many biomechanical studies revealed superior stability of different plates over tension band or screw fixation. Thelen et al., compared 3 fixation methods: bilateral fixed-angle plate, modified anterior tension band wiring, and cannulated lag screws with anterior tension band in multi-fragmentary distal patella fractures. The bilateral fixed-angle plate was the only fixation method that sustainably stabilized a multi-fragmentary articular distal patella fracture during cyclic loading Symptomatic implant irritation is the most commonly reported complication following patellar fracture fixation The main limitation of the current study include the small number of patients however, owing to the nature of the injury and the new technique, we would like to present our results. Another limitation is the short term follow up. We would like to report long term follow up later. Low profile mesh plate is a good option in management of comminuted fracture patella with good clinical outcome. This new surgical technique may be particularly useful in comminuted fractures when other modalities of fixation have not shown good outcomes, and patellectomy would otherwise be considered. The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.