Thermo-chemical pretreatments of biomass typically result in environmental impacts from water use and emission. The degradation byproducts in the resulting sugars can be inhibitory to the activities of enzymes and yeasts. The results of this study showed that combining existing commercial comminution technology can reduce total energy consumption with improved saccharification yield while eliminating chemical use. Impact mill was found to be the most efficient milling for size reduction of forest residual chips from ca. 2 mm to a specific value below 100 µm. The further micronization effectively disrupted the recalcitrance of the woody biomass and produced the highly saccharifiable substrates for downstream processing. In addition, extrusion can be integrated into a clean cellulosic sugar process for further fibrillation in place of the conventional mixing processing. The highest energy efficiency was observed on the impact-milled samples with 0.515 kg sugars kWh−1.Woody biomass is a lignocellulosic material with abundance and renewability and has been considered as a potential feedstock for second-generation biofuel production. As with all cellulosic sugar-based biofuel processes, the first step is to expose the cellulose macromolecules to enzymes to enhance digestibility using a pretreatment process. Many pretreatment methods have been developed to disrupt the structure and morphology of woody biomass ( Among all the pretreatment methods, bio- and thermo-chemical methods rely upon exposing cellulose by delignification and removal of the hemicelluloses. These methods include bisulfite, dilute acid, and alkaline pretreatment processes. The active agents released from the acids and bisulfites may break the ether bonds that link hemicelluloses and lignin with cellulose through hydrolysis, thereby improving accessibility of cellulose to enzymes and making conversion more amenable ( In contrast to the chemical pretreatments, mechanical size reduction employs grinding equipment to reduce coarse woody biomass into fine particles beneficial to enzyme accessibility. Mechanical pulverization of lignocellulose may improve cellulose accessibility and increase efficiency in producing fermentable sugars without inhibitor formation. In addition, a fully mechanical pretreatment process would facilitate a depot-style production of fermentable sugars for fermentation or catalytic conversion to chemical intermediates. However, mechanical size reduction of wood particles and disruption of the fiber cell ultrastructures is an energy-intensive process most typically powered by electricity. In recent decades, various mechanical milling machines such as ball, disc, hammer, knife, roll, and attrition mills, have been employed for size reduction of wood biomass ( Extrusion is a mechanical process widely used in the polymer and food processing fields. The high-shearing force and pressure in twin-screw configurations assist in rapid heat generation and effective mixing, thereby facilitating short residence times. The mechanical pulverization and fibrillation from the extrusion process can be expected to afford enhanced interactions between enzymes and wood particles, promote efficient water diffusion, and increase the accessibility of cellulose to enzymatic attacks ( While emphasizing the overall equipment efficiency and scalability of the overall process for industrial biomass conversion, there is still a lack of supporting information as to using softwood forest residuals for producing second generation biofuels. While a single milling operation is difficult in achieving a suitable performance, a carefully selected combination of different milling technologies may reduce overall energy consumption and enhance economic viability. Our previous research works concluded that the multistep milling process could decrease the amount of energy consumption and significantly improve net energy use in mechanical pretreatment ( The objective of this research is to explore the feasibility of pilot-scale processes for mechanical pretreatments as a pulverization strategy to micronize woody biomass into highly hydrolysable substrates. Initially, the stepwise pulverization process of woody biomass is developed to determine a desirable particle size from a trade-off between energy consumption and total sugar yield. The study investigated the effects of pilot scale coarse milling, fine milling/amorphization, and extrusion fibrillation on particle morphology, cellulose crystallinity, sugar yield, and energy consumption. Different micronizing mechanisms of hammer, impact, and tandem-ring mills were used to disrupt lignocellulosic structures and reduce particle size resulting in different energy consumption levels. The specific research objectives were to: (1) develop a grinding scheme to achieve desirable material characteristics with acceptable energy consumption levels; (2) evaluate the effects of extrusion fibrillation on the sugar yields and energy consumption in the course of cellulose hydrolysis. Therefore, it would be of practical importance to ensure the efficient utilization of the current equipment for addressing a technically feasible pretreatment process with forest residuals for biofuel production. Douglas-fir ( Mechanical pretreatments on wood chips were conducted according to the stepwise pulverization process as shown in     The extrusion treatment was designed to reduce the severity of ball milling requirements. The ball-milled samples were continuously fed to the twin-screw extruder (C. W. Brabender, TSE 20/40, length/diameter of screws, L/D = 30). Extrusion was conducted at 50 rpm with a discharging rate of approximately 20 g per minute. The moisture content of the ball-milled samples was first adjusted to be 55% on a wet weight basis by adding additional buffer solution. The prepared samples were subsequently fed to the co-rotated twin-screw extruder for extrusion fibrillation. Three screw configurations (2 kneading and 1 reverse screw elements represented by The energy consumption of the milling process was measured by a Fluke 1735 Power Logger (Fluke Corporation, Everett, WA). The electricity data of current, voltage, and power factor as well as derived active power and active energy were recorded during the milling processing. The electricity consumption from the empty run (without material charge) preceding and trailing the milling was also collected to obtain a baseline for net specific energy consumption calculation, the power above which was assumed as being consumed on breaking down the particles in contrast to running the mill itself. The total specific energy consumption was calculated by integrating the area under the active power demand curve for the total milling time used in the process. The net specific energy consumption, E The specific mechanical energy (SME) from extrusion is calculated by the equation ( Morphological analysis of samples was performed through SEM (FEI Quanta 200F, field emission gun, high vacuum, ETD detectors, FEI Company, Hillsboro, Oregon, USA) after sputter coating with gold. The milled wood samples were first dispersed in distilled water at a 0.5 wt% loadings and were further sonicated for 10 min with 20% amplitude (Branson, Switzerland) to break particle agglomerates. The median particle size and distribution of the sonicated wood powders were immediately analyzed using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer with a Hydro LV wet sample dispersion unit (Mastersizer 3000, Malvern instrument, UK). An X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (Miniflex 600, Rigaku, Japan) equipped with a Cu Kα (λ = 0.154 nm) radiation source was used to perform XRD analysis of the samples at 40 kV and 15 mA in the range of 10–40° at the scanning speed of 1° per min and step size 0.005. Each sample was measured at least two times for accuracy. The crystallinity index (CrI) of the samples was calculated using the Segal equation in the following form ( The prepared samples were hydrolyzed with Cellic CTec2 and HTec2, complimentarily provided by Novozymes North America (Franklinton, NC). The CTec2 cellulase activity was 150 FPU mL The compositional analysis of the samples was conducted according to a two-step acid hydrolysis. A 300 ± 10.0 mg oven-dried raw sample was loaded in a 100 mL pressure tube and incubated with 3.00 ± 0.01 mL of 72% sulfuric acid at 30 ± 3 °C for 1 h and stirred every 5–10 min. Then, 84.00 ± 0.04 mL of water was added into the mixture and autoclaved for 1 h at 121 °C. The monomeric sugar concentrations before and after hydrolysis were measured by an ionic chromatography system (Dionex ICS-3000), equipped with an ED40 electrochemical detector and AS40 autosampler (Dionex Corp.). The 10 µL of sample solutions were taken and then injected into the system to quantify the concentrations of monosugars. In the system the guard columns (CarboPac PA20 4 × 50 mm) and analytical columns (IonPac AS11-HC, 4 × 250 mm) were used to separate sugars in the solution. The degassed E-pure water, 50 mM and 200 mM NaOH solution was taken as the eluent mobile phase at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The detector was maintained at a pH of 10.4 and the autosampler was used for continuous running. Owing to the co-elution of xylose and mannose, the two sugars were reported as one value as xylan/mannan or xylose/mannose. Six replicates were carried out for each pretreated sample. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the Fisher’s LSD test were performed using SPSS 22 (IBM Corporation, NY, USA) to test the significance of treatments. All significant levels are set at 0.05. The results were reported as their means ± SD. Enzymatic hydrolysis efficiency was represented by the obtained carbohydrate conversion and calculated as follows: Effective separation and fractionation of the different lignocellulosic biomass components is critical to mechanical pretreatment. Particle morphologies from different milling processes correlate to different specific surface areas and hence may influence the accessibility of cellulose by enzymes. The hammer, impact and tandem mills employ different grinding mechanisms that generate different particle morphologies. Their different particle morphology was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The hammer and impact mills generated larger fibers or fiber bundles, with the relatively smooth surface for hammer milled samples, while the tandem ring-milled samples appeared more flake-like, roundish and much rougher on surfaces. The larger fiber bundles in the hammer milled samples may originate from the repeated crushing of the mounted hammers, the collision with the chamber walls, and the inter-particle impacts. On the other hand, the tandem mill appeared to significantly pulverize wood fibers, contributing to consistent and strong impacts on the cell walls. Whatever the exact mechanism, this vibratory milling produced very short fiber bundles with increased surface roughness. Our previous studies indicated that the fracture modes of the cell walls differed by milling method and duration ( Ball milling was adopted for further size reduction of the hammer milled materials. Morphological analysis of ball milled samples revealed a significant influence on the fiber morphology. During 30 min of ball milling the diameter of the fibers remains practically unchanged, however, with 60 min of milling, the average fiber length decreased. For the impact and tandem milled samples, 60 min of ball milling deconstructed the fibers and generated small particles with micro-scaled dimensions. The primary impact of the ball milling appears to be in splitting and delamination of the large fiber bundles along and across the fiber direction. The aspect ratio and circular form of impact and tandem milled samples clearly indicated this action. The 60 min of ball milling, effectively destroyed the fibrous structure and resulted in the formation of amorphous microparticles. Recent studies have also shown that the ball milling can effectively break chemical bonds between lignin and hemicellulose while decreasing particle size ( Extrusion processes use mixing and shear forces to generate heat. When conducted on a wood slurry, this action may enable moisture to penetrate particles and alter particle morphology. The effect of extrusion on the morphology of the milled samples was seen from SEM images. After extrusion processing, the samples appeared more chapped and cracked with coarser and porous structures. Specifically, the wood structure of hammer-milled samples was disintegrated into a ribbon and network of sponge-like morphology. The wood particles from impact- and tandem-milled samples showed smaller fiber agglomeration resulting in large roundish structures with coarse surfaces. The surface morphologies showed greater disruption and loosely spherical and porous structures as extrusion temperature increased. When the temperature reached 150 °C, the individual particles were less than 100 µm in diameter and less regular fibrous structures than those processed at 50 or 130 °C. The fibrillated samples were morphologically finer and evener compared to the other samples at lower temperatures. Particle size reduction increases specific surface area (SSA) of lignocellulosic biomass and is useful in increasing hydrolysis efficiency. The study found that particle size reduction from 590–850 to 33–75 μm nearly doubled sugar conversion rates ( In addition to the changes in particle size, 60 min of ball milling decreased the crystallinity index (CrI) significantly for the hammer, impact, and tandem milled wood powders (  The crystallinity of the extruded samples as measured by XRD is depicted in Although disrupting crystallinity may enhance the enzymatic saccharification of biomass, it has been indicated that increasing SSA is more effective for improving enzymatic accessibility ( Twin screws extruders have limited clearance between the screws and the barrel. The co-rotation of the twin screws resulted in high-shear forces and intensive mixing. Combining forward, reverse, and kneading screw elements in a twin-screw extruder may impart different shear forces on the feedstock in the barrel. As observed in  The significant change in morphology and structure of milled woody biomass aims at improving the rate and extent of enzymatic hydrolysis. The effects of the different milling methods on carbohydrate conversion are presented in With additional ball milling, the efficiency of the enzymatic hydrolysis was further improved. After 1 h of ball milling the conversion of saccharides increased up to 80% from 20.5% for untreated wheat straw ( Glucose and xylose yields for hammer milled samples after extrusion fibrillation processing at 150 °C are shown in The different arrangement of kneading and reverse screw elements were investigated to generate different compression and shear action on the feedstock. The energy consumption of mechanical pretreatment is generally a major concern for the economical production of biofuels. The specific energy consumption (SEC) of different milling methods was calculated according to Eq. The energy efficiency (kg sugar/kWh) can be used to evaluate the performance of the mechanical milling process for producing simple sugars. The energy efficiency was calculated according to From the analysis above, it can be concluded that the TM had the highest SEC following the IM and finally the HM with the lowest SEC. The higher energy consumption of BM can be relieved by optimal grinding design, scaling-up, and lower instrument investment From a feasible economical perspective, multi-step grinding scheme of woody biomass should be carried out based on different milling methods. The industry-scale processing parameters and standards can be set for pilot-scale production of fine wood powders with multi-step comminution technology. Further development of combined mechanical pretreatment can be focused on optimizing combined grinding process to achieve the highest yield of sugars with less energy consumption for biofuel production. To further the study, a comparison on the techno economic analysis of the woody biomass conversion to cellulosic ethanol between our developed stepwise pulverization process and the thermochemical conversion process has been pursued for the economic feasibility and will be published in another paper. Combination of simple industry-based comminution technologies was developed to enhance enzymatic hydrolysis of forest residues with less total energy consumption without the involvement of any chemicals. The hammer milling appeared the most efficient coarse milling for the initial size reduction. Through initial coarse milling particle size was reduced to a specific value and then below 100 µm through further pulverization. By optimizing the combined grinding steps, a highly saccharifiable substrate can be achieved with overall low energy inputs. The findings might increase the understanding and give some insights into combination milling pretreatments for woody biomass. The scanning electron images for particle morphology of pretreated woody biomass and figure of energy consumption vs. particle size from TM are available as a This study was supported by the Joint Center for Aerospace Technology Innovation, Washington State and by the Northwest Advanced Renewables Alliance project (Grant No. The work at Nanjing Forestry University was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 