Determining stope boundaries is one of the critical steps to be taken when an underground mining method is selected; because of their significant impact on the profitability of the mining project, the stope boundaries have to be optimum to achieve maximum profits. This paper introduces a new hybrid algorithm that is a combination of dynamic programming and greedy algorithm. Although this proposed algorithm may fail to provide a true optimum solution, it generates better solutions than existing algorithms do. The new proposed algorithm and three existing algorithms are used to find the optimal stope boundaries on a real case ore body. The results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can improve the profit by 117.78%, 16.86% and 0.42% compared to Floating Stope, Maximum Value Neighborhood (MVN), and Greedy algorithm solutions, respectively, on a real case study at a reasonable CPU time. Due to the increase in stripping ratios and haulage distances in open pit mines, mining costs increase. As a result, switching from open pit mining to underground mining may be more beneficial. Also, underground mining can be the only alternative for deposits with large overburdens. When the underground mining method is selected, it is necessary to determine the optimal workable layout as stope boundaries. The main purpose of optimizing stope boundaries is to determine an appropriate plan to select the best combination of blocks in the block model. This plan should maximize the overall profit subject to geometrical, geotechnical, and safety constraints. Obviously, this plan should be optimal because even a minor deviation from the exact plan's value may result in wasting millions of dollars of mining capitals. The existing Most of the mining problems are large scale while exact optimization methods are usually not applicable to solve these problems. Inevitably, they should be solved by low computational time (meta)heuristic algorithms. There exist a large number of strong heuristic and (meta)heuristic algorithms in the literature to solve a variety of mining problems such as prediction of hangingwall stability, slope stability, waste tailing recycling potential and so on ( Let The next section of this paper reviews relevant literature related to stope boundary optimization. Even four decades after the presentation of the first algorithm for optimizing stope boundaries, the growth rate of these algorithms has been slow. The reported works on the stope boundaries optimization problem are either sub-optimal or over simplified. For instance, although the Floating Stope is a famous stope boundary algorithm that was proposed by The MVN algorithm, another heuristic algorithm, was proposed by The Optimum Limit Integrated Probable Stope (OLIPS), another dynamic programming algorithm, was designed by     Advantages, Although the heuristic algorithms for the stope boundary problem mainly generate sub-optimal solutions, they usually have low processing time and include fewer simplifications. Consequently, they are more applicable than rigorous alternatives for solving the real world problems. The heuristic algorithms’ solutions differ from each other. Any modification to these algorithms to decrease the optimality gap is very valuable. The contribution of this paper is to propose a new hybrid algorithm for stope boundaries optimization to achieve better results than what is possible with current algorithms. A new polynomial-time dynamic programming algorithm is proposed in this paper that guarantees the optimal solution for a given row or column. It is a 1D algorithm and in order to make it capable of solving 3D problems, it is combined by a greedy algorithm as a hybrid approach. Since dynamic programming optimality has a direct effect on the hybrid algorithm, highest value results was recorded by this proposed approach and its validation was completely successful on both hypothetical and real cases. In this paper, a new hybrid algorithm is proposed to optimize stope boundaries. This combines greedy and dynamic programming algorithms. The main problem is solved using the proposed greedy algorithm. In the greedy algorithm, by converting specific two-dimensional subsets of the original economic block model to single blocks, the initial complicated 3D problem is converted to a simple secondary one-dimensional sub-problem. Then, a new dynamic programming algorithm is applied to find the optimal boundaries on the aforementioned secondary sub-problem. Of the solutions to these simple sub-problems, the best is chosen based on greedy approach criterion. Then corresponding blocks to this solution are added to the initial problem solution. Dynamic programming is a well-known technique that can be used to solve a large number of optimization problems. Using this technique, a complicated problem is broken into smaller sub-problems and instead of solving the complex original problem, the sub-problems are solved and their solutions stored. After solving all of the sub-problems, the algorithm investigates the sub-problems solutions and combines the solutions to solve the original problem. The new proposed algorithm is designed based on the dynamic programming procedure, and is suitable for finding the optimal stope boundaries in a given row or column of a block model. It is a one-dimensional polynomial-time algorithm and guarantees the optimal solution. All dynamic programming algorithms almost use the same approach. They calculate the cumulative value for each state at each stage; find the highest cumulative value and track it to find other states located in the optimal solution. The algorithms’ steps are: Calculate the cumulative value for all states and store their best previous states. Find the highest cumulative value at the final stage; its value presents the optimal stope boundaries value. Track this highest value state at the final stage; dimensions, positions, and the number of the stopes that make the optimal boundaries. The algorithm's variables and parameters are defined in The stage If In other situations (i.e., The current cumulative value ( Also, the cumulative block set is defined by recursive The union of all the state values from the 1st stage to The only difference between π This algorithm does not allow the two adjacent states to overlap, without any negative effects on the global optimality. After identifying the overlap between the current state value and previous state path (π Where λ After calculating all the cumulative values, it is necessary to determine the highest value path ( Also, the positions and dimensions of all the stopes on the To determine The proposed hybrid algorithm uses a combination of greedy and dynamic programming approaches to optimize stope boundaries. The dynamic programming is optimal but the greedy In this algorithm, by converting a subset of A graphical visualization for converting 2D slices to a 1D matrix ( A poly-metal silver-zinc-lead deposit was modeled using the proposed algorithm. This deposit consists of 1,036,800 blocks. Block dimensions along the all main coordinate axes are 10 m and the average grade of silver, zinc and lead is 139.21 gr/ton, %3.21 and %0.26, respectively. Due to the high volume of the deposit's overburden, underground mining methods generate more profit than open pit method. Also, feasibility studies show that the sublevel stoping method is more compatible than other underground mining methods for extracting this deposit. The minimum length, width and height of the stopes are assumed to be 50 m. Undoubtedly, stope boundary optimization is one of the main mining problems which plays an important role in the economy of the mining industry. However, four decades after the first algorithm was presented for this problem, there is yet to be a comprehensive algorithm. Most of the algorithms are heuristic and their optimality is not guaranteed. Also, due to many simplifications in designing rigorous algorithms, they are not appropriate to solve real case problems. In this research, a new hybrid algorithm was introduced for stope boundary optimization. Although it may provide a locally optimum solution, it can find a better solution compared to its alternative algorithms at a reasonable CPU time. This hybrid algorithm and three existing algorithms were employed to find optimal stope boundary in a silver-zinc-lead deposit. The minimum and maximum improvements by this algorithm were 0.42% and 117.87%, respectively. The obtained results confirm the introduced algorithm's ability to find a better solution to stope boundary optimization problems. Better solution and better boundaries mean less waste of mining project capital, while help mining companies to develop sustainable projects that boost their profit. At the end, it should be noted that substitution of the proposed greedy algorithm by one of its alternatives such as genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), simulated annealing (SA) and so on may yield to better solutions for the stope boundary optimization problem. For further investigation, it is suggested to check these meta-heuristics instead of the new proposed greedy algorithm.