This paper presents an integrated approach to landscape functioning assessment combining energy efficiency and hydrochemical balance studies. Energy balance is expressed by surface temperature while hydrochemical balance is illustrated by electric conductivity and selected hydrochemical parameters. Six model sub-watersheds with different land use situated in southern Bohemia were chosen to show the influence of landscape management on landscape functioning. The watersheds with higher humankind activity were shown to have both higher and more fluctuating average surface temperature as well as higher electrical conductivity in the runoff surface water. Watersheds with the predominance of forests and meadows showed opposite trends in the monitored parameters. Our results show that sustainable landscape management leads to lower temperature extremes and consequently to low matter and water losses. Large improvements of energy and matter balance can be achieved by restoration of permanent vegetation and/or effective water retention and accumulation.A landscape is an ecologically heterogeneous area that consists of a variety of ecosystems that interact and form more or less dynamic balance of stability ( High temperature fluctuations (daily and seasonal) have a negative effect on matter and water balance of the landscape ( Surface temperature ( In this study we combined remote sensing methods and water sampling analyses to: calculate surface temperature of six catchments (with different land cover types) from Landsat TM6 satellite data in three time periods (1991, 2002, 2008); assess the hydrochemistry (content of nutrients, base cations, anions, el. conductivity) of these catchments with different landscape management. The aim of the study was to illustrate the relation between the surface temperature and hydrochemical functioning of a cultural landscape. We assumed the catchments with higher proportion of built-up areas and arable land would have a more unbalanced surface temperature regime and higher average surface temperatures. As a consequence of higher surface temperatures we awaited accelerated mineralization in these catchments reflected in higher concentrations of ions and higher electrical conductivity of surface waters. The study area is situated in the Třeboňsko Landscape Protected Area, in the southern part of the Czech Republic. Třeboňsko (700 The relationship of land surface temperature, derived from Landsat TM satellite data and selected physical–chemical parameters of water is presented on the example of six various catchments ( The studied catchments largely differed in land cover types ( The physical–chemical parameters of water were monitored in three periods: 1990–91, 2000–02 and 2008–11. Water samples were collected three times during the year namely in spring (April), summer (June) and early autumn (turn of August and September). The water samples from totally forested, diverse and forested catchments (in the years 1991 and 2002) were taken as mixed samples from fishponds. In the wet meadows catchment the samples were taken from a channel draining three quarters of the area; in the agricultural catchment from the inflow to the fishpond and in the agricultural-drained catchment from the main drainage channel, near its mouth to the stream. The forested catchment had a special sampling regime. In 1991 and 2002 water samples were taken from a fishpond; in the period 2008–11 samplings from the main inflow to the fishpond were added to find out possible differences between the two sampling sites. Average values of each parameter and each period were calculated from the measured values. Electrical conductivity, HCO El. conductivity of water samples was determined using a WTW Multi Lab P5, P4 720 device. TN and TP were determined by a flow injection analysis using automatic analyzers FIAstar™ 5000 and FIAstar™ 5012. Na The surface temperature was calculated from the thermal channel TM6 of Landsat5. This satellite has a 16 days revisit period. The selected catchments were scanned at 9:38 GMT Surface temperature was analyzed from the images taken on September 1st 1991, July 21st 2002 and July 29th 2008. In 2002 and 2008 the land cover of the studied areas was relatively diversified, in particular the areas used for agriculture comprised of a mosaic of green vegetation, crops just before harvest and areas already harvested. In 1991 almost all crops had been harvested; so in agricultural catchments bare land dominated. Surface radiation temperatures were calculated from thermal radiance values of Landsat thermal infrared channel using the formula Since the data from different years were acquired under different conditions the results have to be standardized before carrying out statistical analyses. The following method used in standard scores ( Surface temperature was influenced by meteorological conditions preceding the satellite scanning, in particular by the precipitation pattern. If, precipitation occurred in the critical period before scanning we assumed lower and more balanced surface temperature of all land cover types. The air temperature during the time of the satellite scanning (10:00 GMT The catchments differed in both the average values and the fluctuation of the surface temperature ( In July 1991 most agricultural areas had already been harvested. Precipitation nine days before the Landsat data acquisition was 46.4 The growing season 2002 was rich in rain, with 86.7 The growing season 2008 was characterized by in this area typical summer conditions when vegetation was limited by a slight moisture deficit, crops had mostly been harvested; only maize remained. In the 9 days period prior to the thermal data acquisition only 15 If water saturation of a landscape is low, there is not enough water available for evapotranspiration. Its intensity is regulated, depending on the type of vegetation and land cover. As was shown in the forested (F), the totally forested (TF) and the wet meadows (WM) catchments, the forest stands, thanks to the effective water use, maintained lower surface temperature and reduced temperature fluctuations. On the other hand the catchments, with predomination of agricultural land (D, A, AD) showed only poor capacity for dampening the temperature fluctuation. During summer when the maximum solar irradiance reaches the ground (July and August) and the common crops have usually already been harvested, solar energy is not used for the latent heat flux of evaporation, but for the sensible heat flux, resulting in surface temperature increase. Simultaneously, high surface temperature leads to faster and more intensive matter losses and washing-out from the catchment. The content of dissolved substances in water increases (see In the period 1990–1991 only three basins were included in the comparison of water characteristics as other data needed for the subsequent assessment were not available. Average values of el. conductivity differed in all catchments. The highest el. conductivity was measured in the diverse (D) catchment (471 The comparison showed similar relations between the monitored sites also in the period 2000–02. The highest el. conductivity was measured in the diverse (D) catchment (318 A detailed monitoring, extended by four localities (seven in total), was carried out during the period 2008–11. The highest average values of el. conductivity were measured in the agricultural-drained (AD) areas (625 Concentrations of major cations were five times higher in the agricultural-drained (AD) catchment when compared with catchments, where forests predominated. The values of Na Analysis of variance and post hoc Tukey's test were used to compare the studied sites. The analyses were performed for the physical–chemical parameters as listed in The statistical analyses showed significant differences in electric conductivity of the three catchments ( The statistical analyses showed that ten years later (2000–02) the forested and totally forested catchments differed only in el. conductivity ( The statistical comparison of the 2008–11 data showed no significant difference between the catchments with a significant proportion of forests, wetlands and permanent grasslands (F, TF, WM) with an exception of Na A literature review showed a lack of papers dealing with landscape functioning based on a combination of surface temperature and hydrochemistry measurements as introduced by Our results showed that relatively high surface temperature of land cover and high spatial fluctuations of temperature are associated with increased outflow of dissolved substances from the catchment. The catchments with higher portion of arable land and built-up areas (AD, A, D catchments) are characterized by higher values of surface temperature, el. conductivity and chemical parameters of water (HCO Sustainable management should aim at closing water and matter cycles in the landscape. High surface temperature and large surface temperature differences result from drainage policy together with vegetation damage and consequent reduction of evapotranspiration. High surface temperature gives rise to heat and pressure potentials which cause turbulent flow of air and consequent drying of landscape. Sustainable management supporting low matter and nutrient losses and dampening temperature extremes in the cultural landscape can be achieved by restoration of permanent vegetation. There is also a great need to support ecosystem functions provided by fishponds, floodplains and other types of wetlands. The paper was supported by the project and grants of