In this paper, numerical simulation models built using FLAC3D were simulated 16 times with different in situ stresses and different driving cycle footages to investigate outburst risk of coal mine roadways. The results suggest that an outburst is most likely to happen when the maximum in situ stress is perpendicular to the roadway axis, and the risk increases to the maximum when the driving cycle footage is at the stress concentration peak. However, conditions are much safer when the maximum in situ stress is parallel to the roadway. The stress distribution was validated with field experiments. The results suggest that most of the roadways in coal mines should be arranged parallel to the maximum stress direction if practical, and that the driving cycle footage should not be at the stress concentration peak. The results will help improve coal mine safe design and provide a driving procedure to prevent gas outbursts.China lacks oil and natural gas, but coal provides more than 70% of the country’s energy ( To eliminate gas outburst accidents, scholars have carried out extensive research ( The outburst risk is higher when there is sharp stress concentration close the fractures to reduce the permeability and keep high gas pressure gradient near the face. Hence, it is helpful to reduce the outburst risk by reducing the stress concentration and the gas pressure gradients. The three dimensional in situ stresses are usually different in different directions. The in situ stresses of some coal mines in China were tested by hydraulic fracturing method, and it was found that the maximum horizontal stress is 0.5–2 times the vertical stress, and that the stresses are generally different in different directions ( Stress and displacement distributions around roadways are widely researched ( FLAC3D is a three-dimensional explicit finite-difference program for simulating the behavior of three-dimensional structures built of soil, rock or other materials that undergo plastic flow when their yield limits are reached, and is widely used in mining engineering ( The model’s length, width and height are 44 The model was built to run the simulation 16 times according to four kinds of in situ stress states and four kinds of driving cycle footages. The roadway driving process of different driving cycle footages is shown in The fixed boundary around the four sides and bottom of the model means the grids in the face of the model can slide in the plane but cannot move vertical to the plane. While the stress boundary on the top of the model means the compressive stresses in three directions were added on the top of the model, and the values are equal to the in situ stress in every direction. During the roadway driving process the maximum unbalanced force was monitored to help determine whether a stable equilibrium solution is reached. If the unbalanced force approaches a very small value and become constant, this indicates that an equilibrium state is reached. The maximum unbalanced force change during the roadway driving process is shown in There are abundant primary cracks in the rock mass, and the opening or closing of cracks is significantly affected by the normal stress. The relationship between the dimensionless permeability coefficient and the normal stress can be expressed as Eq. In the 3-D numerical simulation model, the normal stress According to the study plan above, the stress distributions ahead of roadway faces under different in situ stress states were obtained ( When the in situ stress is 10 Different stress distributions should also cause different displacements. The displacement along the roadway axis of the rock mass in front of the roadway face under different in situ stress conditions is shown in When the maximum stress direction is perpendicular to the roadway axis, the rock mass within 2.5 The Mohr–Coulomb yield criterion was used ( When the maximum in situ stress direction is perpendicular to the roadway axis, as shown in The analysis above suggests that the change of the stress distribution will also alter the permeability, and the different in situ stresses will cause the different permeability distributions ahead of the roadway face (  It is known that driving a roadway is a cyclic process. The driving length by one cycle is called the driving cycle footage. In order to study the stress evolution of the rock mass ahead of the roadway face at different in situ stress states and different driving cycle footage, the stress and displacement of the rock mass 0.25 According to the models, when the three-dimensional stress tensor is asymmetric and the maximum stress is perpendicular to the roadway axis, as shown in The Xia Yukou coal mine is under the control of the Hancheng Mining Co. Ltd. The #3 coal seam, with a thickness of 5 The coal seam is stable for there are no faults and drapes near the three roadways, the in situ stresses should be stable in the work face ( The Δ First, drill the borehole to the preset position and record the beginning time as Second, turn on the #1 and #3 valve and turn off the #2 valve as shown in Third, set level the water manometer and keep the water surfaces on the same plane. When it is 3 Fourth, 2 During the process of driving the three roadways in Xia Yukou coal mine, the values of Δ Both of the forecast values, Δ The field experiment confirms that in situ stress has significant effects on outburst risk of a roadway. The numerical simulation results match the field experiment well.  When the maximum stress is perpendicular to the roadway axis, the coal and rock nearby the roadway face can be broken by the high stress gradient to decrease the strength ( Overall, the maximum stress direction has a significant impact on the distribution of stress, displacement and damage in front of the roadway face. It is known that the coal and gas outburst is much more likely to occur when the stress concentration and gradient are high, the coal strength is low and the gas pressure and content is high ahead of the roadway face ( In addition, immediately after a driving cycle the three dimensional stresses in front of the roadway face is very unstable and drop rapidly in a short period of time. The stress drop increase to the maximum when the maximum in situ stress is perpendicular to the roadway axis, and the driving cycle footage is about 3 The results show that the stress distribution and evolution in front of the roadway face is affected by both the in situ stress and the driving cycle footage, and can provide the guidance needed for goal mine underground planning engineers. Most of the roadways should be designed parallel to the maximum stress direction if practical, to avoid coal and gas outbursts, and the driving cycle footage should not reach the peak of the stress concentration location. Driving a roadway in a coal seam that could have a gas outburst is one of the most dangerous occupations that exist. Based on our study, the following conclusions can be made: In situ rock stress greatly affects the gas outburst risk of roadways; it is much more dangerous when the roadway is perpendicular to the maximum in situ stress than parallel to it. The driving cycle footage has a significant impact on the outburst risk of a roadway. Commonly, the stress drop and the gas outburst risk increase to the maximum when the driving cycle footage reaches the peak of the stress concentration. The in situ stress should be tested, and the maximum stress direction should be marked before designing a coal mine. In addition, most of the roadways should be arranged along the maximum in situ stress direction, and the driving cycle footage should not reach to the stress concentration peak. Financial support provided by the