Gasification of excavated landfill waste is one of the promising options to improve the added-value chain during remediation of problematic old landfill sites. Steam gasification is considered as a favorable route to convert landfill waste into H2-rich syngas. Co-gasification of such a poor quality landfill waste with biochar or biomass would be beneficial to enhance the H2 concentration in the syngas, as well as to improve the gasification performance. In this work, steam co-gasification of landfill waste with biochar or biomass was carried out in a lab-scale reactor. The effect of the fuel blending ratio was investigated by varying the auxiliary fuel content in the range of 15–35 wt%. Moreover, co-gasification tests were carried out at temperatures between 800 and 1000 °C. The results indicate that adding either biomass or biochar enhances the H2 yield, where the latter accounts for the syngas with the highest H2 concentration. At 800 °C, the addition of 35 wt% biochar can enhance the H2 concentration from 38 to 54 vol%, and lowering the tar yield from 0.050 to 0.014 g/g-fuel-daf. No apparent synergetic effect was observed in the case of biomass co-gasification, which might cause by the high Si content of landfill waste. In contrast, the H2 production increases non-linearly with the biochar share in the fuel, which indicates that a significant synergetic effect occurs during co-gasification due to the reforming of tar over biochar. Increasing the temperature of biochar co-gasification from 800 to 1000 °C elevates the H2 concentration, but decreases the H2/CO ratio and increases the tar yield. Furthermore, the addition of biochar also enhances the gasification efficiency, as indicated by increased values of the energy yield ratio.alkali and alkaline earth metal the ash content of the initial sample, wt.% Brunauer-Emmett-Teller char matrix dry-ash-free weight basis enhanced landfill mining energy yield ratio lower heating/calorific value the calorific value of the fuel/sample, MJ/kg the calorific value of the produced syngas, MJ/NM the initial mass of the sample before gasification, g the final mass of the sample after gasification, g municipal solid waste non-local density functional theory refuse-derived fuel solid-phase adsorption solid-phase extraction the total volume of the produced syngas, Nm The Enhanced Landfill Mining (ELFM) concept has been gaining societal interest to replace conventional remediation methods for problematic old landfills. The state-of-the-art of ELFM involves the integration of landfill excavation, advanced materials sorting and processing, and thermal conversion processes for retrieving materials and energy resources back to society [ Among various thermal conversion methods in the framework of ELFM, high-temperature gasification processes (e.g. slagging gasification) are regarded as viable candidates for combined energy and material valorizations in the form of syngas and vitrified ash residue [ H Several studies have demonstrated significant differences between the fuel characteristics of excavated wastes from landfills and fresh Municipal Solid Wastes (MSW) [ The addition of other fuels has been proposed in several studies to enhance the gasification performance of MSW exhibiting such poor properties. Most of those studies utilized biomass as the auxiliary fuel during the co-gasification of MSW. A study by Pinto et al. [ In the case of high-temperature MSW gasifications, the slagging gasification technology has been considered as a proven technology for converting ash into slag during gasification of MSW [ Biochar is a porous carbon-rich material that can be produced as a byproduct from pyrolysis. It is considered that further utilization of this biochar residue in a gasification process provides a highly beneficial outcome [ In this study, excavated landfill waste samples were subjected to gasification tests under a steam atmosphere with the main objective to produce a H An excavation project was carried out at the Mont-Saint-Guibert landfill in Belgium, where at least 5.7 million m As a result of the pretreatment, five fractions were obtained. For the gasification tests in this study, the RDF fraction consisting of the light waste fraction (or commonly also known as a 2D fraction) with a particle size ranging between 90 and 200 mm was chosen as it has the highest calorific value. In dry mass basis, this fraction consists of 1% wood, 4% paper, 8% textile, 43% plastics, 10% other combustible materials, 2% metals, 2% inert materials, and 31% fine particles as was measured by a hand sorting method by García López et al. [ Lignocellulose sawdust biomass from beech wood was used as the raw biomass sample and the feedstock to produce biochar. This biomass was provided by J. Rettenmaier & Söhne Gmbh, Rosenberg, Germany. A pyrolysis process was carried out to produce biochar by using a vertical lab-scale fixed bed reactor, which consists of a cooling and a heating zone. In the experiment, the biomass was placed inside a metal basket and kept in the cooling zone while the temperature of the heating zone was elevated until 500 ᵒC. After it reached this value, the biomass was inserted in the heating zone and this temperature was maintained for 30 min. Thereafter, an evacuation of the basket to the cooling zone took place. The produced biochar was then collected for further gasification tests. The details of the pyrolysis procedure and reactor have been reported by Ratnasari et al. [ The fuel compositions of RDF-landfill, biomass, and biochar samples are presented in  The steam gasification tests were performed by using a lab-scale horizontal tube reactor, as schematically shown in Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) gas sorptometry measurements were performed by using a Micromeritics model ASAP 2000 instrument to characterize the BET surface area of the raw and gasified biochar samples. The sample was subjected to a degassing process conducted at 250 °C for 12 h before the BET analysis. The test was then performed by using the N The conversion rate of the feedstock sample was determined after each gasification test by using the following calculation, In addition, the performance of the gasification tests was assessed by using the energy yield ratio (  In contrast, steam co-gasification of RDF-landfill with biochar results in different trends with respect to the product yield distribution.  The composition of syngas (in vol%) produced from co-gasification of RDF-landfill at 800 ᵒC with different fuels blending proportions is shown in The syngas components yield from the co-gasification of RDF-landfill with biochar is presented in Overall, the addition of biochar during steam gasification of RDF-landfill produces a syngas with a higher concentration of H  Steam co-gasification of RDF-landfill containing 35 wt% biomass or biochar were also performed at different temperatures, and the results are presented in On the other hand, the co-gasification of the RDF-landfill and biochar at higher temperatures also produce higher H The molar ratio of H At 800 ᵒC, steam co-gasification of RDF-landfill with biomass at lower blending ratios (<35 wt%) results in higher H In contrast to gasification at 800 ᵒC, syngas produced during gasification of the RDF-landfill sample only exhibits higher H  Even though their syngas has a relatively high calorific value, the gasification of RDF-landfill samples suffers from low EY values as a result of a low syngas yield and eminent chemical energy losses in the form of tar. The EY value is 0.44 at a gasification temperature of 800 ᵒC, which rises to 0.54 at 1000 ᵒC. The use of biomass or biochar as an auxiliary fuel could enhance the gasification performance as indicated by higher EY values. Specifically, at 800 ᵒC, one can see that the value of the EY ratio increases proportionally with the amount of biomass content in the fuel, as its maximum value (0.69) is obtained at a biomass content of 35 wt%. In contrast, the optimum EY value in the case of biochar co-gasification is obtained at a 25 wt% biochar content. Greater amounts of biochar reduce the EY value, due to the low conversion rate of biochar at a low gasification temperatures. Nevertheless, co-gasification of 35 wt% biochar exhibits better gasification performance at higher temperatures than that of other fuel mixtures. At 1000 ᵒC, this gasification has an EY value of 1.11, whereas gasification of RDF-landfill without any fuel addition and with 35 wt% biomass addition only show EY values of 0.54 and 0.84, respectively. The results in The absence of the synergetic effects in this study might be explained by several reasons. The high amount of inorganic materials in the RDF-landfill, especially Si, could be one of the reasons. As mentioned previously, the synergistic effect between plastic and biomass occurs as the biomass typically releases volatiles earlier than that of plastics. At the same time, the release of volatiles from biomass can be affected by the presence of inorganic elements. According to previous studies, the presence of inorganic elements such as Si, could inhibit the devolatilization rate of biomass and cause the degradation of biomass to start at a higher temperature [ Apart from the explanation above, it should be considered that this study only focused on the co-gasification at low biomass proportions (≤35 wt%). There is a possibility that the synergistic effects can only be observed at a high range of biomass proportions. Nevertheless, more investigations should be done to verify the phenomenon mentioned above. On the other hand, the synergetic effects observed in the case of biochar co-gasification can be explained by the heterogeneous reactions during the tar reforming process over biochar particles. It is known that the rate of heterogeneous tar conversion on the char surface is higher than the homogeneous tar reforming (R4 – R6), especially at temperatures lower than 1000 °C [ As illustrated in       The inherent AAEM particles on the surface of biochar have a crucial role in enhancing the tar reforming process. Ca and K are among the most catalytically active AAEM [  As opposed to the case of co-gasification with biomass, the contribution of a high amount of Si from RDF-landfill does not seem to affect notably the tar cracking performance over biochar. As explained before, the heterogeneous tar conversion over biochar begins when the tar compounds are absorbed into the biochar matrix/pores. Therefore, only the inherent inorganic materials retained in the interior of the biochar matrix would affect the tar conversion. The external Si particles coming from the RDF-landfill might not have a significant influence as they exist in the form of soil/sand particles. These particles have a larger particle size distribution than the biochar’s pores; hence, it can not enter into the biochar matrix without any special treatments.  Overall, raising the gasification temperatures increase the syngas yield regardless of the sample mixtures. In the case of co-gasification with biochar, the rise of syngas yield could be mainly attributed to the higher biochar-steam reaction. This is indicated by the greater conversion rate of the feedstock at higher temperatures ( Even though biochar co-gasification results in a lower tar generation than that of biomass, its tar cracking performance decrease at higher gasification temperatures. This phenomenon is mainly caused by the structural change of biochar and the release of AAEM species at higher gasification temperatures. According to Widayatno et al. [ The rapid pore enlargement during gasification at higher temperatures consequently causes the release of more AAEM species. Additionally, the reduction of tar conversion at 900 and 1000 °C might also be attributed to the higher amount of gases released by the gasification reaction of H In this study, the potential of biomass or biochar addition during steam co-gasification of RDF obtained from excavated landfill waste to improve its gasification performance is investigated, especially concerning the H The addition of biomass can enhance the H The addition of biochar produces higher H Biochar can effectively reduce more tar amount than that of biomass at low gasification temperatures. However, the tar removal efficiency decreases with increasing gasification temperature, which mainly due to the reduction of active sites of biochar following the release of more AAEM and the higher rate of biochar-steam reactions at higher temperatures. The presence of biomass increases CO production, which causes a lower H Both biomass and biochar could improve the efficiency of landfill waste gasification, as indicated by the higher values of the energy yield ratio (EY). Additionally, the results from co-gasifications at higher temperatures indicate higher EY values in the case of gasification using biochar additions. In general, the addition of biochar shows a promising result for enhancing the gasification performance of landfill waste by increasing its H  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The NEW-MINE project has received funding from the European Union’s