 The original Debye–Hückel theory is valid only for highly diluted solutions of electrolytes and is based on a model in which the ions are considered simply as charged dimensionless particles. The change of the Gibbs energy of the system is calculated considering the electrostatic interaction between adjacent ions. The validity of chemical equilibrium is based on the existence of the experimentally measured equilibrium constants. The change of the Gibbs energy of the system is determined from the values of these constants. In this method, the substances entering the reaction area are regarded as chemical units and the products are often regarded as complex substances. Chemical equilibria are described by the relationships of the thermodynamic activity of substances taking part in the reaction. However, these activities are not directly proportional to the concentrations of the substances taking part because of the deviations from the ideal behaviour of the system and, in fact, these deviations are a source of the change of Gibbs energy and are included in the so-called activity coefficients. For every specific concentration the activity coefficient of each dissolved substance in the solution differs. The amount of a substance in chemical processes is described in most cases by the molar fraction  In practice, the concentration in the solution is expressed most frequently in the units of molarity Activity If component it would be interesting to examine the behaviour of cobalt from the viewpoint of the activity of substances taking part in the reaction. From this viewpoint, the activity coefficients of the substances taking part may be expressed by γ In the case of dilute solutions of electrolytes in water, it is often assumed that the activity water is unity. This is not correct from the thermodynamic viewpoint and may cause problems in calculations. Generally, if a solution is in equilibrium with its vapour, the chemical potential of each component in the solution must be equal to the potential of its component in the gas phase: where If the solution obeys Rault’s law where Then All very diluted solutions behave ideally, especially aqueous electrolytes which behave in this manner only at very high dilutions, as discussed later. In more concentrated solutions, the deviations from the ideality are caused by multiplication of the molar fractions by activity coefficients and In the case of the aqueous solution of an electrolyte this definition of the activity coefficient is not convenient for the solute which is not volatile so that the system does not have the and and This is a theoretical background for using the activity coefficients for determining the activity of the substances on the basis of their concentration. These values are required for thermodynamic calculations. An alternative method of processing the deviations from the ideal state is to use the Bjerrum ‘osmotic’ coefficient ϕ in the equation  Comparison of the equations The activity coefficient is a unit used to multiply the vapour pressure of the solvent above the ideal solution. This gives the vapour pressure above the new solution of the same concentration. The resultant value is then used in physical chemistry in the relationships describing the increase of the boiling point, the decrease of the freezing point and osmotic pressure of liquids. The molal osmotic coefficient ϕ can be defined as follows:  For water it holds that: For example, for a 2M solution of potassium chloride KCl at 25°C the activity of water is equal to 0.9364; If a solution contains more than one component, we may use the equation for ln The activity of a solvent may be determined by measuring its partial pressure above the solution in comparison with partial pressure above the ideal solutions with the same concentration. This may be realised in experiments using the isopiestic method. In this method, we examine the solutions of salts that are in equilibrium with the solution as a reference substance for which the accurate values of the osmotic coefficients in a wide concentration range are available. The reference substances are represented by NaCl, KCl, CaCl  If the polynomial expression of the activity of water as a function of the molality of the electrolyte is available, numerical integration can be carried out. The isopiestic method is suitable for solution concentrationd from 0.1 The activity coefficient of three electrolytes of different valences are presented in The solutions of the non-electrolytes differ from the ideal state because of low binding forces, for example, van der Waals bonds, etc., whilst the form of the curves of the electrolytes is the result of strong bonding. Debye and Huckel [ The Debye–Hückel theory is based on the fact that the electrolytes dissociate in a solution producing ions which may be regarded as point charges. The chemical nature of the ions is without mass, but the charge in the unit volume of the solution controls the range of interaction between the charges. The salts with different valences produce different amounts of ions in the solution. Electrolytes such as NaCl with a ratio of 1:1 produce 2 ions, electrolytes with a ratio 2:1 or 1:2 such as CaCl where Every ion is considered to be surrounded by an ionic atmosphere with the opposite sign. The single positive ion in a dielectric solution of a binary electrolyte is surrounded by both negatively and positively charged ions. However, because of the existence of electrostatic attractive and repulsive forces, the negative ions are located closer to the central positive ion than other positive ions. This non-equilibrium of the charges is the ionic atmosphere which is the reason for the attractive force of the central ion. Since the entire solution contains the same number of positive where where This distance is known as the thickness of the ionic atmosphere and depends on the ionic strength of the solution, The ionic atmosphere surrounds the central ion with potential ψ The central ion possesses a certain amount of energy from the It is assumed that this excess energy which the ion receives as a result of being surrounded by the ionic atmosphere, is the result of deviation of the electrolyte solutions from the ideal behaviour. The chemical potential of ion in the ideal solution is where The difference between the last two relationships, The result of substitution for The expression in the square brackets consists of universal constants and can be replaced by expression where  The Debye–Hückel theory and the equations The individual activities of the ions and, therefore, the activity coefficients of the individual ions cannot be measured and therefore, as already mentioned, do not have any thermodynamic meaning. However, they may relate to the measurable mean activity of the ions. The main unit or the ‘molecule’ of a binary electrolyte dissociates into the total number of the ions Or If the valencies of the ions are equal to z This gives The above theoretical considerations valid for electrolytes are based In the majority of processes when using more concentrated solutions than 10 where The possibility of eliminating these pseudo-basic parameters is where z and although this equation is not very accurate, it may be used for solutions containing several electrolytes. Its generalisation is Davis’s equation [ which results in good agreement with the measured values of the mean activity coefficients in diluted solutions with the mean deviation of approximately 2% in 0.1 Due to increased demands on the availability of data on the thermodynamic properties of the aqueous solutions of electrolytes, more and more published studies appeared concerned with this problem in the sixties and seventies of the previous century. More and more data were published on different aqueous systems of the electrolytes and activity and osmotic coefficients in aqueous solutions, and the accuracy of the published data was improved  The Pitzer method described in several publications by Pitzer The Pitzer equations are based on the Debye–Hückel limiting law which is valid if ions are bonded by long-range interactions. It also gives equations for explaining the effect of bonding by short-range interactions without considering the formation of discrete chemical species, for example, non-charged ion pairs in electrolyte solutions. As expected, there are strong interactions between the cations and anions with higher valencies, and the behaviour of the electrolytes may be processed either by the Pitzer method of using equilibrium constants describing the resistance of discrete complex species. Pitzer [ where In this equation, The relationships for the osmotic and activity coefficients were then transformed using Where Further development of the equations taking into account the valencies of the ions and the number of ions formed in dissolution of electrolytes of different types shows that every type can be solved independently and the mixed electrolyte would be regarded as a different case. This research would consist of processing the available data of osmotic coefficients of the individual classes of simple electrolytes and by evaluating them and optimising using The results obtained for many simple electrolytes were published in [   Expression Coefficient The third problematic coefficient is defined by Numerical factors such as ( According to Pitzer [ When considering the electrolyte of the type 2:2, it was found [ The added constants have the values α The equations This was carried out Pitzer and Kim [ where In equation The first expression in the Pitzer and Kim proposed the following relationship for calculating the activity coefficient of the salt Term  The Pitzer approach to calculating the activity coefficients is based on the Debye–Hückel The expressions  Pitzer and Kim calculated the values of ϕ or ln γ The majority of calculations were repeated [ Similarly, a relatively large number of data were published on geochemical systems [ Pitzer derived his equations for the short- and long-rane arrangement of ionic strength on the basis of the fact that these forces do not lead to the formation of discrete chemical species in the solution. This means that there are no interactions between the electrons of the ions forming the chemical bonds between them. Therefore, the Pitzer equation shows that the original form of the Pitzer equation cannot be used for describing the behaviour of a system containing non-ionic substances. Bromley [ The value of the parameter Several examples of the application of the Pitzer equations with specific data obtained from the calculation of the parameters ϕ, The deviations from the Debye–Hückel limiting law, valid in solutions of strong electrolytes with a concentration higher than 10 Metal Me with the valency z The maximum number of the ions L which may form on complexes with Me  If the ligand is a non-charged molecule, for example, ammonia, equilibria can be explained in the same manner but the charge of each complex is The factors controlling the absolute and relative amounts of each specie, containing a metal and free ligand in the solution are: the values of each equilibrium constant; the total concentration [Me total concentration of the ligand [ the ratio of these two concentrations; activity coefficients of each species present in the solution. Depending on the total concentration of the metal in the solution, complex Me The extent of formation of the complex Me but if multi-atomic complexes are present, the concentration of the complexes containing more than one atom of the metal in each ion the molecule must be multiplied by the number of metal atoms. The average number of the ligand is given by the equation In this case, the concentration of the ligand in the complex species is divided by the total concentration of the metal and the relationship is quite important, especially if the equilibrium constants are measured. When writing the chemical equation representing equilibrium, the solvation of the species present is usually ignored. The metallic ions in the aqueous solutions are highly hydrated and in many cases it may be assumed that the ligand displaces the water molecule in the co-ordination site around the metal atom. For example, the ion Cu(NH Like the other bivalent and trivalent ions of the metals of the first transition group of the periodic table of elements, the simple hydrated ions Cu The ion Cu(NH Bjerrum studied the decrease of the values of This shows that: This equation is used if every ligand group occupies only one coordination position and if Thus, it may be assumed that the majority of the experimental data have a statistical effect. The effect of the ligand was divided by Bjerrum into the ‘electrostatic effect’ and the ‘residual effect’. The electrostatic effect is determined by the charge of the ligand and species containing the metallic ion. The ion of the ligand The value of the equilibrium constant by the formation of a metallic complexes may be determined by comparison with the values of the equilibrium constant of the individual hydrated metallic ions and molecules and the ions of the ligand in the solution. The forces of The equilibrium constant depends on the change of the standard Gibbs energy of the reaction Δ this is controlled by the change of the standard enthalpy Δ The change of the standard enthalpy is measured by the change of the thermal volume of the reactants and products in the formation of the complex and is determined by the type of chemical bond formed between the metallic ion and the ligand. In the case of single valency ligands the value Δ The change of the standard entropy in the formation of complexes is sensitive to the nature of the medium in which the complex is located. In aqueous solutions, Δ Bonding of the metallic ion with the non-charged ligand does not reduce the number of ions present in the system and the water molecules are slightly reoriented. In the formation of a complex this results in a relatively small positive or even negative change of entropy. Δ At different temperatures from 25 Similarly, the change of the standard entropy may be expressed by the equation Calculation of Δ The change of the reaction enthalpy depends on the enthalpies of all reactants taking part. The thermal content, i.e., enthalpy is defined by the equation: were In other words, the thermal content must depend on the amount of heat required to increase the temperature of the system by one degree which is the heat capacity At constant pressure These definitions of the heat capacities can be used to determine the relationship between the change of the total heat capacity of and subtracting the relevant equations for the initial and final states one obtains These are Kirchhoff laws. The heat capacity of 1 where  The measurable values of Δ  The expression is known as the function of Gibbs free energy, Substitution into The equilibrium constant of the reactions is determined from Although the free energy functions are available for many chemical reactions, they are not available for the majority of equilibria in aqueous solutions. For these purposes it is then necessary to make a number of assumptions in order to be able to estimate the approximate values of log One of the approximation methods is the van’t-Hoff reaction isochore. The Gibbs–Helmholtz equation may be written in the form and the temperature change of the equilibrium constant is obtained by substituting has the integral form To solve this equation it is necessary to consider Δ The values Δ and after integration Combining this relationship with  In other words, the errors of the values of log There is insufficient information on the values of Δ The values of the equilibrium constants depend on pressure at constant temperature in accordance with the equation: where Δ In the beginning of the section it was stated that the equilibrium In order to avoid these deviations, the salt with a relatively high concentration of 0.2–2 The additional electrolyte should be inert so that its ions should not interfere with any investigated equilibrium reaction. Usually, they include the perchlorates of alkaline metals or nitrates, assuming that none of these ions forms complexes with the majority of metals. Of course, this may not always be the case and if the investigated ligands form relatively brittle complexes with a metal, a competing reaction may also take place. For example, if it is required to determine the value β If the stability of ZnNO In fact, there are two sources of basic information on the stability constants. Sillen et. al. In conclusion, if we are concerned with the relatively concentrated solutions, the two main approaches, i.e. the formation of complexes and grouping of the atoms cannot be mixed together. The equation derived by Pitzer on the basis of an interaction between the ions does not consider the formation of new specific species. Consequently, for example, in the diluted solution CoCl Many bivalent metallic sulphates have activity coefficients in the range 0.7–0.035 for the concentration in the range 10 The thermodynamics of the behaviour transition metals in aqueous solutions is almost always described by the model of grouping of the ions and equilibrium constants were discrete species. In most cases, these constants are determined from the measurement of the number of ligands or metal complexes at different metal-ligand ratios using several metal concentrations. The measurements are evaluated on basis of the presence of certain species in the solution. For example, in the Cu The model of the ionic interaction for this system requires the cation-anion interaction between Cu