The flocculation kinetics of kaolin particles induced by two polyelectrolytes is studied by using small-angle laser light scattering (SALLS). Two different methods, image analysis and SALLS, are used to calculated the fractal dimensions of flocs formed under different flocculation mechanisms. For a high charge density of polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC), the initially flocculation rates are slow due to the quite low molecular weight. Smaller and more compact flocs are in the particle–particle connections, and restructuring of the flocs occurs in the flocculation process. With cationic polyacrylamide C498 of very high molecular weight and low charge density, however, the initially flocculation rates are much higher due to its rapid adsorption on kaolin particles, but it will take the adsorbed polymer a much longer time to reach equilibrium due to re-conformation. High potentialities of adsorption prevent the particles from entering the interior of the floc structure or rearrangement, which results in a more open floc structure. Different underlying flocculation mechanisms are evident for these two kinds of polyelectrolytes, in which charge neutralization is mainly involved for the low molecular weight and high charge density polymer of PDADMAC while polymer bridging is suggested to be the dominant mechanism for the high molecular weight polyelectrolyte of C498.The synthetic organic polymers have been widely used in the industrial solid–liquid separation process. Practical examples include applications in water and wastewater treatment, mineral processing, paper making, etc. It has been accepted that the bridging mechanism is operating in the flocculation by nonionic polymers. However, the situation becomes more complex in the systems containing colloids and polyelectrolytes of opposite charges. For example, the aggregation kinetics and aggregate structures of hematite have been studied in the presence of polyacrylic acid of different molecular weights, polyacylamide and partially hydrolyzed polyacrylamide of high molecular weight In the previous research, the mechanisms of flocculation of colloidal particles were mostly based on the final results of flocculation, e.g., the residual turbidity, the settling rates and the viscosity Cationic polymers, such as polyacrylamide and polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC) are widely investigated in synthetic colloidal systems and in water treatment. An in-depth study of their flocculation kinetics and floc structures in aggregation can help to a better understanding of the flocculation mechanisms. In this investigation, the flocculation kinetics of the negative kaolin particles induced by these two polyelectrolytes is compared using SALLS. Their floc structures are studied using two different methods, image analysis and the mass fractal dimension of SALLS, and the flocculation mechanisms are also discussed. The optimum dosages are determined by the residual turbidity and zeta potential measurement. Kaolin clay was used as a model suspension. The stock suspension of kaolin particles was prepared in deionized water, which was similar to Yukselen and Gregory Two commercial cationic polyelectrolytes, polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride and polyacrylamide, were used in flocculation tests based on their typical molecular sizes and charge density. PDADMAC (Taicang Floc Company, China) was low molecular weight of about 1.2 million and high charge density of 100%. C498 (Cytec industries Inc, USA) was a cationic copolymer of acrylamide and acryloxyethyltrimethylammonium chloride with high molecular weight of around eight million and low charge density of 55%. The cationic polymers were all prepared in a concentration of 0.1% (W/W) solution according the method provided by the companies. All the flocculation experiments were conducted at room temperature. The test suspensions were contained in 1-l beakers. Using standard jar tests, including rapid mix at 200 Mastersizer 2000 was used to monitor the dynamics of floc size as the flocculation proceeded. Jar tests were conducted in a similar fashion except that the slow stirring at 40 Details in the theory of the mass fractal dimension using SALLS have been reported in a few literatures The mass fractal dimension The two-dimensional fractal dimension The effects of cationic polymer concentration on the zeta potential and residual turbidity are shown in It shows that the charge density and molecular weights of the cationic polymers play important roles in the coagulation of negative particles. For oppositely charged polymers and particles, two main mechanisms can be involved in the particle flocculation, i.e., charge neutralization and bridging flocculation. The optimal dosage of PDADMAC with low molecular weight is found to occur near the point of zeta potential, which is most likely attributed to simple charge neutralization. With more polymers added, the charge is reversal, implying an electrostatic repulsion between the particles. The flocculation induced by C498, however, cannot be explained simply by charge neutralization mechanism. This argument is based on the following results: (i) there is no proportional relationship between the optimal dosage of the polymers and their charge density; (ii) the flocculation zone by C498 is much broader than PDADMAC; (iii) flocculation kinetics and floc structures are distinguishingly different, which will be given in the later section. Hence, different mechanisms, including polymer bridging, are probably involved in the flocculation with C498 due to the high molecular weights.  In all the range of PDADMAC concentration, the floc size increases laggardly at the beginning of flocculation. The initial rates of the floc growth in the flocculation by C498, however, are greater, and no lag time is found, indicating the faster aggregate formation rates. At the optimal dosage of 0.15 It is well known that the flocculation kinetics with polymers depends on several factors such as the mixing condition, adsorption on the particles, re-conformation of the adsorbed polymers, collision efficiency and breakage of flocs The initially slow rates of aggregation with PDADMAC may be explained by its low molecular weight and a large fraction of the added polymer to neutralize the kaolin surface charge As shown in Furthermore, the images of kaolin flocs induced by PDADMAC and C498, as shown in Direct information about the floc structures can be obtained by analyzing the data from static light scattering. As shown in A drop in scatter intensity for C498 at the optimal dosage of 0.40 As the aggregate size increases over time, the fractal dimension usually decreases and the floc structures become more open The floc structures by high molecular weight polymer of C498 are more open in comparison with those by PDADMAC. As discussed in Section For the flocculation of kaolin particles by polyelectrolytes, different mechanisms can be involved based on the polymer characteristics. With the low molecular weight and high charge density polymer of PDADMAC, the flocculation rates are slow due to the slow adsorption and the direct contact between the destabilized particles. The floc structures via charge neutralization are more compact, and the rearrangement and reconstruction of flocs occur in the flocculation process. With high molecular weight and relatively low charge density polymer of C498, however, polymer bridging is the dominant flocculation mechanism. The rapid adsorption of the polymer on the kaolin particles in a transient state results in instant high flocculation rates. The C498 polymer takes a much longer time to reach equilibrium due to undergoing re-conformation. The floc structure induced by high molecular weights is more open and retains unchangeable via bridging flocculation mechanism. These results that the mechanisms are differentiated in the flocculation through the floc growth and structure may have significance for the applications of the polymers in practice. The authors are grateful for financial support from the National 863 program under 2002AA601120.