Ion exchange has not been extensively studied nor industrially used for recovering small amounts of silver from concentrated base metal-chloride solutions. A novel multistep process utilizing a weak anion exchanger with polyamine functionality is proposed and its performance was investigated experimentally. Suitability of a silica based polyamine functional resin WP-1 to the task was demonstrated by comparing Ag uptake and selectivity of several ion exchange resins and adsorbents using batch equilibrium experiments. HCl was found to be the best choice for washing impurities, especially Cu, from the bed after the loading step. Tetrasodium salt of EDTA was found suitable especially for selective desorption of lead from the loaded bed, but also other impurities were scrubbed if still present after the wash. Both thiosulfate and thiourea were shown to be effective for elution of Ag from the WP-1 bed, but thiourea is preferred because of the slight affinity of thiosulfate towards the resin. Stability of the performance of the process was shown in several consecutive adsorption–elution cycles containing all the needed washing and scrubbing steps. With the developed process, 72% pure silver product was obtained. As the washing step can be designed such that no silver is lost, the recovery yield for Ag depends only on the length of the loading step, and even 100% recovery can thus be achieved for the whole process.In earth's crust Ag is most commonly associated with ores of Au, Cu, Pb and Zn ( Despite the fact that ion exchange is generally seen as a potential method for recovering minor metals at small concentrations, it has not been extensively studied for recovering Ag from concentrated base metal-chloride solutions.  Besides selectivity, another aspect that deserves attention is elution of Ag from the bed if the separation process is operated in loading-elution mode. Thiosulfate is known to form strong complexes with Ag and thus it has been used in photography as a fixing agent for Ag. From that application it has been adopted as the eluent in solvent extraction of Ag ( Therefore, the aim of this work was to develop an ion exchange method for recovering Ag in the presence of a large excess of base-metals in concentrated chloride solutions. Several ion exchange resins and other adsorbents were first tested in batch experiments. After that a single column ion exchange process was developed for a polyamine functional weak anion exchanger WP-1. In particular the issue of selecting the eluent was addressed. The process was also run for several cycles to study its stability and accumulation of impurities. All the separation materials tested are introduced in In addition to the separation materials the following chemicals were used: AgCl (supplier VWR International), CaCl Ag uptake characteristics of the separation materials were investigated by equilibrating them in a shaker at 25 The feed solutions were synthetic, and they were prepared by mixing the metal chloride salts with NaCl and HCl containing aqueous solution overnight. The Cl The separation materials were used as received without any pretreatment (dry materials). The adsorbed amounts of metals were calculated from liquid phase ICP analyses (see Dynamic column separation experiments were done in 15 Details of the individual column experiments are given in All metal analyses of aqueous samples were done from 1 Initial screening of separation materials was done with batch experiments using the solution described in For the five abovementioned promising materials separation factors for Ag over the impurities, Ag/Ca, Ag/Mg and Ag/Ni selectivities were extremely high for all the studied materials ( Because of the complexity of the feed solution ( Our proposed process consists of five steps:  NaCl 0.25   In In runs 1, 2 and 3, where free base form resin beds were used, some Fe precipitate was locally observed in the beginning of the loading step. This phenomenon is verified by the fact that the pH increases to over 3, because the resin absorbs acid, but then quickly decreases as the feed contains 10 The purpose of the step 2 (washing) was to remove impurities, especially Cu and Zn, from the resin bed. Other metals successfully washed from the bed included Fe, Mg and Ni, but Pb remained in the bed. 2.3 BV of 0.5 Efficiency of the washing (step 2) has a significant meaning to the latter steps. Because the amount of Cu in the feed is such high, in some runs a small amount of Cu migrated to the elution step and a precipitate was formed with thiourea. In the reaction Cu(II) is reduced to Cu(I), which then forms a sparingly soluble complex with formamidine disulfide, an oxidation product of thiourea ( In scrubbing step 3, tetrasodium salt of EDTA was used for desorbing of strongly bound Pb, and the rest of the other impurities remaining after step 2, especially Zn, from the resin bed. It can be seen from First choice as an eluent in step 4 was thiosulfate, since it is known to be a strong complexing agent for Ag forming Ag(S Thiourea was identified as an alternative eluent. It associates strongly with heavy metals and also with Ag, because it is a strong Lewis base having free electron pairs in both sulfur and nitrogen atoms. The Lewis base properties also make the complexes more stable at low pH, which is why the thiourea eluent should be acidic ( Full elution curves were recorded in Runs 4 and 5 (see Because the Cu is not eluted from the bed with thiosulfate, there is a serious risk of its accumulation in the long term. On the other hand, even if it is not completely eluted with thiosulfate, it could possibly be desorbed in the protonation stage by HCl especially if that step was long enough. It is also possible that with both eluents, the purity could be increased with longer washing and scrubbing steps, but this would lead to increased chemical consumption and effluent amounts. In addition, the obtained eluate might still need further purification and concentration before producing the final product. Despite the better Ag/Cu selectivity with the thiosulfate elution, thiourea is the preferred reagent because thiosulfate is too strongly bound to the resin bed. In a continuous operation this could cause a need for periodical regeneration of the bed. If thiosulfate is used in elution, the resin is preferably protonated prior to the next loading step, so that the pH cannot increase in an uncontrolled manner during loading, and thus local Fe precipitates cannot form. 1.0 BV of 1.0 HCl was found to effectively protonate the WP-1 bed. Here, another benefit of the thiourea elution is seen; separate protonation of the bed is not needed because the eluent by itself is acidic. The stability of the performance of two alternative processes (thiosulfate and thiourea eluents) was investigated with two continuous runs with four and five full loading-elution cycles including appropriate washing, scrubbing and preconditioning steps. The results and sequences are shown in According to the ICP analyses, the loaded amounts of some metals at some cycles were lower than the sum of the desorbed amounts in different steps. The experimental uncertainty in the loaded amounts can be assumed to be larger than that of the desorbed amounts because it has been calculated indirectly from the difference between measured concentrations in the feed and the concentration profiles in the column outlet. Nevertheless, some trends over the cycles can be clearly seen and are discussed below. All the purities discussed in the text have been calculated based only on those metals shown in In Run 6 the behavior of the process was not stable over the five cycles ( After each cycle more and more Cu was observed in the samples of EDTA scrubbing and thiosulfate eluate instead of the desired NaCl wash. In the 3rd cycle there was more Cu in the eluent than Ag, and in the 5th cycle the amount of Cu was almost eight times higher. The longer NaCl wash and HCl regeneration after the elution did probably not remove the accumulated Cu because the conditions were alkaline and the regeneration acid was spent to the protonation. A similar trend as with Cu was observed also with Pb, the amount of which increased in the eluate during the Run. However, due to the smaller concentrations of Pb, the absolute amount was not as significant to the Ag purity as that of Cu. In Run 7, over the four cycles, the process was much more stable than in Run 6 ( The recovery of silver from concentrated base metal-chloride solutions was studied. Based on batch screening experiments, in which several different adsorbents and ion exchangers were compared, polyamine functional weak anion exchanger WP-1 was chosen for dynamic column studies. The protonated form of the resin was observed to have better dynamic capacity for silver, and also with free base resin there was some Fe precipitate observed. Affinity order of the metals to the resin was Pb Thiosulfate and thiourea both have strong affinities to silver and thus may be used for elution, though thiourea is preferred because thiosulfate was observed to have some affinity to the resin. Also due to the chemical nature of the eluents, thiosulfate solution should be slightly alkaline meaning that an additional protonation step is needed while thiourea solution should be acidic thus leaving the resin readily in protonated form. The presence of even minor amounts of copper was found to be a problem with both the studied eluents. With thiourea it forms precipitate, and with thiosulfate it is not eluted and thus accumulates to the process. The optimized process with thiourea elution was steadily operated for four full cycles. No metals or chemicals were accumulated to the bed, yield and purity (61–72%) of silver did not decrease, and no silver was lost in the washing or scrubbing steps. 