An attempt to improve the machining performance of NbC-Ni cutting inserts by rapid pulse electric current sintering (PECS), TiC and Mo2C additions and laser surface modification (LSM) was done. Use of a nickel binder and additions TiC and Mo2C to liquid phase sintered (LPS) NbC based samples led to comparable hardness (>13 GPa) and KIC (~10 MPa.m1/2) to LPS WC-Co/Ni samples. The laser surface modification (LSM) technique produced a ~2.5 μm thick self-carbide coating, increasing the surface hardness of all the samples. Laser surface modification was done to improve abrasion and attrition wear resistance. Face-milling of grade 17 grey cast iron (BS 1452/GG35) was conducted at 100–500 m/min cutting speeds (v
                     c) and 0.25–1.5 mm depths of cut (ap). The insert wear was measured after every pass, and analyzed by annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM). During roughing, WC-Co based inserts had the lowest flank wear rate (FWR) values, with the WC-10Co (LPS) insert having a FWR of 10.15 μm/min after 20 min cutting time. However, during semi-finishing and finishing, NbC-4TiC-12Ni (PECS) and NbC-4Mo2C-4TiC-12Ni (PECS) inserts had the lowest FWR values, showing up to six times longer tool life than the WC-Co (LPS) inserts based inserts and 12 times longer life than the WC-Ni based inserts. Generally, LSM improved the NbC inserts' tool life, reducing the FWR values in all NbC based inserts in all cutting tests.Milling is a machining operation which results in cutting by rotation of the cutting inserts in the opposite direction to of the feed of the workpiece [ Cemented carbides generally consist of ceramics (tungsten carbide) embedded in a ductile binder matrix (cobalt) [ Grey cast iron (GCI) is a type of cast iron with graphite, which is typically used in applications where high stiffness is more important than tensile strength [ The starting powders and their characteristics are given in The milled composite powders were consolidated in an SPS furnace (HP D5, FCT Systeme, Germany). The powders were poured into cylindrical graphite dies with inner and outer diameters of 20.9 mm and 40 mm respectively, and 48 mm height. The composite powder assemblies were heated in a vacuum (2 Pa) in two steps, for example WC-10Co (wt%) powders were first heated to 1000 °C at a rate of 200 °C/min and subsequently to 1240 °C at a heating rate of 100 °C/min, and the temperature was held at 1240 °C for 5 min during sintering. A cooling rate of 200 °C/min was used for all samples. The applied pressure was increased from 16 MPa to 30 MPa at 1000 °C, and from 30 MPa to 50 MPa at 1240 °C within 30 s. The pressure was then held constant at 50 MPa throughout the rapid sintering cycle. Horizontal and vertical graphite papers were used to separate the powders from the die and punch set-up. Hexagonal boron nitride was placed on the graphite paper to prevent carbon diffusion from the graphite paper to the powders during sintering. The graphite die was wrapped in a carbon cloth to minimize the heat loss from the die surface. The temperature was controlled by an optical pyrometer focused on a central borehole on the upper punch, 1 mm above the top surface of the sample, to give an accurate measurement of the sample temperature [ Liquid phase sintering (HIP, Ultra Temp, USA) was done by heating the compositions in a vacuum (0.04 MPa) at an initial heating rate of 2.4 °C/min up to 1200 °C. At 1200 °C, cobalt loss protection (CLP) was carried out by adding argon gas at a pressure of 0.37 MPa, and a heating rate 3.5 °C/min up to 1430 °C. The temperature was held constant for 75 min, and for the last 20 min, hot isostatic pressing (HIP) was done at 4.4 MPa to eliminate all the surface porosity [ Archimedes' principle was used to determine the density of the sintered samples (ED224S, Sartorius, Germany). Microstructures of the cemented carbides were examined in a field emission scanning electron microscope (SIGMA, Karl Zeiss, Germany), with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (X-act, Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom) and annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) (JEOL 2100, with a LaB A Medicom LD50C laser with maximum output power of 50 W was used for surface modification of the sintered samples and cutting tool inserts. Treatment was done by applying a nano pulse 5 mJ laser with a process frequency of 5000 Hz. Scanning speed of 100 mm/s and laser beam diameter of 100 μm were used. An 80% overlap was applied, and the laser beam was passes four times on every surface. Cutting tool inserts manufactured from the sintered WC and NbC cemented carbides were secured on to a Pilot F75SN12080 cutting tool holder attached to a Bridgeport GX1000 CNC milling machine with a Oi-MC Fanuc series controller. The Grade 17 grey cast iron (BS 1452/GG35) workpiece consisted of graphite flakes in a ferritic matrix [ The average resultant force (F The flank wear and crater wear were evaluated using the same techniques as material characterization. The tool life criterion for failure was VB The flank wear was measured after every pass and a maximum cutting time of 20 min was used for every test. Each test was repeated twice on different cutting edges. Cutting inserts which failed the tool life criterion before 20 min were removed from the test and their cutting time was recorded. The WC-10Co inserts were used as the standard for wear and tool life. Any adhered workpiece material was removed from the cutting edges using dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl) [ Before the adhered workpiece material was removed from the cutting edges, cross-sections through the worn regions of the flank were cut using a FIB SEM to reveal the interface between the workpiece and cutting edge. During preparation of the FIB-SEM cross-sections, areas of interested on the worn cutting edges were identified and covered by a carbon-based protective layer. A Gallium (Ga) ion beam of 30 kV energy was used to cut out the cross-sections from the bulk sample, and they were placed on a copper FIB grid. The cross-sections were thinned using a 30 kV Ga ion beam, first at a high beam current, and then at a slightly lower beam current, until the thinned cross-sections were ~100 nm thick. The Ga beam energy was reduced to 5 kV and the sample thinned further to ~90 nm. The final preparation involved polishing the sample using a 2 kV Ga ion beam. Once all the cross-sections from the different inserts were cut out, placed on the copper grip, thinned and polished, they were moved to the annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscope (ADF-STEM) for analysis of the wear on the insert cutting edges. The backscattered SEM images of WC-10Co produced by LPS (  Similar to the WC-10Co (wt%) samples, the PECS NbC samples had reduced NbC grain size because of the shorter sintering time and lower sintering temperature during PECS, preventing continuous Ostwald ripening [ The Vickers hardnessess and fracture toughnessess (K To further improve the hardness, abrasion and attrition wear resistance, laser surface modification (LSM) was done on the samples using a nano pulse laser. The LSM technique produced a ~2.5 μm thick carbide layer, which increased the surface hardness of all samples ( The NbC-12Ni (LPS) sample had the highest K All the PECS samples had lower ball-on-three-balls (B3B) transverse rupture strengths (TRS) than the corresponding LPS samples ( The average resultant force (F The LPS and PECS WC-10Co inserts had lower FWR values than the NbC based inserts during roughing, due to their higher TRS and K Crater wear was not observed in any of the inserts (with and without LSM), due to the fine nature of the GCI chips derived from the brittle graphite flakes in the GCI microstructure [ During semi-finishing at a Similarly, during finishing at a Pulse electric current sintering (PECS) resulted in higher hardness and lower fracture toughness (K This work was financially supported by