Electrode materials for supercapacitors are at present commonly evaluated and selected by their mass specific capacitance (C
                     M, Fg−1). However, using only this parameter may be a misleading practice because the electrode capacitance also depends on kinetics, and may not increase simply by increasing material mass. It is therefore important to complement C
                     M by the practically accessible electrode specific capacitance (C
                     E, Fcm−2) in material selection. Poly[3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene] (PEDOT) has a mass specific capacitance lower than other common conducting polymers, e.g. polyaniline. However, as demonstrated in this communication, this polymer can be potentiostatically grown to very thick films (up to 0.5mm) that were porous at both micro- and nanometer scales. Measured by both cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectrometry, these thick PEDOT films exhibited electrode specific capacitance (C
                     E, Fcm−2) increasing linearly with the film deposition charge, approaching 5Fcm−2, which is currently the highest amongst all reported materials.Poly[3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene] (PEDOT) responds in a fast, reversible and stable manner to relatively large potential perturbations However, it has been demonstrated that electrochemically deposited polypyrrole films only show proportionality between capacitance and mass, which converts to film thickness or deposition charge on an electrode substrate of fixed surface area, when the films are relatively thin (deposition charge <5 In fact, focusing on the “mass specific capacitance” ( For PEDOT, very little is known about its “electrode specific capacitance” against the mass. As discussed afore, if PEDOT may be made into stable and thick films, and also retains its excellent redox reversibility and charge-discharge cycling stability towards large potential perturbations, it will become a much preferred candidate for commercial applications, disregarding its relatively small In this work, electrochemical polymerisation of 3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene (EDOT) was first investigated in acetonitrile containing 0.2 Interestingly, in this work, the low potential oxidation was not observed on the Pt electrode, indicative of the well-known interaction between the gold surface and a sulfur compound such as the EDOT molecule. Further, the S–Au interaction (likely adsorption) is spontaneous and occurred soon after the addition of the EDOT solution to the EQCM cell. This means that before the potential scan was applied for recording the CV and the MMP, the gold disc was already covered by the adsorbed EDOT molecules. Consequently, the corresponding part on the MPP in The equivalent mass, The anodic deposition of PEDOT was then carried out on a 1.6 Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of the PEDOT coated Pt electrodes were recorded in the acetonitrile with 0.5 Clearly, these EQCM, IR and CV characterisations all confirm that the potentiostatically grown PEDOT coatings were of similar quality to previously reported PEDOT prepared by chemical or electrochemical means. Because the emphasis of this work is the electrode specific capacitance of this polymer, the CVs shown in In the aqueous electrolyte, the CVs presented a more rectangular shape as from an ideal capacitor. This performance is believed to have, at least partly, benefited from the higher polarity and conductivity of the aqueous electrolyte than the acetonitrile electrolyte. Nevertheless, for those CVs with the rectangular shape, the electrode capacitance can be calculated as It has been considered that the Values of the imaginary impedance, The inset in In summary, the potential for anodic deposition of PEDOT films has been selected as 1.0 Finally, it is worth mentioning that in this laboratory various conducting polymers and their composites with carbon nanotubes The authors are grateful to the EPSRC for financial support and to Bayer for provision of the monomer used in this work.