Nickel hydroxide has been prepared chemically and electrochemically from sulfate and nitrate media respectively. The effect of bimetallic additives Cd–Zn, Cd–Mn, Cd–Co, Cd–Fe, Cd–Al during chemical precipitation on discharge capacity has been studied. A discharge capacity of 190 mAh/g of nickel hydroxide was observed for nickel hydroxide precipitated in presence of Cd and Al; and a capacity of 200 mAh/g was obtained with a sample that was produced electrochemically at a current density of 50 A/m2.Nickel hydroxide has been extensively used as an active material for the positive electrode in rechargeable alkaline batteries such as Ni–Cd, Ni–Fe, Ni–Zn or Ni–MH batteries. Improvement of the electrochemical performance is made by new synthetic methods of preparation of electrodes, doping of some elements, or by changing the crystal structure ( Oxidation of β-Ni(OH) It has been shown that electrodes based on α-phase hydroxide have a higher charge capacity, lower charge and higher discharge voltages. Unfortunately the α-phase reverts to the β-phase in the alkaline media which is used in batteries (e.g. KOH). Thus the stabilization of the β-phase of nickel hydroxide in an alkaline media is an important goal for potential applications. To enhance the stability, many studies have been carried out on the partial substitution of metal ions (such as Cd, Zn, Co, Mn, Fe, Al, etc.) into the lattice of nickel hydroxide. Cobalt additives have been widely used in nickel hydroxide battery electrodes since the time of Edison ( In the present work, nickel hydroxide has been prepared chemically in presence of transition metal ions and the synergistic effects of bimetallic additives (Cd–Zn, Cd–Mn, Cd–Co, Cd–Fe, Cd–Al) on the properties of nickel hydroxide are discussed. Since the electrochemical preparation of nickel hydroxide gives high purity, high discharge capacity material that requires less washing ( Nickel hydroxide samples were prepared by neutralizing nickel sulfate solution with sodium hydroxide in presence of transition metal ions as additives. 100 ml of nickel sulfate solution (1.0 M Ni) was taken and sodium hydroxide solution (1.0 M) was added drop-wise with constant stirring while the temperature was maintained at 40–45 °C until the pH reached about 12.5. Bimetallic impurities added were Cd (6 g/L) together with Zn, Mn, Co, Fe, and Al (each 2 g/L). The precipitated slurries were filtered and washed thoroughly with distilled water until these were free from sulfate ion and excess of alkali. The samples were then dried in an air oven at about 65 °C. The nickel content of the precipitated samples was estimated volumetrically and the transition metal ion concentration was measured by atomic absorption spectrometry. A 500 ml beaker was separated into two chambers by a polypropylene diaphragm and used as the electrolytic cell. The anode was an insoluble titanium substrate (0.3 cm thick) with dimensions of 10 cm length and 5 cm width. The cathode was a stainless steel sheet with dimensions of 10 cm length and 5 cm width. Fresh electrodes were used for each experiment. The electrolysis was carried out for 6 hours by applying constant current from a regulated DC power supply unit. The electrolyte was prepared using nickel nitrate and distilled water. The initial composition of the catholyte and anolyte were kept the same in all experiments. The XRD patterns were recorded at a rate of 2°/min using a Philips PW 3710 X-ray diffractometer (Cu target with Ni filter). The particle size analysis was measured by Malvern Particle Size Analyzer, Master Sizer 2000. Water content of nickel hydroxide was determined with a Shimadzu DT-40 Thermal analyzer. The mean particle size of the nickel hydroxide prepared in the presence of 6 g/L Cd ( One sample of nickel hydroxide was dried at 65 °C was tested for water content using thermo-gravimetric analysis. The results showed a weight loss of 10% which is matching with the literature value of Ni(OH) The preparation of nickel hydroxide electrode has been described in earlier work ( The nickel hydroxide and cadmium hydroxide pellets (counter electrode) were firmly fixed in the electrolytic cell containing 200 mL of 6 M KOH as electrolyte. A BITRODE deep cycle tester was used to measure the discharge capacity after three conditioning cycles. The cell was charged continuously for 9 h with a current of 80 mA, then after 10 min rest it was discharged at the same current. Discharging was carried out until the cell voltage reached 0.8 V vs. the cadmium hydroxide pellet. The discharge capacity of the material was found only after three conditioning cycles. In the first conditioning cycle, the cells were charged for 72 h at a current of 12 mA and discharged to a cut-off voltage of 1 V. In the second conditioning cycle, the cells were charged for 36 h at a current of 24 mA and discharged as the first conditioning cycle. In the third conditioning cycle, the cells were charged for 12 h at a current of 32 mA and discharged as before. Studies on the partial substitution of metal ions in nickel hydroxide have been carried out in order to improve the stability of nickel hydroxide. As shown in In the case of bi-metallic additives, 6 g/L Cd (as CdSO The physico-chemical and electrochemical characteristics of these samples are shown in In comparison, In another set of experiments, cobalt oxide was added along with nickel hydroxide powder prepared with bimetallic additives. The data shown in The structure of all the nickel hydroxide samples were examined by XRD ( During the electrochemical preparation of nickel hydroxide, nitrate ions get reduced in-situ at the metal surface to either nitrite or hydroxylamine ( A series of experiments were carried out by varying the current density from 50 to 500 A/m A second set of experiments were carried out under similar conditions at a current density of 200 A/m Electrochemically precipitated nickel hydroxide gave a higher discharge capacity of 200 mAh/g than that obtained for chemically precipitated nickel hydroxide in the absence of additives. Further work on the effect of other metallic additives during electrochemical precipitation is being conducted to obtain a higher discharge capacity.  The physico-chemical and electro-chemical properties of nickel hydroxide depend upon the preparation conditions and additive present. The nickel content of nickel hydroxide samples varied in the range of 45.0–58.7% whilst the tap density varied in the range of 1.00–1.75 g/cm Doping with metal ions like Mn A discharge capacity of 190 mA/g was obtained when 6 g/L Cd and 2 g/L Al was present during chemical precipitation of nickel hydroxide. External addition of cobalt oxide during electrode preparation gave better discharge capacities for the nickel hydroxide samples. A maximum discharge capacity of 221 mAh/g was obtained in the presence of Cd and Mn additives when cobalt oxide was externally added while preparing the electrode. In the electrochemical synthesis method, lower current density (50 A/m High initial nickel concentration favours the electro-crystallization of nickel hydroxide. The authors are grateful to the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources, New Delhi and Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi, for financial support for this work. The authors are thankful to Prof. B.K. Mishra, Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India, for his kind permission to publish this paper. Part of this work was first published in the Proceedings of the International Conference on Emerging Trends in Mineral Processing and Extractive Metallurgy organised by RRL, Bhubaneswar, Orissa and published by Allied Publishers Pvt Ltd., 1/13-14, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi-110 002 in 2005.