Background and aim
                  The objective of this study is to introduce a novel percutaneous reduction technique for irreducible and difficult paediatric radius and ulna fractures in the distal forearm.
               
                  Methods
                  From May 2010 to January 2012, the percutaneous joystick technique was conducted in 48 children who sustained irreducible or difficult radius and ulna fractures in the distal forearm. The series comprises 32 male and 16 female patients with an average age of 11 years (range, 7–15 years). Among them, 22 patients were <9 years of age. At the final follow-up, the range of motion of the wrist and grip strength of the hand were assessed. Measurements were compared to those on the opposite side. Wrist function was assessed with Mayo Wrist Score. Appearance and patient satisfaction were assessed using the 10-cm visual analogue scale. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
               
                  Results
                  Bone healing was achieved in all patients (radius: mean 3.5 weeks, range, 3–4 weeks; ulna: 3.8 weeks, range, 3–4 weeks), respectively. After an average follow-up period of 39 months (range, 36–45 months), patients had an average range of wrist motion of 74° (range, 65–86°) in flexion and 64° (range, 54–78°) in extension. The mean grip strength of the injured side was 33.7kg (13.8–47.6kg). The mean Mayo Wrist Score was 97 (range, 85–100), including 44 excellent and four good results. The mean scores of appearance and patient satisfaction on the forearm were 9.7 (range, 9–10) and 9.8 (range, 8–10), respectively. No significant difference was found regarding the range of motion and grip strength (p
                     <0.05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The percutaneous reduction technique is a safe and valuable procedure for irreducible and difficult paediatric fractures of distal radius and ulna.The distal radius and ulna are the most common sites of fractures in children. Adequate reduction is often achieved by nonoperative manoeuvres Different from adult fractures, paediatric fractures of the distal radius and ulna are primarily treated nonoperatively because of uniform rapid healing and the potential for remodelling of residual deformity Owing to good tolerance of displacement in children, whether the irreducible paediatric fractures should be reduced is generally a matter of debate. Noonan et al. McLauchlan et al. The objective of this report is to describe a percutaneous leverage technique for reduction of paediatric irreducible fractures of radius and ulna, followed by percutaneous pinning. We also present the excellent results obtained in children treated with this minimal invasive technique. This study was approved by the institutional review boards of the hospitals involved. Informed consent was obtained from the parents of each child. From May 2010 to January 2012, the percutaneous reduction technique was carried out in 48 children who had irreducible or difficult radius and ulna fractures. ( Patients in this study were required to meet all of the following criteria: (1) children of age 6–16 years; (2) complete fractures of distal radius and ulna; (3) failed trials of nonsurgical treatments or splinting; (4) two-part fracture without comminution or with slight comminution; (5) an angulation >30°; (6) malrotation; and (7) a translation >1 Operation was performed under brachial plexus block or general anaesthesia, without the need for a pneumatic tourniquet control. The forearm was placed on a radiolucent operating table, and the operation was performed under fluoroscope. At an insertion point about 1.5–3 After surgery, the injured forearm was placed in a short arm splint, with the forearm in the supine position. A range of motion exercises of the hand was encouraged. The patient returned for follow-up radiography every week. The K-wires and splint were removed on the basis of the radiographic evidence of healing ( Bone healing was defined as callus formation across the fracture line on radiographs. Radiographic measurements of alignment included both radius and ulna. Reduction of fractures was assessed by comparing injured forearm to the opposite side on anteroposterior and lateral radiographs. Rotation of radius was assessed on tuberosity view, as described by Evans We used Pearson's chi-squared test to compare the range of motion and grip strength of the injured limb to that on the opposite limb. A The average number of K-wires used in the patients was 4.2 (range, 4–5). After reduction, the mean remaining rotation of radius was 3° (range, 0–9°). The mean ulnar variance was −0.3 After an average follow-up period of 39 months (range, 36–45 months; Distal forearm fractures in children are common and are managed differently when compared to similar injuries in adults In practice, however, the standard of accepted alignment varies widely. Adequacy of reduction after manipulation is determined by translation and angulation of the radius and ulna on anteroposterior and lateral radiographs Kamat et al. Paediatric fractures in distal forearm are typically classified into three types, that is, greenstick fractures, complete fractures, and distal radial metaphyseal fractures Our percutaneous reduction technique is a minimal invasive procedure. The mechanism of our technique involves the use of a reduction pin pivoted at a bony fragment. The reduction pin is used as a lever that amplifies an input force to provide a greater output force to reduce the displacement, avoiding more soft tissue injuries by forceful traction and manipulation. The lever mechanism can also achieve more accurate reduction compared to the use of traction–manipulation method alone, thus resulting in good function and appearance. That may be the rationale behind our results being superior to the case series studied by Zimmermann et al. Some surgical pearls need to be addressed. First, we often insert the K-wires into the soft tissues manually and gently to decrease the risk of injury to the sensory branches of radial and ulnar nerves. We insert the K-wires on the true radial aspect of the radius or at the steroid because the superficial branch of the radial nerve runs its course on the dorsolateral aspect of the distal forearm Our fixation technique using smooth K-wires is a minimally invasive procedure with a low rate of morbidity Indications for our technique are irreducible complete fractures of distal radius and ulna with >30° of angulation or difficult fractures; malrotation, a two-part fracture without comminution or with slight comminution; failed trials of nonsurgical treatments or splint immobilisation; and reduction that cannot be maintained. Contraindications are greenstick fractures, factures with minimal displacement and angulation, and reducible fractures. Nevertheless, surgeons should weight gain and loss before decision making. An angulation <30° is not contraindicated, because a better reduction and alignment yield better outcomes In conclusion, our percutaneous reduction technique is a safe and valuable procedure for irreducible and difficult paediatric fractures of the distal radius and ulna. None.