Obtaining clean, uniformly thin and high-quality TEM specimens entails a great deal of work that has a number of parameters that have to be considered carefully depending on specimen preparation technique(s). The parameters, such as voltage, current density, temperature, time, electrolyte, and electrolyte flow rate, have the most significant importance in a double-jet electropolishing technique. Useful hints to have the least failures in preparing TEM specimens and optimum values of the above parameters for pure Al are given and discussed.To understand and correlate the nature of the microstructure of metals and their alloys directly with their physical, chemical and mechanical properties, TEM analysis has been a major tool. TEM analysis requires successfully prepared thin foils about a few hundred nanometers or less thick from bulk materials The size, shape, and micro- and macrostructure of the hole and time for hole formation were determined as a function of the specimen thickness, electropolishing voltage and the pump flow rate of the electropolisher. These characteristics served as guides to determine the optimum electropolishing conditions. Pure Al sheet with 99.99999% purity used in this study was obtained from Alfa Aesar, a Johnson Matthey Company. Square 1 A stereomicroscopic view of the pure Al specimens, 200 μm thick and 3 mm in diameter, prepared using different electropolishing voltage values, i.e., 16, 30, 45 and 60 V with the constant pump flow rate of 15 (arbitrary units as indicated on the polishing unit), is presented in The variation of the time for hole formation and the calculated hole area of the high purity Al disks as a function of the electropolishing voltage are shown in Determination of the suitable and correct electropolishing parameters is not easy due to the fact that these parameters have a wide range that makes repeatability difficult. The voltage adjustment needs to be done properly to achieve the ideal electropolishing. During this process, the formation of an anodic viscous layer of electrolyte on the specimen surface is responsible for thinning. The ideal thinning will create a smooth surface and polished specimen by removing both the macroscopic bumps and microscopic irregularities, respectively    The quality of the information from TEM analysis study is directly related to the quality of the thin foils being examined. Electropolishing is the most common and physically deformation-free specimen preparation technique available for examining electrically conductive materials. In the present study the twin-jet electropolishing parameters for producing high-quality disks of high purity Al were studied with the purpose of both showing the effects of the polishing parameters, achieving well-prepared reproducible TEM disks and adding to the general knowledge basis for workers in this area of scientific research. On the basis of the results reported in the present investigations, the following conclusions can be drawn. At a polishing voltage range between 8 and 12 V, specimens with smooth and clean surfaces and with holes near the center of the polished area were successfully produced. It was clearly demonstrated that increasing the applied electropolishing voltage resulted in decreasing the required time for the hole formation. However, at higher voltages, such as 45 and 60 V, the holes were unnecessarily large and not centrally located in the disks. Smooth, clean and well-polished surfaces were observed on specimens prepared using the range of pump flow settings from 5 to 35. Also, it was observed that the required time for hole formation decreases with an increase of the pump flow rate. When the electropolishing voltage and the pump flow rate are maintained constant, there is a significant increase in the specimen thickness; the variation in the size of the hole area is negligible due to the endpoint detection sensitivity of the polishing unit. An increase in the specimen thickness resulted in a significant increase in the required time for the hole formation. The author would like to thank Prof. Hüseyin Çimenoğlu from Istanbul Technical University for his help during the optical and stereomicroscope investigations of this study. The author is grateful to Bernard J. Kestel for his supports on providing the literature and sharing his own experience. In addition, Santhana Eswaramoorthy and Eric Lass from University of Virginia for their help on providing literature are gratefully acknowledged. The author also would like to thank Dr. Brian Gable for his helpful discussion.