A facile one-step calcination-free approach is introduced to synthesize zinc cobaltite nanospheres (ZCONS). The as-prepared electrode exhibited high specific capacitance of 1596 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and outstanding cycling stability of 119% after 2000 cycles. The excellent performance is ascribed to the electroactive surface of Zn and Co oxides and the fast electron and ion transport in the microporous/nanoporous structure.Supercapacitors have enticed much attention for next generation power storage devices due to their higher power density than batteries, and higher energy density than conventional dielectric capacitors To this end, ZnCo Herein, we report the synthesis of ZnCo A solution contains 0.5 mmol zinc nitrate hexahydrate (98%, Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mmol cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mmol urea [99%, Sigma-Aldrich] was prepared by dissolving an appropriate weight in 15 ml deionized water, then 10 ml of Hydrogen peroxide (H The crystallographic information of the prepared samples was established by powder X-ray diffraction [Alpha-1 Panalytical XRD instrument with a Cu Kα radiation at α = 1.540598 Å]. A Zeiss SEM Ultra 60 field emission scanning electron microscope (equipped with Oxford EDS detector) was employed to examine the morphologies of the product. Structural investigations were carried out using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and High-Resolution TEM (HRTEM) using JEM-2100F (JEOL) and the elemental composition was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron microscopy (XPS-Thermo Scientific K-ALPHA USA) using Al Kα monochromatic radiation. The adsorption capabilities were obtained by nitrogen adsorption isotherms at 77 K with a surface area and pore size analyzer using Quantachrome NOVA 3200 instrument (USA). The working electrodes were prepared using a homogenous slurry of ZCONS, super P (conductive additive) and poly(vinylidene difuoride) (PVDF) binder in N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) in a weight ratio of 80: 10: 10. Then the prepared slurry was coated onto nickel foam (1 cm by 1 cm) and dried at 60 °C. The mass loading of the samples for supercapacitor tests was 6 ± 0.5 mg cm ZnCo The phase purity and structure of the as-prepared ZNCONS were examined by XRD,    The electrochemical performance of the as-fabricated ZCONS was examined by cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD), and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) techniques. The CVs and CDs of the ZCONS were recorded at different scan rates and different current densities, respectively, in the potential range of 0–0.4 V The second redox couple (peaks at 0.33 V and 0.24 V) are correlated to the following redox reaction The two distinguishable redox couple overlapped and the CV curves deviated from the original behavior (  Long cycle life is a significant requirement for the practical applications of the supercapacitors.   To explore the ZCONS for practical application, an asymmetric supercapacitor was made using ZCONS as positive electrode and AC as negative electrode. The electrochemical properties of an asymmetric supercapacitor cell were measured ( On the basis of these data, the relationship between energy density and power density (E and P) is shown in In conclusion, microporous/nanoporous ZnCo