Soil macrofauna contribute to soil aggregation, as well as to enzymatic and nutrient dynamics in soils. Few studies have investigated the influence of millipede species from tropical regions on these soil variables. The objective of this study was to investigate the influence of the millipede Glyphiulus granulatus (Gervais, 1847), on aggregation, enzymatic activity, and phosphorus (P) fractions in a subtropical soil under controlled conditions. The present study was performed using 0, 2, 6, and 12 individuals per microcosm with five replicates of each density. After an incubation period of 28days, the increase in G. granulatus population density reduced the proportion of aggregates between 1.00‐2.00mm (y=236.16−1.4921x, P
                     <0.05). The aggregates between 1.00‐2.00 and 2.00‐4.76mm were negatively correlated (r=−0.95, P
                     <0.05). The increase population densities resulted in increased nitrogen (N) levels in the soil. The greatest population density (12 millipedes per microcosm) increased soil N content by 7%. The activity of β-glycosidase increased with densities of 6 and 12 millipedes per microcosm as compared to the control. However, the acid phosphatase activity was reduced in the presence of the millipedes, particularly at high densities, reaching 341μg
                     p-nitrophenolg−1
                     soilh−1 while 489μg
                     p-nitrophenolg−1
                     soilh−1 was found in the control treatment. The millipedes had no influence on available inorganic P fractions (H2O-Pi and NaHCO3-Pi). However, the amount of readily labile P (H2O-Pi+NaHCO3-Pi+NaHCO3-Po) was greater at the highest millipede density (12 individuals) and was mainly related to the increase of NaHCO3-Po. This indicated that the available P in soils may be conserved by cycling of organic P with high densities of such macroinvertebrates.Organisms from soil macrofauna including earthworms, ants, and termites, have a significant role in modifying chemical and physical attributes of soils, consequently being able to increase resource availability for other species ( The class Diplopoda (millipedes) is a diverse group of land animals that constitute the third largest group within Arthropoda, following Insecta and Arachnida ( Few studies have demonstrated the influence of millipedes on soil structure and most research has been performed with In agricultural and natural systems, soil organic residue decomposition and mineralization processes are controlled by three main factors: (1) environmental physico-chemical conditions, which are controlled by climate and regional edaphic conditions; (2) vegetation type, which influences the material quality and its degradability; and (3) by the nature of the decomposer community, microorganisms and edaphic fauna ( Soil macrofauna is the main agent responsible for the initial fragmentation of organic residues ( Due to the importance of nutrient cycling in agricultural and natural systems, the influence of edaphic macroinvertebrates on enzymatic activity has been studied previously (e.g., Phosphorus (P) is one of the most limiting elements for agricultural production in tropical and subtropical regions. In such areas, mineralogy influenced by high weathering, facilitates strong adsorption of this element in the soil clay fraction, thus, the highest portion of P remains in the non-labile fraction ( In order to comprehend soil P dynamics, it is essential to understand the modifications occurring within different soil fractions. The residence time of this element in the soil solution is determined by its interactions with mineral particles, stabilization by organic matter, and association in organic-mineral complexes (  The incubation experiment was conducted under laboratory conditions with adult The soil used in the experiment was classified as Typic Argiudoll ( The soil was air dried and sieved (2 Soil field capacity and residual moisture were determined ( Treatments T1, T2, T3 and T4, respectively, consisted of 0, 2, 6, and 12 individuals per microcosm, with 0, 8.4, 25.2, and 50.4 The experiment was conducted for 28 Undisturbed soil samples were obtained using a spatula. Then, samples were sieved in water to determine proportions of stable aggregates by class (modified from The enzymatic activities of β-glycosidase and acid phosphatase were evaluated from wet samples (∅ To evaluate the influence of After crushing and passing 2 After checking the data for normality and homoscedasticity by the Shapiro–Wilk and Bartlett tests, respectively, the data was submitted to analysis of variance (ANOVA). A regression analysis was performed to evaluate the relationships between millipede density and soil aggregation and between millipede density and P fractions. For enzymatic activity and P fractions, a Fisher's LSD test was used as a post-hoc test. Aggregate classes were tested against both C and N levels as well as P fractions with a Pearson's correlation test. The same test was used to the soil pH against both enzymatic activity and P fractions. The analyses were performed with the aid of the Sisvar 5.6 software. After 28 The presence of millipedes did not influence the soil organic carbon content ( The available inorganic P fractions (H The most abundant fraction was NaOH-Pi (0.1 The presence of millipedes influenced enzymatic activity of β-glycosidase (F Results observed for Aggregates between 2.00‐4.76 In this study, the millipede species Chemical modification of the residues may occur during migration through the digestive tract of millipedes ( The observed results do not confirm that the presence of NaHCO In natural systems soils (e.g., forest and native fields) from tropical and subtropical regions, the inorganic P (Pi) available for plants appears to be dependent on the organic P (Po) cycling within the soil organic matter ( HCl-Pi (1.0 The NaOH-Pi (0.1 The results partially confirm that Edaphic invertebrates may modify specific soil microbial populations responsible for enzymatic activity ( Synthesis and activity of microbial phosphatases are disadvantaged under conditions of high P availability and stimulated under limited conditions of this nutrient. The absence of millipede influence on available P forms may have occurred due to the “senescence effect” of the excrements ( The reduction of acid phosphatase activity under the presence of millipedes may also be explained by the direct feeding activity and excrement production, especially within the highest population density. While studying the tropical earthworm Activity of the millipede The β-glycosidase activity increased at densities of 6 and 12 millipedes. This is probably due to fragmentation activity in the supplied cattle manure as well as the release of intracellular microbial enzymes. The reduced acid phosphatase activity in the presence of millipedes may be attributed to the soil pH increase, which resulted from deposition of millipede feces in the soil. Available inorganic P fractions (H The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the Foundation for Research Support and Innovation of Espirito Santo (FAPES) in granting a doctoral level scholarship to the primary author. The authors also acknowledge the support of the Graduate Program of Soil Science at the