This article calls for a historical and spatial approach to studying the role of local elites in mineral production networks, paying attention to how they operate across scales and how they navigate structural constraints over time. Using empirical data from different mines in the Democratic Republic of Congo, it conceptualizes local elites as those who access and control (exclude others from) the factors of production (land, labour and capital). It argues they are able to do so because they operate across scales (extraversion) and adapt to changes in the political economy (repositioning). The article highlights their role as labour mediators, (land/mineral) rent appropriators, capital accumulators and illuminates how coercion and redistribution may work together to achieve control.Mineral production networks connect underground deposits and mineral-bearing land in specific places to trading houses, smelters and manufacturers operating at a global level. The global production network approach (GPN) has sensitized us to the importance of incorporating ‘horizontal’ relationships into the analysis of global networks, which had been neglected in the global commodity chains (GCC) and global value chains (GVC) literature (most clearly articulated by While research in different mineral-rich countries has highlighted the crucial role of local elites as mediators, owners or rent-seekers (see among others Our theoretical argument speaks to the literature on brokerage ( In his classic book on the state in Africa, While it is true that elites “may defend their own interests and that they continuously seek to acquire ever-increasing resources by all available means”, including predatory and violent ones (coercion), they also strategically redistribute part of these resources ( By focusing on the factors of production (land, labour, capital) in Congo’s mineral production networks, we aim to shed more light on Therefore, we also aim to draw on Ribot & Peluso’s access theory, which is inspired by a Marxist tradition in political economy that differentiates between those who possess the means of production (the ruling bourgeoisie in capitalism) and those who labour with other people’s capital or means of production (the proletariat). According to Ribot & Peluso, this translates into a distinction between ‘access maintenance’ (the ability to keep your own resource access open) and ‘access control’ (the ability to facilitate or exclude other people’s access). The ways in which individuals maintain or control access have been categorized as access mechanisms. However, “the ability to benefit is never absolute or definitive, but the outcome of a continuous bargaining process and the product of a changing political-economic context” ( Critical readers might argue that our account bears strong resemblance to dependency theory, which constituted an influential and popular theoretical framework for the analysis of (under)development from the 1960s to the 1980s ( We would like to emphasize that our argument is, in two important respects, different from the approach taken by the Frank school in dependency theory. First of all, we make a deliberate choice to highlight the agency of local elites in Congo’s mineral production networks. Rather than presenting them as passive tools of foreign capitalist players, we follow Bayart’s example in documenting and rendering visible the elites’ remarkable capacity to combine different registers of power, to reposition themselves in view of changing political and economic conditions, and to bend the presence of outside actors in their own advantage. Second, we show that local elites did not only develop strategies to protect their own interests or those of their foreign allies, but that there are also several examples of elites offering protection and support to their followers as well as redistributing part of their wealth. That being said, the preceding should not be taken to imply that, in our opinion, dependency theory as a whole needs to be discarded. In fact, as Approaches like these, which examine the active and widely varied roles dominant classes can play in processes of dependency, correspond closely with the perspective we adopt in this paper. In what follows we analyse elites’ extraversion and repositioning in view of some structural trends characterizing pre-colonial, colonial, post-colonial artisanal and industrial, militarized, neoliberal and small-scale mining in the DRC (see Congo’s mining history did not start with the arrival of Belgian colonialism. The former province of Katanga, situated in the south-eastern part of the country, has a long tradition of copper mining that underwent some structural changes in the precolonial period. In this section we illustrate the expansion of the copper production network in Katanga, in other words, the increasing integration of copper production in regional trade and economies. In precolonial Katanga, a distinction existed between ‘sacred kings’, who ruled over people and who were believed to possess supernatural powers, and ‘chiefs of the earth’ or land/clan chiefs, who were considered the legitimate custodians of the fertility of the land and its inhabitants. The ‘sacred kings’ extracted rents from their subjects in the form of tribute payments, which they subsequently used to participate in the regional trade and accumulate capital. In doing so, they were able to acquire precious goods from elsewhere, increase their personal wealth and redistribute resources to their clients. The sacred kings applied a strategy of extraversion and made skilful use of their position as intermediaries between local producers living under their rule, and the regional economic system. The land chiefs, for their part, only benefited from precolonial mining through their authority to manage what In Sanga territory, a copper-rich area in Katanga, the ultimate control over the mines was in the hands of Mpande, the paramount chief and sacred king. People coming from outside were allowed to mine and keep the ores they had dug up, but only on the condition that they handed over part of their production as a tribute. In some cases, Mpande would delegate the division of labour and technical control over the mining process to a specialized labour contractor. In the case of iron production, for instance, the person overseeing the mining activities was a man called In the mid-nineteenth century, the Yeke, a group from the north-western part of what is today known as Tanzania, started developing trading relationships with Katangese copper producers. In 1856, the son of one of these traders, who would later become the ruler of the Yeke empire, moved to Katanga with a group of followers, marrying into local royalty and establishing a good relationship with Mpande. Initially, these immigrants were only allowed to work as traders and were excluded from participation in mining and smelting because they lacked the necessary ritual and technological skills, which were jealously protected by families of Sanga master smelters ( There are good reasons to argue that the first ruler of the Yeke was, in many respects, a classic big man. Unlike the aforementioned sacred kings, he was not someone who succeeded to, or was installed in an existing position of leadership, but an ambitious and successful entrepreneur who came to power through a series of impressive performances in the economic arena. Once he had established his rule in Katanga, the Yeke sovereign held a monopoly on all the goods destined for long-distance trade (mainly ivory and slaves), while he also managed to lay his hands on a considerable part of the goods circulating on the domestic Katangese market. As far as copper was concerned, 10% had to be handed over to the sovereign by way of tribute ( The role of African elites in controlling land, labour and capital changed considerably during colonial times. Although several factors help to account for this, the most important ones are the transformation – and partial destruction – of traditional authority structures and institutions by the Belgians, the eclipse of artisanal production as a result of the emergence of industrial mining dominated by foreign capitalist interests, and the introduction of a capitalist mode of production in different sectors of the economy. The Belgian colonizers developed various strategies to destabilize the indigenous agrarian economy and to ensure Africans’ participation in the colonial wage labour economy in general, and the mining industry in particular. They first of all abolished several of the larger chieftaincies and developed their own system of indirect rule, co-opting chiefs into the colonial administration and setting quotas for the amount of goods, labour and taxes chiefs were expected to furnish ( Despite all these efforts to create the necessary conditions for a flourishing colonial wage labour economy, the threat of labour shortages did not disappear. The colonial administration called in the help of private and semi-public labour recruitment agencies. The Chiefs were expected to help meet the labour requirements of the colonial wage labour economy. When push came to shove, however, there was considerable variation in the way customary authorities reacted to these requests. In some cases, chiefs were happy to collaborate with the labour recruiters visiting their villages. In exchange for cash payments and personal gifts they encouraged young boys and men to register for employment ( In the first period of post-colonial industrial mining, roughly between 1960 and 1990, two major changes affected mineral production and the position of local elites therein. First, the new regime’s nationalization policies initially created opportunities for rent seeking and capital accumulation on the part of ‘new’ elites, but eventually produced a major crisis in industrial mining. Second, falling international commodity prices (copper in 1975, tin in 1985) further deepened the crisis in the formal economy and triggered the shift towards informal production of mainly gold and diamonds, creating new opportunities for (‘new’ and ‘old’) local elites. The position of customary chiefs was further weakened in the early 1970s by attempts to integrate them in the regional administration and to set eligibility criteria (such as a minimum level of education), but these attempts never fully succeeded ( These changes in the broader political economic context affected and reshaped mineral production networks, as we illustrate with an example from the MGL and its successor Sominki had an ambivalent relationship with local chiefs and politicians. On the one hand, complaints about their ‘arrogant’, ‘corrupt’ and ‘demanding’ attitudes were legion. When industrial productivity declined and international (copper and tin) prices fell, much of the formal production shifted to informal networks. This also accounted for the emergence of new elite groups around the ‘illegal’ extraction and smuggling of gold. This can be illustrated by the case of the This blurs the lines between what we call here postcolonial industrial mining and artisanal mining, between legal and illegal. It evidences how boom and bust cycles create opportunities for new elites to accumulate capital (e.g. the managers of nationalized companies, the traders/smugglers), appropriate rents (e.g. the Mining Police) and control labour (e.g. the As argued above, artisanal mining (re)emerged in the wake of the structural economic crisis that was caused by internal as well as external factors. The role of local elites in artisanal mineral production can be linked to two main changes. First, there were changes in access to land, related to legal ambiguities and increasing commodification. Second, informal production deepened and informal trade networks expanded in the relative absence of corporate and government enforcement mechanisms. In the eastern provinces, illegal In South Kivu’s Bushi area, where Luhwindja’s gold mines are situated, land was traditionally both a community good and a community responsibility ( Kalimbi, a cassiterite mine in Buhavu chieftaincy, Kalehe territory, has been under control of big man Placide Chirimwami since the early 1990s ( Recent regulatory changes (since 2011) have created new opportunities for elite capture. One example is the mandatory grouping of individual miners in cooperatives, which must be seen as part of a broader formalization strategy with a strong legalist bias. However, case-studies have demonstrated that the compulsory regrouping in cooperatives has provided a very fertile ground for elite capture, such as in Ngweshe in South Kivu ( Although militarized mining is not strictly confined in time (and some mines are still militarized today), the period of the second Congo war (1998–2003) should offer a starting point to understand the profound transformations as well as the continuities in mineral extraction and trade. During this war, Uganda and Rwanda were directly involved in the plundering of Congo’s resources ( At the same time researchers have illuminated continuities with respect to the functioning of politico-military networks and to governance systems in place before, during and after the war. Writing about mining governance in Bisie mines, Appropriation of mining rents happened through direct or indirect control: forced labour (commonly called Interesting in this quote is the reference to the chief who tried to resist such coercive practices. But just like in the colonial period, some chiefs condoned, if not actively encouraged, Since the official end of the war in 2003 the government’s strategy to attract foreign direct investment in large-scale mining, combined with changes in global commodity markets (booming demand for cobalt, spike in gold price) provoked changes in Congo’s mineral production. Large-scale mining expanded in Katanga province (copper and cobalt), while the firm establishment of industrial companies was more difficult in the eastern provinces, given the security and logistical challenges. The repositioning of local elites will be illustrated by the cases of Banro Corporation, currently the only large-scale gold producer in South Kivu and Maniema province, and Tenke Fungurume Mining (TFM), First of all, transnational companies tend to rely on local labour hire companies for a flexible supply of cheap casual labour. These labour companies are owned or managed by local elites (chiefs, politicians, businesspeople). For the transnational companies, outsourcing to local firms is not only cost-reducing; it also allows them to comply with local content requirements imposed by the government, Protest against the lack of job opportunities in Katanga has also been expressed through other channels and with active involvement of local elites. In 2009, Lwanzo Lwa Mikuba, an urban socio-cultural association claiming to represent all the Sanga in Katanga, started pressuring TFM’s management to increase the number of Sanga employed by 50% ( Local elites have thus skilfully adapted to a changing political economic landscape, in which the DRC became (again) increasingly attractive for foreign investors. Most rents from large-scale mining in the DRC do not flow back to the local level ( The 2002 Mining Code distinguishes between industrial, artisanal and small-scale mining. Whereas historically small-scale mining has not been widespread in the DRC, the semi-industrial production mode is now expanding. This is mainly due to two phenomena: the increasing presence of foreign investors and technology transfers, and the government policy encouraging mechanization and the transition from artisanal to small-scale mining. In the Ministry of Mine’s vision (2010) and in line with international policy thinking, this ‘transition’ is embraced as one of the main goals. It is believed to pull people out of poverty and contribute to the “emergence of a Congolese middle class”. Our historical vignettes have highlighted continuities and changes in Congo’s mineral production network. Boom and bust cycles in industrial and artisanal mining have been triggered by external trends (commodity prices and demand) as well as the internal political economy. The location of local elites as mediators between such global, national and local dynamics allows and encourages them to (re)position themselves in view of changing political-economic circumstances. As our analysis demonstrates, their ability to benefit from mineral production, and exclude others from these benefits, not only derives from their position in the mineral production network, but also from historical continuities as well as changes in the political economic context. Mediation has taken many different shapes in the course of Congo’s mining history, ranging from customary chiefs assisting labour recruitment agencies in finding workers for the colonial mining industry, over local elites enabling large-scale mining corporations to continue their operations after Congolese independence, to businessmen concluding arrangements with foreign occupying forces and their Congolese allies, and cooperative leaders with foreign investors. Yet, what all these forms of mediation appear to have in common is that they always involve a strategic form of brokerage. Contrary to what the sociological literature on brokerage suggests, these brokers are not just ‘connecting the dots’. Drawing on multiple sources of authority and capitalising on their position as intermediaries between the global and the local, elites have been able to sustain patron-client relationships, offering protection and assistance to their followers in exchange for the latter’s loyalty and various types of material rewards, while at the same time also acting as gatekeepers, granting or facilitating outsiders’ access to Congo’s mineral riches in exchange for part of the mining rents. Our analysis has demonstrated the persistent importance of (material and financial) appropriation by local elites. Whether in the form of tribute payments, financial compensations from external labour contractors, salaries and gifts from (colonial) governments and large-scale mining corporations, taxes paid by artisanal miners, or members’ contributions in cooperatives, elites have always managed to derive material benefits from mineral production and trade. Congo’s mining history is filled with examples of local strongmen taking advantage of the continuously high global demand for raw materials to obtain resources for themselves and to consolidate their dominant position at the domestic level. In applying such ‘strategies of extraversion’, however, they have contributed to what Bayart has described as the Coercion has proven to be a frequently used and highly effective tool for capturing rents and mobilising labour in different phases of Congo’s mining history. Pre-colonial rulers like the head of the Yeke empire introduced a system of forced labour in the artisanal mines under his control, recruiters working for the colonial mining industry frequently resorted to the use of violence to make people join the ranks of the wage labour force, and state and non-state armed groups organized systems of Being aware of the risk to make sweeping generalizations, we have intentionally focused on structural continuities as we believe the current literature on elites’ positions in mining is too fragmented and segmented between, say, artisanal mining and large-scale mining ( The research on which this article is based was carried out over a period of 10 years, between 2005 and 2015. The first author would like to acknowledge the financial contributions by the Flemish Interuniversity Council (VLIR), the Institute of Development Policy (IOB) and the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO), as well as the partnership with the CEGEMI (Centre d’Expertise en Gestion Minière) at the Université Catholique de Bukavu. The second author is very grateful for the financial support from the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO), WOTRO Science for Global Development, the Belgian Science Policy Office, as well as for the research assistance received from Santa Aloni Katweteba and Stéphane Lumbu Maliba. This paper was first presented at the ECAS conference in Bazel, June 2017 and benefited from the discussions at the conference ‘Mining in comparative perspective’ at Ghent University, December 2017. We thank all participants as well as the two reviewers and the editor for their insightful comments.