Particle breakage is a significant phenomenon in civil, transportation and mining engineering. In this study, the evolution of the particle size distribution (PSD) and that of particle breakage of an overall sample and along the specimen height were systematically investigated via a series of impact loading tests for two sands: a carbonate sand (CS) and a quartz sand, i.e., Fujian sand (FS). The test results on the overall sample showed that the CS sample exhibited more changes in void ratio than the FS sample. In addition, the increase in the breakage extent in the overall CS sample at the initial loading stage was greater than that in the overall FS sample, and the final breakage extent in the overall CS sample was 45.8% larger than that in the overall FS sample. The PSD curve in an effective layer for the CS sample or FS sample broadened compared with that in the substratum effective layer, implying that the particle breakage was inhomogeneous along the specimen height. The CS or FS in the topmost effective layer beneath the hammer reached its corresponding ultimate fractal gradation, whereas the CS or FS in the lower layers presented values below the ultimate fractal gradation. Furthermore, the PSD and grain crushing distributions were more inhomogeneous along the FS sample than the CS sample.single-number breakage index area-ratio breakage index relative breakage index breakage potential (Unit: mm) total breakage (Unit: mm) particle diameter (Unit: mm) maximum particle diameter (Unit: mm) minimum particle diameter (Unit: mm) percentage finer (Unit: %) fractal dimension input work (Unit: kJ) weight of the hammer (Unit: g) height of hammer lifted (Unit: mm) acceleration of gravity (Unit: m/s blow number specific gravity relative density initial specimen height (Unit: mm) average height (Unit: mm) maximum void ratio minimum void ratio initial void ratio ultimate void ratio void ratio dry density of sand sample (Unit: g/cm density of water (Unit: g/cm volume of sample (Unit: cm mass of sample (Unit: g) radius of sample (Unit: mm) height of sample (Unit: mm) fitting parameter fitting parameter square of correlation coefficient Particle breakage is a phenomenon that occurs when particles of granular soils are exposed to considerable stress or shear strain and then break into smaller-sized particles The aim of this study is to investigate the grain crushing and PSD evolution of carbonate and quartz sands along the specimen height after impact loading. The average grain crushing in an overall sample is also introduced for comparison with the grain crushing distributions along the specimen height. Comparisons of the grain crushing distributions along the specimen height between carbonate and quartz sands are also presented. The current research could be applied in the engineering field, such as for pile driving engineering and estimating the distributions of deformation and grain crushing. The two types of sand used in this study are Fujian sand (FS), produced from Fujian Province of China, and carbonate sand (CS) obtained from the East Beach of China. Impact compression tests are conducted via an automatic impact apparatus. As shown in The sands used in this study were dried before testing. The initial specimen height  The packing density of a specimen at a specified grading is mainly influenced by the particle shape   The breakage index for quantitatively estimating the particle breakage extent is mainly based on the PSDs of granular soils before and after the tests, which cover a single-number breakage index (e.g.,  The six steel rings used in the sample preparations correspond to six layers of tested soils. As shown in   Sand particles in the higher effective layers are close to the hammer, whereas the particles in the lower effective layers are farther away from the hammer. The energy dissipation for particle breakage in the higher effective layers is larger than that in the lower effective layers due to granular jamming   The particles of the CS sample before loading, as shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image from In contrast, the particles of the FS sample before loading, as shown in the SEM image from A series of impact loading tests were conducted on carbonate and quartz sands to investigate the evolution of grain crushing and PSD of the overall samples and along the specimen height. The main conclusions are summarized as follows. The test results on the overall samples show that the void ratio of the CS sample at the initial loading stage decreased more sharply than that of the FS sample. In addition, the CS sample was gradually compressed to a lower void ratio than the FS sample in the subsequent loading stage. The PSD curves of the overall CS and FS samples broadened with increasing input work. The breakage extent of the overall CS sample increased more at the initial loading stage than that of the overall FS sample. The final breakage extent of the overall CS sample was 1.46 times that of the overall FS sample. However, the overall CS and FS samples could not reach their corresponding ultimate fractal states despite the input work reaching 40.8 kJ. The PSD curve in an effective layer was laid over the substratum effective layers, indicating that the grain crushing along the specimen height was inhomogeneous. The tendency of the PSDs of the CS and FS toward fractal grading was more obvious in the topmost effective layer than in other effective layers. The PSDs in the topmost effective layers of the CS and FS samples approached the corresponding ultimate fractal gradations with the fractal dimension of 2.61 and 2.47 when the input work was up to 40.8 kJ, respectively. The distributions of particle breakage and gradation along the FS sample height were more inhomogeneous than those along the CS sample height. In addition, a more angular particle shape was observed in the FS sample than the CS sample. These various observations were attributed to differences in the mineral composition and hardness between the two sands. The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the