For the first time in situ, deep penetrating O2 profiles were measured in abyssal sediments in the western South Atlantic. Construction of deep penetrating O2 optodes and adaptation to a benthic profiling lander are described. The opto-chemical oxygen sensors allow measurements to a depth of 55cm in marine sediments. A vertical resolution of 0.5cm was used to determine the O2 dynamics in those oligotrophic deep sea sediments; the oxygen concentration across the sediment water interface was measured with a resolution of 100μm. Oxygen penetration depth (OPD), diffusive oxygen uptake (DOU) and oxygen consumption rates were determined at four stations north of the Amazon fan and one at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Diffusive oxygen uptake rates ranged from 0.1 to 0.9mmolm−2
                     d−1; the oxygen penetration depth ranged from 8 to 26cm. Carbon consumption rates calculated from the diffusive oxygen uptake rates were in the range of 0.3–3.0gCm−2
                     a−1. Comparison between in situ and laboratory DOU and OPD measurements confirmed previous findings that core recovery and warming have strong effects on the oxygen dynamics in deep sea sediments. Laboratory measurements yielded a decrease of 50–75% in OPD and consequently an increase in DOU by 1.5 and 18-times. Deep penetrating oxygen optodes provide a new tool to accurately determine oxygen dynamics (and thereby calculate carbon mineralization rates) in oligotrophic sediments. However, oxygen optodes as used in this study do not resolve the diffusive boundary layer (DBL). The data show that deep penetrating O2 optodes in combination with high-resolution O2 microelectrodes give a complete picture of the oxygen dynamics, including the DBL, in deep sea sediments.The oceans cover approx. 71% of the earth, of which approx. 55% have water depths greater than 3500 Oxygen electrodes have been an excellent tool for studies of oxygen dynamics in marine sediments ( A common indirect method to define the base of the oxic zone in marine sediments is to determine the Mn Recently To determine in situ O This study was performed during a cruise in March/April 1997 aboard the R/V An autonomous profiling lander ( To measure deep sediment oxygen profiles, a new elevator system ( The oxygen optodes are constructed from multimode silica–silica step index fibres with 100 The calibration of the optode signal versus the oxygen concentration was done in situ, using a 2-point calibration. The constant reading in the bottom water before profiling is taken as bottom water concentration, determined by Winkler titration of a water sample. The constant reading in the anoxic part of the sediment is taken as zero oxygen. The in situ calibration of the zero point was checked by an onboard calibration. Therefore the zero oxygen signal at in situ water temperature was compensated for pressure (linear signal increase of 0.75‰ atm To calculate the oxygen concentration from the recorded signal, an empirical relation based on the Stern–Volmer equation is used ( In situ microelectrode measurements were also made in the upper 10 All sensors (opto-chemical and electro-chemical) were checked for signal drift by comparing the reading in the bottom water before and after the profiling. Photographs of the sensors during profiling into the sediment were taken every 20 Oxygen profiles were measured shipboard on sediment cores recovered by a multiple corer ( The thickness of the diffusive boundary layer (DBL) was determined directly from the measured microprofiles. The transition between the homogeneous oxygen concentration in the turbulent bottom water and the linear gradient in the DBL was used as the upper DBL boundary ( Oxygen profiles from five stations in the Equatorial South Atlantic are shown in Oxygen dynamics at GeoB 4417 and 4419 were measured simultaneously with optodes and electrodes ( Oxygen consumption rates in discrete sediment layers calculated from the optode profiles at station GeoB 4419 exhibited a rate of 4.4 At two stations (GeoB 4417 and 4419) laboratory oxygen profiles were measured on cores using O In oligotrophic deep sea sediments only a small percentage of organic material produced in the surface water reaches the seafloor. This slow sedimentation rate has a strong influence on the organic matter oxidation pathways, leading to low oxygen respiration rates and consequently deep penetration of oxygen into the sediment (e.g. Comparisons of in situ and laboratory measured OPD and DOU rates exhibit strong differences, especially in sediments from abyssal depths. The pore water chemistry of the recovered cores is altered or compacted due to decompression and warming effects ( A comparison of our measured fluxes with a global benthic oxygen flux map ( Assuming steady-state oxygen dynamics and a C The supply of organic matter from surface waters through the water column to the sediment surface can be calculated from transport equations ( Potential reasons for the enhanced mineralization rates at the sediment surface are temporal variations in the annual sedimentation rate. Seasonal variations of the surface primary production, as reported for this area ( We gratefully acknowledge the captain and crew from the RV