Determination of liberation spectrums by using MLA and QEMSCAN techniques require polished sections and fine particles. These techniques cannot be performed in-situ and for coarse particles. Thus, the focus of this technical note is to investigate whether the image analysis method can be used for the determination of liberation spectrum for coarse particles. Two methods were used to determine the liberation spectrum. In the first method, the liberation spectrum was obtained using the small and large diameter of particles. In the second method, the liberation spectrum was determined using the small and large diameter of particles as well as the shape correction diameter. The results showed that the image analysis can be used to successfully determine the liberation spectrum. The composition of composite particles was significantly improved when the stereological correction was used i.e. the square root of the mean square error for the particle composition using the method 1 was 1.25% while that using the method 2 was 0.60%. The proposed method might be used for the determination of liberation spectrum of high-grade real coarse particles. However, this requires a significant amount of future work.Coarse gangue rejection is used in the mineral processing industry to separate valuable coarse particles from gangue coarse particles based on different properties of minerals such as color, magnetic properties or density It would be also beneficial during coarse gangue rejection if liberation spectrums of valuable minerals (i.e. the compositional distribution of particles) are determined. For example, the consumption of hazardous reagents can be significantly high for streams that have a significant amount of highly liberated particles while the opposite is true for poorly liberated particles. Liberation spectrums can be routinely determined using different techniques such as MLA or QEMSCAN A drop weight device was used to crush both yellow and red phase (i.e. plaster) to prepare particles with irregular geometric shapes. All composite particles were prepared by combining yellow and red phase. The densities of composite particles were determined by measuring separately the masses and the volumes of both the yellow and red phase; the volumes of both yellow and red phase were obtained by using Archimedes’ principle (i.e. when a phase was immersed in water, the level of water increased and based on the difference in water level, the volume of the phase was obtained). Fully liberated particles were also determined by using the Archimedes’ principle; the yellow phase has 5.5 ± 0.1 g/cm To prepare the images, all particles were placed on a black background. The photos of the samples were taken using a camera (Canon EOS 1D X, Japan) and optimal lighting. Each photo was obtained by manually rotating all particles to make different particle surfaces visible for more precise liberation measurements. Considering that the smallest particle was 1.5 mm, it was possible to determine the mass of each particle. The volume of each particle was obtained using the Archimedes' principle (i.e. when one particle was immersed in water, the volume of the displaced water represents the volume of the particle). The photo was converted to the LAB color space in which L represents lightness while A and B are the green–red and blue–yellow color components, respectively. The LAB color space was used in MATLAB to determine different phases in composite particles and one phase in fully liberated particles. Furthermore, in the MATLAB code, the median filtering method In the image analysis, all particles were approximated as an ellipsoid which has three dimensions i.e. Considering that As regards particle size distribution method, the masses of particles were obtained based on the volumes of particles and their densities; the density of particles were determined using the Archimedes’ principles (see The photo of the particles and the image of the composite particles used in this work is shown in    The results showed that image analysis can be used to determine the liberation spectrum of coarse particles. However, the most important problem of the developed methodology is that completely locked particles would not be visible while in the polished sections, these particles could be exposed in some sections. Certainly, if a small proportion of the locked particles are present, it might be possible to consider their portion by a simple correction based on the difference between the mineral grade determined using XRF and the mineral grade obtained using the image analysis of crushed particles. It is also important to highlight that liberation analysis using MLA or QEMSCAN would require using fine particles while our methodology can be successfully used for coarse particles. A significant amount of future work is planned to use this methodology to determine mineral liberation of coarse ore particles obtained by crushing of real high grade ores. In this technical note, the image analysis method was proposed for the determination of liberation spectrum for coarse artificial particles. The results showed that the image analysis successfully predicted the liberation spectrum of the composite particles when the stereological correction was used i.e. the square root of the mean square error for the particle composition using the method 1 was 1.25% while that using the method 2 was 0.60%. Although this work demonstrated that the image analysis might be used for determination of liberation spectrum of artificial coarse particles, further work is required to investigate the benefits of this method for real coarse particles. Moreover, further work is required to develop an in-situ imaging method that can be used to determine the liberation spectrum of real coarse particles during coarse gangue rejection.