Visual erosion examples based on that occurred in the minerals and oil and gas industries are illustrated by a paint modeling technique. The visual paint patterns were used to illustrate erosion damage “hot spots”. This provided an insight into the underlining fluid dynamics process involved with erosion damages. This insight allows design changes to be made to reduce erosion, illustrated by examples in this paper. The patterns of erosion damages on paints were found to be similar to that occurred with metal materials. This was supported by a similarity in measured erosion angular erosion distribution with cylindrical samples. Error analysis suggested that spatial variations in velocity across a material surface accounted for most of the error in the paint modeling technique.
                  Due to its low cost and rapidity, the technique is particularly suitable for developing and optimizing the design of flow geometries to reduce erosion, without the need to change the materials used.Particulate erosion on material surfaces is common in many process industries, particularly in the minerals processing industry. To reduce erosion due to solid particle impact on the surfaces of materials in multiphase flow equipment, it is general practice to use wear-resistant materials or coatings/surface hardening treatments. This paper focuses on research aimed at reducing the surface erosion of materials through flow geometry modification, without changing the materials used or their properties. As erosion rate is a function of particle velocity and particle impingement angle Erosion is often found to be unevenly distributed, and localized deep material loss or holing can lead to functional failure, even if most of the equipment remains undamaged. To achieve erosion reduction via a fluid-dynamics approach, it is essential to model or simulate changes in both erosion rate and distribution as a function of any geometrical modifications. To this end, a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) erosion modeling technique has been developed Materials are often characterized as either ductile or brittle, according to their differing erosion rate versus angle of attack curves Erosion of metals is the major problem addressed by this paper, as metals are widely used in the mineral processing industry. Metals such as mild steels, aluminum and titanium often exhibit ductile or mixed ductile/brittle behavior Wu et al. The objective of this paper is to present erosion solution cases, developed from applying the paint modeling technical through laboratory or site testing, with validation by error analysis and cylindrical sample measurements. Two experimental flow loops were set up, as shown schematically in In the air/solids flow test loop ( A mixing tank similar to that depicted in For the purpose of illustration, our practice of applying spray paint for erosion modeling is introduced here. To produce a qualitative illustration of erosion using the multilayer paint technique, the paint had to be evenly distributed so that thickness variation across the material surface was minimal. It was therefore necessary to reduce any gravity-induced flow of wet paint film on a material surface, or part thereof, inclined to the horizontal plane. This was achieved by using a very fine paint spray, and applying the successive layers at intervals that allowed drying between each application. Typically, multiple layers of paint each 40–60 To validate the paint modeling technique to a variety of materials, more accurate measurements of the effect of particle impingement angle were conducted. These used a similar approach to Erosion measurements of metal samples were conducted using a purpose-built erosion measurement facility similar to that described in Painted cylinders were also tested for comparison with the metallic samples. Paint thickness measurements on the cylindrical samples were made in a separate rig using the Fischer Dualscope MP20 gauge, which was mounted in a drill chuck so that the probe could be traversed around the cylindrical sample.   The data presented in For a number of years, the paint modeling technique described in this paper has been used at CSIRO to conduct laboratory-scale modeling of erosion development in full-scale industrial flow equipment, and anecdotal evidence from industry appears to support our results. To illustrate,      Brown The severe erosion on the back of the blades of the two full-scale Rushton turbines displayed in For the tests, a lab-scale model of each new trial design was simultaneously tested against a lab-scale model of the existing (benchmark) design, in identical mixing tanks, under the same conditions and over the same period of time. The results of one such experiment are illustrated in Due originally to Finnie When paint is used to model a metal material, the ratio of the erosion Ideally, one would want a constant It is proposed to define the error in the paint erosion model as a deviation of this proportionality, as expressed below, assuming that a similarity in the erosion versus impingement angle The multilayer paint erosion modeling technique is a rapid, low-cost visual tool for assisting laboratory-scale development of erosion minimization solutions. Qualitative test results can be obtained typically within a few hours using the slurry flow loop, while significantly less time, typically from seconds to minutes, is required using the air/solids flow loop at higher velocities. The technique represents a significant advantage over testing on real material samples, in terms of both material costs and time taken to obtain meaningful results. It is particularly suitable for studying the effects of geometrical design changes on both erosion rate and distribution, and it is our view that real material erosion testing should be reserved for the final validation of optimum alternative designs. Paint modeling can be used not only as a qualitative visual technique, but also as a quantitative technique if paint thickness and distribution are carefully controlled. As most off-the-shelf paints are ductile, they are suitable for simulating metals such as aluminum and mild steels. It is nevertheless noted that this quantitative feature is most useful in a comparative sense, and any erosion visualization should be assessed against a reference or benchmark design. It should be pointed out, however, that this approach is only suitable for materials showing similar erosion versus particle impact angle properties as those of the paint layers. Fortunately, a wide range of materials of engineering importance fall within this category, including most metals such as aluminum, mild steels and titanium alloys. It is very encouraging, as reported in this paper, that the angular distribution of erosion around cylindrical test samples of various metal materials exhibited very similar behavior to a painted cylinder sample. This confirmed that their erosion characteristics as a function of particle impingement angle are similar, and provides a strong basis for adopting the paint modeling technique. It should be also pointed that at a considerably higher impingement velocity the wear mode/erosion mechanism on target materials may change, e.g. from ductile to brittle. Future work will be required to fully clarify this effect, particularly in cases involving gas/solids erosions, where high velocities are high. Preliminary research at CSIRO suggests that it is possible to model brittle materials using a ceramic paste. Given the rapid progress with CFD modeling, and its increasing popularity, one may question the relevance of the paint modeling technique. However, our experience suggests that it is still a major challenge in CFD to model complex multiphase flow and its effect on erosion at the material surface. It would therefore be prudent to use physical experimental validation to validate CFD simulations, before recommending full-scale implementation of any new flow design concepts. A key message here is that the rapid, low-cost, multiplayer paint erosion technique is of considerable benefit in the development of improved flow designs that reduce erosion. It is particularly advantageous in identifying and overcoming localized peak erosion, or ‘hot spots’, such as holing due to vortices or sharp bends. Practical applications based on this approach offer tremendous savings to industry in terms of both material costs and equipment downtime. As an example for its practical significance, it is worth to mention that an improved slurry heat exchanger was developed and implemented in a RioTinto's mineral processing plant. The new design which provided extended wear service life by an order of magnitude has since been patented and adopted by the manufacturer in its products for world wide distribution. In passing, it should be noted that micro erosion texture patterns which were conventionally studied with assistance of SEM photos was not considered, since only relatively large-scale erosions, and their locations were concerned, and visualized by the paint erosion damage patterns. Finally, it is worthwhile discussing the error inherent in the paint modeling technique. As mentioned, ideally the ratio of paint erosion over real material erosion would be a constant, so that the erosion distribution on a material surface is proportional to that on the paint. In reality, the variation in velocity across a surface contributes to a deviation in the paint erosion pattern away from the erosion on a real material (Eq. This paper presents extensive case examples and solutions on erosion patterns developed on industrial equipments with assistance of a rapid and low-cost multilayer paint modeling technique. The technical was found suitable for visualizing the erosion distribution on material surfaces exposed to particulate-laden flows. An error analysis and validation of the technique via comparisons with other experimental techniques and full-scale equipment show that the technique is suitable for use in the development of improved flow geometrical designs that reduce peak erosion, without the need to change the traditional materials used, or their properties. The technique has been shown to provide a reasonable model of the erosion behavior of ductile materials, ranging from low carbon steel to white iron and has been tested in a variety of mineral processing equipment. The authors are grateful for the support of CSIRO Minerals DU Flagship, Alcoa World Alumina, BHP Billiton/Worsley Alumina, Rio Tinto Alcan and Tyco Flow Control, who sponsored this work through the AMIRA International Collaborative Research Project P931 ‘Reduced Erosion in Multiphase Flow Equipment’. We also wish to acknowledge Huping Luo of Chevron for collaboration and support, and Lawrence Cheung of CSIRO for the artwork and photos.