Comparative studies on the adsorption of gold from waste rinse water (Au 178.3mg/L and trace Cu, Ni, Zn, Sn, etc) of the semiconductor manufacturing industry have been reported using nonionic Amberlite XAD-7HP, strong base Bonlite BA304, and Purolite A-500. Batch and column studies were carried out to optimize various process parameters such as contact time, acidity of solution, and resin dose for gold adsorption from waste rinse water and elution to get a gold-enriched solution. The results showed that Bonlite BA304 and Purolite A-500 resins could exchange gold easily at high acidity whereas Amberlite XAD-7HP adsorbs gold effectively at low acidity (adjusted pH=0). Purolite A-500 was found to be the most suitable resin as it adsorbed 99.6% gold at an A/R ratio of 8.33 and a sorption capacity of 53.6mg gold/mL resin. The mixture of acetone and hydrochloric acid at a volumetric ratio of 9.0 could elute gold loaded on Purolite A-500 resin to yield 10,497mg gold/L. The adsorption behavior of gold on Amberlite XAD-7HP and Bonlite BA304 followed both the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. In the case of the Purolite A-500 resin, it followed suitably a Langmuir isotherm. Kinetic data for gold adsorption on the three resins followed a second-order rate.Gold is an important metal used for several applications. In the industry the most important use of gold is for the manufacturing of electronic parts and devices such as cell phones, calculators, personal digital assistants, and global positioning system units. Generally, solid-state electronic devices use very low voltages and currents which are easily interrupted by corrosion or tarnish at the connector's contact points. Gold is a highly efficient conductor that can carry these low voltage currents and remain free from corrosion. Electronic components such as connectors, switches, relay contacts, soldered joints, connecting wires, and connection strips made of gold or coated with this metal are highly reliable ( In general, the concentration of gold from various solutions varies from 1 to 2000 The present work is focused on the comparative studies for the adsorption of gold from waste rinse water of the Korean semiconductor industry. After the gold electroplating of an electronic device, the etching of plated material with a solution of reverse aqua regia (HCl:HNO The original waste rinse water generated during the manufacturing of the semiconductor supplied by the Korean Semiconductor Company was used for experimental purposes. The composition of waste rinse water used for experimental purposes is presented in Purolite A-500 (macroporous strong base resin) was supplied by Purolite Company, Bonlite BA304 (gel strong base resin) by Born Chemical Company and Amberlite XAD-7HP (nonionic resin) by Rohm and Hass. The characteristic properties of all the three resins are presented in The experiments for the adsorption and elution of gold using the various resins and mixture of eluents were carried out in batch and column scale. The batch experiments were carried out in a conical flask using a shaking water bath under atmospheric conditions using Amberlite XAD-7HP, Bonlite BA304 (gel strong base resin) and Purolite A-500 (macroporous strong base resin). The theoretical loading capacity of strong base resins was determined by titrating Cl After the gold adsorption, the resin was separated from the raffinate with a filter paper (Whatman no. 41). The gold adsorption and elution experiments were also carried out in a column made of Pyrex glass with a diameter of 10 The effect of contact time on the adsorption of gold by the three resins was determined using 1 The pseudo second-order reaction is mostly concerned with the amount of metal on the adsorbent's surface and the amount of metal adsorbed at equilibrium ( The plot of ( As the acid concentration in the solution is one of the vital parameters in the adsorption process, the effect of acidity on gold adsorption by the three resins was investigated. The waste rinse water used for the experiment contained very high acidic content i.e. 7.5 The adsorption of the gold complex on Amberlite XAD-7HP can be proposed in Eqs. (4) and (5) to express the interaction between the protonated oxygen atom of the ester group C In the adsorption of gold from the solution of high acidic concentration, the equilibrium tends to shift toward the left side in Eq.    These resins (Bonlite BA304 and Purolite A-500) contain the functional group –N(CH The gold adsorption behavior of the resins Bonlite BA304 and Purolite A-500 is not significantly affected by changes in acid concentration (1.0–7.5 Studies were carried out to determine the loading capacity of all three resins. A 1.0-g sample of each resin was contacted at room temperature with 25 Based on the data obtained from the above loading capacity experiments, the adsorption isotherms were plotted. The Langmuir and Freundlich models are well-known isotherms used to determine adsorption phenomena. According to the Langmuir model the uptake of metal ions occurs on a homogeneous surface by monolayer adsorption without any interaction between adsorbed ions. The model can be presented in linear form as follows: The Freundlich model assumes that the uptake or adsorption of metal ions occurs on a heterogeneous surface by monolayer adsorption. The model can be described as follows: The plots ‘(1/ The tests for the determination of the breakthrough curve for gold adsorption using the resins Amberlite XAD-7HP, Bonlite BA304 and Purolite A-500 were carried out in a column. The breakthrough curve for the adsorption of gold takes place when the concentration of gold in the raffinate begins to increase significantly until it finally reaches the same concentration of gold as in the feed waste rinse water. After this point, no more adsorption takes place. The breakthrough curve is considered as the time of completion of the adsorption cycle in a continuous process used for industrial applications ( The elution experiments were carried out to desorb gold from the gold-loaded resins. Varying concentration (0.5 to 3.0 The elution of gold from the gold-loaded resin was carried out in a column with the mixture of acetone and hydrochloric acid in column. The volumetric ratio between acetone and hydrochloric acid was 9.0 and the flow rate was 0.88 The main goal of this study was the assessment of the performance of nonionic and strong base resins in order to recover gold from the waste rinse water of semiconductor industries. The experimental results showed that all the three resins are effective for the recovery of gold (III) from the waste solution. The strong base resins (Bonlite BA304 and Purolite A-500) had high adsorption efficiency at high acidity of solution whereas the nonionic resin (Amberlite XAD-7HP) was only effective for the adsorption of gold at low acidity. The elution efficiency of Purolite A-500 was higher than the Bonlite BA304 resin. The gold loaded on Amberlite XAD-7HP was easily eluted by a mixture of acetone and hydrochloric acid. The gold was eluted from the gold-loaded Purolite A-500 resin to yield a gold-enriched solution containing 10,497 This paper is based on work supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) under the project entitled "Development of Technology for the Recycling of Valuable Metals from End-of-Life Small Electric & Electronic Equipment".