The transport behaviour of yttrium from nitrate medium was investigated using dinonyl phenyl phosphoric acid (DNPPA) as a carrier in liquid membrane phase, employing microporous hydrophobic hollow fibre supported liquid membrane (HFSLM) module. The influence of feed composition, carrier concentration, feed acidity, strip acid concentration and flow rate of feed on permeability and flux of Y(III) is discussed. The stripping solution was sulphuric acid solution. Increasing the carrier concentration increased the % transport of yttrium, while an increase in the feed metal concentration decreased the percentage transport. A lower acidity in the feed solution and 3M H2SO4 concentration in the stripping phase are favourable for the transport process due to the increase of mass transfer driving forces. The % transport of yttrium increased with an increase in flow rates up to 100mL/min. Under optimized conditions of 0.2M DNPPA, 1g/L Y(III), 0.05M feed acidity, 3M strip acid (H2SO4) and 100mL/min flow rate, the % transport of yttrium was more than 95% in 5h of operation.High purity rare earths are in great demand for various applications in electronics, automobiles, petrochemical and magnetic materials industry. Yttrium in particular finds applications in superconductors, lasers, phosphors, industrial cutting and welding, distance sensing, photochemistry and digital communication. Apart from these applications, it is used as super alloys with nickel and cobalt in solid oxide fuel cells as well as in yttria stabilized zirconia used as ceramic oxygen sensor. These applications need high purity yttrium oxide as the starting material. The separation of rare earths is very difficult due to similar chemical properties. Solvent extraction (SX) and ion exchange (IX) techniques are mostly employed for their separation and purification ( Feed solution was prepared by dissolving yttrium oxide of 99.9% purity, obtained from Indian Rare Earths Ltd. (IREL), Alwaye, India, in nitric acid. Free acid content in the rare earth nitrate solution was determined by precipitating the rare earth with sodium oxalate followed by titration with NaOH using phenolphthalein indicator. The concentration of yttrium was determined by ICP-AES (JY Ultima2). DNPPA (> DNPPA of the desired concentration was loaded onto the hydrophobic microporous membrane of the HFM module. A schematic representation of HFM module has been shown in Y(III) ions react with (HR) The Y complex species diffuses to the opposite side of the liquid membrane by concentration gradient and reacts with strip acid to transfer Y(III) ions into the stripping phase as given in equation: The performance of the liquid membrane is described in terms of permeability coefficient ‘P’ of a transported species. The permeation of a metal species through HFSLM in a recycling mode is expressed in terms of the equation given below ( ‘A’ represents the total effective surface area of the HFM (cm Parameter ‘Ø’ is defined as follows: From the slope of the linear plot of ln C Batch single contact experiments were performed for evaluating the distribution coefficient values of the metal ion for different carrier (DNPPA) concentrations at different acidities. Based on the results obtained, HFSLM runs were carried out. The effect of individual experimental parameters on the % transportation of the metal ion was studied to arrive at the optimum conditions. DNPPA was loaded on the membrane of the HFM module and feed comprising of 1 Feed Y(III) was varied from 1 to 8 The effect of feed acid on extraction of Y(III) was studied in the acidity range 0.01 to 2 Single contact experiments with HNO Transportation behaviour of yttrium at a carrier concentration of 0.2 Reproducibility of HFSLM for Y(III) transport system was checked in different experiments under identical conditions, where each time fresh feed and strippant solutions were passed. The membrane was cleaned, washed and impregnated with extractant before the start of new run. The permeability of Y(III) in the three runs indicated a good reproducibility of the transport of the metal ion. The permeation behaviour of Y(III) through hollow fibre supported liquid membrane containing DNPPA as the carrier phase from nitrate medium was studied. The effects of experimental parameters such as feed metal ion concentration, feed acidity, carrier concentration, flow rate and strip acidity on the % transportation of Y(III) were investigated. Under optimized conditions of 0.2