Yard trimmings were pretreated by Ceriporiopsis subvermispora, a white-rot fungus that selectively degrades lignin, to enhance methane production via solid-state anaerobic digestion. Effects of moisture content (MC), at 45%, 60%, and 75%, on the degradation of holocellulose and lignin in the fungal pretreatment step and on methane production in the digestion step were studied with comparison to the control group (autoclaved without inoculation) and raw yard trimmings. It was found that C. subvermispora had a high lignin degradation of 20.9% but limited cellulose degradation of 7.4% at 60% MC. Consequently, samples pretreated at 60% MC achieved the highest methane yield of 44.6L/kg volatile solid (VS) in the digestion step, which was 106% and 154% higher than the control group (21.6L/kg VS) and the raw yard trimmings (17.6L/kg VS), respectively. The increase in methane production was probably caused by the degradation of lignin during the pretreatment.Yard trimmings, which include grass, leaves, and tree and brush trimmings, are one of the main components of municipal solid wastes (MSW). In 2011, there were about 250 To reduce the recalcitrance of lignocellulosic biomass, physical, chemical, and biological pretreatment methods have been extensively investigated in the past decades. Physical pretreatment such as comminution increases the degradability of biomass by increasing the surface area of the feedstocks. Some physical pretreatments, such as irradiation, can also alter the lignin structure and solubilize lignin. However, high energy consumption associated with physical pretreatment makes it not feasible for large scale application ( Biological pretreatment using white-rot fungi has been shown to be effective in selectively degrading lignin and increasing enzymatic degradability of lignocellulosic biomass for ethanol production ( During fungal pretreatment, the moisture content plays an important role. Water is critical in transferring nutrients, so sufficient water is needed for the healthy growth of fungi and normal ligninolytic activity. Too much water, however, may inhibit the growth of fungi by reducing the available oxygen ( The objectives of this study were to: (1) study the effect of moisture content during fungal pretreatment on the degradation of total solids (TS), cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin; (2) investigate the effect of fungal pretreatment on methane yield of yard trimmings; (3) study the effect of fungal pretreatment on holocellulose degradation (i.e., cellulose and hemicellulose) during SS-AD. Yard trimmings were collected from the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center (OARDC) in Wooster, OH. They were air-dried to a moisture content of less than 10%, and ground with a hammer mill (C.S. Bell Co., Tiffin, OH, USA) to pass through a screen sieve with 12.7-mm openings. Yard trimming particles were bagged and stored at ambient conditions until used. The chemical compositions of yard trimmings are shown in The white-rot fungus Dry yard trimmings particles of 100 The inoculum for SS-AD was the effluent from a mesophilic liquid anaerobic digester, fed primarily with municipal wastewater, in Zanesville, OH, operated by the Five groups of SS-AD reactors were setup, with four groups fed with yard trimmings described in Section The cumulative methane yield was defined as follows: The TS and VS of feedstock and effluent were measured according to the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater ( The column of HPLC used for sugar analysis was Aminex HPX-87P (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Berkeley, CA, USA), with HPLC grade water as the mobile phase. The mobile phase flow-rate was 0.3 The biogas was collected in Tedlar gas bags and its volume was measured with a drum-type gas meter (Ritter, TG 5, Germany), and the composition of biogas (CO Statistical significance was determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA, The effect of moisture content on the degradation of yard trimmings during pretreatment is shown in Dry matter loss during the fungal pretreatment process reached 12.45% when the yard trimmings were at 60% MC, which was much higher than the control group (0.5%). The results are similar to those from Cellulose degradation during fungal pretreatment under all the conditions was not significantly ( As hemicellulose is also a substrate needed by microbes in SS-AD to produce methane, the high degradation loss (around 27%) of hemicellulose during fungal pretreatment had a negative impact on the biogas yield of SS-AD. However, the degradation of hemicellulose could make the main substrate, cellulose, more available for hydrolysis ( Lignin degradation from the treatment group was significantly higher than that of the control group. Significant differences in lignin degradation were observed among the feedstocks with different moisture contents. Although previous studies reported that the optimal moisture content for lignin degradation was 70–80% ( Fungal pretreatment could significantly increase methane yield. Fungal pretreatment improved the methane yield of yard trimmings by 85–154%, compared with raw yard trimmings. As shown in As shown in The correlation between lignin degradation and methane yield indicates that methane yield increased linearly with lignin degradation by fungal pretreatment ( Holocellulose degradation in the treatment group with the optimal methane yield (fungal pretreatment at 60% MC) was compared with the control at 60% MC and with raw yard trimmings as feedstock. Degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose during the 40-day SS-AD is shown in There was no detectable degradation of hemicellulose in SS-AD of raw yard trimmings. A 5.7% and 16.7% degradation of hemicellulose was observed in SS-AD of the fungal pretreatment group (under 60% MC) and control group, respectively. The VS reduction for the fungal pretreatment (at 60% MC) was 9.5%, while in the control group it was 2.4%. This result was not surprising, considering that cellulose and hemicellulose degradation were the main contributors to the total degradation of feedstocks. The higher VS reduction in the fungal pretreatment group can be ascribed to the higher cellulose degradation during SS-AD compared with the control group. Even though the control group had higher hemicellulose degradation (16.7%) compared with the fungal pretreatment at 60% MC (5.7%), the hemicellulose content was only half of the cellulose content in yard trimmings. Thus, cellulose degradation contributed more to the VS reduction compared with hemicellulose degradation. Furthermore, the cellulose degradation in the fungal pretreatment at 60% MC was around 11 times (16.4%) higher than that in the control group (1.5%), while the hemicellulose degradation in the control group was only 3 times (16.7%) higher than that from fungal pretreatment group (5.7%). Moisture content significantly affected the fungal pretreatment performance of yard trimmings by This project was supported by the