H2-rich gas has been widely regarded as a promising energy to substitute fossil energy in iron ore sintering process for CO2 reduction. This investigation mainly focused on researching the influences of H2-rich gas injection parameters over sintering bed on sintering performance, and elucidated the potential function mechanism through both experiment and numerical simulation. Results indicated that increasing injection concentration and prolonging injection time within a proper range improved sinter quality, and the recommended value was 0.6∼0.8 % and 8 min, respectively. Injecting H2-rich gas at earlier sintering stages achieved greater improvement in sintering quality compared with the ones injecting at later sintering stages, and the recommended injection area was 5∼13min. Both experiment and numerical simulation results indicated that injecting H2-rich improved the thermal patterns of sintering bed, with extended high-temperature areas for increasing the generation of high-strength calcium ferrite. Especially when injecting H2-rich gas under the recommended parameters, the heat distribution in sintering bed was optimized and the sintering quality of upper sintering layer was obviously improved. Finally, an injection method for guiding the industrial application with its essence to inject H2-rich at earlier sintering stages was proposed. The research findings provide a promising way for the efficient utilization of clean energy in iron ore sintering plants.Global climate change caused by CO Iron ores are the raw materials used for steelmaking, and many steps should be taken before reaching the final steel product. Iron ore sintering process was the initial high temperature process, the task of which was to agglomerate fine iron ores into lump before smelting them into liquid iron ( As for sintering, coke breeze and anthracite are the common fuel, which are carbon-based fuels, and it is the key reason for CO Unfortunately, high grade and high gravity CH    When conducting the H After sintering, yield, tumbler index, and productivity of sinter product were examined to evaluate the sinter quality. Yield refers to finished sinter (>5 The essence of sintering is to agglomerate separately distributed fine ores into lump with the help of liquid phase formed from the minerals melting. Consequently, the thermal condition throughout the sintering process is important to obtain desirable sinter quality. For evaluating the bed thermal condition, duration of temperature for mineral melting (DTMM) and liquid phase formation area (LPFA) were used. DTMM was the duration that the bed temperature above 1200 The LPFA is a calculated value, which refers to the liquid phase generation capacity during sintering process, and it showed a positive correlation to the liquid phase generation amount. The value of LPFA can be figured out by Eq. Mathematical models were used to observe the influence of H As for ordinary sintering, basic physicochemical reactions consisted of water drying & condensation, fuel burning, CaCO During modeling process, the operation parameters of laboratory tests were selected as the initial and boundary conditions, which can be found in The influence of H The influences of H Under the recommended H  The quantitative amount of typical minerals ( The changed microstructural properties of sinter were close to the thermal state of sintering bed. For deeply revealing the function mechanism of H To make the influence of H From    Influencing rules of H Deep mechanism of H An injection method aimed at instructing the industrial application of efficient H We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled “Insight into the application of hydrogen-rich energy in iron ore sintering: parameters optimization and function mechanism”. This work was financially supported by the