In order to extract vanadium from LD (Linz–Donawitz) converter slag of steelmaking plant, an alkaline roasting–acid leaching study was carried out and the effect of different parameters on the kinetics of vanadium dissolution was determined. The leaching residue was characterized by XRD, XRF and SEM/EDX analyzer. The maximum vanadium recovery of ca. 95% was achieved at the optimum leaching condition of 70°C, S/L: 1/15, acid concentration: 3M and leaching time: 150min. It was shown that particle size has a significant effect on the dissolution of vanadium and maximum extraction was achieved at the finest size of below 0.850mm. Dissolution of vanadium in sulfuric acid showed that there are two stages in the kinetics of leaching. In the first 15min, a sharp increase in the amount of vanadium extracted was observed and at longer times, leaching became slower. Shrinking core model (SCM) was used to describe the kinetics of the slag acid leaching. SCM equations were modified to represent the long time leaching process in which the initial recovery of vanadium (at the beginning of long term period) is not zero. It was found that the kinetics of leaching at low temperature is controlled by chemical reaction for both short and long leaching periods. Rate of leaching is controlled by solid product diffusion regime at high temperature.Recycling of waste material has become very important during the past decade due to the reinforcement of environmental regulations which require minimizing the waste disposal. Steelmaking operations are specifically concerned by this problem due to the production of a huge quantity of by-products ( Vanadium is an important product that is used almost exclusively in ferrous and non-ferrous alloys due to its physical properties such as high tensile strength, hardness, and fatigue resistance ( The common grade of vanadium in processed ores is usually less than 2% ( Vanadium bearing materials are treated by means of several processes such as calcium reduction, roast/leach, solvent extraction and ion exchange to recover vanadium either as metal, ferrovanadium, vanadium pentoxide, or in the form of various chemicals ( A silica-thermic process is employed in electric furnaces to produce the ferrovanadium. The two stage technique involves reducing and refining. Then, the mixture of vanadium slag, V   The lime present in the slag causes difficulties by forming an insoluble calcium vanadate, instead of the more soluble sodium vanadate. The formation of calcium vanadate is prevented by adding pyrite (FeS  There are a few researches done on the kinetics of vanadium from LD converter slag. In the present study the effect of different leaching parameters; particle size, acid concentration, reaction temperature and solid:liquid ratio (S/L) on the extraction of vanadium from LD converter slag has been investigated using salt roasting and sulfuric acid leaching. The kinetics of the leaching process was studied using shrinking core model (SCM). The LD converter slag was collected from disposal sites of waste materials of Esfahan Steel Company, Iran. After crushing and grinding, the sample was divided into three size fractions, < Sulfuric acid used in the leaching and kinetic experiments was obtained from Merck, with a purity of 95–98%. Sodium carbonate used as the salt in the roasting experiments was 99% pure from Merck. Ferrous ammonium sulfate was provided by 99% with a purity of Merck. Alkaline roasting was done to change vanadium compound to a soluble form. The roasting stage was conducted by placing the sample mixed with sodium carbonate in a muffle furnace for a certain temperature and time. The roasting condition applied was 1000 The XRD pattern of the sample after roasting and the major minerals present in the sample are shown in The roasted sample was leached in sulfuric acid at certain temperature, S/L ratio and time. The leaching experiments were performed at an atmospheric pressure in a pyrex reactor equipped with a reflux condenser. The reactor had 3 necks, one for the condenser, one for thermometer and the last served either for the inlet of the sample or for withdrawal of samples at regular time intervals or for pH measurements. The reaction mixture was agitated with a magnetic stirrer and heated on a hot plate indirectly, through a water bath. For each leaching test, the sample and the solution of predetermined concentration were charged into the reactor and the mixture was well mixed at 600 After a specific leaching time a Buckner funnel equipped with a glass filter was used for the filtration step. The slurry was filtered and the filtrate was analyzed by ferrous ammonium sulfate titration ( For kinetic experiments, leaching was performed at the optimum condition obtained. The temperature range applied was 25, 40, 50 and 70 To determine the effect of particle size, 20     Based on the above discussion the optimum leaching condition was determined to be: acid concentration, 3  In the present work, the shrinking core model (SCM) was used to describe the acid leaching of vanadium compounds ( The fraction of reacted vanadium at any time Using the data shown in Eq. Using the data shown in The fraction of reacted vanadium at any time Using the data shown in Similar to the discussion in the previous section, Eq. Using the data shown in When diffusion thorough the product layer is the rate controlling step, the fraction of reacted vanadium at any time Again, based on the experimental data of To test the validity of diffusion thorough the product layer mechanism in the long time process, the corresponding differential mass balance equation should be integrated using new boundary conditions ( Using the data shown in  From In general, although the apparent mechanism was described by a chemical reaction control scheme, the intrinsic mechanism can be described by a shrinking core–shrinking particle scheme. This model has been developed and investigated by Characterization of the leach residue was carried out using scanning electron microscopy equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDX, Cam Scan, MV2300 model, England). This analysis was used to determine distribution of elements in the residue after leaching for 20  Based on the results obtained from the current work, the following conclusions were made: The LD converter slag from disposal sites of waste materials in Esfahan Steel Company, Iran was used. Three size fractions, < Maximum vanadium recovery of 95% (370 According to kinetics, two leaching stages are proposed. At stage one (the first 15 The SCM equations were improved to be applied to long time leaching, for which the existing equations do not cross the origin since the concentration of vanadium is not zero at the onset of this period. The rate of leaching of vanadium is controlled by chemical reaction at low temperature whereas it is controlled by diffusion through the solid product at high temperature. The calculated activation energy for short time and long time leaching at low temperature evaluated to be 24.86  stoichiometric coefficient concentration of sulfuric acid (kg/m diffusion coefficient of sulfuric acid (m rate constant (s initial radius of particle (m) vanadium extracted divided by vanadium in the un-leached sample time of reaction (s) start of long time period (s) fraction of reacted vanadium fraction of reacted vanadium at time density of vanadium ore (kg/m time for complete dissolution (s) The authors wish to thank Esfahan Steel Company of Iran for providing the sample of LD converter slag. Also, fruitful discussions with Professor A. Azaad-Mehr during this research and his help for vanadium titration procedure are gratefully acknowledged.