Kalgoorlie Consolidated Gold Mines (KCGM), the largest gold producer in Australia, has spent in the last 4 years considerable efforts to develop a parallel processing alternative to roasting primarily because of the increasing sulphide content of the ore in the Superpit and the long term tendency for more stringent environmental regulations. Ultra-fine grinding (UFG) was the technology selected to process part of the increased concentrate tonnage. A laboratory investigation was then initiated, to improve the leaching conditions of the flotation concentrate with the objective of maximizing gold recovery while minimizing processing costs. The concentrate used for the laboratory investigation had the following composition: 41.4g/t Au, 59.7% pyrite, 0.3% chalcopyrite, 38.2% gangue, and a P80 of 114μm. The gold in the concentrate is refractory and contains free gold, gold tellurides and gold associated with pyrite. Deslime concentrate and the ultra-fine grind fraction of the concentrate were also used in the study. A high concentration of lime in conjunction with lead nitrate proved more effective to dissolve gold tellurides compared to pH 11 used by the plant. The new leaching conditions also reduced significantly cyanide consumption from 12–15kg/t to 3.5–4.0kg/t. At a P80 of 21μm, the cyanidation with 4.5g/L NaCN, 25ppm DO, 1g/L lime yielded solid residues with 8.6g/t Au. Addition of lead nitrate to the leach produced a leach residue at 7.8g/t Au. Using a finer grind, a P80 of 11μm, an additional gold extraction of 1.6g/t was obtained, which was similar to the gold extraction of the UFG processed on site (leach residue of Gidji). The reduction of cyanide consumed was attributed to passivation of pyrite and chalcopyrite. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) examination of the leach residue indicated that the majority of remaining gold was primarily encapsulated within pyrite; indicating that the refractoriness of the tellurides has been effectively mitigated by the approach. The high oxygen demand of the conditioning stage was reduced by adding lead nitrate.
                  The leaching of the sulphide concentrate at a coarser grind is not an economical option. Lead nitrate addition showed a more beneficial effect on the leaching of UFG than leaching of the bulk concentrate. A plant trial on the effect of high lime concentration and lead nitrate addition, as well as a pilot plant trial, are scheduled to test the laboratory results.Kalgoorlie Consolidated Gold Mines (KCGM) is the largest gold producer in Australia, with an annual production of ∼750,000 ounces from an open pit mine. The ore is refractory and contains free gold and gold tellurides as well as gold associated with pyrite. After SAG milling and ball-milling, the ore is processed by flotation followed by roasting of the pyrite concentrate at the nearby Gidji roaster. The calcine is leached directly at the roaster facility. The flowsheet also includes direct leaching of slimes concentrate and leaching of the flotation tails. The increasing sulphide content of the ore in the Superpit and more stringent environmental regulations associated to the roaster operation have resulted in efforts to develop an alternative process to roasting. An early process to treat gold-telluride ores involved oxidative using bromocyanide ( Previous work on gold-telluride ores, practiced in Canada, indicated that cyanidation performed at high pH, high oxygen addition ( Due to concentrate production exceeding the roasting capacity, KCGM elected to utilise ultra-fine grinding (UFG) as the technology to process the concentrate surplus at the Gidji operation ( Fimiston concentrate, UFG and slimes were received from KCGM, Australia on November 23rd, 2001. The sulphide concentrate had a P Grinding of the concentrate, at a P  The lime, sodium cyanide, lead nitrate and oxygen used were all certified reagent grade chemicals. Distilled water was used. Experiments were run in either 1 A series of initial tests were run on a P At the end of the test, the pulp was passed through a 20-mesh screen to recover carbon and filtered to obtain a preg solution. The filter cake was then washed with a volume of distilled water proportionate to the volume of the original pulp and analysed for precious metals by fire assay after it was dried and homogenized. Gold concentrations in the leach residues were used to calculate the extraction kinetic plots. The leach solution and wash solutions were titrated for free cyanide with silver nitrate and rhodamine as an indicator, and then assayed for gold and base metals (Fe, The exploratory study was used to determine a potential avenue for leaching of the sulphide concentrate at a coarser grind, and, if not prove successful, focus was to be allocated to improving leaching of the fine concentrate. The first step was to establish the comparison with the actual plant leaching regime and a new leaching mode, using a high concentration of lime, adding lead nitrate, increasing the DO and the concentration of carbon. Because the sulphide concentrate was not leached directly in the plant, it was decided to use the slimes fraction of the concentrate to obtain a comparison basis. The slimes have a higher gangue content than the UFG feed (coarser fractions) with 18% sulphur compared to 28% sulphur for the UFG as indicated in  The use of a high lime concentration is very important to produce a high calaverite leaching rate. The leaching efficiency of the new regime being demonstrated, the investigation was continued using the sulphide concentrate at a coarser grind. A straight cyanidation of the concentrate at a P An increase of concentration of cyanide to 7.1  XPS analysis of a gold foil immersed in a slurry containing the KCGM sulphide concentrate, in absence and in presence of lead nitrate, indicated that lead nitrate participates in the enhancement of the leaching rate by decreasing the magnitude of coating formed at the surface of gold by the dissolution of elements such as sulphide, silver, iron from the ore as well as coating of calcium from the solution ( Pre-conditioning the concentrate with lime and oxygen (pH of 12, 2.5 The addition of 1000 It could be argued, that the oxygen addition rate used in these laboratory tests were unrealistically high (2.5 At a P SEM examination of two leached sulphide concentrate samples indicated that the majority of remaining un-leached gold in the residues occurred as tellurides being primarily encapsulated within pyrite ( Leaching of the site UFG sample, collected at the same time as the sulphide concentrate, showed a similar gold extraction of 85.7% (tailings at 6.22 Because the leaching of the sulphide concentrate at a grind of 21 Based on the leach regime practiced in October 2001, plant operating data indicated that significant gold dissolution continued to occur in the CIP circuit ( The first phase of tests outlined the potential of improving leach kinetics and reducing the cyanide consumption using pre-conditioning. For the KCGM ores, the test results showed that gold leaching kinetics can be increased with high lime concentration and a DO of 10 Increased gold leaching kinetics resulted from using high lime concentration, high DO and lead nitrate addition. Under these conditions, the cyanide consumption was reduced from 15 High oxygen demand was noticed at the conditioning stage, which could be reduced by lead nitrate addition. There was therefore an incentive to consider performing a plant trial on the leaching of slimes and UFG, using high lime and lead nitrate. A pilot plant has also to be used to obtain more details on the leaching kinetics because of the very long retention times of the tanks in the plant (48 Additional work is required to optimize the leaching parameters and the individual effect of lime and lead nitrate for slimes and UFG. The authors wish to thank KCGM and CANMET for the permission to publish this work, to Mike Nelson who kindly made plant information available, David Tretbar of Barrick Goldstrike, for the SEM examination and Pierre Beaudoin for the editorial review. Thanks also to CANMET staff: Jean Cloutier for the fire assay and other analysis, Gilles Laflamme and Dr. Rolando Lastra for the mineralogical analysis, John Graham and Phil Mulvihill for the other analysis.