Using mineral slags to replace a portion of cement is a promising way to reduce carbon emissions from concrete production. However, slag concrete suffers from low early-age strength and large dry shrinkage. To address this issue, limestone powder was utilized as an activator for slag concrete in the present study. The effects of limestone addition on compressive strength, fluidity, carbonation resistance and drying shrinkage were evaluated. The results suggest that adding limestone significantly increases the early strength due to nucleation and filling effects. Remarkable decreases in the slump loss, carbonation depth and drying shrinkage are also achieved. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) analyses indicate that limestone powder contributes to densification of concrete microstructure by reducing the volume fraction of large capillary pores. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) suggests that limestone appreciably promotes early-age hydration. This work is the first attempt to quantify the net contribution of limestone addition to carbon footprint reduction and concrete production cost on an equal-strength basis. With 10 wt% limestone addition, approximately 60% reduction in CO2 emission and 21% in production cost can be achieved without compromising concrete strength.Concrete is a mass construction material due to its prominent adaptability, good durability and low cost Granulated blast furnace slag (GBFS) is a by-product from the ironmaking process, which consists mainly of silicates and aluminosilicates Limestone resource is abundantly available in China, with a distribution area of 438,000 square kilometers, accounting for about 1/20 of the country's land area. The positive contribution of limestone powder to concrete early-age strength due to nucleation effect has already been reported In this work, limestone powder was used as an activation agent for pulverized slag concrete to improve its early-age strength. The effects of limestone addition on the fluidity, carbonation resistance and drying shrinkage were experimentally investigated. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) analyses were conducted to examine the microscopic morphology and pore size distribution, respectively. Thermogravimetry analyses (TGA) were conducted to investigate the hydration phase development. The environmental and cost benefits of utilizing slag and limestone in the concrete industry were also assessed. The results of this work are expected to provide not only theoretical guidance for improving the performance of slag concrete in practical engineering, but also a promising solution to turn discarded limestone fines into valuable resource at minimum cost. P.O 42.5 ordinary Portland cement conforming to Chinese standard GB175-2007 Pulverized slag, ground from granulated blast furnace slag (GBFS), was used as a supplementary cementitious material, the specific surface area and density of which being 390 m Limestone powder, with a Blaine fineness of 710 m The concrete mix proportions are provided in Concrete specimens were made into 150 mm × 150 mm × 150 mm cubes for compressive strength tests, in compliance with GB/T 50081-2002 “Standard test method for mechanical properties of ordinary concrete” Fresh concrete mixture was loaded into a slump cylinder without compaction and the surface layer at the top of the cylinder was scraped off and then smoothened. Once the cylinder was lifted, the slump constant, defined as the difference between the highest point of the collapsed mixture and the height of cylinder, was measured to characterize the fluidity of concrete. Then the mixture was placed in a plastic bucket and sealed with a plastic film. The slump test was repeated twice after 30 min and 60 min of storage, respectively, to evaluate the slump loss of the mixture. Concrete specimens sized 100 mm × 100 mm × 400 mm were employed for the carbonation tests, following GB/T 50082-2009 “Standard test method for long term performance and durability of ordinary concrete” Prism specimens sized 100 mm × 100 mm × 515 mm were used for drying shrinkage tests, in accordance with GB/T 50082-2009 To perform MIP tests, mortar cores devoid from coarse aggregate were drilled from parent concrete. Three replicated samples were prepared for each concrete mix and the measured results were averaged to ensure the statistical reliability. Prior to the tests, these samples were immersed in anhydrous ethanol to terminate hydration and then dried in an oven at 105 °C for 24 h. MIP tests were performed using an AutoPore II 9220 mercury intrusion porosimeter (Micromeritics, USA). SEM analyses were conducted using a S-4800 field emission scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi, Japan). The paste samples were coated with gold before testing. Thermogravimetry analyses (TGA) were performed in nitrogen atmosphere, using a Star 409 PC thermogravimetry analyzer (Netzsch, Germany). Paste samples were ground into powder and then heated from ambient temperature to 900 °C at a constant rate of 10 °C/min. The measured compressive strength of different concrete samples is shown in With limestone powder addition, a considerable increase in the early-age strength was observed. Compared with sample groups FS15, FS35 and FS55, the 3 d and 7 d strength of sample groups FS15-LP10, FS35-LP10 and FS55-LP10 were increased by 40.3%, 44.0%, 38.4% and 32.1%, 29.8%, 27.1%, respectively, owing to the nucleation effect of limestone powder. The nucleation effect was first reported by Soroka et al. A slight improvement in 28 d strength was also found in all concrete mixture, likely due to the filling effect of limestone powder since the nucleation effect is most pronounced in the early stage and vanishes with time as hydration proceeds. Due to its finer particle size, limestone powder can fill the interstices (pores) between cement particles, leading to a denser packing and refinement of pore structure with higher strength. It can be concluded that limestone powder is a preferable activation agent for slag mixture owing to its beneficial effect on early-age strength improvement. Moreover, as mentioned before, slag contributes to later-age strength development due to its pozzolanic effect, so that a synergetic effect can be achieved for concrete matrix containing both admixtures, which exhibits superior mechanical properties. Fluidity, usually characterized by slump tests, reflects the consistency of fresh concrete mixture that directly affects the difficulty and quality of construction. Results from the slump tests are summarized in The reaction of carbon dioxide in the air with calcium hydroxide in concrete, accompanied by decreasing alkalinity, is commonly known as carbonation. Concrete with high volume of slag admixture has low carbonation resistance due to the pozzolanic reaction, which consumes additional Ca(OH)  Since the solid phase volume of cement hydrates is smaller than that of the reactants, spontaneous shrinkage of concrete occurs during the hardening process. Drying shrinkage, i.e. contraction of total volume due to moisture loss from the surface of hardening concrete under unsaturated humidity, accounts for a dominant portion of total shrinkage. Effect of slag replacement ratio from 15 wt% to 75 wt% on concrete drying shrinkage is graphically presented in It is noted that drying shrinkage decreases appreciably with limestone addition. For group FS15-LP10, the drying shrinkage at 3 d, 7 d and 14 d was reduced by 15.1%, 9.4% and 6.4%, respectively, compared with group FS15. Limestone can be regarded as a filler material, which reduces the total pore volume of cement-based materials, thus restraining capillary water evaporation SEM micrographs of samples O and FS35 at 7 d are shown in SEM micrograph of 28 d aged ordinary concrete is shown in Comparing The pore size distribution and cumulative pore volume of samples FS35, O and FS35-LP10 at 7 d are shown in As shown in The TG/DTG curves of paste samples after 7 d curing are shown in Determination of CaCO Note that 0.98 in Eq. The net impact of limestone powder addition on CO A substantial change in the trend can be observed when limestone powder is added as an activator. According to the green curve in The benefits of incorporating limestone powder into slag concrete is, however, not limited to strength improvement and carbon footprint reduction potential. A reduction in dry shrinkage, carbonation depth, as well as slump loss is also found in our study, which implies better workability and durability. It is fair to say that the synergetic use of discarded limestone and mineral slag is highly beneficial for producing concretes with satisfactory engineering properties and turning both solid wastes into valuable resources. The manufacturing costs for different concrete formulations are listed in The price gap between slag and cement promises large economic benefits when slag is used as a supplementary cementitious material for concrete production. Compared with the reference sample (group O), the total production cost of sample FS60-LP10 is reduced by 21%. In this study, limestone powder was utilized as an activator for slag concrete. The effects of limestone addition on the compressive strength, fluidity, carbonation resistance and drying shrinkage were experimentally investigated. This work is the first to quantify the net effect of limestone powder addition on carbon footprint reduction and concrete production cost on an equal-strength basis. The following conclusions are drawn: Adding up to 10 wt% limestone powder significantly increases the early-age (i.e. 3 d and 7 d) strength of slag concrete due to nucleation and filling effects. A slight improvement in 28 d compressive strength can also be achieved, primarily due to its filling effect. SEM and MIP analyses confirm that adding limestone contributes to densification of microstructure and refinement of pore structure by reducing the volume fraction of large capillary pores. TGA demonstrates that limestone effectively promotes early-age hydration, explaining for the increased strength. When limestone powder is used as an activator for pulverized slag concrete, as much as 60% reduction in CO Through the synergetic use of pulverized limestone and slag, a reduction in dry shrinkage, carbonation depth, as well as slump loss is also observed with limestone powder addition, which implies better workability and durability of concrete.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the