For the first time, it has been experimentally demonstrated that hydrophobic quaternary ammonium compounds dissolved in hydrocarbons are able to effectively extract chromium(III) from alkaline aqueous solutions. Experimental investigation has been performed on extraction of chromium(III) with benzyldodecyldimethylammonium bromide (BDDMA-Br), trioctylmethylammonium chloride (TOMA-Cl) and trioctylmethylammonium hydroxide (TOMA-OH). The yield of chromium(III) extraction was studied at various contact times of the aqueous and organic phases, the composition of the phases, and ageing time of the initial aqueous phase. Under optimal conditions, the extraction of chromium(III) goes quickly with Cr(III) removal exceeding 99%.Depending on the kind of chromium(III) ionic species, pH, and composition of the aqueous phase, one can distinguish two possible ways of metal extraction. Cationic forms of Cr(III) present in the aqueous solutions at pH 2–5 can be extracted with acidic extractants like carboxylic and/or organophosphorus acids. The application of aliphatic carboxylic acids to extraction of chromium(III) leads to good enough distribution ratios, however, the rate of the process is low and prolonged contact time of the aqueous and organic phases is necessary to obtain a good recovery Extraction of chromium(III) with organophosphorus acids goes quickly but its yield does not exceed 60–70%. Better yield of extraction was achieved with mixtures of di(ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and/or of di-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) and their ammonium salts. These mixtures were used for separation of chromium(III) from spent tanning liquors. After 2 min, the yield of Cr(III) extraction from aqueous phase at pH=5 exceeded 95% or 86% with mixtures of D2EHPA or of Cyanex 272 and their ammonium salts, respectively. However, the stripping of Cr(III) from the loaded organic phase was difficult because 8 M hydrochloric acid must be used Until now, little attention has been paid to the extraction of anionic forms of chromium(III) complexes. Such complexes, formed in the presence of large excess of chlorides or thiocyanates, have been extracted from acidic media with tributyl phosphate (TBP) or other solvating solvents, e.g. 4-methyl-2-pentanone, ethers, esters, and higher aliphatic alcohols. The highest yield of extraction has been obtained when chromium(III) complexes were extracted from ammonium thiocyanate with TBP and 4-methyl-2-pentanone. The extraction of chromium(III) thiocyanate complexes is rather less selective because under similar conditions, the complexes of thiocyanate Fe(III) and Co(II) were co-extracted The anionic species of chromium(III) formed with ethylene-diamine-tetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 1,2-diaminecycloheksanetetraacetic acid (DCTA) have been extracted from acidic media with tri-octyl-methylammonium chloride (TOMA-Cl) As it comes from the literature on chromium(III) extraction, none of the extractants studied allowed for an effective extraction towards cationic and anionic species of Cr(III). Moreover, both cationic and anionic complexes of chromium(III) have been extracted only from acidic or neutral media while no information concerning Cr(III) extraction from alkaline media was unavailable. It is generally accepted that anionic monomers Cr(OH) Quaternary ammonium salts are well known as good extractants of anionic complexes. Therefore, this work is devoted to estimation of the extraction ability of some quaternary ammonium compounds: trioctylmethylammonium chloride (TOMA-Cl), trioctylmethylammonium hydroxide (TOMA-OH), and benzyldodecyldimethylammonium bromide (BDDMA-Br) towards chromium(III). We present the results of studies on the liquid–liquid extraction of chromium(III) from alkaline media (chromium(III)–sodium hydroxide–quaternary ammonium compounds–hydrocarbon diluents) at various compositions of the aqueous and organic phases, contact time of the organic and aqueous phases, and ageing time of the initial aqueous phase. The model solutions of chromium(III) have been prepared from reagent grade KCr(SO Trioctylmethylammonium chloride (90% for synthesis, Merck-Schuchardt) and benzyldodecyl-dimethylammonium bromide (containing 99.75% BDDMA-Br in dry matter, Polfa-Pabianice, Poland) were used as received without further purification. Benzene, toluene, mixtures isomeric xylene (OBRPR, Poland, all solvents, p.a.) and Trioctylmethylammonium hydroxide (TOMA-OH) was obtained by conversion from TOMA-Cl as a result repeated contact of TOMA-Cl solution in Extraction experiments were carried out at constant volume phase ratio 1:1. The temperature (25±0.5 °C) was kept constant in all experiments. The aqueous and organic phases were placed in conical flasks and then shaken mechanically with an Elpin 357 shaker (Poland) for an experimentally determined time needed to reach extraction equilibrium. Then, the liquid phases were transferred to separatory funnels and the phases were left to clarify and separate. The distribution of chromium(III) in both phases was determined spectrophotometrically with 1,5-diphenylcarbazide after oxidation of Cr(III) to Cr(VI) with a mixture of concentrated acids and KMnO A series of extraction experiments was performed for the freshly and 96-h-aged alkaline 6 mM solutions of Cr(III) and 0.05 M solutions of TOMA-Cl and BDDMA-Br in different hydrocarbon diluents containing various additions of 1-decanol. Formation of a third phase was observed during chromium(III) extraction from 0.5 M NaOH aged solutions with TOMA-Cl, irrespective of aromatic hydrocarbon used and of the 1-decanol content in the organic phase. A similar phenomenon was also observed for 0.05 M TOMA-Cl solutions in The solubility of BDDMA-Br in The effect of phase contact time on Cr(III) extraction was examined in two different series of extraction experiments, namely: the first series in which the initial concentration of Cr(III) was lower than the initial concentration of extractants and the second series in which this relationship was reversed. The phase contact time was varied from 0.25 to 7 h. In the first series, 0.05 M solutions of TOMA-Cl in The yield of chromium(III) extraction from freshly prepared solutions in 0.1 M NaOH with both extractants is excellent and exceeded 98.6% and 99.7% with BDDMA-Br and TOMA-Cl, respectively, after 15 min of phase contact. Completely different results were obtained for extraction of Cr(III) from freshly prepared 0.5 M NaOH solutions with TOMA-Cl where the yield of Cr(III) extraction increased with increases in phase contact times. The maximum extraction of Cr(III) reached about 90% when the phases were equilibrated for at least 3 h. The lower yield of chromium(III) extraction from freshly prepared 0.5 M NaOH solutions than from 0.1 M NaOH could be due to a stronger competition between hydroxyl anions and hydroxochromates(III) as well as from higher ionic strength of solutions containing 0.5 M NaOH. It is also evident that the yield of Cr(III) extraction with both ammonium salts from aged solutions at higher NaOH concentration is slightly sensitive to prolongation of the phase contact time. However, after the same time of phase contact, the results obtained with TOMA-Cl are better than those with BDDMA-Br and vary within the ranges from 94% to 95% and from 87% to 90%, respectively. The effect of phase contact time on Cr(III) extraction was also investigated at the ratio of the initial metal concentration to the initial ammonium salt concentration equal to 1.5. Chromium(III) has been extracted from freshly prepared 0.03 M solutions in 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5 M NaOH with 0.02 M TOMA-Cl solution in The prolongation of phase contact time to over 3 h Experiments were performed using 0.05 M solutions of TOMA-Cl in The results Chromium(III) was extracted from fresh and 96-h-aged 0.1 and 0.5 M NaOH solutions at metal concentrations ranging from 1.0 to 49.1 mM. Initial organic phases were 0.05 M solutions of TOMA-Cl and BDDMA-Br in In contrast to fresh 0.1 M NaOH solutions, the results of extraction of chromium(III) from both fresh and aged solutions at higher NaOH concentrations are different. The yield of extraction with TOMA-Cl and BDDMA-Br from freshly prepared and aged chromium(III) solutions in 0.5 M NaOH is lower than that in the previous case and also depends on the initial metal concentration in the aqueous phase. The extraction yield increases as the initial Cr(III) concentration is increased and then passes through flat maxima at 5–13 and at 13–28 mM of Cr(III) in fresh and aged aqueous feed solutions, respectively. At higher concentrations of Cr(III), the yield of metal extraction decreases. It can be explained in terms of the increase in ionic strength of the aqueous phases The initial organic phases at concentrations of TOMA-Cl or BDDMA-Br ranging from 0.01 to 0.10 M, have been applied in a series of 10 extraction experiments. The freshly prepared and 96-h-aged 3–30 mM chromium(III) alkaline solutions at NaOH concentration varying from 0.1 to 0.6 M, were used as the initial aqueous phases. The effect of the initial concentration of BDDMA-Br on chromium(III) extraction is illustrated in Extraction curves of chromium(III) at various initial concentrations of TOMA-Cl and at various initial concentrations of NaOH in the aqueous phases are shown in The effect of the initial TOMA-Cl concentration on the extraction of chromium(III) at different metal concentrations (3, 5 and 30 mM) but constant concentration of sodium hydroxide (0.5 M) are compared in It is generally accepted that in ideal extraction systems, the extraction should increase with an increase in the initial concentration of extractant A comparison of extraction efficiencies of different extractants was carried out for about 5 mM freshly prepared solutions of chromium(III) in 0.5 M NaOH. The initial organic phases contained BDDMA-Br in benzene or TOMA-Cl in The results of these studies are shown in With respect to increasing extraction abilities towards Cr(III), the examined quaternary ammonium compounds follow the order: BDDMA-Br<TOMA-Cl<TOMA-OH. This order correlated with the literature data where TOMA-OH was found to extract oxoanions of metals better than TOMA-Cl We demonstrated for the first time that quaternary ammonium salts (compounds) are able to extract chromium(III) from alkaline solutions effectively. Under optimal conditions, the extraction of chromium(III) is quick and its yield exceeds 99%. The extraction efficiency of chromium(III) from solutions containing 0.1 M NaOH is independent of their ageing time, initial Cr(III) concentration in the aqueous phase, and initial extractant concentration in the organic phase. The extraction yield of Cr(III) decreases with increases in the initial concentration of NaOH in the aqueous phase. At higher NaOH concentration, the extraction yield of chromium(III) increases with increases in ageing time of the aqueous phases as well as with increases in initial concentration of chromium(III) and ammonium salts in the feed aqueous and organic phases, respectively. However, above certain initial concentrations of metal in the feed aqueous phase and of extractant in the organic phase, the yield of extraction of chromium(III) decreases. This effect was attributed to increasing ionic strength of the aqueous phase and aggregation of extractant in the organic phase. The work has been sponsored by a grant from Polish Committee of Scientific Research (KBN) No. 7 T08 043 10. Professor Witold A. Charewicz is gratefully acknowledged for critical evaluation of the text.