Multi-fractured horizontal well (MFHW) is commonly used in the development of unconventional reservoirs. Flowback data after hydraulic fracturing is of critical importance in the characterization of hydraulic fracture, stimulation evaluation, and reservoir simulation. This study presents a two-phase diagnostic plot and a semi-analytical flowback model for the early-time flowback period when fluid influx from matrix remains insignificant and production is mainly from the fracture network. The developed model considers the changes of water saturation in hydraulic fracture (HF) under fracture depletion mechanism and pressure-dependent permeability and porosity, and is able to predict HF attributes, such as fracture half-length, initial fracture permeability, and initial pore volume of fracture network. A new method of calculating average pressure in the fracture is developed based on the solution of water-phase diffusivity equation and is compared with the traditional material balance approach based on the tank model. Three iterative workflows are proposed using the successive substitution method to calculate fracture attributes under different production conditions. Validation of the developed flowback model, average pressure calculation method, and the analysis workflow, as well as their application in an MFHW drilled in Horn River Shale show the applicability of this study to interpret flowback data quickly and estimate HF properties accurately.Considers pressure dependent Requires only water production data Assumes constant Requires both water and gas production data Assumes constant Requires both water and gas production data Multi-fractured horizontal wells (MFHWs) have been widely used to economically produce from unconventional resources, such as tight and shale gas. Rate transient analysis (RTA) is a commonly used technique to conduct quantitative analysis on the well performance of MFHWs. Many mathematical tools have been investigated to characterize reservoir and HF properties using RTA ( Early studies of flowback analysis had focused on the qualitative insights and flow regime analysis. In recent works, many authors investigated the mathematical development of flowback models to conduct quantitative analysis. During the early flowback period, the fluids (water or water and gas) inside the fracture network flow along the fractures to the wellbore. Meanwhile, formation gas may enter the fracture network creating a coupled fracture-matrix flow. Early attempts of flowback modeling focused on fluid flow in the fracture. To consider fluid influx in flowback modeling, advanced analysis methods continue to evolve by coupling fracture flow with single-phase or two-phase influx from the matrix. The present study focuses on analyzing the flowback data during primary fracture depletion. We developed a 1D model to estimate HF attributes and forecast the flowback behavior during early gas production from the fracture network, and proposed a two-phase diagnostic plot to identify flow regimes. The developed model provides a quick estimation of fracture properties and can be used for further development of more complex scenarios. A new average pressure calculation approach is proposed based on the solution of diffusivity equation, which releases the need for gas-phase flowback data as input. The proposed flowback model, average pressure method, and the analysis workflow are validated against several numerical simulations and applied to an MFHW drilled in Horn River Shale in British Columbia, Canada. We first describe the conceptual model and the assumptions made in this study. RTA flow regime analysis on flowback data is introduced as a basis for further mathematical development and model application. Then, a 1D two-phase flowback model for boundary dominated flow (BDF) is developed. We also proposed a new analytical method to calculate average pressure in the fracture which does not rely on gas production data as the input, and compared the new method with the material balance approach. At the end of this section, the method of successive substitution is applied to iteratively obtain key fracture properties, such as fracture half-length, initial fracture permeability, and initial pore volume of the fracture. As shown in Based on these explanations, the main assumptions include: Water only sources from the hydraulic fracture and matrix contribution to the water production is negligible due to low water mobility in the matrix. Gas only sources from the initial gas in fracture, and matrix contribution is negligible. Water is assumed to be slightly compressible, and water compressibility is constant. Water formation volume factor, water viscosity, fracture permeability, and fracture porosity are pressure-dependent variables, which are evaluated at average fracture pressure. While linear, elliptical, and radial flow may be observed for different fracture geometries, which are controlled by The gravity segregated relative permeability curves ( Flow regime analysis is a useful tool to identify what production stages the well has experienced and to extract reservoir and fracture properties from specific flow regimes. The analysis is usually based on the long-term production data by generating the diagnostic plot, which is rate normalized pressure ( Single-phase water transient flow (infinite acting linear flow) is the first flow regime that may be observed during the flowback period. After well stimulation, the hydraulic fracture is mostly saturated with fracturing liquid. Therefore, single-phase water production dominates the fracture system at the beginning, which shows the half-slope straight line in the diagnostic plot. During the two-phase transient flow, the diagnostic plot shows a half-slope straight line as well. The produced gas is the initial trapped gas inside the fracture network. Although half-slope straight line can also be observed, the single-phase transient flow model cannot be used for FR2 because gas production has a significant impact on total compressibility so that assuming only water expansion dominates flow will cause an enormous error ( Two-phase boundary dominated flow (BDF) in the fracture is the most dominant regime for water flow during the early flowback period exhibiting a unit-slope line in the diagnostic plot. The behavior of gas production during flowback period is different with water production. As pointed out by Due to the high conductivity of hydraulic fracture, we assumed 1D BDF for the fracture. This work divides basic production conditions during flowback period into constant BHP and constant rate, which can be extended to more realistic variable BHP/rate condition using the superposition principle. We first developed a 1D two-phase flowback model under constant BHP conditions. The water-phase material balance equation for an infinitesimal fracture element is given by: Dividing both sides of Eq. Applying chain rule to the accumulative term (right-hand side) and substituting Using the definitions of water and fracture compressibility ( Eq. The exponential relationship of pressure-dependent fracture permeability and porosity ( We used the pseudopressure ( The governing Eq. Eq. Taking the derivative of Eq. Applying Darcy's water surface flowrate for the whole fracture Eq. Applying the long-term approximation described by Constant rate case in flowback modeling is as important as constant BHP case, not only because it is the basic condition for well testing, but also it can be easily extended to variable rate/BHP case with superposition principle. With the same definition of pseudotime and pseudopressure in Eqs. The analytical solution of Eq. We evaluate Eq. Taking the long-term approximation ( Here we extend the constant rate solution of pseudopressure to variable-rate condition by applying superposition principle ( Similarly, we evaluate Eq. Introducing the definition of According to Eqs. Average pressure in the fracture is a critical parameter used to evaluate pressure dependent properties and calculate pseudopressure and pseudotime in the flowback model. Material balance equation is a simple and popular way to obtain average pressure, which requires both water and gas production data as the input ( The new method is based on the solution of pseudopressure from the diffusivity equation. The volumetric average pseudopressure under constant BHP, constant rate, and variable rate conditions are calculated by taking the integral of Eqs. According to the definition of pseudopressure in Eq. Assuming that pseudo average pressure can be approximated with average pseudopressure, Eq. With the relation between pressure and pseudopressure in Eq. Substituting Eqs. We use the simplified material balance equation proposed by With the average water saturation, Here, the fracture network is treated as a tank system in the early flowback without gas matrix influx acting on fracture flow. The material balance equation based on gas fracture storage can be written as ( Based on the proposed two-phase flowback model and the average fracture pressure calculation methods, we developed an analysis technique to interpret early-time flowback data and estimate fracture properties such as The specialty plots described in Sections 2.3 require the calculations of pseudopressure and pseudotime. Pseudotime According to the definition of pseudopressure in Eq. Unlike constant/variable-rate case, ( By substituting Eqs. If we assume constant water viscosity and apply integration by parts, we can obtain the analytical expression for Eq. To perform analysis with the proposed flowback model, the data interval in BDF should be identified first. According to flow regime analysis presented in Section 2.2, two-phase BDF flow (FR3) starts right after the end of two-phase transient flow in the fracture (FR2). Therefore, a diagnostic plot should be used to identify the end of FR2, which is the beginning of FR3. The new initial and boundary conditions for FR2 under constant BHP condition and constant rate condition are given by:  Eq. We defined the derivative of This section presents three workflows using successive substitution method to extract For the constant rate or variable rate flowback model in Eqs. However, the calculation of average pressure in Eqs. Workflow I and II have the same calculation procedures. The only difference is the method used to calculate average pressure in the fracture. They both follow seven steps: Guess an initial value for Obtain average fracture pressure Generate two-phase diagnostic plot, Generate specialty plot ln( Calculate a new value of Repeat step 2 to 4 until the relative error of Determine The two workflows cover both constant BHP and constant/variable-rate flowback models which are capable of analyzing complex flowback data in reality. Workflow I uses material balance approach to calculate average pressure in the fracture, which requires both water and gas-phase production data as the inputs. Whereas, Workflow II only requires water-phase production data and releases the need for gas data for flowback analysis by applying the new average pressure calculation method. For the field application, it depends on the availability and quality of gas-phase production data to choose the most appropriate workflow. If the well is producing under constant BHP condition, Workflow III is an alternative way to analyze flowback data which uses the diffusivity equation approach to calculate average pressure in the fracture. It follows nine steps: Guess an initial value for Obtain average fracture pressure Generate two-phase diagnostic plot, Generate specialty plot ln( Calculate a new value of Repeat step 2 to 5 until the relative error of Calculate a new value of Repeat step 2 to 7 until the relative error of Determine Workflow III only requires water-phase production data as the input, like Workflow II, but it is only valid for constant BHP case. Therefore for flowback analysis under constant BHP condition, Workflow I, II and III all work. To validate the developed flowback model, average pressure calculation methods, and the proposed workflows, we conducted several numerical simulations for one fracture stage as shown in A list of simulation runs with different degrees of nonlinearity and production conditions are given in First, we tested the accuracy of the average fracture pressure calculation methods against the numerical simulation for Case 1, Case 2, and Case 3. These cases are all under constant BHP condition so that the diffusivity equation approach for constant BHP and variable rate case, and material balance approach can be compared against each other and the numerical simulation results by considering The results show that there is a good agreement between numerical simulation and analytical methods. Although the nonlinearity caused by two-phase flow and pressure dependent fracture permeability is increasing from Case 1 to Case 3, the good match of average pressure for all the cases indicates that the nonlinearity does not affect the accuracy of average pressure calculation. The average pressure values obtained from the variable-rate method are sensitive to the quality and trend of production data. Further investigation is required to improve the calculation of average pressure using variable-rate method. After validation of average pressure calculation methods, we tested the accuracy of the two-phase flowback model against the production data obtained from the numerical simulation, by considering The two-phase diagnostic plot for each case shows a clear half-slope straight line indicating the transient flow, which is expected based on Eqs. With the slope and intercept of the specialty plot, we used Eqs. To further validate our model, we compared the analysis results with the two-phase flowing material balance model proposed by In this section, we validated the proposed workflows of the successive substitution method in Workflow II follows a similar procedure as Workflow I, with the difference in average pressure calculation. Therefore, the above-mentioned validation is valid for Workflow II. We validated Workflow III with the flowback data generated from Case 1. With the set parameters We applied the flowback model to an MFHW drilled and completed in the Muskwa and Otter Park members of the Horn River Shale in part of British Columbia, Canada. This field example was analyzed by Table 7 shows the real field data from the Horn River MFHW with 15 hydraulic fractures. The input parameters are consistent with those used by  We applied the proposed two-phase water flowback model to analyze flowback data and used the diffusivity approach under variable rate condition to calculate the average pressure in the fracture. We started the Workflow II with an initial guess of fracture volume We also analyzed the long-term production data to extract the fracture attributes in the late time using the RTA technique for transient linear flow and history matching approach. Considering that gas is dominantly produced in the long-term period with water production negligible, we first use the single-phase gas formation linear flow model (  In this paper, we proposed a 1D two-phase model to analyze water-phase flowback data of MFHWs in shale reservoirs and a two-phase diagnostic plot to identify flow regimes during flowback period. Pressure-dependent fracture permeability and porosity are accounted for in this model. Compared to other flowback models, the proposed models consider water-phase relative permeability into pseudopressure to linearize the governing equation. Furthermore, this paper first developed flowback model under constant BHP condition although it is only valid for cases with low extent of nonlinearity, whereas other researchers derived flowback models under constant rate condition. With the flowback model, we proposed a comprehensive analysis workflow to iteratively calculate In the derivation of the new average pressure calculation method, it is assumed that pseudo average pressure can be approximated by average pseudopressure. Therefore, the proposed method is not applicable to the systems with significant nonlinearity in two-phase flow and pressure dependent permeability. As the nonlinearity increases, the approximation is expected to be worse. Also, the variable rate method of calculating average pressure is very sensitive to the data quality, which needs careful attention to smoothen the production data. More work needs to improve this method to make it robust. The flowback model in this paper is developed for early gas production period, which assumes water and gas sourced from the matrix are negligible. This could be invalid for reservoirs with relatively high matrix permeability or secondary fractures. When the fluid influx from the matrix cannot be overlooked, our model could be inapplicable. The modeling of 2D two-phase flow during the late flowback period needs further investigations. This work presents a semi-analytical two-phase model to analyze early-time flowback data from MFHWs and evaluate fracture properties, such as fracture half-length, initial fracture permeability, and initial pore volume of fracture, under constant BHP, constant rate, and variable rate/BHP condition. The following important conclusions can be drawn: The two-phase semi-analytical model is based on water diffusivity equation and considers pressure-dependent fracture permeability and porosity. By introducing new definitions of pseudopressure and pseudotime, the proposed two-phase diagnostic plot is able to identify flow regimes more accurately during flowback period. A diffusivity equation approach is developed to calculate average pressure under constant BHP, constant rate, and variable rate/BHP condition. The method releases the demand for gas-phsae production data as input and is not affected by the extent of nonlinearity. Comparing against input fracture parameters in numerical simulation, the developed constant BHP flowback model has more error and is only applicable to cases with slight nonlinearity. The constant/variable-rate model is more accurate with relative error <10%. The proposed three analysis workflows can closely predict fracture properties. The iterative procedure is robust and practical for the field applications. Workflow I is valid for cases with gas and water-phase flowback data both available, whereas Workflow II and III are more applicable and only need water-phase production data as input. Workflow III provides an alternative analysis method to calculate fracture properties under constant BHP condition. A field example in Horn River Shale is analyzed using the proposed flowback model to demonstrate the practical application of the mathematical developments presented in this study. The field application shows that the fracture half-length and permeability are reduced by twice and four times, respectively, after three months of production.  The intercept of ln( The intercept of Gas formation factor, Water formation factor, Bottomhole water formation factor, Initial water formation factor, Fracture compressibility, Total compressibility, Water compressibility, Dynamic drainage area Derivative of rate normalized pseudopressure, Initial gas storage in the fracture, Remaining gas in fracture, Cumulative gas production, Fracture height, Hydraulic fracture Fracture permeability, Initial fracture permeability, Water relative permeability The slope of ln( The slope of Multi-fractured horizontal wells Pressure, Base pressure, Average pressure in the fracture, Initial fracture pressure, Pseudopressure, Pseudo average pressure in the fracture, Average pseudopressure in the fracture, Initial pseudopressure, Bottomhole pseudopressure, Pressure at standard condition, Bottom-hole pressure, Dimensionless water flowrate The water-phase downhole flowrate, The water-phase surface flowrate from the whole fracture, Rate normalized pseudopressure, Rate transient analysis Gas saturation Initial gas saturation Water saturation Average water saturation Average water saturation in fracture at the end of flowback Initial water saturation Initial pore volume of the fracture, Remaining water volume in the fracture, Hydraulic fracture width, Initial water storage in fracture, Cumulative water production, Location in the fracture, Fracture half-length, Time, Pseudotime, Superposition pseudotime, Temperature at standard condition, ° Fracture porosity Initial fracture porosity Gas density at standard condition, Reference density, Water density, Water density at standard condition, Water viscosity, Gas viscosity, Permeability modulus, Fracture coefficient,  Initial The Initial fracture Fracture Gas Standard condition Water Dimensionless Pseudo or constant BHP model Pseudo or constant rate mode The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the