The global buckling behaviour of welded Q460GJ steel H-columns under eccentric compression was investigated experimentally and numerically in this work. In the experimental programme, a total of eight columns with different slendernesses and width-thickness ratios were tested subject to eccentric compression. The load carrying capacities of steel columns were quantified in the tests. Numerical models were developed for steel columns, in which initial geometric imperfections and residual stress were taken into account. The model was validated by test data, and a parametric analysis was conducted. Comparisons were made between the load-carrying capacities calculated from numerical simulations and design codes. It was illustrated that estimating the load-carrying capacity of this type of columns by using GB50017-2003, ANSI/AISC360-10 and AIJ 2010 would result in remarkable errors in most cases. In contrast, curve “a” in Eurocode 3 can be used to predict the capacity of columns with good accuracy when the slenderness ratio is greater than 100, even though it would slightly underestimate the load capacity when the slenderness ratio is relatively small. The results can be used for the design of Q460GJ steel columns under eccentric compression.As steel structures are increasingly used in large-span and high-rise buildings, the requirements on steel properties have been raised. High-strength steel is a great improvement in the strength of mild steel, as a higher strength will reduce the size of structural members. However, the thickness effect on the yield strength of high-strength steel is still significant. In other words, the strength decreases considerably with increasing thickness of steel plates. To minimise this effect, a new type of high-performance steel, namely, GJ structural steel, is developed in China [ Up till now, most of the study on global buckling behaviour of columns was focused on conventional steel. Rasmussen and Hancock [ In this study, experimental tests and numerical simulations were conducted to investigate the buckling behaviour of welded Q460GJ steel H-columns under eccentric compression. A total of eight columns with different width-thickness ratios and slendernesses were tested in the experimental programme. Numerical models were established and validated, in which initial geometric imperfections and residual stresses were considered. A parametric study was carried out to examine the effect of slenderness and eccentricity on the load capacity of Q460GJ steel columns. The load capacities calculated from different design codes, including GB50017-2003 [ In the experimental programme, eight welded Q460GJ steel H-columns were tested under eccentric compression. Prior to testing, the mechanical properties of steel plates were obtained through tension tests, and initial geometric imperfections and residual stresses were measured so that numerical models could be developed subsequently. H-sections were welded from flame-cut Q460GJ steel plates with a fillet weld size of 10 mm. The submerged automatic arc welding was used to weld the H-section. The current was 605 A, and the voltage was 32.5 V. The welding speed was 25 cm/min. The loading eccentricity and slenderness are two key factors that affect the buckling behaviour of eccentrically-compressed steel columns. Thus, four different cross-sections with varying loading eccentricity and slenderness were selected in the experimental study. The material properties of GJ steel plates were determined though tension tests in accordance with GB/T 228-2010 [ In addition to strengths, the stress-strain curve of steel plates could also be obtained from tension tests. It is well known that the load-carrying capacity of steel columns is affected by initial imperfections. In the test, initial bending, loading eccentricity and residual stress are the most important imperfections. The initial bending of columns was measured by using an infrared laser level meter prior to installation. Three measuring points were arranged along the column height, as shown in Residual stresses in H-sections were measured through sectioning method. The section was sectioned into a series of steel strips with a nominal width and gauge length of 10 and 150 mm, respectively. The lengths of strips before and after sectioning were measured, and thereafter the difference could be calculated which could be used to quantify the residual stress. More details can be found in the work conducted by Alpsten and Tall [ All H-columns were tested in a 10,000 kN testing machine. Pin supports were achieved about the Linear variable displacement transducers (LVDTs) were used to measure the lateral displacement of columns at the mid-height and quarter points along the column height. Additional LVDTs were attached to the supports to measure the shortenings of the column and lateral displacements at the ends. In addition, three inclinometers with an accuracy of 0.01°were placed at both ends of each column to monitor the rotations. To capture the strain of steel columns, seven strain gauges were attached to the column web and flanges at 400 mm away from the ends (See In this experimental study, a compression force was initially applied to the column at a rate of 0.025    In addition to experimental tests, numerical simulations were also conducted to investigate the effects of slenderness and loading eccentricity on the buckling behaviour of Q460GJ H-columns. Numerical models were developed by using commercial software ABAQUS. In the model, steel columns were simulated by solid element C3D8R from the element library, and pin supports were considered at both ends of H-columns.  In accordance with the validated numerical model, a series of parametric study was carried out to study the influence of slenderness and loading eccentricity on loading capacity. The dimensions of H-columns, labelled as H-314, H-266, H-218 and H-170, remained the same as the measured values, as shown in To evaluate the accuracy of different national codes in predicting the load capacity of Q460GJ steel columns, comparisons were made between the load capacities calculated from numerical simulations and design codes, including the GB 50017-2003 [ To conduct statistical analyses, the relative error (RE) of load capacity was calculated, as expressed in Eq. (1): In this study, the global buckling behaviour of welded Q460GJ steel H-columns under eccentric compression was investigated through experimental tests and numerical simulations. In the experimental programme, eight H-columns with different cross-sections and slendernesses were tested, and the load capacity of all columns was quantified. In the numerical model, initial geometric imperfections and residual stresses were considered. Parametric study was conducted based on the verified numerical model. The following conclusions could be drawn from experimental and numerical study. All steel H-columns developed global buckling under eccentric compression. A decrease in the loading eccentricity or slenderness of H-columns increased the load capacity but reduced the associated deflection measured at the mid-height. By considering initial bending, residual stresses and loading eccentricity, the numerical model could predict the load capacity of columns with good accuracy. The verified model was used for parametric study on the effect of slenderness and loading eccentricity on load capacity. Comparisons between numerical results and design curves in different national standards suggested curve “a” in Eurocode 3 [ It should be pointed out that this study only discusses the buckling behaviour of welded Q460GJ steel H-column, and further experimental and numerical investigations are necessary to establish design methods for Q460GJ steel columns of other section types. The authors gratefully acknowledge the