Laboratory drop weight tests and numerical modelling have been used to study the effect of impact energy on the degree of fragmentation of cylindrical granite specimens. The drop weight tests indicated that the degree of fragmentation of the granite formed a non-linear relation with impact energy. In the modelling of the drop weight test, the shear localisation developed in the granite was assumed to represents discrete fracture planes. Image analysis of the model outputs was undertaken to determine particle size distributions. Corresponding grading curves from the numerical modelling were then validated against the laboratory derived curves indicating the potential of numerical modelling to simulate the fragmentation process of brittle rocks.The dynamic fragmentation of solid, brittle materials is a fundamental activity that lies at the start of many manufacturing and recovery processes, most notably during crushing in the minerals and aggregates industries, during blasting in quarries and tunnels and in the action of some rock cutting processes The present research has been conducted with a view to improve the understanding of the basic impact breakage process, allowing it to be simulated more accurately. By improving the simulation of breakage in numerical models it should be possible to optimise the fragmentation process in terms of both energy input and product size range produced for a wide range of rock fragmentation processes. Other authors have studied the dynamic fragmentation process in a number of contexts. General dynamic fragmentation papers are presented by a range of authors The experimental procedure adopted has been to use an impact rig to dynamically load cylindrical specimens of rock and then measure the resulting fragmentation by sieving of the fragmented product. Sequences of tests have been conducted for different impact masses and impact velocities. The experimental results have been used to validate a numerical simulation of the same process using the finite difference approach. The numerical model includes a number of innovations, most notably a methodology to fragment and size the impacted sample. The size reduction process in the mineral processing industry relies almost universally on loading of particles by compression at velocities in the range of 2 to 5 The drop weight testing machine is a useful tool to determine the energy input/size reduction relation for breakage of brittle materials. Its use has dramatically increased in recent years for evaluating breakage parameters of various forms  A picture of the device known as the JK-Tech Drop Test Device, is presented in The tests which form the initial part of a more extensive study were conducted on individual cylindrical samples of a Cornish Grey Penryn Granite from Carnsew Quarry. Microscopic examination showed a standard granitic composition where plagioclase feldspar and quartz predominate. Other essential minerals present are alkali feldspar, biotite mica and muscovite mica. Close investigation of the plagioclase feldspar surface indicates some alteration to Kaolin, although this is not widespread enough to affect the mechanical properties of the rock. Also present as accessory minerals are chlorite and tourmaline, with chlorite being produced by alteration of biotite mica. Examination of crystal size reveals a ground mass of 2 to 3 Samples had a diameter of 37.5 The drop weight tests were conducted on the prepared cylindrical samples at three drop weight increments of 30, 40 and 50 After each test the broken sample was removed from the machine and sieved to determine the size distribution. The sieve sizes used were in two ranges: 37.50, 31.50, 26.50, 22.40, 19.00, 13.20, 9.50, 6.70, 4.75, 3.35 2.36, 1.70, 1.18, 0.850, 0.600, 0.425, 0.300 The method of sieve analysis adopted was as suggested The cumulative frequency size distribution curves for constant drop heights are given in The Figures show, as would be anticipated, that with increasing energy of impact a greater degree of fragmentation of the granite samples occurs. To represent the degree of fragmentation of the samples after the drop weight test the estimated sieve size that 25% and 50% by mass of the sample would be expected to pass through was determined from the cumulative frequency curves. The determined sieve size values for each drop weight/height configuration are given in  A numerical model of the drop weight test on the granite samples was constructed utilising a commercial two-dimensional finite difference code developed for geomechanical problems known as fast Lagrangian analysis of continua (FLAC) The FLAC numerical modelling software was used in full dynamic mode so that the correct energy balance required to simulate fragmentation was maintained. The dynamic simulation also allowed the impact forces, strain rates and propagation of stress waves within the medium. The model was constructed in three representative parts: the drop weight, the rock sample and the underlying anvil. The finite difference grid generated by FLAC, is shown in Interfaces were used to model the contact between the drop weight and sample, and the bottom anvil and sample ( The FLAC modelling was undertaken as a two-dimensional plane strain analysis for a number of practical reasons. Given that the main thrust of this research was to study fragmentation and process its results into size distributions the complexicity of processing three-dimensional results into three-dimensional objects and then sizing these objects was seen as too ambitious at this stage in the study. Limited three-dimensional analysis with FLAC3D is planned for comparative purposes as part of the wider study. However, it will only compare two-dimensional sections through the model and is unlikely to attempt to analyse three-dimensional fragments. The image analysis software utilised later in the results analysis is strictly limited to two-dimensions. The development of three-dimensional fragment processing and sizing software would require considerable additional effort and resources in its own right. A logical compromise is to initially conduct a two-dimensional analysis to improve understanding at this level before attempting the far more complex three-dimensional analysis. To correct the two-dimensional representation of the three-dimensional drop weight test, adjustment of the material properties was required. The correction used a reduction factor based on an equivalent volume approach The stiffness, density, cohesion and tensile strength material parameters were reduced within the model by multiplying the actual values by Two materials need to be simulated within the model of the drop weight test. These are the granite sample, which is capable of brittle failure and yield, and the robust steel structure of the testing system (drop weight and anvil). Laboratory testing of the granite was undertaken to determine it's Young's Modulus, unconfined compressive strength, Brazilian Disc tensile strength and triaxial strength. The unconfined and triaxial testing was undertaken on cylindrical core samples, similar to those used in the drop weight test, using a servo-controlled stiff press with lateral confinement being provided by a Hoek Cell. The axial deformation of the samples was measured during the unconfined compression tests using two LVDT's to allow determination of the Young's Modulus. All the testing was undertaken in accordance with ISRM standard procedure. In this research, the Mohr–Coulomb and the Hoek–Brown criteria are applied to the rock material strength properties subjected to dynamic loading and To represent the constitutive behaviour of the granite a Mohr–Coulomb strain–softening material model was adopted. To simulate the brittle fracture of the granite, the strength was reduced to the residual value (fracture strength) given in One of the initial objectives of this study comparing laboratory impact breakage results to numerical models was to determine if static properties and failure criteria were appropriate for modelling dynamic breakage at the loading rates typically developed in the test apparatus. The initial criteria and methodology chosen have proven satisfactory to date producing reasonably realistic results with little correction or modification. However, further detailed parametric study may eventually indicate that changes are required to failure criteria to model the dynamic failure optimally The steel structure (drop weight head and anvil) of the drop rig system was simulated as a linear elastic material with no yield. A representative Young's Modulus for the mild steel structure was taken to be 200 To monitor the stress wave During brittle fracturing of rock it is generally considered that the crack density increases with spatial clustering of cracks at peak stress and shear localisation in the strain softening stage Shear strain localisation is simulated within the FLAC models at the onset of yield and progressively develops during subsequent strain softening. This allows the FLAC models to simulate crack propagation within the material. Previous research had also indicated that shear strain contours within FLAC models can be strongly correlated with areas of fracturing encountered in a range of rock mechanics modelling problems. In the modelling exercise shear bands were used to separate solid material from shattered or broken material, allowing the FLAC output from the dynamic modelling to be processed into black and white fragmented images. To determine the magnitude of the shear strain increment that represented the full development of macroscopic fracture planes, sequences of images were constructed at 5, 7.5, 10 and 12.5 These images were then analysed using the image analysis software Image Tool for Windows Version 3.00 The short axis dimensions and areas of the individual fragments for the entire modelled sample were used to construct simulated cumulative frequency grading curves. The simulated grading curves generated from the FLAC models of constant drop height of 1000 Grading curves were constructed for shear strain increments of 5, 7.5, 10 and 12.5   The two sets of grading curves shown in Grading curves using the procedure described above were constructed for the numerical simulations representing the drop weight tests with a weight of 50 A series of drop weight tests have been undertaken on cylindrical specimens of Cornish Grey Penryn granite at nine different drop height/weight configurations. The degree of fragmentation of each sample has been represented by the sieve sizes that 25% and 50% of the broken sample would pass through. The degree of fragmentation has been shown to be linearly inversely related to impact energy. The computer numerical modelling program FLAC has been utilized to simulate the drop weight test on the granite sample. The output of the model was analyzed in terms of shear strain banding within the sample. Image analysis on outputs obtained from the FLAC modelling was undertaken to determine the particle dimensions allowing simulated grading curves to be constructed. The grading curves showed that the optimum shear strain increment to predict macroscopic fracture planes was 10 The simulated grading curves obtained from FLAC modelling and image analysis were compared to the corresponding grading curves obtained from the laboratory drop weight test. The comparison indicated that the FLAC modelling provides a method of predicting the dynamic fragmentation of the cylindrical granite samples. However, from the analysis it can be seen that FLAC has limited capabilities in predicting the size of larger single broken particles, from the coarser fraction. In the image analysis program, the area of a particle is represented by a number of pixels. Should two big particles be connected to each other in the model by just one pixel, the image program would represent this as one piece. In reality, in the actual size reduction process, the particle would be broken. The aim of this study was to test a numerical model fragmentation methodology on a sequence of measured laboratory breakage tests. The simulation has proven to be realistic and shows promise for further development. By validating the numerical modelling approach on the laboratory drop rig experiment, its use on more realistic industrial breakage processes becomes a possibility. It is envisaged that a validated fragmentation model for a rock type could be used in a series of simulations to optimise the operational parameters of plant such as crushers at the design stage. In summary, due to the scale of mineral processing or quarrying plants, prediction of performance is difficult. This is particularly true for accurate prediction of energy input/product size distribution relations. The benefits of this type of prediction technology can be summarized as: 1. Reduced operating cost; 2. Increased throughputs and thus valuable mineral production; 3. Improved downstream process performance as a result of improved feed specification and 4. Reduction in fine and waste production which in a particular problem in quarrying.