The objective of this study was to assess the effect of a native anecic species on phosphorus availability in an Oxisol characterised by a low chemical fertility. Experiments were carried out at Carimagua research station in a representative site of the isohyperthermic savannas on the Colombian Orinoco basin. One field study and two laboratory/incubation studies were performed in a natural herbaceous savanna and a Brachiaria decumbens and Pueraria phaseoloides pasture. In the laboratory, experiment pots were prepared containing soil collected from the respective field paddock's topsoil. Total P content was higher in earthworm casts than in the surrounding soil in field samples, 50% in native savanna soil and more than 100% in pasture soil. In casts produced under laboratory conditions this increase was relatively low (10–20%). Under field conditions, almost without exception, all P fractions were increased in casts relative to the original soil (corresponding to the increase in total P content), being relatively greater in the labile inorganic P fractions. In addition, samples from the natural savanna showed that pH of casts was higher (5.2) than that of soil (4.6) in both field and laboratory samples. Except in the native savanna under field conditions, the phosphatase activity was reduced in casts by 16.7 to 44%. From our results we conclude that earthworms in the field incorporate P from litter or other organic sources (i.e. undecomposed plant and root material, earthworm faeces) which is not normally measured in the analysis of bulk soil.At present there is increasing evidence that soil macroinvertebrates improve soil fertility due to their role in soil organic matter transformations and nutrient dynamics at different spatial and temporal scales, which may improve nutrient uptake by plants ( Earthworms belong to this functional group because through their burrowing activities, mixing soil with litter and egesting casts inside the soil or at the soil surface, they affect the physical properties of soils, nutrient cycling and plant dynamics ( About 75% of soils in Neotropical savannas are strongly weathered, acidic and infertile belonging to the order of Oxisols (USDA Soil Taxonomy 1978). Low total and available P contents and high P fixation capacity due to high contents of Fe and Al oxides characterise these soils. Only 20% of total fertilizer P applied to soils in these agroecosystems is recovered by the crop to which it is applied ( The potential of the Colombian savannas, an isohyperthermic ecosystem dominated by Oxisols, for both crop and livestock production systems, is limited by the lack of available P for primary production ( Casts of large anecic This study was conducted during May–September 1994 at the CIAT-CORPOICA experimental station at Carimagua (4°30′N; 71°19′W; 150   Three experiments were performed during the rainy season of 1994: one field study and two laboratory/incubation studies using soils from the same plots (paddocks) where the fieldwork was conducted. The field experiment was carried out from May to August in two nearby land use systems (paddocks). They were a 2.3 A randomized block-design was used. In each paddock, nine areas of 4×4 and 1×1 The surface casts that were already present in the sampling areas were removed the day before the experiment started, and on the following day, fresh surface casts recently deposited were identified, and displaced aside the earthworm gallery. Casts were tagged with a plastic peg to identify the time of in situ incubation that corresponded to six different ages, i.e. 1, 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64 days after they were egested in the soil surface. In order to ensure enough cast material for a given incubation time, casts were picked up, placed in an ice chest and carried to the laboratory. 70 Control soil samples were taken in each paddock by splitting it into four areas where five 0–15 Two laboratory experiments were conducted. In the first (LE1), no additional treatment other than the soil from the paddocks was applied. In the second (LE2), two additional treatments were applied in factorial combination with the two field treatments, e.g. green vegetative material collected from the same land use systems was added to one of the treatments. In order to test the effect of plant material addition on P dynamics the vegetative material was oven-dried, finely ground and mixed with the corresponding soil at a rate of 20 Phosphorous in soil and earthworm casts were fractionated according to a modified method of Inorganic P removed by anion exchange resin comes either from solution or is desorbed from the Al and Fe oxyhydroxide colloid surfaces in the soil ( Phosphorus in the microbial biomass and acid soil phosphatase activity were estimated on moist samples using procedures described by Total carbon and nitrogen were analyzed on previously 2 The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test ( Phosphatase activity in soils and casts ranged from 120 to 313 Total P content was significantly higher in 1-day old earthworm casts than in control soil for both laboratory incubated and field aged samples ( Bray-II P and total C concentrations were significantly higher in 1-day-old casts than in the corresponding control soil for field samples in both systems ( The effect of The immediate effects of casting on the concentration of P in soil P pools in the field and laboratory are shown in Under laboratory conditions where the increase in total P content due to casting (11–17%) was much smaller than in the field, increases in the sizes of P fractions ranged from 0 to 344% ( The dynamics of labile pools of P in ageing casts is shown in Similar patterns in P dynamics in P The use of both field and laboratory experiments in this study helps provide a better understanding of the actual dynamics of nutrients in soil and in biogenic structures produced by soil macroinvertebrates. Although the total P contents of control soils in the field and laboratory experiments were similar, ingestion by Phosphorus incorporated into soil from ‘non-soil’ sources may enter into all P fractions (organic and inorganic) but the fractionation data indicate that a greater proportion entered into labile P Although beginning with almost identical total soil P contents, casts produced in situ in the Our study confirmed the results obtained by several authors who reported higher P contents in earthworm casts than in the surrounding soil from grassland ecosystems (  A higher phosphatase activity in savanna soil than in pasture soil may be due to very low P  Microbial activity is enhanced in casts of tropical earthworms due to strong enzymatic activity and available organic C ( Casts of The importance of Studies on the role that soil ecosystem engineers play in P dynamics in Neotropical savannas are restricted to a few. Soil feeding termites can increase available P in their nests two or five-fold ( We thank the staff at Carimagua station for their friendship and invaluable help during field work, G. Borrero and M. Rodrı́guez (CIAT) for their technical assistance with the phosphorus fractionations. We are grateful to I. Rao (CIAT), P. Lavelle (IRD, France) and M. Brossard (IRD-EMBRAPA Brazil) for their comments, criticism and useful recommendations made on a previous version of this manuscript. Thanks to R. Thomas (CIAT) for English revision. Andrés F. Rangel is acknowledged for his help during fieldwork while doing his own research and A. Feijoo for his comments and support given to one of the coauthors. We are also deeply appreciated to two anonymous referees for their suggestions that helped us improve this article.