The aggregation behaviours of sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate (AOT) and sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphate (NaDEHP) solutions are studied via the energy transfer of acridine orange (AO) and rhodamine B(RB) molecules. The approximate apparent energy transfer efficiency (ϕ
                     a) of the dye molecules reaches its maximum value when the concentrations of AOT and NaDEHP are far lower than their cmc. This might be caused by the formation of surfactant–dye mixtures. The anionic surfactants (SDS, AS, AOT and NaDHEP), cationic surfactant (CTAB) and nonionic surfactant (Triton-X-100) are chosen to investigate the effect of the structure of surfactant on the ϕ
                     a between AO and RB molecules. The results indicate that the effective energy transfer may occur in the anionic surfactant systems and it is not obvious in the nonionic and cationic surfactant systems.The surfactant system is a good model for simulating the biological system At present the studies about the energy transfer between two dye molecules in the single-chain surfactants and polymer/surfactants have been carried out AOT was purchased from Fluka Corp. AO, RB, bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphate (HDEHP, C.R.), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), sodium alkyl sulfonate (AS), cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) and Triton-X-100 were bought from Shanghai Chemical Corp. (China). The preparation of NaDEHP was described in previous paper The solutions of AOT (0.03 Fluorescence spectra were recorded on F-4500 FL Spectrophotometer. The optimal excitation and the maximum emission spectra of AO and RB molecules obtained by continuously scanning the excitation and the emission spectra are 493/529.2 The fluorescence technique is very important in the study of the physico-chemical properties, such as the micropolarity, the microviscosity and the aggregation number of the aggregates formed by surfactants. AO and RB are common dye molecules (the protonated molecular structures are shown in the following scheme). The excitation and emission spectra of the AO and RB molecules in aqueous solution are shown in The fluorescence spectra of AO and RB in the AOT and NaDEHP solutions are given in It can be seen from The self-quenching usually occurs when the concentration of the dye molecules is larger than 10 The wavelength of 450 When the concentration of AOT is larger than 2.5 According to Wu and Jiang's From the above study we know that the energy transfer can effectively occur in the suitable concentration of AOT and NaDEHP solutions. In order to study the effects of different kinds of surfactants on the The aggregation behaviours of double-chain surfactant AOT and NaDEHP are investigated via energy transfer between dye molecules AO and RB. The fluorescence intensity of the dye molecules distinctly increases before the surfactant concentration reaches its cmc, indicating that the cationic dye molecules strongly interact with the anionic surfactants and form the mixed micelles. The apparent energy transfer efficiency ( The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from National Natural Science Foundation (29973023) and Natural Science Foundation (Y2001B08) of Shandong Province in China.