Beneficiation of coal of −4.76mm+3mm size fraction was investigated in a laboratory model Denver jig. Process variables were studied to analyze their effect on the performance of jig in terms of yield and ash content of clean coal. Three-factor three-level Box-Behnken design of experiments with response surface methodology (RSM) was employed to understand the performance behavior of jig. From the study, the bed height was found to be the most significant parameter affecting the yield and ash content of clean coal. It was possible to reduce the ash content from 24.32% in feed to an ash content of 16.55% in clean coal at 2L/min water flow rate and 10min jigging time. Influence of operating variables of the jig on responses was presented and discussed in 3D surface plots. The developed model was found to be significant within the range of parameters under investigation with correlation of co-efficient values as 0.99 (yield) and 0.98 (ash).Coal reserves of India are of low quality because of drift origin and the quality deteriorates further on account of mechanized bulk mining and exploitation of poor quality seams Coal preparation plants typically employ several parallel circuits of cleaning and dewatering operations, with each circuit designed to optimally treat a specific size range of coal Due to poor liberation at coarse sizes, a high degree of ash and sulfur rejection is sometimes difficult to achieve. The fine coal fraction possesses the maximum cleanability potential because of superior liberation characteristics The main aim of the study was to investigate the beneficiation of finer size coal fraction (−4.76 Regression models have been developed using three-factor Box-Behnken design of experiments for prediction of performance of jigging. Subsequently, effects of operating parameters on response (yield and ash content of clean coal) were discussed using 3D response surface plots. Crushed coal (−100 The size distribution of the crushed sample (−10 Proximate analysis of sample under investigation (−4.73 Beneficiation studies were carried out on −4.76 Performance of the beneficiation of coal using jig was evaluated on the basis of yield and ash content of clean coal. From the studies ( The cumulative weight of top and middle layers showed the yield of clean coal between 61% to 64%. The highest yield of about 64% was observed at water flow rate of 3 The performance analysis was carried out through statistical analysis. Fifteen experiments were conducted based on the Box Behenken experimental design. Out of these, 3 experiments were performed at the base level for estimation of the experimental error. The experiments ( Results were inserted to Design Expert software (trial version) and 3D response surface plots were chosen to analyze the effect of variables on the responses (yield and ash content) as function of bed height, water flow rate and jigging time. The model developed using these factors and their interaction is given in Eqs. From For a desired value of ash content in the clean coal, the suitable height of bed may be obtained from the results ( Actual and predicted values of yield and ash content were compared graphically and are shown in Model adequacy was checked from the plot between the residuals and the run number which are shown in  The Box-Behnken statistical experimental design procedure was found to be applicable to modeling of coal beneficiation using jig and in predicting the effects of important variables on the yield and ash content of clean coal. The bed height was found to be the most significant parameter affecting the yield and ash content of clean coal. Response function predictions determined by the regression analysis were in good agreement with the experimental results with correlation co-efficient values of 0.99 for yield and 0.98 for ash. Lowest cumulative ash content of 16.55% was obtained from the feed as of 24.32%, at 2