A novel method of extracting silver from silver sulphide concentrates is provided in this study. The method is selective for silver in the presence of 1.0M of thiosulphate solution with acetic acid–ammonium acetate buffer at pH4.15. The conditions are calculated using related equilibria constants and then tested with experiments.The silver metal industry has been seeking alternative reagents for leaching metals from sulphide ores for many years. The well known toxicological affects of cyanide and difficulties of waste treatment and other difficulties such as increasing regulatory scrutiny of new projects and a lowering of cyanide discharges to acceptable levels are of considerable concern to the industry. It is anticipated that approval for any new project using cyanide would be extremely difficult in the world. Thus, the political and environmental cost of using cyanide becomes too high and the establishment of an economic and environmentally viable option for extracting silver without the use of cyanide would seem essential. Recently, world industry attention has tuned to a relatively cheap and non-toxic reagent i.e., thiosulphate, and various studies with thiosulphate have been reported in the literature ( However, as researchers have claimed there are several obstacles that must be overcome before a viable and economic process is ready to replace cyanide ( This study describes a novel procedure for silver dissolution from silver sulphide concentrates with a significant concentration, i.e., more than 5 Silver ions are known to form strong complexes with thiosulphate. However, the complexing ability of thiosulphates is not great enough to extract silver from silver sulphide concentrates alone. The pH of the medium is also crucial in terms of its decomposition and it has to be maintained at pH The overall reaction can be written as In order to extract a significant amount of silver ions, i.e., more than 5.0 All leaching tests were performed in a closed reactor with a stirring apparatus under thermostatic conditions (±1 In all experiments particles of about 50 The reaction mixture including the concentrate and leaching solutions were placed in the reactor. The reaction was carried out until the dominant black colour of the silver sulphide faded and the pH increase has ended (at about 4.30). In order to determine the efficiency of the extraction the solutions were subjected to chemical analysis by AAS. The leaching liquor was prepared to include 1.0 A 100 The leaching experiments were carried out at room temperature since higher temperatures had no significant affect on the efficiency of the extraction. The solution pH can be maintained at around 4.15 by using CH As follows from As it was emphasized earlier, all metal sulphides except some precious metals such as Au, Pt, Ag and Cu should react with SO The authors would like to thank chemist Cahit Demiralp for his valuable help in the laboratory studies, Dr. Nil Ertas and Dr. Stephan Astley for their help and reading the text and Sevim Yildiran for her patience during the study.