The density of Al2O3–CaO–MgO–SiO2 system is calculated using a model for molar volume. The model is similar to the one used for enthalpy of a multicomponent solution in the CALPHAD approach. The expression for molar volume consists of two terms: one representing the volume contribution from pure components and the other the volume of mixing. The molar volume of mixing takes into account of the binary and the ternary interactions. A total of 565 experimental density data for the constituent unary, binary and ternary systems were collected from the literature. These were used as input to simultaneously optimise the model parameters describing the molar volume, after ensuring that the data belong to a fully molten state. During the optimisation 48 data points that showed significant deviation from the average trend were excluded. The optimised model parameters for the unary, binary and ternary subsystems were used to calculate the density of the quaternary system. The calculated results were compared with experimental data. Finally, it is shown that the volume of mixing of binary systems correlates well with the corresponding enthalpy of mixing.Information regarding the density of molten oxides is essential for solving problems in several research fields, including metal extraction, metal refining, and geological sciences. The slag density is required as an input in the mathematical modelling of transport phenomena in many high-temperature metallurgical processes. It is also one of the key properties of the molten slags that gives insight into its molecular structure. Reliable experimental density data for many slag systems are not available in the temperature and composition ranges of interest. This is mainly due to the difficulties associated with high-temperature measurements. It is, therefore, worthwhile to develop a model for density estimation of multicomponent molten slags using available density data of the lower-order system. The density (ρ) of a Note that Persson et al. [ However, it is not clear how Thibodeau et al. [ An extrapolation model for the molar volume of mixing of a multicomponent system is presented here. It is an extension of the approach of Xin et al. [ Published density data concerning melts of Al Thibodeau et al. [ To model the molar volumes of the binary and higher-order systems, temperature-dependent expressions of molar volumes of the unaries are needed. Since the liquidus temperature of the mixture of oxides is much lower than that of the pure oxides, it is required that the unary expressions should be valid far below the respective melting points. In this work starting expressions for the molar volumes of molten CaO and MgO were taken from Nakajima [ All the density data except the quaternary data listed in The optimisation was done in steps. To begin with all binaries were treated as regular solution-like, which allows their excess volumes to be modelled using a single model parameter. Optimisation of model parameters for Al Optimisation of model parameter for Al Simultaneous optimisation model parameters for CaO, Al Optimisation of model parameters for Al Simultaneous optimisation of model parameters for MgO, Al Optimisation of model parameters for Al Simultaneous optimisation of the model parameters for CaO–MgO, Al Finally, all the model parameters were simultaneously optimised including all 517 data. At this stage, the regular solution approximation was relaxed for the binaries Al The parameters were rounded-off according to the criterion suggested by Kumar and Wollants [ At any step of the optimisation, if any The optimised model parameters for the unaries, binaries and the ternaries are listed in As mentioned in Section Based on the values various statistical indicators of the goodness-of-fit given in For Al From Among the ternary systems, the Al As mentioned in Section To investigate the correlation between The correlation between The linear correlation given in Eq. A density model for the Al The processed data required to reproduce these findings are available in the supplementary data section. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at