The Mg corrosion reaction sequence was considered in terms of possible elementary reaction steps, and their plausibility in relation to their thermodynamic status. The uni-positive Mg+ reaction sequence is thermodynamically favoured, and can occur by a number of elementary steps. There are a number of possible dissolution reactions (which are defined are reactions which contribute no electrons to the corroding Mg electrode). It is impossible at this stage to conclusively determine the reaction mechanism without knowledge of the species present at the magnesium–water interface.The uni-positive Mg The sum of these reactions gives the expected overall reaction: The apparent valence for Mg during corrosion has been evaluated A perceived shortcoming of this uni-positive Mg Some recent papers Recently, Lebouil et al It is possible to show that (i) the experimental data of Lebouil et al The dissolution reaction, Eq. That consideration prompted this paper, which has the aim of examining the possible elementary reaction steps for Mg corrosion, with the aim of achieving a deeper understanding of the Mg corrosion process. This examination has been conducted on the basis that: A thermodynamic analysis, on the basis of the assumption that kinetic factors are not controlling factors of the reaction sequence, can provide insights into the possible reaction mechanism; An overall reaction, such as Eq. The rate of any individual elementary reaction can be understood as dependent on an activation energy, which is directly related to the standard Gibbs energy of formation of an unstable, short-lived transition state present during the elementary reaction process; If the reaction sequence includes steps that are thermodynamically unfavourable (i.e. with a positive change in Gibbs energy), the mechanism can be interpreted to be less likely than the alternatives (subject to the first assumption); Individual elementary reactions which involve only the transfer of charge are considered fast relative to other reactions; and Reactions which produce more than two products are considered irreversible. Samaniego et al. Frankel et al. There has been no attempt to verify the increased exchange current density reaction sequence. There have been no measurements related to the exchange current density of the cathodic reaction. Support for the increased exchange current density reaction sequence has, nevertheless, been expressed by The increased exchange current density reaction sequence assumes King et al. Williams, McMurray and co-workers Swiatowska et al.  The value for the standard Gibbs energy of formation of Mg Perrault For ease of comparison, the change in Gibbs energy (Δ The overall magnesium (Mg) corrosion reaction consumes Mg and water; produces magnesium hydroxide, and hydrogen; and is given by: Both dissociation reactions are thermodynamically unfavourable, and Mg is only sparingly soluble as Mg The series of individual or elementary reaction steps for the Mg corrosion reaction, Eq. The aim of this paper is to elucidate which reaction sequences are likely contributors to the Mg corrosion reaction by (i) considering the possible electrochemical, dissolution, and mixed reactions, and (ii) considering these possible reactions in terms of the possible intermediate species. The various possible dissolution and electrochemical reactions are explored to evaluate the plausibility of particular component reactions. Reaction sequences are less likely if they contain elementary reaction steps with a large positive change in Gibbs energy of reaction. The more plausible reaction sequences are those with each individual step leading to a reduction in Gibbs energy. The electrochemical mechanism involves ionisation of Mg at the anode, ultimately to the sparingly soluble Mg(OH) The magnesium hydroxide product forms a permeable layer on the surface of corroding Mg. The overall anodic partial reaction can be comprised of the possible elementary reactions given as Eqs. An intermediate MgOH with an Mg valence state of +1 has been proposed previously. It seems apparent that this is not stable as it has not been isolated, however it is possible that it is present as a short–lived intermediate. The possible electrochemical elementary reactions involving MgOH are as follows. Surface charge on the corroding Mg surface is expected to be shared between Mg atoms as presented in Eq. Mg Assuming similar orders of magnitude of activation energies for the elementary reactions, the anodic chemical reaction mechanism most likely consists of contributions from Eqs. The overall cathodic partial reaction in acidic solutions is: Under basic conditions the overall cathodic partial reaction is: It is plausible (and thermodynamically favourable) to form magnesium hydride, MgH Possible direct dissolution reactions equivalent to Eq. Direct hydration is the process by which magnesium directly splits water molecules without electron transfer through the metal. For this overall reaction to progress by elementary steps, two alternative mechanisms can be postulated. In the first step, water adsorbs to the surface of the magnesium as an Mg–H In the second step, the reaction progresses through splitting of water molecules between two Mg atoms, which then adsorb the H The oxide-mediated reaction sequence is thermodynamically favoured, as presented by Eqs. The kinetics of magnesia hydration have been explored in the literature In addition, a side-reaction of MgO is also thermodynamically favoured, as presented by Eq. In the hydronium-mediated reaction sequence, the Mg metal can react with protons and water (effectively with hydronium complexes H Also plausible are reactions involving the intermediate ionisation species of the electrochemical pathway, i.e. Mg This sequence has a similar energy potential to any of the single ionization processes involved in the electrochemical reaction. It requires free surface sites of two Mg atoms, however, and is not strictly an elementary reaction: it has the same requirements of intermediate stability as Eqs. Finally, local charge on the metal surface (from a single ionisation step) may undergo charge transfer with surface water molecules, as given by Eqs. Whilst the change in Gibbs energy of these reactions are positive, the values are small, indicating that there may be non-trivial quantities of these variants. The Any of these single ionisation step processes result in MgOH The electrochemical reactions associated with Mg corrosion are thermodynamically favoured as was already known. In addition, a number of dissolution sequences are identified. It is impossible at this stage to conclusively determine the mechanisms of this reaction without knowledge of the species present at the magnesium–water interface. These would provide insight into the relative kinetics of the elementary reactions, which are currently uncertain. Until these are known, all that is possible to determine is the likely reaction sequences, which are accomplished by considering the thermodynamically favourable intermediates. An elementary reaction step proceeds from reactants, through an unstable transition state to the reaction products. Transition state theory A reaction sequence is composed of multiple elementary reaction steps. Product species of all but the final step that are sufficiently stable for their thermodynamic properties to be measured are termed intermediates If a reaction sequence is kinetically-controlled, that indicates that the rate of the overall reaction sequence is limited by particularly large Gibbs energies of a transition state. If it is thermodynamically-controlled, the difference in Gibbs energy between the transition state and the various stable species – reactants, intermediates, and products – is small. Under the latter circumstances, the Gibbs energy of the intermediates plays the governing role in the rate of the overall reaction sequence. At the extreme limit – of entirely negligible activation energies of transition states – a thermodynamically unfavoured intermediate plays a kinetically equivalent role to a transition state. If a reaction sequence includes intermediates that are highly unfavoured, the speed of progression through that particular pathway will – even under the most favourable kinetic circumstances (e.g. with negligible Gibbs energy of transition states) – be limited by the thermodynamically unfavoured intermediates. On the other hand, this does not necessarily imply that a pathway consisting of intermediates that are all thermodynamically favoured will have fast reaction rates – there may be large energy barriers in the form of unquantified transition states that fundamentally limit the reaction progression through that sequence. Consequently, this analysis is constrained. It is not able to identify which reaction sequence is fastest, and consequently cannot provide the basis for determining the reaction mechanism. It can identify, however, if a particular reaction sequence must be slow due to thermodynamic limitations. That is, it can rule out particular reaction sequences, but not rule any in. It consequently can provide only an indication of the balance of probability as to which reaction sequences may be more or less likely. The standard Gibbs energy of formation of the different reactants provides some additional information in a measure of their relative stability. The most thermodynamically favoured intermediate species of the different reaction sequences presented here, if identified at the corroding surface, would provide some corroborating evidence in support of the individual reaction sequence to which they contribute. The electrochemical reaction sequence seems most likely to progress by Eqs. The behaviour shown in It can be concluded that the electrochemical reaction sequence at the anode is likely to take one of the pathways described above, dependent on the standard Gibbs energy of formation of Mg The cathodic pathway is not of particular interest, except to note that in alkaline solutions Eqs. A dissolution reaction sequence in addition to the above electrochemical reaction sequence is necessary to explain discrepancies between measured Mg dissolution and the Faraday law In addition to the oxide-mediated dissolution reaction sequence, two distinct mixed reaction sequences were presented, outlined in Eqs. Consequently, it seems most plausible that the disparity between measured dissolved Mg and the Faraday law is best explained by a combination of the electrochemical reaction sequence discussed above, and the oxide-mediated dissolution reaction sequence. This particular explanation appears to be supported by reports of an MgO layer underlying the magnesium hydroxide film on Mg corrosion interfaces Additionally it is nominally plausible for local sites on the surface to be acting individually as anodes or cathodes. However the presence of any positively charged species will lead to greater instability of MgH species, which are the intermediates in the cathodic reaction. A surface dominated by hydrogenated species has not been considered. Such a condition is considered broadly unlikely if hydrogen is allowed to diffuse away from the interface, and as the hydrogenated species of Mg are in general of relatively lower stability, particularly under basic interface and bulk conditions. Previously a uni-positive Mg The existing value of the Gibbs energy for Mg The apparent valence of Mg during corrosion could provide, in principle, a measure of how much of the total corrosion is by an electrochemical pathway In practice, however, it is not clear that Subsequently, Atrens and coworkers Thus, the apparent valence of Mg during corrosion provides an estimate of how much corrosion occurs by an electrochemical pathway only if there is no isolation of any electrochemical corrosion from the electrochemical measurement system, by e.g. shielding of corrosion by hydrogen bubbles. The Mg corrosion reaction was considered in terms of possible elementary reaction steps and their plausibility in relation to their thermodynamic status. The uni-positive Mg There are a number of possible additional dissolution reaction sequences, of which the oxide-mediated reaction sequence seems most plausible. It is impossible at this stage to conclusively determine the mechanisms of this reaction without knowledge of the species present at the magnesium–water interface. This research was supported by the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence Design of Light Alloys, CE0561574. Professor Evgueni Jak is thanked for useful discussions about the thermodynamics of Mg