The kinetics of molybdenite roasting was studied by non-isothermal TGA–DTA with heating rate 10°Cmin−1. Mechanical activation of molybdenite was accomplished via milling in a planetary mill under air atmosphere. Mechanical activation decreased the ignition temperature of reaction from 470 to 180°C after 36h of milling. The model-fitting kinetic approach has been applied to TGA data. The reaction mechanism for non-activated molybdenite was determined to be chemically controlled with E
                     =34.25kcalmol−1 and A
                     =2×108
                     s−1. In the activated molybdenite the reaction mechanism changed to diffusion control with E
                     =60.55kcalmol−1 and A
                     =6×1019
                     s−1.pre-exponential factor (s activation energy (kcal differential reaction model integral reaction model rate constant (s exponential integral radius of particle (cm) gas constant (1.987 temperature mean experimental temperature time (s) extent of reaction heating rate (K Mechanical activation of solid substances is one of the components of modern scientific disciplines of mechanochemistry. At present, mechanochemistry appears to be a science with a sound theoretical foundation which exhibits a wide range of potential application The literature on the subject is quite extensive and several review articles have appeared summarizing the earlier studies. Fox In the field of extractive metallurgy many works have been carried out on the sulfidic concentrates The starting material for all pyro-processes of Molybdenum is the molybdenite concentrate. Almost all molybdenite concentrate are first Subjected to roasting to yield technical grade molybdic oxide which forms the basic raw material for all commercially used products of molybdenum. The roasting of molybdenite concentrate involves a number of chemical reactions The kinetics of molybdenite oxidation can be studied by thermogravimetry method. In most of the reported TGA studies the temperature of sample was linearly increased. The rate of a solid state reaction can be generally described by This research was carried out with molybdenite samples from the Sarcheshmeh Copper industries in Iran with 0.99 Mechanical activation was accomplished via milling in a FP2 planetary mill under air atmosphere using a 20:1 charge ratio (the mass of grinding media to mass of concentrate) and a filling factor of 0.3 (volume of charge/volume of mill). The milling media used was stainless steel vial and balls of 20 A Mettler Tuledu Star System was used for simultaneous TGA–DTA studies. Experiments were performed under non-isothermal condition at programmed linear heating rate of 10 The starting material and products were analyzed by employing Philips X-pert X-ray diffractometer with PW 2273 tube and Cu Kα radiation with scan rate 0.04°  The effect of milling time on the specific surface of molybdenite is represented in  Using the TGA data the extent of reaction was calculated by the following equation It seems that milling of sample for 5 By inserting various The set of Arrhenius parameters for molybdenite oxidation in the unmilled and 5 From the view point of pre-exponential factors for the solid state reactions the theoretical values are 10 In For the remaining models the goodness of fit is customarily estimated by a coefficient of linear correlation, For  Mechanical activation of molybdenite causes the decrease in intensity of diffraction lines, the shift in diffraction lines and the diffraction line broadening. Mechanical activation decreases the ignition temperature of reaction from 470 to 180