In this paper, we consider fractured sorbing media (e.g., gas shale and coal bed methane reservoirs) as either dual porosity media comprising matrix-fracture or as triple porosity media comprising separate organic and inorganic matrix components and fractures. We accommodate the combination of mechanical deformation and desorption induced matrix shrinking in conditioning the evolution of fracture aperture and effective stress difference between each medium. These considerations result in an improved permeability evolution model (IPEM) for both dual porosity and triple porosity fractured sorbing media. Then we have simplified the model for triple porosity fractured sorbing media by reducing the geometry configuration from three dimensional to one dimensional, marked as SIPEM1. Specifically, SIPEM1 is a model simplified from the IPEM, and consider that when the size of the REV and the volumetric strain is small, replacing the volume with the side length of each layer medium in defining the model will bring relatively small error. This model is further simplified to SIPEM1-1 by assuming that the effective stress of each medium is the same. Then we have validated the models with field data. Finally, we compared prediction results from these models under different conditions. This study has found that IPEM is the most accurate model, especially for fractured sorbing media with a larger compressibility. SIPEM1-1 does not consider the difference of the effective stress of each medium and thus it is relatively less accurate in describing the evolution of permeability compared with SIPEM1 that considers this difference. This gap increases with the increase of permeability difference between fracture and matrix.Shale gas and coal bed methane reservoirs are becoming important as unconventional hydrocarbon resources ( An idealized gas shale or coal bed methane reservoir is shown in Previous studies have described the evolution of permeability in fractured sorbing media. It is undeniable that the establishment of these models has significantly improved our understanding of the evolution of permeability in fractured sorbing media. However, most of these models do not consider all the physical processes involved during production, such as accurate representation of effective stress in matrix and fracture, fracture aperture, volumetric strain and so on. To be more specific, the effective stress in matrix and fracture is different in the production period because of the large difference in matrix permeability and fracture permeability that could potentially cause significant difference in gas pressure. Therefore, despite the stress-induced strain might be negligible with respect to the adsorption/desorption of the matrix, we should consider the difference of effective stress between matrix and fracture when developing permeability evolution model. Furthermore, because fracture aperture is very small, most of the previous study did not consider the impact of fracture aperture when calculating the volumetric strain of the fractured sorbing media. Finally, compared to conventional gas reservoirs, coal reservoirs have larger compressibility ( This work represents fractured sorbing media as either dual porosity media ( This model was then simplified by modifying the model configuration from three dimensional to one dimensional, marked as SIPEM1. Specifically, SIPEM1 is a model simplified from the IPEM, and consider that when the size of the REV and the volumetric strain is small, replacing the volume with the side length of each medium will only create relatively small error. Then it was further simplified by assuming that the effective stress of each medium is the same, marked as SIPEM1-1. Then we have validated these permeability evolution models for fractured sorbing media consisting of triple porosity media using field data. Finally, to explore the differences among these models, we compared model results by using different input parameters for different cases. The flowchart used in this work is shown in This section corresponds to the first part of the flowchart. An improved permeability evolution model for fractured sorbing media will be constructed. After that, we simplify the model for later comparative analysis. In this work, the following basic assumptions are made: Reservoir is isothermal, and gas viscosity is constant under isothermal conditions. The reservoir is saturated with the ideal single-phase gas (CH Dual porosity media is composed of matrix-fracture, and triple porosity media is composed of organic matrix, inorganic matrix and fracture. Each medium is homogeneous and isotropic. Gas adsorption/desorption follows the principle of Langmuir isothermal behavior, and this process only occurs in the matrix for dual porosity model, and the organic matrix for triple porosity model. The deformation of the reservoir is assumed to be infinitesimal. In this section, we focus on the dual porosity fractured sorbing media ( According to the effective stress principle for multi-porous media ( We assume that the length of the REV is The desorption induced shrinkage strain during gas production can be expressed as After the initial equilibrium state, to accurately consider the effective stress in the matrix and the fracture, the volumetric strain of the REV can be expressed as In this equation, the first item on the right side is the degree of contribution of volumetric strain of matrix induced by the change of effective stress to the volumetric strain of the REV; the second item is the degree of contribution of volumetric strain of fracture induced by the change of effective stress to the volumetric strain of the REV; and the third item is the degree of contribution of shrinkage of matrix induced by the desorption. Substituting Eq. Therefore, the change of effective stress in the fracture can be rewritten as The change in effective stress induced fracture deformation can be obtained from The change of fracture porosity can be expressed as Based on the cubic Law ( After established IPEM for dual porosity fractured sorbing media, next we develop the permeability evolution model for triple porosity fractured sorbing media. Shale reservoir can be also considered as a fractured sorbing media containing organic matrix, inorganic matrix, and fracture, as shown in The effective stress for triple porosity fractured sorbing media can be expressed as And the rest of the parameters are the same with those defined in the dual porosity model. For triple porosity media, the length of the REV can be simplified as Similar to the dual porosity model, the volumetric strain of the triple porosity media can be expressed as The items in the above equation are similar to that in Eq. Substituting Eq. From Eq. We then obtain the improved permeability evolution model (IPEM) for triple porosity fractured sorbing media as So far, we have established IPEM for dual porosity and triple porosity fractured sorbing media. The same assumptions are used in the derivation of both permeability models. Next, we will simplify this model and obtain SIPEM1 and SIPEM1-1 for triple porosity fractured sorbing media for later models validation and comparison. Because when the size of the REV and the volumetric strain is small, replacing the volume with the length of each medium will only cause relatively small error. Based on this, the volumetric strain of the REV can be expressed as Eq. Then the dynamic porosity can be expressed as The change in effective stress induced fracture deformation can be obtained from Then, the Simplified IPEM, marked as SIPEM1 for the triple porosity fractured sorbing media can be established as If the impact of mechanical deformation on the permeability is trivial compared to the impact of swelling or shrinking ( The dynamic porosity can be written as Then, the Simplified IPEM, marked as SIPEM1-1 can be established as After establishing the fracture permeability evolution models for dual porosity and triple porosity fractured sorbing media, validations are needed. Therefore, in the following, we will show the validations and comparisons of the permeability models for the triple porosity fractured sorbing media. In this section, we provide the equations that govern different physical processes and can be integrated together to numerically solve field problems. The deformation characteristics of the reservoir have been widely studied in previous studies ( For the triple fractured sorbing media like shale gas reservoirs, it is believed that only free gas exists in the inorganic matrix and fractures, while both free gas and adsorbed gas exist in organic matrix. Based on the principle of Langmuir isothermal behavior, gas desorbs from the organic matrix pore surface to pore space and is then driven by the pressure drop. As desorption continues, the gas concentration gradient between the bulk and the surface of the organic matrix drives gas diffusion in the solid organic matrix. For the inorganic matrix and fractures, only free gas exists. Hence, the migration of gas in these two media can be considered as viscous flow and driven by gas pressure gradient. We assume that the gas transport in the organic system follows the Fick's law. Since the pore sizes in the organic matrix are of the order of nanometers, Knudsen diffusion should be considered. So the mass balance equation for the gas phase is defined as The modified diffusion coefficient can be written as ( Due to the low transport properties of gas in organic matrix and the low proportion of organic matrix, we simplify the equation by assuming only the porosity of organic matrix changes during gas extraction. Although this simplification will bring some small errors, it has little effect on the results of this study. Finally, the relationship of modified diffusion coefficient and porosity of organic matrix can be expressed as The porosity of organic matrix and can be expressed as ( These equations define how the adsorbed gas diffuses in the organic portion of the composite system. We assume that the gas transport in the inorganic matrix and in the fracture follows Darcy's law, so the mass balance equation for the gas phase can be defined as Similar to the organic matrix, the porosity and permeability evolution in the inorganic matrix can also be expressed as ( This set of equations allows the gas flow in the inorganic matrix and fracture to be calculated. In this section, we use the finite element method to solve the equations derived in the previous section and then validate the models against field data. As shown in Field gas production rate for a horizontal well ( In order to more accurately explore the impact of the difference in the effective stress of each medium on fracture permeability evolution, based on case2, we reduce the differences of permeability of each medium, and specific parameters are listed in Before analyzing the influence of the difference in effective stress, firstly we calculate how gas pressure evolves at point A (the center point of the simulation area) using the three developed models for case2, and the results are shown in The evolution of gas pressure at point A for triple porosity media using SIPEM1 for case3 is shown in After the above comparative analysis and model validation, we can conclude that, although both SIPEM1 and SIPEM1-1 can describe the field trend of gas production, the error of SIPEM1-1 is relatively larger. The gap between the two models is mainly due to the effective stress difference in each medium. The gap between SIPEM1 and SIPEM1-1 will be relatively larger when the permeability difference of each medium is large. And, obviously, this conclusion is also reasonable for the dual porosity fractured sorbing media. The evolution of fracture permeability at point A corresponding to IPEM and SIPEM1 for case2 is shown in  Next, based on case2, we change the input parameters, listed in From the above comparative analysis and model validation, we can conclude that, although both SIPEM1 and IPEM can describe the field trend of gas production, IPEM is better in terms of accuracy. Although IPEM is more complex in terms of mathematic expression, its breadth of application would be greater. In particular, for fractured sorbing media with large compressibility, IPEM can describe permeability evolution behavior more accurately. We have considered the shale gas or coal bed methane reservoir as fractured sorbing media that can be treated as a dual porosity media of matrix-fracture or triple porosity media of organic matrix, inorganic matrix, and fracture. Based on the combined effects of mechanical deformation and desorption induced shrinkage, an improved permeability evolution model for fractured sorbing media were established. Then, we have simplified this model for triple porosity fractured sorbing media, and validated them with field data. Last, we made comparisons among the models under different conditions. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study. The effect of fracture on reservoir gas production is critical and the most obvious manifestation is in the early production days where the production rates are the highest. Therefore, it is crucial to accurately predict the evolution of permeability of the fracture. Even though the strain induced by adsorption/desorption is greater than the strain caused by the increase in effective pressure resulting from gas production, we still need to accurately consider the effective stress of different media. If the effective stresses of different media are assumed to be equal, error in permeability evolution would be expected and this would impact the production results from numerical simulations. Through the comparative analysis between different cases, it can be concluded that although IPEM is mathematically more complex, its breadth of application would be greater. For fractured sorbing media with large compressibility, IPEM can describe the porosity and permeability evolution more accurately. This study was supported by the