The disintegration of three industry relevant algae (Chlorella vulgaris, Neochloris oleoabundans and Tetraselmis suecica) was studied in a lab scale bead mill at different bead sizes (0.3–1mm). Cell disintegration, proteins and carbohydrates released into the water phase followed a first order kinetics. The process is selective towards proteins over carbohydrates during early stages of milling. In general, smaller beads led to higher kinetic rates, with a minimum specific energy consumption of ⩽0.47kWhkgDW
                     −1 for 0.3mm beads. After analysis of the stress parameters (stress number and stress intensity), it appears that optimal disintegration and energy usage for all strains occurs in the 0.3–0.4mm range. During the course of bead milling, the native structure of the marker protein Rubisco was retained, confirming the mildness of the disruption process.peak area [AU] constant [–] concentration of component total concentration of component volume cell concentration [–] bead diameter [m] specific energy consumption [kWh theoretical specific energy consumption [kWh specific energy consumption at 3τ [kWh minimal specific energy consumption [kWh carbohydrate release first order kinetic constant [s disintegration first order kinetic constant [s protein release first order kinetic constant [s mass of biomass on dry weight [kg] agitator speed (revolutions) [s stress number [–] reduced Stress number for disintegration [–] reduced Stress number for grinding [–] stress intensity [J/Nm] optimal stress intensity [J/Nm] disruption/milling time [s] agitator tip speed [m volume [mL] degree of disintegration (Dis), protein concentration or carbohydrate concentration [–] maximal degree of disintegration (Dis), protein concentration or carbohydrate concentration [–] carbohydrate yield [%] protein yield [%] bead bulk density [kg bead filling ratio [–] specific density beads [kg characteristic time of process kinetic [s] There is a growing demand for sustainable protein sources and bio-based products as an alternative for traditional agricultural crops. Microalgae are a potential source of renewable high value proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and pigments for food, feed and chemical industries ( Bead mills are commonly applied in the chemical industry for the manufacture of paints/lacquers and grinding of minerals ( Furthermore, for the disintegration of the microalga  To describe the comminution of cells in bead mills as a function of different process parameters, Accordingly, the Furthermore, the Consequently, the theoretical specific energy input is proportional to the product of the number of stress events times the energy of such events: The SM was first applied to microalgae by The aim of this work is to investigate the effect of the bead size on the disintegration, release of water soluble components and energy consumption during the bead milling of    To obtain a biomass paste, The bead mill experiments were performed in a horizontal stirred bead mill (Dyno-Mill Research Lab, Willy A. Bachofen AF Maschinenfabrik, Switzerland) operated in batch recirculation mode. The operation procedure was previously described by First order release kinetics was used to calculate the kinetic constant Upon reviewing our previous work ( Samples were taken at different time intervals directly from the feeding funnel, which was maintained under gentle stirring. The maximum sampled volume was always <2.5% of the feed volume. For all cases, bead milling experiments were conducted for 1 The dry weight concentration was determined as described by The disintegration percentage was analyzed as described by The protein and carbohydrate yield after bead milling are expressed as: To determine the total starch content on biomass DW, lyophilized algae were dissolved in 1 150 Native PAGE analysis was performed as described by Statistical analysis was performed by analysis of variance (ANOVA). When groups were significantly different at an α level of 0.05, Tukey’s honest significance test was performed to find which groups differed. The overall effect of bead size is studied first in terms of kinetic rates and product yields. The mechanism of disintegration is then analyzed using the stress model and subsequently the specific energy consumption and selective protein release are presented. As a follow up to   For Among the strains tested, the disintegration rates of  Different algae batches were used per bead size, and the composition (total protein, total carbohydrate and starch on biomass DW) of each batch was measured to calculate the product yield using Eq. According to Considering the difference in protein and carbohydrate release kinetics, it is important to note that the time at which 87.5% release of each component is achieved is different for each species and bead size. For  On average, a carbohydrate yield ( The disintegration of microalgae cells and the breakage of organelles and internal structures to release water-soluble biomolecules are the result of the shear generated by collisions of beads in the mill chamber. Using Eq. In this study, the SN (Eqs. When plotting the disintegration percentage as a function of the measured specific energy consumption Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs of For the release of proteins, a similar behavior was obtained with respect to the disintegration when plotting the fraction of release (normalized with respect to On the other hand, the release of carbohydrates revealed a different tendency ( The specific energy consumption for the release of 87.5% (3τ) of the maximal protein release (  With respect to the estimated energy content of a microalgae being 6.82 As described above, it is known that mechanical disintegration techniques are energy inefficient processes in which a large part of the energy is not utilized for the effective breakage of cells. In a first assumption, the total energy is used to move parts (agitator), to displace beads and fluid, and dissipated into heat, which needs to be removed from the system by means of cooling. For the energy-efficient hydrodynamic cavitation process proposed by An overview of the protein and carbohydrate concentration at 3τ protein release in the water-soluble phase is given in The proteins released by bead milling were analyzed by means of Native PAGE to provide insight about the size of the released proteins and whether they were negatively affected (i.e., degradation or aggregation) ( The band intensities of Rubisco were graphically processed to a density chromatogram allowing peak identification and integration. With respect to the maximal amount of Rubisco obtained, a relative density plot was created ( The kinetics of disintegration and component release was improved for We would like to thank Tiny Franssen-Verheijen of Wageningen University Electron Microscopy Centre for her help with the SEM, and Prof. Dr. Shirley Pomponi for proofreading of this manuscript. This project is conducted under the framework and financed by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 