Wet oxidation processes such as Fenton and Fenton-like have been considered to treat radioactive ion exchange resins. This investigation demonstrates the oxidative dissolution of cation exchange resin beads by using a fluidized bed Fenton process. The cation exchange resin beads were firstly saturated with catalyst (Fe(II)) in the tubular reactor with a temperature control jacket, and then initiated the oxidation with injecting the H2O2 into the fluidized bed reactor. By means of adjusting a suitable amount of ferrous ions saturated on the cation IER, the reaction can be aimed on the IER destruction rather than homogeneous oxidation. The conversion of resins to gas and soluble fragments reached 91.6% under conditions of solid loading = 117.6 g/L, 25 mL H2O2 dosage (50 wt%), FeSO4 = 10 mM at 75 °C. The fluidized bed Fenton process is efficient and ready to control for the oxidation of cation exchange resin beads in heterogeneous catalysis.The organic ion-exchange resin (IER) is widely employed in the water purification system in nuclear facilities due to the ion exchange process is very effective at transferring the radioactive content of a large volume of liquid into a small volume of solid. After its consumption, the spent IER becomes highly radioactive wastes and pose special handling and treatment challenges ( The treatment of cation IER using Fenton process involves heterogeneous (solid resins oxidation/dissolution) and homogeneous (dissolved organic carbons degradation or mineralization) reaction steps ( Moreover, the cation IER dissolution reaction rate is major dominated by three factors: Fe(II) and H The major available fluidized bed Fenton technologies are focused on using some solid state catalysts such as iron oxides to catalyze hydrogen peroxide for the degradation and mineralization of dissolved organic carbon ( The fresh and used cation exchange resin in this work is bead form (NRW-100) and purchased from Purolite Company. The cation resin was consisted of protonated sulfonated polystyrene cross-linked with divinylbenzene. Properties of selected IERs were as listed in Experiments were conducted in a glass double shell tubular reactor ( The morphology change of IER during dissolution process was observed by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6510, Japan). Samples were prepared with gold and platinum plated on the surface for analysis. Through SEM images, the oxidative degradation of IER by fluidized bed Fenton process could be visualized. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis was also used to identify the element distribution. The dissolved total organic carbon was measured by TOC analyzer (InnovOx Laboratory, GE). When collecting the generated gas during the oxidative dissolution of IER, the top of the reactor was mounted with plug, which can connect with a flexible tube to introduce the gas. The collection of gas over water method was adopted to measure the gas volume by recording the water level drop in a graduated cylinder. In term of the gas composition analysis, the gas introduction tube was connected with a gas collection bag, then extracted the collected gas by solid phase extraction method and analyzed by GC-MS (JEOL JMS-700 and SHIMADZU QP2010). Also, the compositions of gas were analyzed using portable gas analyzers such as BW GasAlertMicro 5 PID (VOCs, H By our screen tests, while the high concentration of H In the fluidized bed Fenton process, the scenario switches to a well-controlled reaction state. When the injected H The morphological change before and after the oxidative dissolution of IER was observed by using SEM. As shown in It is well-known that the Fenton's reagent has best efficiency for the degradation of dissolved organic matters in aqueous solution at pH ranging from 2.8 to 3.2. In this study, the catalyst (ferrous ions) solution were prepared in 0.1 M sulfuric acid (pH < 2) without further pH adjustment and then the cation exchange resins were immersed into the solution to exchange primary ferrous ions on the resins. The ferrous ions impregnated resins are considered to be reactants which can further react with oxidant on the surface. Therefore, the solution pH is not the major dominated parameter for the oxidative dissolution of resins in this system. However, some dissolved organic matters, which generated from the oxidative dissolution of resins, are major composed by organic acids that induced the solution pH decrease (pH < 1). The effect of pH on the degradation of the dissolved organic matters should be more than the dissolution of resins. As 10 g of IER is completely mineralized without side reactions, it demands about 121 g (or 110 mL) of H The results for IER dissolution as a function of H The effect of catalyst concentration on IER degradation was performed over a range of 2.5–35 mM at 75 °C (T The expansion ratio of fluidized bed volume is controlled by adjusting the recycle flowrate; the fluidized velocity was changed to alter the resin bed volume from one to three times (10 g of IER), but the fluidized velocity had almost no effect on the performance of oxidative dissolution process (data not shown). The effective reaction volume of the reactor is about 250 mL so packing about 50 g of IER can reach twice expansion bed volume in this reactor. In this section, increasing the loadings of IER with lower dosage of H The different injection rates of H The gas composition generated from the IER decomposition is listed on The organic species in both gas and solution phases were further measured by GC-MS after the oxidation of IER in the fluidized bed Fenton process. Some water insoluble long-chain hydrocarbons were detected in the gas ( The reaction mechanism in this work is proposed in The fluidized bed Fenton process is efficient and ready to control for the oxidation of cation IER in heterogeneous catalysis. During the oxidation of cation IER, both reactions of gas generation and IER beads dissolution occur almost simultaneously; it means that partial IER beads are directly mineralized to vapor and the others are oxidized to soluble species. By means of adjusting a suitable amount of ferrous ions saturated on the cation IER, the reaction can be aimed on the IER destruction rather than homogeneous oxidation. The oxidative dissolution efficiencies of cation IER can reach 91.6%–96.7% under the equal molar dosage of H  The authors would like to appreciate the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at