The extraction of primary ores and the end user of the contained minerals are typically separated by large distances. Under current paradigms, the transportation of minerals is powered by fossil fuels, which produce significant greenhouse gas emissions (GHG). Off-site greenhouse gas emissions from transportation of mineral products are not currently considered to be within the scope of influence of the mineral industry except in those cases where the company owns and operates the transport fleet. The significance of these emissions has therefore not been regularly accounted for. This paper presents the results of a study conducted by the authors of the emissions from transportation of Australian minerals (as one of the world’s key minerals producers). The results indicated that an estimated 4.4Mt of CO2-equivalent was produced domestically by transportation in 2008. This is equivalent to 6% of other emissions from the Australian minerals industry (McLellan, 2009). Estimates of the emissions from export shipping of Australian bulk minerals indicated that an additional 96.4Mt of CO2-equivalent is produced from this source, which is 20% greater than the entire on-site and off-site electricity generation emissions from the Australian minerals industry. Possible mitigation options were examined, with fuel substitution for biodiesel, natural gas or hydrogen showing the highest potential in the medium to long term.carbon dioxide equivalent (all reference to CO full fuel cycle (the life cycle of fuel from production through to use) greenhouse gases net tonne kilometres (tonnes transported multiplied by kilometres transported) diesel blended with 5 per cent of biodiesel. Australia is a nation with abundant natural resources and a large scale minerals industry by world standards. As part of mining, extracting and producing minerals and metals, the industry generates significant greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, estimated to be up to 14% of total Australian emissions ( Australia produces a wide range of minerals for domestic and export markets. A total of 352 significant mines were operating in the 2008–2009 period, for which much of the basic information (e.g. location, commodity) was available ( Of the 352 mines whose data were available, 206 operating mines were selected for inclusion on the basis of the above assumptions. Most of the remaining mines were gold mines, which largely ship low volume metal product. More relevant data including production tonnage, mode and distance of transport were collected from company annual reports, official websites and other sources. Some distances between mines and processing plants or ports were estimated using Google Earth™ to fill gaps in the data. The transportation of minerals consists of two basic legs – domestic and international. In the Australian context, domestic transport is largely rail and ship based, while international transport is exclusively by ship due to geographical constraints. For this study, domestic transportation was defined as product (e.g. concentrate) from the mine gate to market or the next stage of processing and international travel was from the nearest Australian port to the port of the country of destination. It did not include transportation within a mine site, such as mine trucks transporting ore for an open cut pit. A summary of the key data related to tonnage and transportation for each commodity is presented in The major domestic transport modes for minerals concentrates and ore are rail, road, ship, conveyors and slurry pipelines. The tonnage and distance transported are mine-specific, and these data were gathered from annual reports and online websites in most cases. The product of tonnage and distance was used to determine the most dominant transport modes and is measured in net tonne kilometres (ntk). Rail is the dominant method of transportation for coal, iron ore, bauxite and base metal concentrates. Due to the clustering of mines, significant infrastructure exists for railing large tonnages of product to port. Approximately 35% of coal is transported on electric rail in Queensland and New South Wales (estimated based on ( Australia is the world’s largest producer of bauxite, with 31% of global production in 2008 (   International transport of Australian minerals is entirely dominated by shipping. The key markets for Australian minerals are shown in Carbon emission from transport were estimated using emissions coefficients based on average emissions per tonne-kilometre for a given transport mode. These emissions coefficients, presented in In the case of trains and trucks, which are likely to be empty on one leg of a return journey to port from a mine, GHG emissions on the unloaded leg are considered to be equivalent to 50% of the value for a fully loaded train (based on a comparison of emissions per gross tonne-kilometre with per net tonne kilometre ( Emissions for the operation of conveyors were estimated from tonnage and distance with appropriate factors ( A summary of the key data related to energy usage and emissions for each commodity are presented in The work presented in this paper has focussed specifically on quantifying the CO The overall analysis estimated that total GHG emissions from domestic transportation (that is, from the mine gate to the next stage of processing or market as defined earlier) is 4.4Mt CO The emissions from minerals transportation are broken down by transport mode and by material sector in The total emissions from international transport were estimated to be 96.4Mtpa CO There has only been one report that was identified as containing estimates of transportation based emissions from the mining sector ( Domestically, rail transport is the highest emitting transport mode, while overall international shipping is the largest emitter, contributing greater than 96% of all minerals transport emissions. A number of mitigation strategies to offset emissions from these transport methods were examined and the results of this analysis are presented in this Section. Broadly, these can be categorised as: fuel switching for decarbonisation, efficiency improvement, reducing the transport burden through on-site processing and carbon offsets. The current train and ship fleets operate largely on diesel or fuel oil. Biofuels have been on the market for a number of years. DB5 (diesel blended with 5 per cent of biodiesel) is one potential alternative fuel for use in standard diesel engines without modification. GHG emissions from using biofuel are likely to be lower than standard liquid fuels however, in some circumstances, they may lead to higher emissions or only a neutral benefit ( Depending on the feedstock used (waste, sustainably cropped or virgin forest), the feedstock transport and the feedstock production practices, the addition of biofuel can typically reduce emissions – by 1.5–4.2% for DB5 according to The current annual usage of fuel for transportation of minerals in Australia is estimated to total 787 PJ, which is approximately equal to 20.4 GL of diesel. On the assumption that the calorific value of a litre of biodiesel is approximately the same as for a litre of diesel, the amount of land required to produce sufficient oil feedstock is shown in The results in Engines operating only on biodiesel will most likely require modification over standard diesel. However, this is a financial not technical barrier to widespread implementation. Worldwide food shortages may be a larger hindrance to this strategy. The conversion of food crops to biofuels or planting energy crops instead of food crops could be considered contentious and not necessarily a more sustainable option from the global perspective. Hydrogen vehicles deliver the clear benefit of zero tailpipe emissions, with only water produced after combustion or reaction. On the face of it, this seems to be an ideal solution to resolving the issue of GHG emissions, but there are significant barriers to widespread implementation, and the full fuel cycle implications need to be taken into account. Hydrogen locomotives have been tested and examined in comparison with conventional diesel-electric and electric trains ( The cost of fuel cells, while decreasing gradually, was recently about $4000/kW, approximately 100 times greater than the cost of internal combustion engines ( Estimates of the potential full fuel cycle benefits of hydrogen fuel cell locomotives using data from The biggest benefit of an electrified rail system is zero tailpipe emissions. If low carbon electricity sources can be used for electrifying minerals transportation, the emissions could potentially be greatly reduced. However, the overall or full fuel cycle (FFC) emissions of electric rail under current electricity production scenarios from mainly fossil fuels indicate that diesel locomotives produce lower emissions (45% lower FFC CO Electrified rail networks exist, mainly in central Queensland for coal transportation ( The proportion of renewable electricity generation in Australia is only approximately 4% in total, one quarter of which is contributed by wind and solar ( Hybrid vehicles offer higher efficiency fuel usage by capturing lost energy with regenerative braking. Life cycle emissions are estimated to be approximately 40% less than conventional vehicles ( The battery, in particular, is of key importance in terms of the impact and applicability of this technology as the batteries would use of lithium and rare earth metals which are likely to have a high level of embodied energy. In addition, the cost and lifetime of these batteries would need to be analysed to determine if this technology would be viable. Hybrid locomotives are being trialled by Rio Tinto in an effort to reduce fuel costs and environmental impacts of emissions ( Some mining areas, such Mount Isa and Olympic Dam, have smelters and/or refineries on-site or nearby, where concentrate is refined to very high percentage of metal product. With on-site processing to high grade metal product the mass of material transported is greatly reduced, thus reducing total emissions. The contained metal concentration of base metal concentrate products may vary however some typical grades are: copper at 30–40% ( If this scenario is extended to iron ore and bauxite, assuming conservatively that the average grades were 60% and 40% respectively, There are a number of drawbacks to this strategy. Firstly, a mineral processing plant is very capital intensive. If the mine life is too short, setting up a smelter or refinery might not be feasible. The production of an individual mine might not reach an optimum throughput for a downstream processing plant, in which case it might require a group of mines to produce sufficient ore. The validity of this method in reducing emissions is only applicable to a global emissions balance, as on-site processing in Australia would typically entail an increase in national emissions, but a decrease in global emissions. On base metals alone, this strategy would not be sufficient to reduce emissions in any significant sense. The current economic drivers in Australia in general do not favour on-site processing compared with offshore downstream processing particularly for smelting and refining. However, in some cases the introduction of an emission trading scheme or equivalent could tip the balance in favour of on-site processing in Australia. The carbon offset considered here is the planting of trees to permanently sequester carbon dioxide. Other offsets such as purchasing the carbon reduction from projects in developing countries under the Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism were not considered.   If a total reduction in emissions was sought, the only technically feasible options would be renewable-based electric or hydrogen transport. However, the implementation of these options would be hindered by the lack of infrastructure – both for electricity/hydrogen generation and for electrification of the rail lines or provision of hydrogen. Even if it was possible to use renewable energy for all current electricity usage in minerals transport, a reduction of only 1% of overall (domestic and international) emissions could be achieved. Hydrogen fuel cell locomotives have the theoretical potential to produce no emissions if a renewable hydrogen source is utilised. However, in the current state of play, natural gas reforming would be the most likely source, which could reduce emissions by about 30%. The lack of infrastructure for production, transmission and refuelling, as well as the lack of proven fuel cell locomotive technology would all be barriers to implementation. Carbon offsets could be used on their own to produce the required mitigation, but the land area required for permanent revegetation would eliminate this option in the longer term. A more appropriate approach for utilising carbon offsets would be through a portfolio of mitigation options. Two fuel-switching options examined are biodiesel and natural gas. Under the most positive forecasts, biofuels may be able to mitigate approximately 83% of the current overall emissions (assuming diesel and fuel oil can be substituted). In the short term, reductions of 3% could be obtained through the use of a 5% biodiesel blend. Higher blends may require engine conversions, which would be a barrier to implementation. Likewise, natural gas conversions may be able to reduce the emissions by 19%, but the required change of engine would hinder take-up. On-site processing to metal could result in up to 18% emissions reductions, but would not be likely to be undertaken due to the additional infrastructure costs. Also, the gains in transport emissions reduction would be more than offset by the increase in emissions from the additional processing. Running the rail networks more efficiently could result in improvements in efficiency of up to approximately 40% reduction in emissions. Ancillary rail networks (such as those run by Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton in the Pilbara) are typically far more efficient than “hire and reward” rail ( Based on the analysis presented in this section, The analysis presented in this paper indicates that a conservative estimate of current emissions from the transportation of Australian minerals is 100.8Mt CO The transportation of bulk minerals – iron ore, coal and bauxite – accounts for 99% of total GHG emissions and the core transport modes are rail and ship. The majority of this transport is fuelled by diesel or fuel oil, which was therefore the main focus of many of the mitigation suggestions. From a domestic transport perspective, carbon offsetting in the short term could make the biggest impact in mitigating GHG emissions. From an overall transport perspective (domestic and international), there was no strategy in the short term that could significantly mitigate carbon emissions. However, in the medium to longer-term, biodiesel and hydrogen transport appear to be the most likely strategies that could significantly mitigate GHG emissions. This research work was carried out under the auspice and with the financial support of the Cooperative Research Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing (