When considering grinding of minerals, scaling effect induces competition between plastic deformation and fracture in brittle solids. The competition can be sketched by a critical size of the material, which characterizes the ductile–brittle transition. A first approach using Vickers indentation gives a good approximation of the critical size through an extrapolation from the macroscopic to the microscopic scales. Nanoindentation tests confirm this experimental value. According to the grain size compared to the indent size, it can reasonably be said that the mode of damage is deformation-induced intragranular microfracture. This technique also enables to perform cyclic indentations to examine calcite fatigue resistance. Repeated loadings with a nanoindenter on CaCO3 polycrystalline samples produce cumulative mechanical damage. It is also shown that the transition between ductile and brittle behaviour depends on the number of indentation cycles. The ductile domain can be reduced when the material is exposed to a fatigue process.Calcium carbonate (CaCO    Many authors have already tried to define the reagglomeration causes, which origin can be electrostatic according to Uber To check if the second phenomenon, limitation by the initial grain size, is a possible explanation, polished samples were characterized by electron beam scattering diffraction (EBSD). The average grain size calculated from EBSD images was around 200 In this study, we focus on the third point, the determination of CaCO In a first part, in the aim to understand the brittle–ductile transition, the response of the material to a single indent has been studied. This has been first done by using Vickers indentation tests. From these results, a critical size for calcium carbonate could be defined by extrapolating the data. Indeed, due to the rather high applied load, cracks were always observed around Vickers indent and it was not possible to reach the ductile-only regime. That is why nanoindentation tests were then performed to obtain indents without crack in order to confirm the Vickers extrapolated value. In a second part, since grinding induces a large number of shocks, the material response to cyclic stress has been characterized by multi-cycle nanoindentation tests in the ductile regime defined from the single cycle study. Cracks were observed for loads lower than the critical load determined for single indent which indicates that fatigue induced a shift of the ductile–brittle transition size with the number of cycles. The role of test parameters (loading speed, frequency, minimum unloading value in cyclic loading) on fracture propagation is briefly discussed. All tests were performed on freshly polished surfaces of calcium carbonate polycrystals (CaCO Classical indentation techniques such as Vickers microhardness tests are geometrically limited by the four-sided pyramidal shape of the diamond as the tip defect is too large to permit a sufficient accuracy for small indentation loads. Although, some authors use Vickers indenter in nanoindentation tests for loads as low as 10 During indentation, the energy given to the sample can be dissipated in two different ways: (i) a fracture occurs because the energy permits to create new surfaces or (ii) the material deforms plastically, the energy being dissipated by atoms rearrangement. Thermal effects also exist but are here neglected. The predominance of one or another phenomenon can be characterized by a size, referred here as the critical breakage size The energy On the other side, the energy From these equations, the energetic balance becomes favorable to plastic deformation as soon as the size Experimentally, brittle material heterogeneity leads to high scattering on However, the breakage critical size can be deduced by observing the transition between the plastic deformation and the creation of cracks when performing indentations. Thanks to microscopy techniques, such as optical microscopy or atomic force microscopy (AFM), indents on brittle materials can be geometrically characterized by the dimension The diagonal length The length of the cracks 2 Assuming that When plotting the lengths Several indentations were done at 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 Tests at lower loads (2–10 A comparison between the maximum depths measured after the first and the second loading steps enables to define whether a crack occurred or not after the first loading. When the depth difference between the two maxima is larger than 20 Due to the low applied loads in nanoindentation, the indent size (a few micrometers) is significantly smaller than the grain size (≈200 In this study, nanoindentation tests were performed at room temperature (25 Fatigue tests consist in applying cyclic loading with a maximum load lower than the single cycle load for which radial cracks are observed. In this study, cyclic nanoindentation tests were conducted to investigate the influence of fatigue on the breakage critical size of CaCO If a power law is verified, a straight line is expected when plotting log( In this study, a fatigue test based on nanoindentation has been developed to characterize the material resistance to fracture under cyclic loading. For nanoindentation fatigue experiments, Cyclic loads lower than the breakage critical load determined for CaCO As previously shown, the involved volume of material is small, which limits the scattering of the results according to the Griffith theory. For each test, the number In order to ensure a correct location of all consecutive loadings at the same place, the unloading was not total. So during nanoindentation fatigue tests, the load varied between a maximum load Crack propagation was detected using the method employed by Beake et al., who compared the measured change in probe depth between two consecutive maximum loads to detect cracks.   The transition between plastic deformation and brittle fracture in CaCO By extrapolating the straight lines, the ductile–brittle critical size below which no cracking occurs is found to be around 1.9 In order to refine the previous results, nanoindentation tests were performed at loads chosen around the critical load obtained from the extrapolation of the Vickers indentation results. Using the depth increase criteria defined in 2.3, none of the 50 indentations made at loads up to 4 mN produces cracks after the first cycle whereas a non-negligible number of indentations performed at higher loads (6, 7.5 and 10 For each load, the plasticity length √(2 For each maximum load (2–10 For The evolution of the ductile–brittle transition is plotted on In this study, three main issues were investigated: the existence of a critical size between a ductile behaviour and a brittle behaviour and its determination from indentation tests; the behaviour under cyclic loading at microscale, which is close to classical macroscopic fatigue behaviour and can also be described by a power law in the investigated load range; the decrease of the transition size resulting from cyclic loadings. The existence of a critical size under which a brittle material become ductile is not a new concept. In the proposed method, this critical size was first experimentally extrapolated from Vickers indentation and then directly determined from nanoindentation tests. The possibility to apply very low loads on the sample using nanoindentation tests enables to observe the transition between ductile and brittle behaviours of CaCO During grinding, particles undergo a high number of shocks. That is why understanding the material behaviour under fatigue loading may be a key point to improve its grinding. Fatigue is extensively studied for metals but less investigated for brittle materials. It was shown in Section In the single indent study (Section For industrial applications, the fineness of the final ground powder, and consequently the decrease of the ductile–brittle threshold, is of major importance. Two ways can be explored to improve grinding efficiency. The first one is the increase of the number of shocks during comminution. According to the presented results, high number of shocks would lead to a lower ductile–brittle threshold and enhance fine particles creation. However, for small particles, the probability to receive a shock is smaller, Decreasing the material resistance to fracture is another way to optimize grinding. Environmental parameters (hygrometry, temperature, pressure,…) and/or chemical grinding aids are known to play a significant role in changing the material resistance to fracture. This study has shown that single cycle nanoindentation tests enable to characterize the ductile–brittle transition of brittle materials. This transition can be observed directly instead of being deduced from extrapolated measurements at macroscopic scale. This method permits to determine the material critical size under which the energy balance becomes favourable to plastic deformations and no fracture can occur. A critical indentation load can be related to this critical size. The behaviour under cyclic loading at microscale was investigated with nanoindentation tests which give the possibility to apply lower loads than the failure single cycle critical load. It is found that cyclic loading behaviour is close to usual macroscopic fatigue behaviour. In the tested range, it can be described by a classical fatigue power-law and plotted as Wöhler curve. Thus, failure can occur at lower load for high number of cycles and cracks can appear for particle sizes lower than the critical size defined for a single shock. This result can be related to the final powder granulometry obtained in CaCO