A key component in the atmospheric leaching of metal sulfides is the oxidation of sulfide to either elemental sulfur or hexavalent sulfur. The final oxidation state of sulfur significantly influences the economic viability of a leaching process because of its effects on oxygen consumption, acid generation, and surface passivation. Thus, in the process of developing new leaching technologies, it is important to both characterize and quantify the sulfur oxidation products. In this work, a new method based on Simultaneous Thermal Analysis (STA) is established for the quantification and thermal characterization of elemental sulfur in chalcopyrite leach residues. The STA method refers to the simultaneous application of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The DSC measurements yield information on phase transformation, which can be used to identify the sulfur allotropes. The linear relationship between the melting enthalpy of β‑sulfur determined by DSC and the sulfur content determined by TGA is expediently used to quantify the unknown sulfur content in leach residues.As an alternative to pyrometallurgical processes, hydrometallurgical extraction of copper from chalcopyrite (CuFeS In the most simple and widespread model for passivation by sulfur products, these products are not released into solution at room temperature, but form an electrically non-conductive layer at the surface of the particles. Hence, the overall reaction rate is decreased by inhibiting the electron transfer through the surface sulfur, eventually leading to passivation of the leaching process ( To address the passivation problem, global engineering company FLSmidth® has developed a mechanochemical approach, i.e., the FLSmidth® Rapid Oxidative Leach (ROL) process for atmospheric leaching of chalcopyrite in acidic ferric sulfate. The process can provide >97% copper recovery in 6 h or less. The ROL process includes a chemical activation step as pretreatment and a downstream mechanochemically assisted leaching step that fractures partially leached particles and mitigates the passivation processes ( In this paper, a method based on Simultaneous Thermal Analysis (STA) is developed and tested to analyze the elemental sulfur in the residue obtained from the FLSmidth® ROL process. The STA method employs the simultaneous application of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The combined DSC and TGA signals can provide qualitative information about the sulfur allotropes present in the sample. By using model compounds containing elemental sulfur, quartz, and chalcopyrite, a method for quantifying the amount of elemental sulfur in the leach residue is established and validated. The chalcopyrite leach residue used in the present work was obtained from the FLSmidth® ROL process ( The elemental composition of the leach residue was analyzed by Inductively Coupled Plasma -Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES). The sample was dried overnight to remove moisture. A sample of 0.050 g was mixed with 2 mL H The X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis of crystalline phases in the leach residue was carried out on a Panalytical X'Pert PRO system using Cu-K The compositions of the leach residue and mixed pure mineral standards were characterized using a field emission Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, JEOL 2100F), equipped with an Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS). Samples of 1–2 g were embedded within resin and curing agent for 12 h. Then, the cured sample was polished on SiC pads of 200-mesh, 800-mesh, 1200-mesh, and 2000-mesh in preparation for measurement by SEM-EDS. The thermal behavior of minerals in the residue was evaluated by STA using a Netzsch STA 449F1 instrument. During the experiments, the sample was placed in an alumina crucible, with an empty crucible alongside as a reference. Unless otherwise stated, the furnace was heated from 25 °C to 400 °C for all experiments. Different heating rates and heating programs (heating-cooling cycles) were applied for the establishment of the STA characterization method. The relevant details for the different experiments are provided in the Results and Discussion (Section 3). Nitrogen purge gas with a purity of 99.9% was used as the protective gas with a flow of 100 mL/min. All STA data were baseline-corrected using a scan of an empty crucible. The analyses of DSC and TGA curves were done using NETZSCH Proteus Thermal Analysis software. As illustrated in The mass fraction of elemental sulfur in the leach residue can be determined gravimetrically by toluene extraction. Extraction of sulfur by organic solutions, such as carbon disulfide and carbon tetrachloride, is often used to quantify the amount of sulfur ( The elemental composition of the leach residue listed in  As previously stated, STA is a combined technique of DSC and TGA, which can be used to analyze the elemental sulfur thermal properties. Elemental sulfur can exist as a number of different allotropes. Table S2 (see supplementary materials) compiles data for different sulfur phase transitions at different temperatures. In view of these phase transition data, it is possible to use STA to identify the phases of elemental sulfur in chalcopyrite leach residue. The STA of the leach residue is shown in First stage (1st stage): Heating from 25 °C to 130 °C; Second stage (2nd stage): Cooling from 130 °C to 25 °C; Third stage (3rd stage): Heating from 25 °C to 150 °C; Fourth stage (4th stage): Continuous heating from 150 °C to 400 °C. At this stage, the sample is heated from 25 °C to 130 °C. According to Table S2, the small endothermic peak at 108.2 °C indicates either the depressed melting point of orthorhombic sulfur (α‑sulfur), or the solid-solid transformation of α‑sulfur into monoclinic sulfur (β‑sulfur). In the work of Ficara and Moreira, there are two endothermic peaks at 108.25 °C and 119.50 °C for the DSC of standard sulfur, which represent the α‑sulfur to β‑sulfur transition and the melting of sulfur, respectively ( The integrated DSC peak area can be used to determine the enthalpy of phase transition, and thus, a peak area analysis of the DSC scans can be used to support the above conclusions regarding sulfur allotropes present in the leach residue. The area of the first endothermic peak at 108.2 °C suggests an endothermic enthalpy of 5.73 J/g, which is about ¼ of the heat absorption of the second peak at 119.0 °C (22.08 J/g). According to the thermal data for phase transitions of sulfur, the enthalpy for the α-β sulfur transition is 12.56 J/g, while it is 50.25 J/g for the melting of β‑sulfur (the value differences lie in various samples), which corresponds to a ratio of about 1:4 ( During this stage, the sample is cooled from 130 °C to 25 °C. A distinct exothermic peak is present at 85.6 °C, and this peak is most likely attributed to the recrystallization of β‑sulfur. A temperature of around 50 °C for recrystallization of β‑sulfur has been reported elsewhere ( In this stage, the sample is heated from 25 °C to 150 °C. The distinct endothermic peak at 118.3 °C is probably the re-melting of β‑sulfur as compared with the melting of β‑sulfur in the 1st stage, indicating the sole presence of β‑sulfur in the residue after heat treatment. In support of this, additional DSC investigations of the re-melting of sulfur allotropes in leach residue are presented in Fig. S7 of the supplementary materials. The heat flux of the single endothermic peak at 118.3 °C gives a value of 21.27 J/g, which is approximately equivalent to the 1st stage, further evidencing that the peak belongs to the melting of β‑sulfur. The sample is heated from 150 °C to 400 °C. At this stage, there is a distinct mass loss after a small endothermic peak at around 165.0 °C. According to Miller (1964, 1971), the melted β‑sulfur can transform into the lambda form of sulfur (λ‑sulfur), which can polymerize to form The TGA curve is also plotted in Based on the characterization of the leach residue in Section 3.1, we identified the main mineral phases in the leach residue as sulfur, quartz, and chalcopyrite (with the contents of other compositions being below 4 wt%). Synthetic samples consisting mixtures of pure elemental sulfur (S At this stage, there are two distinct endothermic peaks at around 110.0 °C and 121.0 °C for the four samples. During this stage, the samples are cooled from 130 °C to 25 °C. A distinct exothermic peak In this stage, the samples are heated from 25 °C to 150 °C. The distinct endothermic peak At this stage, the samples are heated from 150 °C to 400 °C. There are also small endothermic peaks at around 165.0 °C for the four samples, which could be assigned to the production of λ‑sulfur. With the increase of temperature, the λ‑sulfur evaporates within one hour ( Examination of the TGA curves indicates the performance of the four synthetic samples are almost the same as the leach residue, with small mass losses of 1.62% during the 130 °C isothermal stage and large mass losses above 150 °C. As shown in Based on the melting enthalpy of elemental sulfur, the quantification of sulfur can be performed from STA measurements. In the above analysis, the second peak during the 1st stage was assumed to be caused by the melting of β‑sulfur, both for the synthetic samples and the leach residue. Additionally, the melting of β‑sulfur occurs at a stable temperature around 120 °C, suggesting that no other changes affect the melting enthalpy of β‑sulfur. Thus, the melting of β‑sulfur is used for the quantification of sulfur. The related function is calculated from a plot of sulfur melting enthalpy versus mass change, based on the DSC and TGA data in Here, the variable To determine the influence of sample mass on the STA measurement, various sample masses were analyzed with a heating rate of 2 °C/min. The results are shown in As evidenced by TGA, the mass losses from the leach residue with samples masses of 6.31 mg, 8.90 mg and 10.00 mg were 57.11%, 58.30% and 60.42%, respectively, with an average mass loss of 58.61%. In the DSC curve, the curve shape is similar for the samples with various masses. The two endothermic peaks at around 108.6 °C and 119.1 °C are in agreement with the transformation of α‑sulfur to β‑sulfur and the melting of β‑sulfur, respectively. The melting enthalpy (marked as area under the curves in It was observed that the TGA-based sulfur content (average 58.61%) is in accordance with DSC-based sulfur content (average 58.32%), illustrating the reliability of STA quantification methods. There is a slight increase of sulfur content with the increase of sample mass, as shown in To determine the influence of heating rate on the STA measurement, the STA of leach residue with a mass of 10.00 mg was analyzed, as shown in  After the leach residue was treated by STA with a sample mass of 10.00 mg and heating rate of 2 °C/min, the ash was collected and subjected to XRD analysis. From the XRD data in After extraction of sulfur by toluene for 15 to 20 min, it was assumed that the elemental sulfur was completely dissolved in toluene. The results are shown in As comparison with the result of toluene extraction, the sulfur content determined by DSC and TGA methods (using 10.00 mg sample and 2 °C/min heating rate), both of which are around 60%, is consistent with 61.14%, indicating the usage of STA as a promising method for the qualitative and quantitative characterization of leach residues. DSC can also be used to determine the enthalpy change of the sample, giving information on the element allotropes and thermal changes of elemental sulfur. The TGA measurement is comparatively stable and accurate for the samples tested. Thus, STA provides a comprehensive method for samples of the kind investigated in this study. In this work, an STA-based method for quantification and thermal characterization of the sulfur in the residue from a chalcopyrite leaching process was developed and evaluated. It was found that STA, which refers to the simultaneous application of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) in a single instrument, can be conveniently used for the quantification and thermal characterization of sulfur in leach residues from the FLSmidth® ROL process. The STA-based method on pure mineral assemblages using a known content of sulfur was used to establish the function to estimate sulfur content and verify the reliability of the method. The sulfur percentage was readily calculated from the sulfur melting enthalpy and mass loss. For the leach residue sample, the only volatile component was elemental sulfur, which was readily evaporated in N This work is part of the Joint Doctoral Programme from the Sino-Danish Center for Education and Research (SDC). The work is also part of the advanced technology platform,  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at