Natural rock has been considered the promising material for thermal energy storage in concentrating solar power plants at high temperatures. Rocks need to keep stable when serving as storage materials and exchanging heat with working fluid many times. To investigate the feasibility of granite in this application, this paper evaluated the thermal stability of granite, including physical and mechanical properties, subjected to different thermal cycles with temperature ranging from 20 °C to 650 °C. Mass and volume of granites were measured after each desired cycle, as well as the P-wave velocity and porosity. Thermal cracks of granite samples in different thermal cycles were analyzed by adopting X-ray computed tomography technique. The results demonstrated that, most of the thermal damage in physical properties such as mass loss, porosity increase and P-wave velocity decrease of granites occurred within 5 thermal cycles, especially in the first cycle, before reaching almost the constant value after the 20 thermal cycles. Uniaxial compression tests were carried out on granites in different thermal cycles, revealing that the peak strength and elastic modulus of granite were also dramatically decreased after the first thermal cycle. Afterwards, the thermal damage in mechanical behavior of granites barely grown and granites kept stable when thermally cycled the granite from 20 to 100 times.Carbon emission reduction and renewable energy sources demand have drawn extensive attention all over the world. The penetration of solar energy technologies has proven to be one of the cleanest ways to produce electricity instead of fossil fuels, which obviously contributed a lot to carbon footprint Gil et al. Many researchers have devoted to investigating the suitable rocks for high temperature thermal storage materials. Jemmal et al. Thermal effects on physical and mechanical properties of rocks have been investigated extensively. The main mechanism of changes in physical and mechanical properties of rocks after thermal treatment is rock structural damage caused by mineral thermal expansion and thermal reactions Granite samples (  After each desired cycle, the mass and volume of granites were measured, as well as the P-wave velocity and porosity, which are considered to reflect the total damage inside the materials. The non-destructive P-wave velocity measurement technique is based on ultrasonic pulse transmission in rock materials. In this technique, two transducers (a transmitter and a receiver), were clung to each end face of sample, and the vaseline was spread between the interface of transducers and rock samples. A constant pressure was applied by putting weight on the transducers to ensure tight contact between the rock samples and the transducers. The time of pulse travel from the transmitter to the receiver were recorded and the P-wave velocity was calculated by divided the sample length by the travel time of the pulse through the rock sample. The porosity was measured with automated mercury intrusion porosimeter produced by Quantachrome. The tested samples were cored from granites with a diameter of 10 mm and a length of 25 mm. Effective porosity can be calculated by the volume of mercury penetrated the pore space of samples. Uniaxial compression tests were performed on the granite after high temperature treatment at desired cycles (0, 1, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100). Uniaxial compression tests were carried out in the MTS815.02 Material Testing System to obtain the strength and deformation behaviors of granite after exposure to different thermal cycles. The axial stress was loaded on the granite samples with the constant axial displacement rate of 0.12 mm/min until failure. Each measurement was conducted three times on different samples for checking the result reproducibility. From the comparison of granites before and after thermal cycling treatment ( The data presented in In addition to the mass loss, it can be observed that expansion of granite sample embodied both in the length and diameter. After the first thermal cycle, the length of granite sample#1 increased by 0.8 mm from 101.2 mm to 102 mm, and the sample #2 and #3 showed almost the same trend with sample #1, increasing by 0.8 mm and 1.1 mm, respectively. The length increasing rate were relatively rapid before 5 thermal cycle, after which the thermal expansion of granite (Sample #1) slowed down with the length of sample increasing by 0.2 mm from 102.6 mm in 20 thermal cycles to 102.8 mm in 100 thermal cycles. After 100 thermal cycles, the average length expansion rate was 1.74% as the length expansion of granite was 1.6 mm, 1.6 mm and 2.1 mm in Sample #1, #2, #3, respectively. The expansion in diameter was very similar to that of in length and based on the diameter and length, the volume expansion of granite sample with thermal cycles could be calculated, as shown in P-wave velocity measurement technique provides a non-destructive way to evaluate the integrity of rock samples. The P-wave velocity of three granite samples for each desired thermal cycle were measured after thermal cycles of 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100, respectively, to investigate the effect of thermal cycles on the stability of granite samples. The data presented in Contrary to P-wave velocity reduction, the porosity of granites increased with the thermal cycles. From To investigate further the influence of thermal cycles on the rock behaviors, thermal cracks of granite samples in different thermal cycles were analyzed by adopting X-ray computed tomography (CT) technique, which has been shown to be an efficient method to reveal the evolution and propagation of defects in materials and has been widely applied to investigate the damage and fracture behavior within the rock material  Based on the above results, we can see that deterioration of granite in physical aspects – mass loss, volume expansion, P-wave velocity reduction, porosity increase and thermal cracks development – occurred mostly in the first 5 cycles before reaching a stable state with thermal cycles more than 20. Fortunately, granite samples kept integrated and the deterioration was not too serious to make granite disintegrate, which qualified granite with the potential to be TES materials. Uniaxial compression tests were performed on the granite after thermally cycled between room temperature and 650 °C and the stress-strain behavior was shown in Based on the experimental data of granite specimens at different thermal cycles listed in Therefore, the previous experimental results demonstrated that, in most cases, thermal damage of granite subjected to thermal cycles occurred most rapidly within in the first 20 thermal cycles and tended to keep at a relatively low rate afterwards. CSP system coupled with granite as TES materials could perform well if designed as per the strength remained after thermal cycled treatment. To investigate the potential of granite used as thermal storage material, thermal stability of granites, including physical and mechanical properties, were evaluated after subjected to different thermal cycles with temperature ranging from 20 °C to 650 °C. The mass and volume of granites were measured after each desired cycle, as well as the P-wave velocity and porosity. In addition, thermal cracks of granite samples in different thermal cycles were analyzed and the strength behavior of granites were observed based on a series of uniaxial compression tests performed on granite specimens. The following conclusions can be summarized. Granite samples suffered from a great mass loss after subjected to the first thermal cycle, combined with the volume expansion embodied both in the length and diameter, which contributed to huge reduction in density. Thermal cycling effects on the mass, volume and density of granite were rather little as the mass and density reach almost constant value with thermal cycles increasing from 20 to 100. The P-wave velocity reduction and porosity increase indicated that there were thermal cracks forming and internal fissures and voids increasing inside the samples, which was certified by the CT images of granites in different thermal cycles, showing that crack density increased slowly when the thermal cycles increased from 20 to 100 as mineral grains had expanded to a great degree after about 20 thermal cycles and the relatively stable structure between mineral grains were formed after so many thermal cycles. The stress-strain behavior of granite before thermal cycling treatment exhibited distinct brittleness after the peak strength, while ductility in the stress-strain curves of granites were observed after thermal cycling treatment, as well as the stage of the initially rapid deformation due to the open thermal micro-cracks rapidly closing under a minor load. The stage of initially rapid deformation becomes more and more significant with the increase of thermal cycles. The change rates of peak strength and elastic modulus demonstrated that the thermal damage of granite subjected to thermal cycles occurred most rapidly within in the first 20 thermal cycles and tended to keep at a relatively low rate afterwards. Granite samples withstood the high-temperature thermal cycled treatment and kept integrated after 20 thermal cycles, making it qualified to be TES materials. CSP system coupled with granite as TES materials could perform well if designed as per the strength remained after thermal cycled treatment. This research was supported by the