The present studies were designed to determine the effect of gallium on the aortic valve cusp mineralization. The studies were conducted on aortic valves collected at autopsy from 35 donors. Each sample was incubated for 21 days in the mineralization-promoting medium, containing Ga at concentrations ranging from 0.0 to 8.0 μg/ml. The elemental compositions of the samples were measured using energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (EDXRF) method. The concentrations of 14 elements were determined: Mg, Al, S, Cl, K, Ca, Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ga, Br and Sr. Calcium contents and Ca/P ratios were considered as markers of the mineralization process. The aortic valves could be divided into two groups depending on the advancement of the mineralization process. The first group in which the process progressed and the second one which was resistant to mineralization. Ga was accumulated in both groups. The results demonstrated that Ga reduced the aortic valve mineralization in dose-dependent manner in the first group and did not influence the mineralization in the mineralization-resistant aortic valves.Ectopic mineralization is the pathological process, which occurs in the soft tissues. Accumulation of inorganic deposits in the aortic valve homografts transplanted to the patients suffering form serious circulatory failures is an example of such process. The regulatory mechanism of the mineralization process is still unknown. Reported data indicate The present studies are focused on in vitro investigations of the gallium involvement in the aortic valve mineralization. The concentrations of Ca and the Ca/P ratios were considered as indicators of the development of the process. The problems encountered in the determination of the aortic valve composition by EDXRF method, resulting from sample inhomogeneity and irregularity are also discussed. The studies were conducted on the samples of aortic valves excised at autopsy from 35 donors (19–66 years old). An aortic valve is composed of 3 cusps. Each cusp was divided into 2 halves, so 6 samples from 1 donor were subjected to the experiment. One sample from each aortic valve was incubated in the Ga-free medium, while the remaining 5 samples were incubated in the medium supplemented with gallium nitrate (Ga concentrations: 0.04, 0.12, 0.40, 1.60 and 8 μg/ml). The samples were incubated under sterile conditions in the containers with 50 ml of the incubation medium at 37 °C in an atmosphere composed of 5% CO Elemental concentrations were determined using energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (ED 2000, Oxford Instruments) under vacuum. The spectrometer was equipped with silver anode X-ray tube and Si(Li) detector (area 30 mm The concentrations of 14 elements (Mg, Al, S, Cl, K, Ca, Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ga, Br and Sr) were determined on the basis of Scherman’s equation An example of the X-ray spectrum is presented in The influence of Ga in the medium (0.04–8 μg/ml) on the Ga accumulation in the tissue and on the Ca and P concentrations as well as Ca/P ratios in the aortic valve samples is presented in In Group I, Ca concentrations and Ca/P ratios significantly drop with the increase in the Ga level in the medium, approaching the values observed in the Group II at the Ga concentration of 8 μg/ml. Although the pattern of changes in the P content in aortic valves is slightly different, it drops to the level detected in non-mineralising valves at the highest medium Ga concentration. In Group II, no effect of Ga on Ca and P concentrations as well as Ca/P ratios was observed after 21-day incubation, despite accumulation of gallium in the aortic valves. Gallium effect on mineralization is a very complex process and detailed discussion of the mechanism of gallium action is out of the scope of this paper. The present work confirmed advantages of the EDXRF method in mineralization studies. The main problem encountered during determination of the elemental concentrations according to Scherman’s equation is the fact that the matrix composition is unknown. We assumed that the cusp composition could be approximated by muscular tissue The present study has shown that aortic valves can be divided into two groups depending on the progress of the mineralization process in vitro – those which are susceptible to mineralization (Group I) and those resistant to this process (Group II). Gallium added to the medium accumulates in the tissue during incubation in both groups. In Group I, Ga added to the incubation medium reduces the Ca concentration and the Ca/P ratio in the tissue. In Group II, Ga has no effect on the tissue Ca level and the Ca/P ratio. Demonstration that Ga at low concentrations suppresses mineralization of aortic valve cusps can have clinical significance. These experiments also confirmed that EDXRF is a valuable tool in the mineralization studies. We are pleased to acknowledge a financial support from the State Committee for Scientific Research (grant no. 7 T11E 046 20).