Microstructure and texture evolution of pure molybdenum prepared by powder metallurgy during the thermal mechanical processing were studied. Uniaxial compression tests were carried out on Gleeble-1500 thermal mechanical simulator in range of temperature (1100 ºC-1300 °C), strain rates (0.1 s−1-10 s−1) and true strain (0.3–0.6), respectively. The results show that the difference in deformation mechanism caused by temperature, strain rate and true strain has a great influence on microstructure and texture. Especially at 1300 °C, pure molybdenum will have obvious geometric dynamic recrystallization, and as the deformation progresses, the jagged high angle grain boundaries are close to each other and forming an equiaxed crystal. This equiaxed crystal structure is separated by a high angle grain boundary and the size of the equiaxed crystal is close to the subgrain size. In addition, this paper focuses on the deformation behavior of pure molybdenum under different true strains. There are two typical orientations of fiber texture. One is <100>//CD fiber texture, including {001} <100> cube texture and {110} <001> goss texture; other is <111>//CD fiber texture, including {112} <111> copper texture and {110} <111> texture. The increased distortion of the deformation provides a certain driving force for the rotation of the grain, prompting it to the preferred slip system, thereby weakening the texture resulting from the deformation. What’s more, the dynamic recrystallization behavior can significantly weaken deformed textures, especially for <111>//CD fiber texture.Pure molybdenum (Mo) has been extensively used in aerospace, nuclear industry, semiconductor lighting, medical equipment and other industrial fields [ Recently, in order to overcome above limitations, most of the researches on thermal deformation of pure Mo focus on microstructure evolution and constitutive equations at different temperatures and strain rates. Chaudhuri et al. [ The present study aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of the deformation behaviors of pure Mo at high temperatures. Not only we investigate the effects of high temperature deformation on the microstructure and texture of pure Mo, but also focus on the evolution of microstructure under four true strains. This paper presents the results of thermal compression tests based on scanning electron microscope (SEM), electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and transmission electron microscope (TEM), showing geometric dynamic recrystallization mechanism with corresponding microstructure observations. The texture evolution of the samples under different deformation conditions was discussed by analyzing the intrinsic texture characteristics of the grains measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Chemical composition of pure Mo powder was given in Cylindrical compressed specimens were machined with diameter of 8 mm and a height of 12 mm with the compression direction (CD) as shown in Samples for microscopy were cut from the middle parallel to the compression axis by electrical discharge machining. Sample preparation and electropolishing are critical for subsequent orientation-sensitive SEM and XRD, is described elsewhere in more detail [ Xiao et al. [  Recrystallization is generally defined as the process that occurs when a deformed structure develops into a new grain structure through nucleation and movement of high-angle boundaries driven by stored deformation energy [ Similarly, In principle, dislocation strengthening (or strain strengthening) and grain refinement strengthening are two important strengthening mechanisms of pure Mo. In this work, during compression deformation, not only the crystal grains were refined, but also a large number of dislocations were introduced. Furthermore, the evolution of dislocation substructures is strongly dependent on the true strain energy (Es) and the relationship between them is given [ According to Eqs. To further analyze the DRX mechanism of pure Mo during the hot deformation, an inverse pole figure (IPF) was used for characterization. In the initial stage of deformation, the flow stress increases due to the interaction and proliferation of dislocations. As the dislocation density increases, the driving force and the recovery rate increase correspondingly, resulting in the occurrence of dislocation climbing and cross-slip, so the dynamic recovery plays a major role at the beginning of the deformation. As a result, a microstructure with low angle grain boundaries (LAGBs) and subgrains is produced during this period. For high stacking fault energy (SFE) metals, like Mo, recrystallization nucleation is achieved by a combination of subgrains, which is called geometric dynamic recrystallization (GDRX) as shown  When pure molybdenum is thermally deformed at a high temperature, on the one hand, a deformed texture is formed, and on the other hand, a dynamic recrystallization process causes a recrystallization texture. However, since the two processes occur simultaneously or alternately, the two textures are not formed completely, thereby affecting the density and type of the thermally deformed texture. The purpose of this study was to show the evolution of texture of pure Mo under different deformation conditions during high temperature plastic deformation. Determination of the overall texture of deformed Mo samples by XRD. Orientation distribution function (ODF) is commonly used to measure the texture of deformed materials. Particularly, ϕ   In order to compare the effects of true strain on the texture at different temperatures, an experimental analysis at 1250 °C and same strain rate was performed. The microstructure and texture evolution of pure Mo during the thermal compression simulation at 1100–1300 °C were studied. The following conclusions can be drawn: As the true strain increases, the deformation energy storage increases, providing a greater driving force for dislocation motion and boundary migration, resulting in a DRX effect, and forming an equiaxed grain structure with a subgrain size separated by a large angle grain boundary. Two typical fiber textures including <100>//CD fiber texture and <111>//CD fiber texture are found in this studied pure Mo after hot deformation. Due to the random orientation of the DRX grains, the DRX behavior shows a significant weakening effect on the texture. The texture strength decreases with temperature increases especially for the <111>//CD fiber texture. The distortion energy generated by the deformation provides a certain driving force for the grain rotation to slide to the preferred slip system, and the density of the texture is weakened, especially at low temperature and high strain. Data used in this study is the results of observations or experimentation that validate research findings. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time due to technical or time limitations. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This work was supported by the