A method of separation by gas chromatography with a flame ionisation detector was developed for quantifying cocaine and heroin in powders seized by law enforcement. The method was validated by studying parameters of calibration, trueness, precision based on trueness error (or systematic bias) and random error. Total error, which is the combination of these errors, verified its adequacy with the objectives fixed by the analyst. Accuracy profile proved to be an efficient decision tool for that purpose.
                  Results obtained with weighted regression model were analysed and allowed to conclude that the method enables quantitation of heroin and cocaine in powders on 2–100% concentration (w/w) range with acceptance limits fixed at 10% and a risk at 5%.
                  The possible sources of uncertainty were evaluated and measurement of their contribution was integrated. The combined standard uncertainty and expanded uncertainty were determined.In this study, a method for quantifying heroin and cocaine and their main adulterants in a same run with a relatively short time (e.g. less than 6 Reliable analytical methods are needed to be in compliance with national and international regulations in all areas. The same demand should be applicable to forensic laboratories and appropriate measures must be taken to ensure data with required quality level is provided to the customer. Method validation is one of them. Validation is also the ultimate phase before the routine use of the method, great care must therefore be taken to check it. The purpose of this validation was to show that the developed analytical method was suitable for its intended use. A global approach based on measurement of total error and accuracy profile as a decision tool was selected A method of analysis is a dynamic process that goes through several successive steps called lifecycle of the method Definition of the desired criteria i.e. validation domain of the analytical method in terms of concentration levels and its objective in terms of acceptance limits. Definition of the experimental design for calibration and validation steps. Analysis of the calibration model. Drawing of the accuracy profile i.e. validation of the criteria defined in point 1. At the end of the study the enlarged uncertainty of the analytical procedure was determined. A solution at 0.7 One ml of internal standard solution was added using certified 1000 Microbalances and micropipettes are certified annually. Vials were sealed with a PTFE/rubber cap and vortexed. This validation approach consists in using two kinds of samples called standards: the calibration standards used to set up the calibration model while the validation standards are used to estimate the precision, trueness and accuracy of the method. Calibration and validation standards are samples of known concentrations prepared with reference materials. They are either pure heroin/cocaine dissolved in the internal standard solution, or completed with a simulated matrix (cutting agents and impurities). Matrix for cocaine was made of phenacetin, lidocaine, levamisole, diltiazem, hydroxyzine, caffeine, procaine and mannitol (see Matrix for heroin was composed of caffeine, paracetamol and noscapine. Noscapine was reported in one paper as an adulterant in illicit heroin samples and it is also frequently encountered in high proportion among impurities The selection of cutting agents was based on statistics extracted from the national database fed by police forensic laboratories The choice of a method has to be made in accordance with the specific issue being addressed. Because gas chromatography coupled with flame ionisation detector (GC-FID) has the advantages to be easily implemented, it was selected for quantitative analyses in routine. In the analytical procedure of our laboratory, identification of the target compounds is always performed by GC–MS prior to quantitation with GC-FID. Any possible interference between constituents would therefore be spotted at this stage. Gas chromatography measurements were performed on a ThermoFisher The carrier gas was helium at a constant flow of 0.6 Peak areas of cocaine, heroin and tetracosane were monitored. With these chromatographic conditions and the use of a less alcoholic solvent mixture, no degradation of cocaine or heroin was observed. Especially, no products of heroin transacetylation in presence of paracetamol (monoacetylmorphine formation and acetylparacetamol) were detected The objective of the method was to quantify the mass percent fraction of molecules of interest in a powder specimen with a matrix. It also had to fulfil the following requirements: the covered concentration range had to vary from 2 to 100% (w/w) and no matrix effect on calibration model shall be observed. The risk for the customer, police or justice services in our case, i.e. false negative result, is defined as the risk to wrongly accept inaccurate results. By contrast, the risk for the supplier, here the forensic laboratory, i.e. false positive result, is defined as the risk to wrongly reject correct results Analytical results must be provided to the law enforcement and justice with guaranties that every expected results obtained in routine analysis will be as close as possible to the true unknown value of the analyte in the specimen. In statistical terms, this is reflected in a proportion of obtained results Π higher than a minimum proportion included in the interval It is important to note that these limits could be imposed by a regulation or by the customer, and can sometimes vary depending on the concentration level. Based on our experience in illicit drugs analysis, for this quantitative method, we estimated dispersion as 10% (acceptance limits When editing the validation protocol, one of the first questions to rise is: “how many experiments are required?”. Due to time and other constraints such as reference materials’ cost, this often translates as: “what is the absolute minimum required?” When referring to calibration experiments, this relates to the number of standards that need to be analysed and the amount of replicates at each concentration level. An experimental design was selected in compliance with the French Society of Pharmaceutical Science and Technology (SFSTP) commission guidelines on validation of quantitative analytical procedures In this case, 3 series of calibration standards with and without matrix, at 3 concentration levels were prepared (see For cocaine: level 1 is 0.057 (0.04 For heroin: level 1 is 0.071 (0.05 Each pair of series (with and without matrix) being weighed by a different operator. Validation standards are samples reconstituted in the matrix or in any other reference material with known concentration (true values) set by consensus and used to validate the analytical procedure. Each validation point was prepared twice by the operator. Values for the replicates resulted of the averaged measurements of two samples, because in routine work, results are calculated in that manner. In total 63 concentrations were measured: 2 27 validation standards (considering the average value obtained from 2 determinations, carried out on separate samples of a given powder). Before starting the validation process, calibration itself should be examined, as it can affect the strategy to adopt in order to achieve an optimal design. For this reason, it is important to know if it is plausible that calibration curve (a) could be linear, (b) could pass through the origin and (c) is not affected by matrix (a selectivity study ensures that there is no interference between peaks of interest: cocaine, heroin and tetracosane). That's why matrices with cutting agents usually encountered in cocaine and heroin have been simulated. Matrix components (even if their peaks are separated from the analyte of interest's) can influence the recovery of the analyte. “Inadequate recovery” is demonstrated as a systematic error (method bias) The relationship between the response (i.e. the chromatographic signal) and the concentration (amount) of the analyte in the sample is a very important parameter that must be considered in the validation of an analytical method. When building a model, it is necessary to express the When variations from environmental sources are introduced, this model becomes more complex. Let For each In classical regression models, the The statistical assessment of normality and regressions will be examined later on. Note that response functions of an analytical instrument depend on its nature (separation instruments, spectrophotometry, absorption, etc.) and the model is selected only after carrying validation testing. With our GC-FID, available response functions were linear regressions without transformation Calculations were performed using open source software R In supplementary files, data used for calculations are provided. R commands are available on demand. The response functions were evaluated using 3 calibration curves built with calibration standards with and without matrix at 3 concentration levels (see Section Several regression models have been tested using VALMETH tool in order to (i) study the relationship between cocaine or heroin concentration (mg/ml) and the analytical response (ratio between peak areas of cocaine/heroin and IS (tetracosane)) and (ii) select the most appropriate one. A selection of various models is available in VALMETH (simple linear regression or linear weighted regression (1/ determination interval (DI), trueness index (TI), accuracy index (AI), precision index (PI), Criteria are ranked in descending order of interest DI, TI, AI and PI (values from 0 to 1), and the out-coming index is used to select the most appropriate model. The selection of the regression model which will be used for routine calibration had to fit the following chosen criteria: a DI equal to 1, meaning that high and low quantification limits correspond to low and high calibration levels (0.057 and 3.14 for cocaine and 0.071 and 4.57 for heroin), to be able to quantify these two illicit drugs from 2 to 100% (w/w), with respect to the previous criteria, with and without matrix, meaning that there is no matrix effect, hence future routine calibrations could be prepared with only analyte reference material and internal standard solution, without addition of a simulated matrix, which saves time, same model for heroin and cocaine, in order to quantify them in a same run (within the GC software restrictions). With these conditions, the most relevant model was found to be weighted linear regression, with and without matrix. In linear models, response is supposed to be normally distributed (Gaussian). Despite the reduced number of individuals ( For each series Research of regression parameters ( Equation of weighted regression for series n° 3 is: A variance decomposition analysis (one-factor ANOVA For the sake of clarity, only variances linked to the model and residual variances within series were reported here. These two variances enable Fisher's test leading to the validation of the model (relevant or not). Critical probabilities ( Finally, when the model is selected, its validation is possible only if residuals are normally distributed and have the same variance within series (see Results show that the hypotheses of normality of residuals and equality of variances cannot be rejected because When the choice of the model from statistical theory point of view is secured, coherence between experimental objectives, especially in terms of determination interval and accuracy, is required. Concentrations of validation standards (VS) were calculated from the model, for each concentration level. From these predicted inverse concentrations, the mean relative bias and the high and low tolerance interval limits considering intermediate precision standard deviation can be determined. Tolerance interval is the domain where future proportion of observations will fall within the predefined acceptance [−λ,+λ] at β level (fixed here at 5%). Afterwards, an accuracy profile can be built with these data ( The tolerance limits, obtained via the weighted 1/ The mean relative bias does not exceed 3% in absolute value for cocaine and heroin. The recovery rate, for cocaine, varies from 96.79% to 100.2% between the levels (0.057 and 3.140). For heroin, it varies from 97.27% to 101.2% between the levels (0.071 and 4.57). The GC-FID analytical method is thus valid. The quantitation limits are the extreme values that can be quantified with a given accuracy. The lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ) is obtained by calculating the lowest concentration below which accuracy or tolerance limits are out of acceptance limits. In our case, accuracy profile is within the acceptance limits, so the lowest level of calibration (corresponding to 0.04 Moreover, with the weighted 1/ Linearity domain covers concentration ranges from 0.057 to 3.14 (i.e. 0.04 to 2.20 As mentioned above, measurement error can be defined as the difference between the measured value The uncertainty on the result may arise from many possible sources (sampling, matrix effects and interferences, environmental conditions, uncertainties of masses and volumetric measuring equipment, purity of reference material, etc.) The overall combined standard uncertainty was calculated using the following formula: Results of heroin or cocaine quantitation are given in weight percentage % The weight percentage is rounded up to the nearest whole number which introduces another uncertainty called rounding uncertainty ( The purity of the reference standard is potentially an additional uncertainty source called standard uncertainty ( Overall analytical uncertainty is given by Eq. When calculating measurement uncertainty two types, correctly known as type A and type B must be assessed and combined  Purities of cocaine and heroin standard must be greater than or equal to 99% therefore there is 1% relative deviation on each level concentration. Then (rectangular distribution) with When The different contributions are shown in For low concentration level (level 1), the uncertainty is mainly influenced by heterogeneity of the material. For medium and high concentration levels, analytical uncertainty with calculation of concentration is the main contributor to the overall uncertainty. Uncertainties from rounding and reference materials are negligible. The expanded uncertainty Validation of quantitative method is essential in analytical chemistry and acutely pertinent in forensic science. It calls upon statistical methods based on strong hypotheses such as normality, heteroscedasticity (homogeneity of variances). Interpretation of results only makes sense if analytical and statistical techniques are properly handled. This combination has been illustrated with quantification of cocaine and heroin, in real conditions (small dataset). A specific linear model was exploited here: weighted regression based on accuracy, trueness and precision criteria. GC-FID method was validated over the 1.8–100% range for cocaine determination, and 1.6–100% for heroin. In a practical perspective, this validation strategy can be summarised in the 4 following steps: selection of acceptance limits in compliance with expected method use, definition of the experimental design and choice of a regression model for the calibration, analysis of results with this calibration model, for each concentration level, calculation of tolerance limits and set up of the accuracy profile. A decision on the validity of the analytical method is then taken. We carried out the evaluation of uncertainties and their contribution. The result showed that for low levels, the contribution of heterogeneity is maximal and for other levels, analytical uncertainty is the main contributor to the overall error. The analytical method validated using this approach has been accredited by the French national accreditation body (accreditation n° 1-2322, available on Other information, such as chromatograms and detailed results of statistical analysis, is provided in supplementary data, datasets used for this study as well. Thanks to Ronan Maron and Frédéric Flores for their contributions to the development, the improvements and updates, of VALMETH statistical tool used for the validation of results in the Forensic framework. Thanks to Virginie Ladroue for the proofreading. Thanks to the reviewers for their relevant comments improving this paper in a substantial way. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: