Objective
                  The aim of this study was to investigate whether radiopaque Portland cement (RPC) facilitates the mineralization process in human dental pulp cells (HDPCs) compared with pure Portland cement (PC).
               
                  Study design
                  Under a scanning electron microscope (SEM), cellular morphology was evaluated. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was analyzed, and nodule formation was assessed by performing Alizarin Red S staining. In addition, the mRNA expressions of mineralization-related proteins were evaluated by performing a real-time polymerase chain reaction.
               
                  Results
                  On SEM evaluation, healthy HDPCs were found adhering to the surfaces of PC and RPC. The ALP activity increased in the PC and RPC groups compared with the control group at 1 day. Alizarin Red stain increased in the PC and RPC groups compared with the control group at 2 and 3 weeks. The mRNA expression of dentin sialophosphoprotein increased at 14 days in the PC and RPC groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  These results show that PC and RPC have similar effects in terms of mineralization and suggest that RPC also has the potential to be used as a clinically suitable pulp-capping material.Portland cement (PC) is the base material of mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA), and it has shown favorable results in both in vivo and in vitro tests. Several studies have suggested that PC is biocompatible and can be used as a safe pulp-capping material. The mineral formation process during dentinogenesis appears to be a highly controlled event that involves noncollagenous proteins, such as osteonectin (ON) and dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP). Although the biocompatibility of RPC has been previously reported, little is known about the detailed events regarding mineralization in HDPCs. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether RPC facilitates mineralization and odontoblastic differentiation in HDPCs compared with PC. The human dental pulp tissues obtained from sectioned teeth were removed aseptically, rinsed with Hanks buffered saline solution, and placed in a 100-mm Petri dish. The dental pulp tissues were minced into small fragments with a blade and cultured in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Biofluid, Rockville, MD) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) with 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 U/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies, Rockville, MD). Cultures were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO Under aseptic conditions, PC (Ssangyong, Seoul, Korea) and RPC (PC:Bi The HDPCs were seeded at 1.0 × 10 The HDPCs (1 × 10 After culturing HDPCs in the presence of PC or RPC for 1, 2, and 3 weeks, Cells were fixed in 70% ice-cold ethanol for 1 hour and rinsed with distilled water. Cells were stained with 40 mmol/L Alizarin Red S, pH 4.2, for 10 minutes with gentle agitation. The pictures of Alizarin Red S staining were photographed under light microscopy. Cells were lysed to extract total RNA by using Trizol reagent (Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Quantifications of ON and DSPP mRNAs were performed by using Exicycler 96 thermal cycler (Bioneer, Daejeon, Korea). One microgram of each RNA sample was subjected to reverse transcription using the AccuPower RT PreMix (Bioneer). The sequences of the human DSPP and ON primers were as follows: DSPP (70 bp): forward 5′-GGG ATG TTG GCG ATG CA-3′, reverse 5′-CCA GCT ACT TGA GGT CCA TCT TC-3′, ON (127 bp): forward 5′-AGA AGC TGC GGG TGA AGA A-3′, revese 5′-TGC CAG TGT ACA GGG AAG ATG-3′. The amount of template was quantified by using the comparative cycle threshold method according to the manufacturer's protocol. Measured mRNA levels were normalized to the mRNA copies of β-actin. We performed these experiments from 3 different cell samples and quantification of mRNA was confirmed by using the same cell sample in triplicate. A statistical analysis was conducted by a 1-way variance analysis. Tests for differences in the treatments were analyzed by Duncan multiple range tests, and any As shown in  To investigate the effect of PC and RPC on the mineralization of dental pulp cells, cells were stained with Alizarin Red S and examined under light microscopy for the formation of mineralized nodules. After the addition of PC and RPC, the formation of mineralized nodules in HDPCs increased at day 14 and 21 ( We analyzed mineralization markers ON and DSPP using cultured HDPCs grown in the presence of PC or RPC. The expression of ON and DSPP mRNAs in HDPCs in the induction medium increased in a time-dependent manner, with the maximum values on day 14 of induction. The expression of ON, as a percentage of housekeeping gene β-actin expression, showed no significant change from day 1 to day 14 of the cultivation period in the PC- and RPC-treated groups. But the expressions of DSPP mRNA in both groups were increased more than that of the control group at 14 days ( Capping of the exposed pulp is designed to treat reversible pulpal injuries by sealing the pulp and stimulating the formation of reparative dentin. For reparative dentin to be formed on a substrate, DPCs should initially attach and proliferate. SEM revealed that the HDPCs adhering to PC or RPC appeared to have a normal cellular morphology, similar to the negative control group. These SEM results indicate that both PC and RPC are biocompatible in producing an extracellular mineralized matrix on a substrate for the mineralization process. For osteoblastic or odontoblastic differentiation and mineralization, there should be an initial period of proliferation and biosynthesis for the extracellular matrix, followed by a period of cell differentiation. In this odontoblastic differentiation study, we analyzed mineralization markers such as ON and DSPP by using HDPCs grown in the presence of PC or RPC. These markers have been considered to play a regulatory role in the mineralization of reparative dentin. The differentiation of the cells to mature odontoblasts was evaluated under incubation and in the presence of PC or RPC, for 1, 2 and 3 weeks, by the time the calcification formed. The degree of Alizarin Red S staining showed a similar increase in PC or RPC compared with control ( Collectively, our results suggest that RPC is as biocompatible and able to facilitate odontoblastic differentiation in HDPCs in short- and long-term culture periods as PC. Finally, regarding the ability to promote mineralization, to our knowledge, this is the first study to report that RPC has the potential to be used as a clinically suitable pulp-capping material.