Texture perception is a multidimensional and dynamic phenomenon resulting from both the initial structure of food and its breakdown during oral processing. The aim of this study is to identify the respective contribution of food and bolus properties to temporal changes in texture perceptions during bread consumption. For this purpose, the perception dynamics of three French baguettes with dif\ferent structures were assessed through Temporal Dominance of Sensations and Progressive Profiling. Samples of crumb with and without crust were tasted by trained panelists. The intensities of nine texture attributes were evaluated at three key stages of oral processing (10%, 40% and 100% of individual swallowing time) using the Progressive Profiling method. Six of them were related with a Multiblock Partial Least Squares (MB-PLS) regression to the initial bread properties and to some bolus properties measured at these three stages. The evolution during oral processing of some attributes such as “soft”, “dry”, “doughy” and “sticky” was more influenced by modifications of bolus properties than by the initial characteristics of the breads. Among bolus properties, the MB-PLS highlighted that the hydration and texture properties of the bolus had a greater impact on texture perceptions than bolus structure. The “aerated” perception was more affected by the crumb structure, while the “heterogeneousness” and the “crispiness” were more affected by the presence of crust. This study thus contributes to improving our understanding of dynamic texture perceptions through a statistical model that takes the physical properties of bread and bolus during oral processing into account.The primary purpose of eating is to provide calories and nutrients to the human body so that it can sustain its energy levels. To do this, oral processing transforms the food into a bolus that is suitable for swallowing and digestion ( In addition to its nutritional value, when eaten, food also provides pleasure through perceived sensations such as aroma, taste and texture. These perceptions vary continuously during consumption, notably because of the breakdown of food, the modification of the bolus structure and the progressive release of the different stimuli. To better characterize foods during their consumption, different dynamic sensory methodologies have been established to study the changes in perceptions over time. Reference methods such as Time–Intensity (TI) or dual TI have been designed to continuously monitor the intensity of one or two selected attributes during food consumption ( Texture perceptions are not only impacted by the initial properties of food, but also by the oral processing and the kinetics of bolus formation, as shown by numerous recent studies and reviews ( Bread is an essential part of our diet. A European consumer eats an average of 59 In this context, this study aimed at identifying the respective contributions of bread and bolus properties to dynamic texture perceptions during consumption. For this purpose, two dynamic sensory methods (PP and TDS) were used. Sensory data were linked to the instrumental properties of bread and boli to determine the drivers at the origin of the texture perceptions of bread. Three breads, B1, B2 and B3 (par-baked and frozen French baguettes), were investigated. They were manufactured with the same raw materials but using different baking processes in order to obtain breads with different crumb and crust structures. The final baking of the par-baked and frozen breads, B1, B2 and B3, took place in a Wiesheu Minimat oven (Wiesheu GmbH, Germany) at 220 A panel of 14 volunteers (ten women and four men, with an average age of 32.9 The bread samples were evaluated for both aroma and texture perceptions using two different sensory tests: the Temporal Dominance of Sensations (TDS) and the Progressive Profiling (PP). During one session of sensory evaluation (TDS or PP), the panelists assessed 1) the aroma of crumb, 2) the aroma of crumb with crust, 3) the texture of crumb and 4) the texture of crumb with crust. So, for TDS and PP, four different lists of attributes were used to assess texture and aroma of CO or CC samples. The present article focuses only on texture perceptions, so only texture data are presented here. In addition to sensory evaluation, supplementary sessions of bolus collection were performed later, to assess their instrumental properties (detailed in the Subsection The panelists were trained during five training sessions of 45 Three key times of bread eating (T1 Eight panelists were selected from the TDS panel to perform progressive profiling (four women and four men, with an average age of 28.9 At the end of the progressive profiling assessment, the panel performances were validated in terms of global and individual homogeneity, discrimination ability and repeatability, using XLStat software (Version 2010.4.02, Addinsoft, France). Physicochemical, structural and textural characterizations of breads (with and without crust) were previously determined ( All the instrumental data on bolus properties are coming from the article of Statistical analyses were carried out with Fizz Traitement software (Version 2.47A, Biosystemes, France), XLStat software (Version 2010.4.02, Addinsoft, France) and R software (Version 2.15.2, free software). Because of the small size of the dataset (3 breads Dominance rates were calculated from TDS data: for each given point in time, the citation rate of an attribute was calculated for the totality of panelists, and gave the dominance rate (in percent). These proportions, smoothed using the Bézier procedure of Fizz Traitement software, were plotted against normalized time (0 The data do not follow a normal distribution when the three times were put together. So, instead of a repeated measure ANOVA, a Friedman non-parametric test was performed on attribute intensities from Progressive Profiling to study the differences of perception between the three oral processing times (T1, T2 and T3). A significant level of p Multiblock Partial Least Squares (MB-PLS) regressions ( As shown in a previous study ( The dynamics of the dominant sensations of the six samples (three breads, B1, B2 and B3, and two modalities, crumb only (CO) and crumb with crust (CC)) were established by the method of Temporal Dominance of Sensations ( In the case of samples with crumb only (CO samples), the three breads had common sequences at the beginning and at the end of oral processing. The “softness” and “aerated” attributes were perceived to be dominant in the first seconds after introducing samples into the mouth. Just before swallowing, the “doughy” attribute was perceived to be dominant for all breads, whereas “stickiness” was perceived to be dominant after swallowing. The three breads could be distinguished by different dominant attributes during the intermediate period of oral processing. For this specific period, the bread B1 had a successive dominance of “heterogeneousness”, “moistness” and “stickiness” attributes. The bread B2 was only characterized by one specific dominant attribute (“homogeneous”). The bread B3 was characterized by a dominance of the “stickiness” and “homogeneousness” attributes. With the presence of crust (CC samples), the temporal sequences of dominance increased in complexity. Once again, common sequences were observed at the beginning (dominance of “crispiness” and “softness”) and the end (dominance of “heterogeneous”, “doughy” and “sticky” attributes) of the oral processing. However, the attributes were different from the ones considered to be dominant for CO samples. Concerning product specificities, results showed that “hardness” and “elasticity” attributes appeared to be dominant at the beginning for the bread B1. During the intermediate period of oral processing, the bread B1 was characterized by a dominance of “elasticity”, whereas “dryness” was the dominant attribute for the breads B2 and B3. Just before swallowing, the “moistness” attribute was perceived as being dominant for the bread B1, and “moist” and “sticky” were the dominant attributes for the bread B3. The TDS swallowing time of each panelist was comprised between 18 and 41 With progressive profiling, the intensities of all attributes were evaluated at three stages of oral processing (T1 Results showed that the variation over time of sensory intensities was different depending on texture attributes ( Differences between CO and CC samples were observed at given times ( Differences between breads were perceived for all attributes at given times ( The six sensory attributes (Y-variables), common to crumb and crumb with crust samples, were related to the bread and bolus properties (X-variables) through MB-PLS ( The MB-PLS enabled the quantification of the contribution of the X-blocks to each dimension ( In the literature, the TDS method has been used more often than the PP method to describe the changes in texture perceptions during oral processing ( With the TDS method, the panelist has to choose “the attribute that most triggers attention” at a point in time ( Despite the fact that the two methods do not evaluate the same parameters (dominance rate for TDS and intensity for PP), they provide coherent and complementary results, as already mentioned in previous works ( As sensory intensities are easier to relate to instrumental data than dominances, a MB-PLS model was built using sensory data from the PP method to explain texture attributes on the basis of bread and bolus properties. The three first dimensions of the model made it possible to explain 51% of the variability of the texture attributes. This R The structure of the dataset (2 blocks: CO samples and CC samples) could have minimized the differences between products within a same block, because of the large differences observed between both blocks. Such a structure of dataset (6 samples) was more statistically robust than the two separated blocks (2 Thanks to the model, we were able to quantify the impact of bolus properties on the temporal variations of texture perceptions. This high impact can be explained by the evolution of breads through the oral processing (axis 1 of MB-PLS; “Dry”, “soft” and “doughy” perceptions can be significantly explained by bread and bolus properties, as shown by the results of the MB-PLS (R The variations in “softness” were mainly explained by the variations in the water-absorbing capacity of bread, bolus hardness, bolus water content and bread density (p The “doughy” perception was defined as “with the consistency of a soft and thick dough”. The variations in the “doughy” attribute were thus mainly explained by the variations in bolus hardness, adhesiveness and cohesiveness and in bolus particle size over consumption (p The model to explain “stickiness” perception was not significant. However, interesting results could be observed. At swallowing time, the bread B2 was perceived as the least “sticky”. Moreover, the TDS curves showed that all breads were perceived as being “sticky” after swallowing, but dominance duration was not the same for all breads. The bread B2 had the shortest dominance duration for “stickiness” (4.2 This work could potentially help in designing new products easier to swallow (“softer”, more hydrated and less “sticky”), for example for patients suffering dysphagia or xerostomia (dry mouth). Even if no significant model was observed for the attribute “aerated”, interesting results were obtained for this attribute. “Aerated” perception was most highly correlated with the second axis of the PLS, which was mainly explained by the bread properties (69% contribution). At each studied moment of oral processing, the three breads were classified in the same order for the “aerated” attribute as for their densities. Denser bread was thus perceived as being less “aerated” throughout oral processing. The perception of “heterogeneousness” was higher in the case of CC samples than CO samples ( As expected, the CC samples were perceived to be “crispy” due to the presence of crust. The bread B3 was perceived as the least “crispy” in PP and had the shortest dominance of “crispy” in TDS. In the literature ( The aim of linking a sensory dataset to bread and bolus properties was to provide a better understanding of the texture perception of breads. A multiblock regression model made it possible to highlight the respective contribution of bread and bolus properties on texture perceptions. The kinetics of sensory attribute variation during food consumption were more highly impacted by the variations in bolus properties than by the initial characteristics of the breads. This study confirmed that oral processing is a key process to better understand texture perceptions. The use of MB-PLS enabled the identification of the contributions of bolus hydration and texture properties (and not so much their structure properties) on texture perceptions. Since hydration seems to be a key parameter to explain the texture perception of bread during oral processing, a better understanding of the links between bread structure and hydration mechanisms could be necessary. To conclude, this study proposes an original statistical methodology to better understand the different mechanisms that occur in texture perceptions. This work could help in the formulation of new products with targeted texture perceptions, as for example, softer bread, easier to swallow, for patients suffering dysphagia or xerostomia. The authors would like to acknowledge