In leaching processes, the mass transport of lixiviants from the bulk of the solution to the site of the mineral of interest is usually the slowest step. Diffusion becomes slower when the particles to be leached are occluded in host minerals. Access to the mineral of interest is enhanced by micro-crack formation within the host minerals as it enhances percolation and migration of lixiviants. Micro-crack formation also augments grinding and allows size reduction and liberation at a lower stress level. In this research, microwave pretreatment was used to augment the grinding of a free-milling gold ore containing quartz, silicates and iron oxides. Under microwave irradiation, selective heating of the different mineral components resulted in thermal stress cracking. Microwave processing enhanced the grindability of the ore, and crushing strength was reduced by 31.2%. The presence of micro-cracks improved leaching rate, and over 95% extraction was achieved within 12h as against 22h for the non-microwaved sample. Such a strategy can be used to maximize recovery and man-hours on processing plants.Most metal dissolution processes are controlled by diffusion of the reacting species from the bulk of the solution and through the Nernst boundary layer to the reaction site on the mineral of interest. The rate of mass transport is further reduced when the mineral of interest is occluded in host minerals which in many cases do act as additional barriers. To liberate metals and expose them to lixiviant attack, comminution is utilized ( Comminution technology generally involves the application of mechanical energy to break down particles and create finer units. This applied mechanical energy takes advantage of existing flaws in the material, extending existing cracks and creating new ones in areas of weakness until the material fails and the particle breaks. Thus, if more imperfections are created, the material will yield more readily to applied mechanical stress. Modification of the mechanical properties of ores may be achieved by: (1) changing the specific energy during blasting ( Microwave processing has the ability to alter the properties of the ore to reduce the mechanical strength and improve liberation, thus reducing the energy required for size reduction ( Minerals have different microwave absorption characteristics, and thus selective microwave heating of individual components in a mixture can be achieved. In some ores, differential heating of constituent minerals generates thermal stresses, which cause the ore particles to fracture. Fracturing may occur along grain boundaries leading to complete or partial physical separation of the components which in turn improves grindability and mineral recovery ( In addition to assisting comminution, microwave energy has a remarkable ability to increase the rate of chemical reactions. Microwaves may be applied directly in the course of leaching or as a pretreatment step prior to leaching. Several researchers have successfully applied it to mineral leaching and digestion, as well as organic and inorganic synthesis ( In many gold ore processing plants, achieving comminution targets is a challenge due to changing ore characteristics. As deep pit mining continues, the Work Index of ores increase and it reaches a time when the installed energy input becomes lower than that required for comminution. This situation causes coarser grinding, reduced mineral liberation with concomitant reduction in leaching efficiency. Some of the strategies developed to address the problems of increasing Work Index include blending ores of different mechanical strength and boosting specific energy during blasting. In a previous study by The sample used in this study was free-milling gold ore from the Tarkwaian rock system in Ghana, West Africa. X-ray Diffraction (XRD) using a Philips X’Pert Pro MPD diffractometer revealed the major phases to be quartz, aluminosilicates, hematite and magnetite. Pure samples of magnetite, hematite, aluminosilicate and silica which were used as surrogates were obtained from Ward Minerals. Selected particles of both as-received and microwave processed samples were coated with carbon to improve the electrical conductivity, and their morphologies were examined using a JEOL JSM 840 scanning electron microscope (SEM). The microwave apparatus utilized in preparing samples for leaching was a Hinari Model MX702 with operating frequency of 2450 Changes in the strength characteristics of the ore particles were tested by determining the crushing strength. For these tests, samples were microwaved to attain sample temperature of 735 Both microwaved and as-received samples were roll crushed to all passing 2 The microwave heating behaviour of the mineral constituents in the ore was investigated by testing magnetite, hematite, aluminosilicate and silica samples which served as surrogates.  The crushing strength of the as-received material was compared with samples microwaved to a sample temperature of 735 Despite the reduction in crushing strength following microwave treatment, work done by The as-received and microwaved samples that were milled to 80% passing 75 The faster leaching rate of the microwave processed ore may be attributed to the thermal stress cracking due to differential heating of the individual minerals that make up the ore. Micro-cracking as observed in Microwave pretreatment was used to generate micro-cracks and reduce the crushing strength of a free-milling gold ore containing magnetite, hematite silicates and quartz. The responses of these mineral constituents to microwaves ranged from hyperactive to passive. Under microwave irradiation, selective heating of the different mineral components resulted in thermal stresses and fracturing. Microwave pretreatment reduced the crushing strength of the ore by 31.2%. The presence of micro-cracks improved leaching rate and over 95% extraction was achieved within 12