The study of the sphalerite bioleaching mechanism showed that the oxidation state of the iron in solution is fundamental because it controls the relative rate of the oxidation reactions participating in the process. In addition, it was observed that the leaching of sphalerite is controlled by a layer of elemental sulphur formed on the surface, which controls diffusion.
                  Microbial attachment on the pyrite component of the zinc concentrate relates directly with the leaching rate of the sphalerite due to the liberation of Fe2+ from contact bioleaching of the pyrite.
                  Bioleaching of the sphalerite concentrate takes place via a cooperative bioleaching strategy involving contact bioleaching of the pyritic phase of the concentrate and the indirect bioleaching of the sphalerite.Commercial bioleaching initially involved copper concentrates; however, new processes using continuous stirred reactors have been developed for the extraction of other metals The bioleaching of zinc concentrates using acidophilic autotrophic microorganisms has been studied extensively. In 1978, Cwalina et al. studied the activity of Konishi et al. studied the bacterial attack of zinc concentrates in batch reactors and concluded that the bioleaching in a medium containing iron took place by means of two mechanisms: (1) the direct bacterial attack and (2) the indirect attack by ferric iron, which was regenerated by the free bacteria living at the expense of ferrous iron in solution Fowler et al. carried out an interesting study in which they maintained a constant redox potential, using either oxidation or reduction of the dissolved iron, then studied the effect of the microbial action on the bioleaching of a sphalerite concentrate. They concluded that the dissolution of the concentrate was indirect via oxidation by Fe In another work of these authors chemical and biological leaching of sphalerite in a medium having the same potential conditions was compared. The results showed the important role of sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms in the ZnS bioleaching process After reviewing the technical literature on this topic, important conclusions can be made; however, it is evident that there is neither total agreement on the mechanism of sphalerite bioleaching nor a unanimously accepted theory that explains the bioleaching process. The true role of the microorganisms in the bioleaching of sphalerite is not clear. Is the indirect action of bacteria via oxidation of soluble Fe The indirect mechanism via production of polysulphide and elemental sulphur, as proposed by Sand, Schippers et al. is the most recent attempt to explain the true bioleaching mechanism As indicated in other papers on pyrite and chalcopyrite bioleaching published in this same Hydrometallurgy issue, Tributsch has proposed three different bioleaching strategies The main objective of this work is to gather new information on the mechanism involved in sphalerite dissolution by bioleaching. For this study, a very pure zinc concentrate was bioleached at two different temperatures: 35 °C in the presence of mesophilic microorganisms and 68 °C in the presence of thermophilic microorganisms. Several variables were studied including the production of soluble ferric iron concentration, the dissolution rate of zinc and iron, and microbial attachment to sphalerite. Explanations for the decline in the dissolution rate of zinc were also pursued by the removal of possible diffusion barriers formed on the mineral surface, followed by a second bioleaching step. Finally, results were confirmed by electrochemical techniques. A zinc sulphide flotation concentrate supplied by Asturiana del Zinc (Asturias, Spain) was used in the different experiments. Chemical analysis of this concentrate showed: 62.8% Zn, 1.51% Fe, 0.09% Cu and 30.8% S. X-ray diffraction analysis of the concentrate showed sphalerite (ZnS) as the major component (88.3%) and small amounts of pyrite (FeS The microorganisms used, conditions and procedure of their culture, description of the bioleaching tests, microbial attachment studies, electrochemical measurements and the two-step bioleaching are described in a paper published in this same issue of Hydrometallurgy entitled: “New information on the pyrite bioleaching mechanism at low and high temperature”. In this study with sphalerite, residues from the first bioleaching test were washed with a CS  The zinc dissolution curves did not show the usual characteristic lag period of the bioleaching process. The leach rate was linear from the beginning of the leach test. This suggests that the dissolution of this concentrate is principally chemical and is mediated by the protons present in the solution. This agrees with the increase of pH during the first days of the leach tests These observations confirm the importance of the indirect mechanism of bioleaching via polysulphide and elemental sulphur production as proposed by Schippers et al. for sphalerite attack A study carried out by SEM showed some differences between bioleaching at low and high temperatures. The differences found between mesophilic and thermophilic sphalerite bioleaching efficiencies may be due to the higher sulphur-oxidizing activity of the thermophilic microorganisms, which would eliminate the passive layer of sulphur. In the experiments with mesophilic bacteria, it is possible that only iron-oxidizing bacteria were selected; this would limit the zinc dissolution process. This was confirmed by studying the bacterial population using TEM. The bacterial selection for iron oxidizers probably occurred at the beginning of the experiments. When the leach experiments were initiated, the inoculum contained a significant concentration of ferrous iron, which would enhance the iron-oxidizing bacteria. The inoculum contained no elemental sulphur and, therefore, it would be difficult for the sulphur-oxidizing bacteria to survive. In the case of To confirm these observations, several bioleaching tests were carried out using the same experimental conditions as the previous tests; however, 2 g/l Fe With thermophilic microorganisms, an increase in the dissolution rate of zinc was observed although the final dissolution decreased. This is thought to occur because of the absence of sulphur-oxidizing capacity. The high initial concentration of Fe These results confirm that, to obtain a high zinc dissolution rate, it is important to not only ensure the regeneration of the Fe The microbial attachment tests carried out with the zinc concentrate during the first day of bioleaching The microbial attachment to ore occurs in three different steps From the results obtained and taking into account the studies performed by other researchers, it can be concluded that sphalerite bioleaching with mesophilic and thermophilic microorganisms is a two-step process. In the first step, zinc dissolution occurs by both the attack of microorganisms initially attached to the pyritic phase of the ore employing the contact bioleaching mechanism In the electrochemical study of the sphalerite, the anodic polarization curves of the concentrate When the scan direction is reversed towards negative potentials (reduction), a sudden decrease of the current is observed. At −300 mV, a reduction peak corresponding to the sphalerite is detected.  When the impact of the sulphur layer on the bioleaching reaction rate was confirmed, an attempt to remove the sulphur layer was carried out using carbon disulphide (CS These experiments show the enormous passive effect of the elemental sulphur layer formed on the sphalerite surface. The elemental sulphur that is formed not only adheres strongly to the sphalerite surface, but is also not readily soluble with CS To successfully bioleach sphalerite, the oxidation state of the dissolved iron is fundamental since it controls the relative rate of the oxidation reactions involved in the process. The magnitude of the initial microbial attachment on the pyritic phase of the zinc concentrate is directly related to the zinc dissolution rate during the process, because the Fe Two-step bioleaching process favoured pyrite dissolution, since this phase did not exhibit any diffusion problems associated with elemental sulphur build-up during bioleaching. Pyrite bioleaching occurred via production of sulphate. Sphalerite, on the other hand, exhibited diffusion problems, because the surface of the mineral was passivated with elemental sulphur during bioleaching. Zinc concentrate bioleaching takes place by means of a cooperative bioleaching strategy. The bioleaching process occurs via simultaneous contact bioleaching of the pyritic phase, possibly through an indirect mechanism by way of thiosulphate, and the indirect bioleaching of the sphalerite, possibly through the mechanism involving polysulphide and elemental sulphur. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the