Among the diverse treatments proposed to promote the osseointegration of zirconia dental implants, hydrofluoric acid (HF) etching appears to be a good candidate. However little is known on the effect of this process on the mechanical properties and long-term reliability. In this work, the surface integrity, the flexural strength and the ageing sensitivity of yttria-stabilized zirconia were assessed after etching in HF 40%. Results show that etching induces an increase of monoclinic phase content and a decrease in flexural strength. The strength decrease is limited to 15% for etching times below 60min, whereas it reaches 29% after 120min because of the formation of large etching pits. No substantial change in the ageing sensitivity was evidenced. Within the limits of this study, HF 40% etched zirconia appears to be reliable for long-term implantation provided that the etching duration does not exceed 60min.Yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia polycrystals (Y-TZP, short: zirconia) are biocompatible and exhibit the best combination of strength and toughness of single-phase oxide ceramics. They were introduced as biomaterials in the end of the 1980s to overcome the limitations of alumina in the field of orthopedics While monolithic zirconia has been almost abandoned for orthopedic applications, in the last decade its use in restorative dentistry has been growing fast To solve the problem of bone loss mentioned above, the key is to achieve a good osseointegration, which was shown to be promoted by rough surfaces Despite the Prozyr Commercial 3Y-TZP powder (TZ-3YSB-E Tosoh Co., Japan) was cold isostatically compacted under pressure of 200 Etching was carried out in HF 40% (Hydrofluoric Acid 40% QP Panreac, Spain) and followed by ultrasonic cleaning in DI water. The volume of acid was 1 An estimation of the average thickness of the layer of material removed during etching was calculated using the following formula: The surface of etched samples was examined by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and the near-surface was observed on transversal sections milled with a Focused Ion Beam (FIB, Neon40, Carl Zeiss AG, Germany) in order to detect phase transformation and damage. Sample surfaces were protected with a thin platinum coating to flatten the surface and minimize ion-beam damage and curtain effect during milling. The final polishing of the cross-sections was performed at 500 pA. Hydrothermal degradation tests (which will also be referred to as “ageing”) were performed in an autoclave, at 134 Three specimens of each group ( The biaxial flexural strength of the samples from the different groups ( where The fractographic examination was a complicated task because samples were broken into tiny pieces. However for some of the specimens it was possible to identify the fracture origin by SEM. Statistical analysis of the strength testing results was performed using SPSS The variability of the strength was analyzed using the Weibull distribution function: For the graphical evaluation of The thickness of the layer of material removed during etching was estimated to be (mean value The observation of the FIB cross-sections evidenced that a small porosity was produced under the surface ( On the other hand, etching produced numerous randomly dispersed pits on the surface, whose typical size increased with etching duration ( Etching induced an increase of monoclinic phase content at the surface in the range 10–23% nevertheless the results do not show a simple relation between this increase and etching time ( Finally, the thickness of the micro-cracked layer induced by the phase transformation measured on a FIB cross-section of a sample from the HF40-120-Aged group was estimated to be d ≈5 Fractographic observations could only be performed on a limited number of samples but evidenced that: Etching pits could initiate failure ( Similarly, porous zones, which may result from a locally deeper penetration of the acid in the material, could initiate failure ( The monoclinic micro-cracked layer induced by ageing was thicker in some zones, which could also nucleate failure: for instance in the case presented One sample from each of the HF40-30 and HF40-60 groups had substantially lower strength than the rest because of very uncommon defects. In the first case the failure was associated to a “tunnel-like” defect ( The mean biaxial flexural strength results are shown The results of the simple main effects analysis which indicate statistically significant differences between groups are represented by letters in All etched groups exhibited a significantly lower strength than the Control group and there was no significant difference between the HF40-30 and HF40-60 groups. There was no significant difference between any of the aged groups. The Control-Aged group exhibited a significantly lower strength than the Control group, there was no significant difference between respectively the HF40-30, HF40-60 and the HF40-30-Aged, HF40-60-Aged groups whereas the HF40-120-Aged group exhibited a significantly higher strength than the HF40-120 group. Weibull analysis ( Regarding the effect of ageing, Weibull analysis confirmed that: The strength distributions of the all the aged groups were very similar. Ageing induced a decrease in strength for the control samples. Ageing induced an increase in strength for the samples etched two hours. Because of the limited number of samples, interpretations regarding the Weibull modulus are subjected to caution. It seems however that neither etching, nor ageing induced substantial changes in the Weibull modulus. HF etching induced an increase of monoclinic phase content at the surface. This could be explained by differences in the dissolution kinetics of yttrium oxide and zirconium oxide by HF, which could create an yttrium depleted layer of zirconia, in which the tetragonal phase is less stable. Besides etching induced different kind of defects in the material: The formation of a thin etch-damaged layer on the whole surface, whose depth did not appear to evolve substantially over time, but could be locally thicker ( Localized damage such as pits (Figs. Additionally, etching could bring to the surface flaws which were just below by dissolving the material that separated them from the outside. For instance, even though the case was isolated, it is worthwhile recalling that the fracture of a sample from the HF40-30 group was associated to a “tunnel-like” defect ( As a consequence, etching induced a decrease in the average strength, without apparently affecting the strength variability. This decrease appeared to be much more important for the HF40-120 group (−29%) than for the HF40-30 and the HF40-60 groups, for which the decrease (−15% in both cases) and the Weibull strength distributions were similar. It seems thus recommendable not to use etching times superior to one hour, which moreover don't bring clear benefits in terms of roughness To understand how the decrease of strength discussed above is related to the effect of etching on the population of superficial defects, some simple models are proposed below. First of all, to estimate the size of the critical defect in each sample group, let us consider a hypothetical semi-circular surface crack of radius a. The stress intensity factor To determine The etch-damaged layer, which could extend an existing surface flaw, can reach locally 3 On the other hand, big pits were observed on the surface of samples from the HF40-120 groups and fractographic analysis evidenced that they can play a role in failure ( Let us then consider then that this pore is associated to a circumferential crack (  The software Maple (version 17, Maple Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) was used to calculate numerically the integral of Eq. For an applied tension σ For an applied tension σ Considering these results, the presence of big pits ( Finally, fractographic analysis also evidenced that deep porous zones could initiate fracture ( To summarize, the models presented above tend to show that: For the HF40-30 and HF40-60 groups in which the pits are smaller than in the HF40-120 group, the model of an existing crack whose dimension is increased by the etch-damaged layer gives a satisfying explanation of the drop in strength induced by etching. The fact that the thickness of the etch-damaged layer was not related to etching time supports this hypothesis, because it explains the similarity between the HF40-30 and HF40-60 strength distributions. For the HF40-120 group, the presence of big pits associated to the etch-damaged layer and of deep porous zones explains the more important drop in strength. There was no substantial difference in the amount of monoclinic phase between the different groups of etched-aged specimens. Another observation worthwhile recalling is that the increase of monoclinic content associated to ageing in the etched samples was close to the increase observed in the Control-Aged group. Furthermore it was observed on FIB cross-sections that the thickness of the micro-cracked layer induced by phase transformation during ageing was not more important in a sample etched for two hours than in the control one. Accordingly the influence of previous etching on ageing appears to be limited. Moreover, there was surprisingly no significant difference in the strength distributions among all the specimen groups after ageing (see The drop in strength induced by ageing of polished zirconia has already been reported in numerous studies On the other hand, the increase in strength subsequent to ageing etched specimens has never been reported. At first, two hypotheses appear to be reasonable to explain this phenomenon. One is that ageing of etched specimens could induce a change in the critical defects responsible for fracture, and the other is that ageing may induce a change in the stress distribution at the surface of etched specimens. However, this second hypothesis appears to be unlikely, since there is no apparent reason for which the presence of a residual compressive stress on the surface would induce an increase in strength for etched specimens but not for control ones. On the contrary, the effect of ageing on the critical defects could explain the differences observed, as it will be demonstrated in the next section. Indeed, a critical flaw induced by etching is necessarily connected to the surface and is therefore necessarily under direct exposure of water vapor. The tip of the crack could thus be transformed, reducing its sharpness. A similar phenomenon of crack tip blunting was suggested to exist by Marro et al. To explain the drop in strength induced by ageing in the Control-Aged group, let us consider first the case of the sample shown in On the other hand, let us consider the case that the degraded layer thickness is homogenous (d These two observations tend to demonstrate that the strength of the Control-Aged samples is governed by the aged damaged layer, which is responsible for the drop in strength, and not by the pre-existing flaws. The mechanism of crack tip blunting discussed below has thus no effect in this case. To explain how pre-existing etching defects could be neutralized and how it could lead to strength increase for the HF40-120 samples, let us consider the hypothesis that ageing could induce some crack tip blunting. Modeling the case of a cracked pit is not straightforward. Therefore, to get an order of magnitude of the blunting necessary to explain the strength increase observed, let us consider the relationship between the stress intensity factors at fracture of a blunt and a sharp crack Ageing seems to lead to two competing mechanisms: On the one hand, etching defects, which are directly accessible to water vapor, are neutralized: a moderate blunting of the crack tip is sufficient to explain the strength increase observed for the HF40-120 samples. On the other hand, the apparition of the degraded layer explains the drop in strength for the control samples. Considering that etching defects are fully inactivated, the strength will be also governed by the degraded layer in the etched-aged groups, which explains the similarity between all the strength distributions after ageing. Etching of 3Y-TZP with HF 40% for times up to two hours has been studied in terms of surface integrity, flexural strength and resistance to hydrothermal degradation. It is concluded that etching induces an increase in monoclinic phase content and a decrease in the biaxial flexural strength of polished specimens. In both cases, these changes do not exceed 15% for etching times below one hour. Besides, HF etched zirconia apparently does not exhibit an increased sensitivity to LTD and the biaxial strength of etched specimens can even increase with ageing, which can be explained in terms of crack tip blunting by phase transformation. Accordingly, within the limits of this study, dental zirconia etched with HF 40% should be reliable for long-term implantations provided that the etching duration does not exceed one hour. The authors would like to acknowledge the