It is still challenging to apply laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) to slurry on-stream analysis due to the moisture in slurry samples causing the low spectral intensity. In this work, a high-frequency pulsed fiber laser was proposed to quickly remove the moisture in slurry samples at the detection point for the first time. The spectral emission intensity and line broadening due Stark effect were investigated for the dual-pulse of fiber laser assisted LIBS (FL-LIBS) mode and signal-pulse LIBS (SP-LIBS) mode. It found that the spectral intensities of Fe and Ca elements were enhanced, while the matrix elements of H and O elements were decreased. Moreover, the currently available spectroscopic diagnostics of plasma, such Boltzmann plot have been used to measure the plasma temperature, while the hydrogen line broadening have been used in the characterization of electron densities. It reveals the type of higher-temperature and lower-density plasma was obtained. The experimental results demonstrated that the fiber laser had the potential to improve LIBS signal intensity and spectral resolution for aqueous matrix samples.It is very important to obtain the Information about mineral contents for better process control and making full use of raw materials and energy. The mineral flotation process is the versatile processing technique to separate different mineral particles [ One of the main challenge for LIBS analytical system on slurry samples is the low signal repeatability due to the inhomogeneous distribution of the solid phase in slurry sample. Different sample pretreatment methods and systems have been employed to solve the sedimentation problem. For example, Michaud et al. [ The technique of dual-pulse LIBS offers a high flexibility in terms of the wavelengths of the pulses, the pulse widths, and the sequence of pulses [ In this study, the first laser was used to preheat the sample [ The schematic diagram of the FL-LIBS experimental setup is shown in The sample used in this work was prepared by blending iron ore concentrates GBW(E)070085 (63.93%TFe, 2.06%CaO and another quantities of other oxides, the particle size is around 80–120 μm) with distilled water (90% water and 10% solid sample). To avoid contamination of the optics from slurry splashing and to reduce slurry sedimentation, we used the circulation system devised in our previous work [ The typical spectra of Fe and Ca elements in slurry sample measured by both the single-pulsed LIBS (SP-LIBS) mode and FL-LIBS mode are shown in  To study the signal enhancement mechanism, the peak intensities evolution of H І 656.285 nm and O І 777.194 nm under the two mode were studied. The results are illustrated in Furthermore, the intensities of H and O maintain at lower level in FL-LIBS mode, which suggests that the sample ablated by the Nd:YAG laser contained less water (H To provide more clarity about the effects of the fiber laser on the spectra, the FWHM of Fe and Ca elements with different Nd:YAG laser energy in SP-LIBS mode and FL-LIBS mode were estimated. The Nd:YAG laser energy was in the range of 30–100 mJ with the interval of 10 mJ. Note that the FWHM of spectra could not be get when the pulse laser energy was lower than 30 mJ. The FWHMs of Fe І 357.009 nm and Ca ІІ 396.847 nm as a function of Nd:YAG laser energy in two modes are illustrated in It is obvious that the FWHMs of Fe and Ca elements are all narrowed down in FL-LIBS mode, which means the spectral resolutions are improved significantly. The maximum FWHM reduction of Fe and Ca elements were 12.5% and 17.53%, respectively. Assuming that the plasma is in local thermodynamic equilibrium in both the SP-LIBS and FL-LIBS modes, the Saha-Boltzmann plot method can be used to calculate plasma temperatures [ The electron density of plasma are usually deduced through spectral line broadening [ Because of the effect of fiber laser with high repetition rate to preheat the slurry sample, the lowering of the threshold may take place, which resulted in different regimes in vaporization and boiling the sample [ The national standard iron ore sample with different Fe concentrations are illustrated in The results reported in the present paper demonstrated that the dual-pulse FL-LIBS excitation of plasma over a slurry sample has specific features, which can be of interest both for basic and applied research. Spectra recorded after introducing the high-frequency fiber laser, showed better analytical capabilities, namely a considerable increase of spectral line intensity of 3–8 times and the line emission narrowing of >10%. For example, the emission intensities of Fe І 357.009 nm, and Ca ІІ 396.847 nm of mineral elements were enhanced by 3.37 and 7.69 times, respectively. Meanwhile, the FWHM of these two spectral emission lines were 12.5% and 17.53% reduction, respectively. In addition, by removing of moisture in the slurry sample by the effect of fiber laser, the higher-temperature and lower-density plasmas were obtained in the FL-LIBS mode. While an overall description of the laser and sample interaction processes still requires further studies. The FL-LIBS has great potential in both researches and industrial applications in aqueous matrix samples analysis due to the advantages of low cost and portability for fiber laser. This research was financially supported by