Barnacles are notorious marine fouling organisms. Their successful attachment to a substrate requires that they search for an appropriate habitat during their cyprid stage. A chemical cue called SIPC (Settlement-Inducing Protein Complex) has been shown to play a key role in the induction of cyprid gregarious settlement; however, the underlying biochemical mechanism remains unclear. Here, RNA-seq was used to examine the gene expression profiles of Amphibalanus amphitrite cyprids in response to SIPC and to identify SIPC-activated intracellular signaling pathways. A total of 389 unigenes were differentially expressed in response to SIPC, and cement protein genes were not among them. KEGG enrichment analysis suggested that SNARE interactions in the vesicular transport pathway were significantly influenced by SIPC treatment, indicating a possible role for SIPC in triggering protein transportation and secretion. Several genes with specific functions in metamorphosis were found among the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). GO (Gene Ontology) enrichment analysis revealed that the DEGs were significantly enriched in enamel mineralization pathways, suggesting that SIPC may also be involved in the activation of mineralization.Barnacles are one of the most dominant marine fouling organisms. Their life cycle consists of planktonic nauplius and cyprid stages, followed by benthic juvenile and adult stages. To achieve permanent and tenacious attachment, the free-swimming barnacle cyprid must actively explore external substrates and find a suitable one on which to settle down, initiate metamorphosis, and grow into an adult [ Currently, it is believed that two main factors determine the surface selection of a cyprid. One is the adhesion strength of the cyprid during its settling, and the other is the presence of chemical cues [ With the recent development of high-throughput sequencing, transcriptomics has been used frequently to understand large-scale patterns of gene expression change. For barnacles, studies have focused mainly on specific tissues or stages. Chen et al. used transcriptomics to identify 7954 unigenes that were differentially expressed between larval and adult stages in To better understand the mechanisms that underlie SIPC promotion of cyprid attachment, we used transcriptome sequencing and bioinformatics to identify genes and signaling pathways that were activated by SIPC treatment. Interestingly, genes encoding cement proteins were not highly expressed after SIPC treatment. KEGG enrichment analysis of the 389 DEGs revealed that many of them are participants in the SNARE-mediated vesicular transport signaling pathway, while parallel GO enrichment analysis indicated that the DEGs are also highly associated with enamel mineralization. It therefore appears that SIPC influences protein transport and enamel mineralization. Our results provide a preliminary understanding of the biochemical mechanisms that underlie SIPC stimulation of cyprid settlement. Adult barnacles of SIPC was extracted from adult Total RNA was extracted from the six cyprid samples using TRIzol reagent following the manufacturer’s protocol. The quality and quantity of extracted total RNA were verified using RNAase-free agarose gel electrophoresis and an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The six cyprid RNA samples were then used for library construction. Messenger RNA was isolated using oligo-dT beads (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and cDNA libraries were prepared using the NEBNext® Ultra™ RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (NEB, USA). Library quality was assessed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. Finally, high-throughput sequencing was performed on the Illumina HiSeq™ 4000 platform in paired-end mode with a read length of 125 bp. Adaptor sequences were removed from raw reads, and the resulting reads were quality filtered using Trimmomatic software. The high-quality clean reads were assembled using Trinity v2.4.0 [ The set of all Trinity unigenes was used as the reference transcriptome sequence, and clean reads from each sample were mapped to this reference using RSEM software [ To prepare After eight days of culture, To investigate differences in gene expression between the SIPC-treated cyprids and the controls, six cyprid samples (three biological replicates of each treatment condition) were collected to construct complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries. The Pearson correlation coefficient was used to confirm the correlation between the three biological repetitions in each condition ( We reasoned that SIPC may promote cyprid settlement by inducing cement secretion. Therefore, we compared the expression of genes for cement proteins between the two groups. Corresponding to previously reported DESeq2 was used to detect differences in gene expression between SIPC-treated cyprids and controls. A total of 389 DEGs were identified. Among these, 359 were upregulated and 30 were downregulated in response to SIPC treatment ( After confirming that SIPC promoted cyprid settlement, it was necessary to determine which proteins were induced by SIPC and played essential roles in cyprid settlement. We identified three DEGs that may encode proteins critical for SIPC-induced settlement: G protein-coupled receptor ( Next, GO analysis was performed to gain further insight into the functions of the DEGs. Positive regulation of enamel mineralization (GO: 0070175) was the only enriched GO term among the DEGs ( SIPC is a complex glycoprotein extracted from both larval and adult barnacles. Oligosaccharides such as mannose may play an important role in cyprid antennules during settlement [ The cyprid settlement process begins with perception of a settlement cue by candidate receptors in the antennules. The antennules contain many tentacles and receptors that respond to external substrates or chemical cues. At present, GPCR and the downstream cyclic AMP (cAMP) pathway are thought to be involved in sensing pheromones [ The signaling pathway was identified by KEGG enrichment analysis. Interestingly, only one main pathway was enriched in the SIPC treatment, Finally, GO enrichment revealed that the positive regulation of enamel mineralization was upregulated in response to SIPC treatment. This result agreed with previous suggestions that SIPC is key to the calcification of cyprids [ In conclusion, our results suggest a process in which cyprid settlement begins with binding of SIPC by GPCR, activating an ion channel, opening a downstream neurotransmitter-related signal pathway, and finally leading to the mineralization process. This hypothetical signal transduction scheme is shown in The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We gratefully acknowledge the generous funding from the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at