The objective of this study was to evaluate the physical and chemical proprieties of desalinated seawater produced by Multi Stage Flash (MSF) and Reverse Osmosis (RO) processes for drinking purpose. The final products, after post-treatment and blending, of Kahrama MSF and Bousfer SWRO plants located in different sites were investigated in this study. Different samples were taken from raw water and product before and after post-treatments in both plants. The physical and chemical balance revealed that the desalinated water produced by MSF plant is of better quality than that produced by the SWRO plant. The Langelier Saturation Index (LSI) was used as an indicator of the aggressiveness and corrosiveness of potable water. Indeed, the LSI of the distillate was slightly positive with over 77% of the values ranging from 0 to 0.13 while about 23% of the values were negative. This is due to the increase of MSF product water temperature from 29°C to 33.82°C during the investigation period and the calcium levels which decreased to a minimum value of 45.95mg/l. On the other hand, the SWRO desalinated water had a negative LSI with values ranging from −3.27 to −1.85. These results are not within the recommended LSI values (between 0 and 0.4), which means that the product is highly aggressive and becomes improper for human consumption. These negative values are directly related to the RO product water temperature below 24.6°C and calcium concentration below 16.03mg/l as well as the lack of proper post-treatment process. From this investigation, it was recommended to improve the RO product post-treatment to make the remineralization process more effective. Some recommended guidelines suggested by the authors were presented in this paper.Calcium Calcium Carbonate Precipitation Potential Langelier Saturation Index Multi Stage Flash Potential of hydrogen Reverse Osmosis Sea water reverses osmosis Temperature (°C) Total alkalinity Total dissolved solids (mg/l) Total hardness Seawater desalination has become the main source that may face drinking water shortage problem in several countries such as Algeria Several large scale Multi Stage Flash (MSF) and Reverse Osmosis (RO) desalination plants are installed in Algeria with a total production capacity of around 1,897,500 Product water of Kahrama MSF plant located in Arzew industrial zone and the Bousfer SWRO plant located in the West of Oran city was investigated in this study. Desalinated water from MSF and RO plants is generally very aggressive resulting in deteriorating the water distribution systems by dissolving the cement/concrete of the pipelines and/or corroding the metal materials. In this paper, aggressive water was defined by a negative LSI value. A number of chemical factors influence the aggressiveness and corrosiveness of the water produced by these technologies. Normally these products are subjected to several post-treatment steps in order to make the final product non-corrosive to the distribution network system and make it potable and safe for human consumption LSI is defined as the difference between the actual pH of the permeate and its pH when it is just saturated with calcium carbonate (saturated pH at which equilibrium exists). LSI is calculated using Eqs. For drinking water the recommended LSI must be: 0 pHs could be calculated by using several thermodynamic quantities such as the second dissociation constant of carbonic acid, solubility product constant of CaCO The product water from desalination plants is typically low in mineral contents, alkalinity, and pH. The post-treated product should, within reasonable limits, match the existing water supply to prevent problems such as aggressiveness of water and excess gas. The results showed that the supplied water doesn't contain enough calcium and alkalinity (low concentrations of minerals or lack of the “stability” components of calcium and bicarbonate alkalinity (≤ LSI was determined for different periods and post-treatment steps. The reason of the observed deterioration of the RO product water quality is the lack of a suitable post-treatment process in the plant. Prediction of some solutions to prevent corrosion in the distribution system was also investigated in this study. The originality of this work is the comparison of the physical and chemical qualities of desalinated water produced by thermal-based (MSF) and membrane-based (SWRO) desalination processes after post-treatment (re-mineralization process) and blending. To evaluate the effectiveness of the process and the quality of desalinated water in order to improve it and make it more sustainable, the variation of physical and chemical proprieties of the desalinated water by MSF and RO as well as LSI values was investigated during the year 2010. The plant constructed by the Japanese company IHI consists of three MSF desalination units and three gas turbines for power generation producing 90,000 Desalinated water after post-treatment is stored in the product tank with a capacity of 25,000 The plant was constructed jointly by the Economic Public Enterprise (EPE) and the Spanish Company AGA. The SWRO plant has a total capacity of 5500 Bousfer plant is equipped with spiral wound polyamide RO membranes (SWC5) provided by Hydranautics. The membranes are installed in 8 and 13 pressure vessel units representing SETA and ASTRAMATIC. The product collected from ASTRAMATIC passes through neutralization system composed with four filters filled with calcium carbonate. It's important to mention that these filters were out of order during all the study period. Finally, post-treatment process consists of dosing sodium hydroxide (NaOH) to adjust pH, then injection of residual chlorine, of 0.3 The conductivity, pH, temperature and LSI of the SWRO and MSF products, before and after post-treatments and blending, were measured during the year 2010 by calculating the monthly average of the parameters which are determined in this study. The monthly conductivity variation of RO and MSF products is presented in pH values of the RO and MSF products vary between 7.18 and 8.5 as shown in The temperature is an important parameter which affects water conductivity, pH and the solubility of oxygen. Any change in water temperature varies its saturation index. The calculation of calcium-carbonate balance and the chemical dose for pH correction depend also on temperature The feed and product water temperatures of the RO plant vary between 14 and 24.6 The physical and chemical parameters of the RO product, feed water and LSI are summarized in As shown in   On the other hand, the results showed that the alkalinity, TH and calcium values of the MSF treated water ( Post-treatment of desalinated water is needed for two key reasons: to protect the public health (by disinfection and minerals addition) and to protect the water distribution networks. The lack of carbonate alkalinity makes desalinated water very unstable and prone to wide variations in pH due to the low buffering capacity. The lack of carbonate alkalinity and calcium may also contribute to increase the aggressiveness since protective calcium carbonate films cannot be deposited on the pipes' walls. In our study, we noticed that the physical and chemical balance revealed that the desalinated water produced by MSF is of better quality than that produced by RO. Indeed, the LSI of the first plant is slightly positive with over 77% of the values ranging from 0 to 0.13. This is due to the increase of MSF product water temperature from 29 Alkalinity ≥ Calcium Carbonate Precipitation Potential (CCPP) Total hardness > Larson Ratio < LSI The goal is to increase the total alkalinity (TAC) and/or TCa. This treatment is recommended for very soft water from desalination streams. The most common method used is the injection of CO Several products are used to increase the pH of water: sodium carbonate, lime as lime water or soda. The choice depends on the dosing rate of each product, hence based on water quality. The implementation of each product should be also taken into consideration: soda requires only a simple injection using a dosing pump, while we need to prepare a solution of sodium carbonate and a saturator to produce limewater. The decrease in pH, if necessary, is done by adding sulfuric acid without dilution Authors wish to thank the Director of Kahrama MSF plant and the Bousfer's SWRO plant manager and their respective teams for their support in providing all the plant details and as much as we needed water samples for laboratory analysis. We also thank them for giving permission to the PhD student to spend one year in both plants for deeper investigation.