Flavones have the potential of being used as a dietary supplement for bone health promotion beyond calcium and vitamin D. Recent studies have showed that flavones enhanced bone formation and inhibited bone resorption by affecting osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation through various cell signaling pathways. In this study, we investigated the effects of a new flavone (2R,3S)-pinobanksin-3-cinnamate, isolated from the metabolites of the endophytic fungus Penicillium sp. FJ-1 of Acanthus ilicifolius L., Acanthaceae, on osteoblast differentiation by using MC3T3-E1 cells. It was observed that (2R,3S)-pinobanksin-3-cinnamate promoted osteoblast differentiation, as evidenced by increased mineralization process and alkaline phosphatase activity, as well as expression of genes encoding the bone differentiation. Moreover (2R,3S)-pinobanksin-3-cinnamate treatment upregulated the gene expression of wingless-type MMTV integration site family, bone morphogenetic protein and runt-related transcription factor 2, and protein expression of phosphor-Smad1/5/8, β-catenin and runt-related transcription factor 2 in MC3T3-E1 cells. The osteoblast differentiation effects induced by (2R,3S)-pinobanksin-3-cinnamate were attenuated by the bone morphogenetic protein antagonist Noggin, and wingless-type MMTV integration site family signaling pathway inhibitors Dickkopf-1. Co-treatment with adenosine 30,50-cyclic monophosphate and guanosine 30,50-cyclic monophosphate pathway inhibitors, H89 and KT5823, respectively, reversed the (2R,3S)-pinobanksin-3-cinnamate-induced activations of p-Smad1/5/8, β-catenin, and runt-related transcription factor 2. Our data demonstrated that (2R,3S)-pinobanksin-3-cinnamate promoted the osteoblast differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells, at least partially through the adenosine 30,50-cyclic monophosphate and guanosine 30,50-cyclic monophosphate signaling pathways, providing the scientific rational to develop (2R,3S)-pinobanksin-3-cinnamate against bone loss-associated diseases.Skeletal homeostasis is under the control of continuous bone remodeling of osteoclastic bone resorption and osteoblastic bone formation. Imbalances of bone remodeling causes a wide variety of bone-related disorders, including osteoporosis, which is prevalent worldwide ( The intracellular morphogenetic protein BMP-Runx2 and the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathways play a crucial role in stimulating osteoblast differentiation and bone formation ( Flavones, found in a wide diversity of plant foods, herbs, spices, and beverages, have the potential of dietary components for bone health promotion beyond calcium and vitamin D. Recent studies have indicated that flavone consumption had a stronger association with bone health than general fruit and vegetable consumption (  The cell line MC3T3-E1 was purchased from Beijing Cell Bank (Beijing, China). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) and α-minimal essential medium (α-MEM) were from Gibco BRL (Gaithersburg, USA). Alizarin red S and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium-bromid (MTT) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, USA). ALP assay kit was purchased from Jiancheng Biological Engineering (Nanjing, China). Real-time PCR reagents were purchased from Thermo Fisher (Waltham, MA, USA). PC was isolated and identified by Prof. Jie Lu from Institute of Materia Medica, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, China ( MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% streptomycin-penicillin, and osteogenic differentiation medium at 37 Cell proliferation was determined by MTT assay. After treatment, MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded in 96-well plates at 4 After treatment, MC3T3-E1 cells were collected and lysed. After centrifuge, the supernatant was collected. The ALP activity was determined by the assay kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. After treatment, MC3T3-E1 cells were washed and fixed with 70% ice-cold ethanol for 1 After treatment, the total RNA was extracted from MC3T3-E1 cells with TRIzol reagent. cDNA was synthesized using the reverse transcription kit with 0.5 After treatment, MC3T3-E1 cells were collected and lysed using RIPA buffer to extract protein. The protein concentration was determined by protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Equal amounts of samples (50 Values were presented as mean MC3T3-E1 cells were treated with PC at different concentrations for 72 MC3T3-E1 cells were treated with PC at different concentrations. Results indicated that PC promoted osteoblast differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells, as evidenced by increased ALP activity and mineralization, and upregulating the gene expression of To investigate the signaling pathways involved in the osteoblast differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells induced by PC treatment, BMP/WNT pathways were analyzed. Results indicated that PC treatment increased gene expression of To further explore pathways involved in the osteoblast differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells induced by PC treatment, cAMP and cGMP pathway inhibitors H89 and KT5823 were co-treated with PC. Results showed that PC-induced osteoblast differentiation was significantly reversed ( Bone metabolism is under the control of mutual interaction between osteoclasts and osteoblasts. Osteoblasts promote bone production by regulating the differentiation and proliferation of osteoblast precursors ( Recent studies on flavones have identified molecular targets in cell signaling pathways that affect bone metabolism. The most studied mechanisms for benefits of flavones to bone have been in the estrogenic actions of phytoestrogens ( MC3T3-E1 cell line has been widely used to study osteoblast differentiation because it could differentiate into osteoblast-like cells and further mature osteoblasts ( Osteoblast differentiation is regulated by BMP and WNT pathways. Moreover, these two pathways cooperate to regulate the bone formation. BMP remains inoperative in the cytoplasm as one of the main signaling cascades ( Increasing evidence suggested that cAMP signaling is a major pathway for regulating several osteoblastic genes, such as Runx2 and osteocalcin. These studies substantiated that the cAMP signaling pathway is important in osteoblast recruitment from osteoprogenitor cells ( In conclusion, our data demonstrated that PC isolated from the metabolites of the endophytic fungus The authors declare that no experiments were performed on humans or animals for this study. The authors declare that they have followed the protocols of their work center on the publication of patient data. The authors declare that no patient data appear in this article. Study concepts and design: Z-FG; Experimental studies: HZ, G-PZ, HJ; data analysis: HZ, G-PZ; manuscript preparation: HZ, G-PZ, HJ, Z-FG. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.