The area of flotation testing of drill core is important in the business plan of most mining companies. Metallurgical information derived from this practice can be used to advantage in strategic decision-making. Sampling, flotation testing and subsequent QemSCAN (Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning Electron Microscopy) analysis of a mineral resource is one example of this approach. A new resource, located in Sudbury, Ontario, is being assessed for the Sudbury Operations of Falconbridge Limited, which includes the Strathcona Mill.
                  In this case, it was possible to improve the value of information from sampling and flotation testwork by using an improved, statistically-based test design, by sampling the resource by generic end-member ore type, and by integrating the Mineral Processing and Mineral Science disciplines into a Process Mineralogy team. In addition to producing standard metal grade and recovery information, this new approach provides more reproducible information from representative samples and flotation testing in a replicate format. QemSCAN technology is used to produce a size by size mineral balance, including both modal percentages and liberation, from which flotation models for each ore type can be developed. As a result, a key understanding of the potential behaviour of a given ore type, if mined and then processed at the current mill operation, is gained at the 95% confidence level.
                  The three ore types of this mineral resource were shown to have different flotation characteristics. Quantifying the mineralogy and liberation in each of the three ore types, has shown that this difference is due to changes in modal percentages of ferro-magnesium and magnesium silicate minerals such as pyroxene, talc and serpentine. Liberation across the three ore types is very similar and is therefore not responsible for variation in flotation performance.The Sudbury Igneous Complex (SIC) is host to a new Ni–Cu resource held by Falconbridge Limited. The SIC is located near Sudbury which is 400 km north of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Ore deposits associated with the SIC occur along the base of this structure in a brecciated rock known as Sublayer or within the footwall breccias and gneisses directly below it. Three distinct ores within the new resource were designated as AB, B and C ores and are defined by their stratigraphic position within the SIC and underlying footwall lithologies. Each of these ores were selected for flotation testwork and QemSCAN mineralogy to assess their respective flotation products. AB ore occurs at the contact between the Sublayer breccias of the SIC and the footwall breccias in the underlying footwall rocks. Sublayer breccias have a noritic matrix and as a result, the percentage of ferro-magnesium silicate minerals is much higher in this ore than in the other two. B ore is hosted by the footwall breccias that lie directly below the Sublayer breccias of the SIC. The matrix of this ore is granitic to granodioritic in composition. C ore is defined by narrow, high-grade stringers (veins) within footwall gneisses, stratigraphically below B ores. The gneisses are also granitic to granodioritic in composition. Assessment of opportunities to improve mineral processing performance in existing concentrators and in describing undeveloped orebodies is key to improving the business case of a mining company. This assessment has traditionally been performed using distinct and separate inputs from mineral processing and mineral science. More recently, process mineralogy has been used to integrate these two disciplines. This trend has been driven by the need to develop and process more challenging ore deposits, and has been assisted by the availability of modern automated instruments. Together with the acquisition of a QemSCAN (Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning Electron Microscopy) from CSIRO in Australia, and with the use of a supporting SEM with EDX/WDX capabilities and an XRD, the development of process mineralogy at Falconbridge commenced in 1997 ( The application of process mineralogy is designed to model the grades and recoveries that can be expected as well as the metallurgical problems to be anticipated when mining begins. In this way, a mill, smelter and refinery can be prepared for the metallurgical challenges that accompany every ore type. In addition, by performing the work at an end-member ore-type level, a better understanding is gained of the causes of metallurgical problems because the effects are neither masked nor diluted as might occur if ores were blended. It is shown that, by use of this approach, the set nature of an orebody can be best exploited with selected flowsheet changes in a concentrator, which address the generic characteristics of the orebody. In this way, the flowsheet provides a process that more effectively fits the mineral processing requirements of the ore. This leads to clear and tangible improvements in grade and recovery. In sampling and testing drill core from a mineral resource, grade, in terms of pay metal, is key. Individual assays of metal grade in the drill core, for example, provide some idea of bulk ore grade, but seldom will any individual assay be sufficient to make a meaningful statement about the ore resource. Furthermore, the typical lognormal distribution of metal values found throughout an orebody complicates the distribution of these values in laboratory mill feed measured in batch tests ( In the context of milled ore grade, the distribution of grades has a particular significance. This is because a pay metal, e.g. nickel, can be hosted by several different minerals, each of which will have a unique nickel content ( The occurrence of pay metals in multiple mineral hosts complicates the sampling and evaluation activities that preface flotation testing of an ore. By developing a sound understanding of the host mineralogy and of generic end-member ore types, it is possible to design sampling and evaluation structures that will represent grade variability. This approach delivers representative sample material to the flotation test, and will supply a diagnostic testing structure in the form of a quality control model. This type of problem was studied in the form of random stratified sampling and was compared to random sampling ( From representative bulk samples, a blending and subsampling procedure using a series of spinning rifflers reduces the group and segregation errors. The variance between replicate subsamples, or batch flotation test charges, is therefore less than would otherwise be the case. By performing each test condition in replicate, and applying appropriate quality controls, the Central Limit Theorem can be applied. As a result, error distribution becomes more symmetrical compared to errors from individual tests ( A representative sample of each ore type was produced using drill core samples. The samples included waste dilution from above and below ore intersections, with an objective of producing a sample that matched the diluted mineral resource grade. The amount of dilution was defined by geological and engineering staff based on ore-body orientation and anticipated mining method. Each composite was milled to a grind equivalent to the current grind used at the Strathcona Concentrator, 56% passing 75 μm. Multiple flotation tests for the individual ore types were conducted and each test product was sampled and assayed. Composites of these flotation products were made up for each ore type, using only individual test samples that were qualified as representative by the Central Limit Theorem. The compositing process made use of commercially available spinning rifflers to produce a minimum of a 0.5 kg composite sample for each test product for each ore type. Each of these composites were assayed to give a sample head assay. Splits of each qualified composite sample were then sized using screens, a cyclosizer and centrifuging methods to give size fractions into the sub-25-μm range and down to a final −7 μm sink size for assay only. Polished sections were prepared for all size fractions down to CS5 (7 to 12 μm) for mineralogical analysis using QemSCAN. A total of eight size fractions were measured for each product, from which a reconciliation back to a head was completed. The rougher/scavenger flotation flowsheet is shown in Flotation tests were carried out for AB, B and C ore types in quadruplicate. As a result of the unusual flotation performance of AB ore, additional tests were performed. Replicate tests for each ore were combined such that a single set of data and one grade–recovery curve was produced for each ore type. A study of the comparative errors was made in the theoretical, or reconciled, ore grade in flotation tests performed at the 95% confidence level ( Five samples were sized for QemSCAN from each flotation group for each ore type. These included the rougher flotation feed, three timed concentrates and a tailing.  QemSCAN is an automated mineral analysis system based on a scanning electron microscope and identification of minerals by their unique energy dispersive X-ray spectra. QemSCAN produces modal analyses, mineral liberation information, mineral and particle size data and mineral associations for both ore and gangue minerals. This enables QemSCAN to provide a full mineral and compositional accounting of a given ore type or mill stream. From such measurements, a size by size Key to the application of automated mineral analysis using QemSCAN is a highly refined library of mineral identifications known as the Species Identification Program (SIP). As X-ray spectra are collected, they are compared to the list of minerals in the SIP to make a positive identification. Quantitative mineral compositions are refined by using actual minerals from a deposit as internal standards. Reference minerals are analysed on a second SEM by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer and wavelength dispersive X-ray (WDX) spectrometer methods to give compositions that are representative of each deposit and zone. Consequently, a SIP and a corresponding mineral composition file are written specifically for each different deposit or zone that is analysed. QemSCAN assays are calculated for each size fraction based on the modal mineralogy and mineral compositions specific to the ore type under study. The calculated assays are then compared to bulk chemical assays for each size fraction. This assay reconciliation is part of the quality control protocol. It provides a measure of the sample representivity, effectiveness of the SIP and accuracy of quantitative mineral compositions used in data processing. When assay reconciliation has been achieved, the data are considered ready for metallurgical interpretation. Flotation studies were carried out to determine the performance of composite samples prepared from drill core of AB, B, and C ores within the mineral resource. A quality control model was employed to achieve the 95% confidence level on the flotation test results. Grade–recovery curves for each of the three ores that make up the new resource are plotted in Results indicate that while the curves for B and C ores lie close to the Strathcona baseline, the curve for AB ore is shifted to the left indicating an inferior metallurgical response. The problematic flotation nature of AB ore was identified at the first flotation stage of this testwork. Thin, grey-coloured froth layers that lacked the metallic lustre of most sulphide floats were indicative of its metallurgical response. Weight recoveries to the primary rougher concentrate were extremely low. The overall nickel recovery of the AB ore was 93.4% with a cumulative nickel grade of 4.3%. In contrast, rougher/scavenger flotation tests of B ore showed a thick silver metallic froth and a high weight recovery to the primary concentrate. The overall nickel recovery and cumulative nickel grade of B ore were found to be 97.07% and 4.54% respectively. The flotation behaviour of C ore followed the same pattern as that of B ore. However, the flotation of C ore resulted in a higher weight recovery in the primary rougher concentrate than obtained from B ore. The froth layer was very dense and had a vibrant metallic sheen. The overall nickel recovery for C ore was 98.13% with a cumulative nickel grade of 5.12%. QemSCAN analysis of the three ores provided details to explain the observed metallurgical performance of the individual ores. The initial effort was focused on the feed liberation of the three ores. Was the shift in the grade–recovery curve for AB ore due to poor liberation of pentlandite? Size by size liberation results for each of the three ores are presented in In AB ore, 85.3% of the pentlandite occurs in liberated particles. The percentage of pentlandite occurring in liberated particles in B and C ores increases marginally to 86.3% and 88.8% respectively. This minor increase however cannot account for the differences observed in the grade–recovery curves. Middling and locked pentlandite accounts for the remaining 14.7% in AB ore, 13.7% in B ore and 11.2% in C ore. In all cases, the most common association is with pyrrhotite, although minor amounts of pentlandite are locked with chalcopyrite and silicate gangue. Once again, because the three ores have very similar locking characteristics, this feature is unlikely to be related to the observed flotation behaviour. QemSCAN results for B and C ores show high percentages of liberated pentlandite floating in the primary roughers. Slower floating particles, recovered to the second rougher and scavenger concentrates, show an increasing number of middling and locked pentlandite-bearing particles. However, in AB ore, the secondary rougher and scavenger concentrates show higher proportions of liberated pentlandite than in the better performing ores. It appears that liberated pentlandite was not floating in the primary rougher of AB ore, and that overall flotation was delayed. Thus, the issue of the poor metallurgical performance of AB ore is not related to liberation but rather to the pulp chemistry of the float. The percentage of ferro-magnesium minerals, as measured by QemSCAN, is compared in While there is a strong correlation between the presence of magnesium-bearing silicates and poor pentlandite flotation, the mechanism responsible for this result is not fully understood. Some researchers ( At Falconbridge, mineral surface studies using Tof-SIMS (time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometer) on a rougher concentrate from a high Mg feed showed that the presence of Mg silicates in a float can have a significant impact on reagents. Although few (3) Mg-silicate specimens were found by manual search methods, all showed the same covering of DF250. In this example, the effect on the frothing agent DF250 is clear. In addition to providing an explanation for the inferior metallurgical response of AB ore, QemSCAN results also showed that despite the fact that the grade–recovery curve for C ore was slightly better than the baseline in the later stages of flotation, it was still not optimised. Flotation results show that C ore had high mass recoveries in the first and second rougher concentrates. The recovery of pyrrhotite to the primary rougher for all three ores is compared in Strong pyrrhotite flotation in the mid to fine size fractions of C ore has resulted in the increased mass pull into the primary rougher concentrate. Further testwork was designed to optimise both AB and C ores based on the information gathered in the first phase of work. Phase two test results showed that the addition of non-sulphide gangue depressant 10F85, intended to depress magnesium silicates, improved the nickel recovery in AB ore, as shown in Optimisation tests for C ore required the use of an iron sulphide depressant, Cytec S-7261A. The result is an improvement in selectivity between pyrrhotite and pentlandite, as shown in Flotation and QemSCAN analysis of the three ore types in the new resource have provided Falconbridge Limited with an opportunity to optimise the flotation flowsheet ahead of mining. The study has shown that the ores have a different flotation response from one another. Pentlandite is well liberated in all three ores. However, in AB ore, low mass recoveries to the first and second rougher concentrates suggest that the pulp chemistry is not optimised for sulphide recovery. In C ore, the opposite occurs. High mass recovery into the first rougher concentrate is a result of strong pyrrhotite recoveries. Clearly, neither of the two ores were optimised using the present flowsheet configuration and follow-up work was therefore required to improve their individual performance. Optimisation tests were carried out in a second phase of work based on recommendations from the initial study. Use of two depressants, one aimed at improving flotation of pentlandite in a Mg-bearing feed, and the other aimed at reducing the recovery of Fe-sulphide gangue were used with success in this case. A third phase of work, which is beyond the scope of this paper, included flotation testing of a composite ore blend based on proportions of ores expected in the mining plan. The use of process mineralogy to gain a better understanding of metallurgical performance of the three ores is predicated upon representative sampling, replicate flotation testing and high quality size by size mineralogical data produced by QemSCAN. Using this approach, Falconbridge Limited has been able to characterise a new mineral resource and make clear recommendations for optimisation of that resource ahead of mining. The authors would like to thank Falconbridge Limited for granting permission to publish this paper. The solid support of the Mineral Processing and Mineral Science staff throughout the development and implementation of process mineralogy at the Falconbridge Technology Centre is also highly appreciated. Our special thanks are due to David Allen, Michele Edwards, Shirley Lalonde, Bernie Leger, and Kelly Roberts. Falconbridge client support for this project has been invaluable. In this regard the authors would like to acknowledge the support of Mike Romaniuk, Daryl McNamara, Gord Marrs, Peter Wells, and Dominic Fragomeni. Special thanks goes to Greg Wilkie at CSIRO for the training and support he provided to the QemSCAN group at Falconbridge.