Three kinds of complex oxides oxygen carriers (CeO2–Fe2O3, CeO2–ZrO2 and ZrO2–Fe2O3) were prepared and tested for the gas–solid reaction with methane in the absence of gaseous oxidant. These oxides were prepared by co-precipitation method and characterized by means of XRD, H2-TPR and Raman. The XRD measurement shows that Fe2O3 particles well disperse on ZrO2 surface and Ce–Zr solid solution forms in CeO2–ZrO2 sample. For CeO2–Fe2O3 sample, only a small part of Fe3+ has been incorporated into the ceria lattice to form solid solutions and the rest left on the surface of the oxides. Low reduction temperature and low lattice oxygen content are observed over ZrO2–Fe2O3 and CeO2–ZrO2 samples, respectively by H2-TPR experiments. On the other hand, CeO2–Fe2O3 shows a rather high reduction peak ascribed to the consuming of H2 by bulk CeO2, indicating high lattice oxygen content in CeO2–Fe2O3 complex oxides. The gas–solid reaction between methane and oxygen carriers are strongly affected by the reaction temperature and higher temperature is benefit to the methane oxidation. ZrO2–Fe2O3 sample shows evident methane combustion during the reducing of Fe2O3, and then the methane conversion is strongly enhanced by the reduced Fe species through catalytic cracking of methane. CeO2–ZrO2 complex oxides present a high activity for methane oxidation due to the formation of Ce–Zr solid solution, however, the low synthesis gas selectivity due to the high density of surface defects on Ce–Zr–O surface could also be observed. The highly selective synthesis gas (with H2/CO ratio of 2) can be obtained over CeO2–Fe2O3 oxygen carrier through gas–solid reaction at 800°C. It is proposed that the dispersed Fe2O3 and Ce–Fe solid solution interact to contribute to the generation of synthesis gas. The reduced oxygen carrier could be re-oxidized by air and restored its initial state. The CeO2–Fe2O3 complex oxides maintained very high catalytic activity and structural stability in successive redox cycles. After a long period of successive redox cycles, there could be more solid solutions in the CeO2–Fe2O3 oxygen carrier, and that may be responsible for its favorable successive redox cycles performance.The direct conversion of methane to synthesis gas using lattice oxygen of solid oxygen carriers by gas–solid reactions is a novel method for utilization of methane Ceria and the oxide materials containing ceria have attracted much attention as oxidation catalysts for their high activity in the redox reactions and high oxygen storage capacity In our previous study, a series of CeO In the present work, the CeO CeO The powders X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were performed on a Japan Science D/max-R diffractometer using Cu Ka radiation ( Temperature programmed reduction (TPR) experiments were performed on TPR Win v 1.50 (produced by Quanta chrome Instruments Co.) under a flow of a 10% H The Raman spectra of oxygen carriers were recorded in a Renishaw Invia Raman imaging microscope. The exciting wavelength was 514.5 The BET surface area was determined by N The selective oxidation of CH After methane oxidation reaction proceeded for a while, purge pure N The CH The XRD results of the fresh CeO For the CeO The H The temperature programmed reactions between methane and different oxygen carriers were performed in a fixed-bed reactor to determine a suitable temperature for the synthesis gas production through gas–solid reaction. The results are reported in terms of CH As can be seen, methane conversion smoothly begins around 550 From The temperature programmed reactions indicate that the selective oxidation of methane to synthesis gas by gas–solid reaction indeed can be achieved at high temperature (≥800  For the CeO The similar trend occurs over ZrO The activity towards CeO Obviously, the synthesis gas with the H Since the synthesis gas production through gas–solid reaction should be performed in a continuous cycle, the cycle performance for CeO  When the cycle number increases to 10, the CH  Obviously, the CeO Direct conversion of methane to synthesis gas using lattice oxygen of solid complex oxides (i.e., CeO The Fe Supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 50574046, No. 50774038) and National Natural Science Foundation of Major Research Projects (No. 90610035), High School Doctoral Subject Special Science and Research Foundation of Ministry of Education (No. 20040674005).