This work studies the effect of the anode and cathode materials on the degradation of the herbicide clopyralid. Different electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs), including electrochemical oxidation with electrogenerated hydrogen peroxide (EO-H2O2), electro-Fenton (EF), and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) were carried out. The first experiments were focused on the effect of the cathode, where the use of the hydrophobic carbon felt modified by the deposition of carbon black & PTFE mixture (MCF) improves the H2O2 production in comparison to a conventional carbon felt (CF), regardless of the anode material employed. On the other hand, a laser-made Ti/Ru0.3Ti0.7O2 mixed metal oxide (MMO) and a commercial boron-doped diamond (BDD) were compared as anodes. Results obtained point out that the MMO anode promotes the accumulation of this oxidant (H2O2) in bulk. Once characterized by the production of hydrogen peroxide, the second part of this study focused on the degradation of clopyralid with the MCF cathode with different EAOPs. Results demonstrate that clopyralid fastly degrades in the sequence EO-H2O2 < EF < PEF, and almost complete mineralization occurs for EF and PEF employing MMO or BDD as the anode. Synergy effect study shows that irradiation of 9 W UVC produces a positive synergistic effect of 81.7% and 41.55% (for the PEF-MMO and PEF-BDD, respectively), ascribed to the additional removal of aromatic intermediates by the UVC and the activation of H2O2. At the end of the treatment, mineralization of the herbicide was attained at 1.22 kW h (g−1 TOC). Finally, considering the lower cost of the prepared MMO, these findings demonstrate the potentiality of using modified carbon felt combined with the laser-made Ti/Ru0.3Ti0.7O2 anode for the treatment of polluted waters.The presence of pesticides in surface and groundwater-related to the use and production of pesticides is of great concern due to the severe environmental impact on the ecosystems and human health [ Advanced oxidation processes have shown high potential for the removal of organochlorinated compounds due to the in situ generation of highly reactive and nonselective hydroxyl radical ( In the EO, the oxidation ability depends on the anode material used [ This process may be enhanced by UV irradiation, due to the photolysis of H Development of cathode materials capable of ensuring a fast and efficient production of H Here we evaluated the mineralization process and decay kinetic of an acid pesticide, clopyralid, using EO, EF, and PEF with a 9 W UVC light employing two types of anodes (i.e., a laser-prepared Ti/Ru Clopyralid (3,6–dichloro-2-pyridine-carboxylic acid, The electrolyzes experiments were performed at a laboratory scale with a cylindrical, open, and undivided three-electrode cell of 0.15 L capacity with a jacket recirculation of water thermostated at 25 °C. A 4 cm Electrochemical oxidation with electrogenerated hydroxide peroxide, EF, and PEF at 0.15 A (37.5 mA cm The hydrogen peroxide concentration was measured by following the concentration of the complex formed between H The effect of the combination of EAOPs was investigated through the synergy coefficient (%) (Eq. The specific energy consumption per unit TOC mass (EC A highly-efficient electrogeneration of hydrogen peroxide is essential for getting an efficient electro-Fenton process. Because of that, it was monitored the production of this oxidant with four electrodes: unmodified carbon felt (CF) and modified carbon felt (MCF) used as cathode materials and mixed metal oxide (MMO) and boron-doped diamond (BDD), proposed as anodes. Interestingly, the employment of the combination MCF-MMO increases 12-times the H It is also essential to highlight the effect of the anode material in H The higher production of H On the contrary, for the MCF, the contact angle was 116.2° The data in On the other hand, the modified carbon felt produced by the deposition of carbon black and PTFE resulted in a fast removal, and high mineralization percentages of both molecules tested [ Degradation tests of synthetic wastes containing 100 mg L Conversely, total clopyralid removal is not attained by the EO-H For PEF, the degradation rate improved in comparison to EF, which can be explicated in terms of the photolysis of Fe(III)-carboxylate species according to Eq. The obtained results showed that the degradation of clopyralid fitted well to pseudo-first-order reaction kinetic  On the other hand, very low TOC removal occurs when using MMO anode. This behavior is expected due to the active nature of the MMO and the low amount of hydroxyls that are generated on its surface [ At this point, it is also worthwhile to point out that irradiation of MMO-Ti/Ru As the final stage of the mineralization reaction, the observed residual organic load is due to the generated short-chain carboxylic acids ( To understand the possible routes by which clopyralid is converted to reaction intermediates, the by-products peaks were monitored over the tests by HPLC, and the primary intermediates were identified for each process studied. As a result, picolinic acid, 3-picolinic acid, 6-picolinic acid other non-identified peaks were detected during clopyralid degradation through the different EAOPs ( The ion chromatography analysis indicates the formation of ammonium, chlorides, and nitrate ions On the other hand, no perchlorate was detected when working with the MMO. Bergmann and coworkers showed that MMOs favored the formation of the chlorate, but perchlorate was not found when working with these anodes [ To investigate the synergistic effect of combined electrochemical oxidation and Fenton's reagent, and the further addition of UVC irradiation, the synergy coefficients for the removal of clopyralid, as a function of the anode material were calculated according to Eq. On the contrary, the BDD anode showed a lower synergy effect due to: ( Regarding the irradiation of UVC light, a positive synergistic effect is seen for both MMO and BDD (41.5% and 81.7%, respectively). This effect indicates that irradiation of UVC light is less important than the addition of an iron catalyst, in the clopyralid removal. Nevertheless, the values found point out a clear contribution of photolysis for molecule breakage into intermediates, which are more easily attacked by the hydroxyl radicals formed homogeneously, allowing more significant removals for both anodes. The results obtained were used to estimate the energy consumptions per unit of TOC (EC However, the energy spent does not present a significant difference when comparing EF and PEF processes, regardless of the anode material. Montes and coworkers [ Another previous study reported by our research group [ Here, the slightly lower values of energy consumption found for PEF (with 9 W UVC light) as compared with EF, regardless of the anode material, can be of interest as a feasible option to treat effluents contaminated with chlorinated compounds such as clopyralid. This fact brings up to consider that the use of cheaper material, such as the MMO used in this work, is a good alternative for both EF and PEF since it yields similar efficiencies in clopyralid and TOC removal using BDD anode. Moreover, additional advantages, such as lower energy consumption similar or even lower than values reported in the literature for EAOPs at similar conditions [ From this work, the following conclusions can be drawn: Electrolysis with the modified carbon felt with carbon black, and PTFE presented much better performance than base carbon felt for the electrogeneration of hydrogen peroxide at the conditions tested in this work (i.e., 0.15 A). Efficiency in the removal of clopyralid depends on the EAOP applied. The removal efficiency increases in the sequence EO-H Carboxylic acids were detected at the end of the EF and PEF process along with different amounts of nitrogenated (NH The PEF-MMO was found to be the most exciting EAOP. An outstanding 41.6% synergistic improvement was found with energy consumption as low as 1.22 kW h g MMO anodes attract attention since presented similar results compared to BDD, being suitable material to remove clopyralid removal from aqueous solutions. Géssica de O. S. Santos: experimental work. Writing first draft. Katlin I. B. Eguiluz: supervision. Writing first draft. Giancarlo R. Salazar-Banda: supervision. Funding adquisition. Reviewing final draft. Cristina Saez: supervision. Writing first draft. Manuel. A. Rodrigo: supervisión. Conceptualization. Funding adquisition. Reviewing final draft. There are no conflicts to declare. Financial support from the