At present, two types of experiments under stress-controlled conditions were normally conducted to measure coal permeability: constant confining pressure (CCP) tests and constant effective stress (CES) ones. The original rationale of this situation was to assume that the impacts of effective stresses and gas sorption-induced matrix swelling/shrinking on coal permeability could be separated and investigated individually. In this study, we collected coal permeability data measured under both conditions with a purpose to see if this original rationale was appropriate. This goal was achieved through collection of experimental permeability data under the CCP conditions; collection of experimental permeability data under the CES conditions; and comparison of those experimental data with solutions of the poroelastic theory. For CCP tests, the permeability ratios change from reductions (less than 1.0) to enhancements (greater than 1). These changes are bounded by an upper envelope and a lower one. The upper envelope is corresponding to the solution of free-swelling while the lower one zero-swelling. For CES tests, the permeability ratios also change within an upper envelope and a lower one. The upper envelope is equal to 1.0 corresponding to the solution of free-swelling while the lower one zero-swelling. Through these comparisons, we found that permeability data for both types of tests are confined within the poroelastic solutions for two extreme boundary conditions: free-swelling and zero-swelling. These findings suggest that permeability ratios for both constant confining tests and constant effective stress tests are primarily determined by the matrix-fracture interactions, including sorption-induced swelling/shrinking, through transient effective stresses in matrixes and fractures.Coal permeability experiments can be divided into displacement controlled ones and stress controlled ones. For displacement-controlled experiments, uniaxial strain experiments are normally used to study the evolution of coal permeability. Many permeability models under uniaxial strain conditions were derived, As for the stress controlled condition experiments, two types of experiments are normally conducted to investigate the impact of coal deformation on the evolution of coal permeability. One is to keep the total stress as constant while the other is to keep the effective stress as constant. When the total stress is constant, the effective stress decreases as the gas pressure increases. Under this condition, the effective stress is believed to be the important reason for the evolution of coal permeability. When the effective stress is constant (this can be achieved through keeping the increment of total stress the same as that of gas pressure), the effective stress impact is eliminated. Under this condition, the gas sorption is believed to be the important reason for the evolution of coal permeability. These two hypotheses have been guiding the experimental research of coal permeability for decades. The primary goal of CCP tests is to measure the influence of effective stress and associated processes on the evolution of coal permeability. For examples, CCP tests were used to investigate the impact of effective stress and the combined adsorption/desorption effect on the evolution of permeability; The primary goal of CES tests is to measure the influence of gas adsorption/desorption on the evolution of coal permeability and the associated processes. For examples, the CES tests were conducted to investigate the impact of gas adsorption/desorption on the evolution of permeability. A number of permeability models were developed to explain the experimental observations and have been reviewed. When a dual porosity system such as coal is assumed as the single poroelastic medium, we hypothesize that the gas pressures between the fracture and matrix has reached equilibrium. This is why we have to measure the coal permeability at the equilibrium state when we use the theory of single poroelasticity. This could take from a few days In this study, we hypothesize that if the experimental observations are the permeability at the equilibrium state, the permeability data should be consistent with the theory of single poroelasticity. We test this hypothesis through collecting all of permeability data at the equilibrium state available in the literature, comparing them with the theoretical solutions of single poroelasticity, and conducting a mechanistic analysis of these comparisons. These results and findings are reported in the following sections. In this section, we collected the experimental permeability data under the condition of constant confining pressure. In these experiments, the confining pressure was maintained as constant (green line) while the gas pressure (black line) increased/decreased from a lower/larger value to a larger/lower one, then the effective stress (red line) decreased/increased gradually with the increasing/decreasing of pore pressure, as shown in Steady State Method: The specific implementation mode of steady state method is shown in Permeability of the coal sample to gas was calculated according to the compressible form of Darcy's law, Pressure Transient Method: The specific implementation mode of pressure transient method is shown in The transient method of Brace was widely used to conduct the gas flow experiments in the low permeability samples. The Brace method involves observing the decay of a differential pressure between upstream and downstream vessels across the sample. This pressure decay is combined with the vessel volumes in the analysis to relate the flow through the sample and thus determine the permeability. For the case of gas injection, we use the lowest gas pressure in an experiment as the initial pore pressure. The permeability ratio is defined as the ratio of permeability at the initial pressure to that at the current one. All experimental permeability ratios under constant confining pressures are shown in For the case of gas depletion, we use the highest gas pressure in an experiment as the initial gas pressure. The permeability ratio is defined as the ratio of permeability at the initial pressure to that at the current one. As shown in According to the magnitude of confining pressure, the distribution of permeability ratios can be divided into three zones from lower confining pressure to higher ones for the case of gas injection. When the gas pressure (from 0 to 2 MPa) is lower, nearly all high confining pressure (>5 MPa) data points are below the k/k According to the magnitude of confining pressure, the distribution of permeability ratios can also be divided into different zones for the case of gas depletion. When the confining pressure is larger than 12 MPa, the permeability ratio first slightly decreases with the decreasing of pore pressure and then increases sharply with the decreasing of pore pressure. When the confining pressure ranges from 9 to 12 MPa, the data distribute in the middle part of the graph. The permeability ratio firstly decreases with the decreasing of pore pressure and then increases slowly with the decreasing of pore pressure. When the confining pressure is lower than 9 MPa, the data spread nearly the entire graph. The permeability ratio firstly decreases with the decreasing of pore pressure, then keep slowly decreases or increases slowly with the decreasing of pore pressure. According to the characteristics of gas, permeability data distribution can be divided to two distinct zones. When the injected gas is non-adsorbing (Ar & He), most permeability ratio data are distributed in the upper part of the graph. When the injected gas is adsorbing (N For the case of gas depletion, permeability data distribution can also be divided into three zones according to gas characteristics. For permeability data of CH In this section, we collected the experimental permeability data under the condition of constant effective stress. In these experiments, the difference between the confining pressure (green line) and the pore pressure (black line) was maintained as constant (red line), as shown in For one particular experiment, a series of pressure increments/decrements was conducted. The gas pressure increases/decreases from the lowest/highest magnitude to a highest/lowest one. In our review of these experimental data, we use the permeability ratio of the permeability at the lowest gas pressure to that at a new pressure. The relations between experimental permeability data and gas pressures under the constant effective stress are shown in As shown in Permeability ratios spread over all spaces between the no change line (k/k As shown in According to the poroelastic solutions the permeability is a function of effective strain only. In this section a conceptual model of fracture permeability under the influence of matrix deformation is introduced, and applied to analyze the mechanisms of permeability ratio distributions under different conditions. Coal is a typical dual porosity/permeability system containing porous matrix surrounded by fractures. In this study the cleat system, fractures, joints, and faults are uniformly called the fracture system. It is commonly assumed that Darcy flow is a result of flow in the fracture system and that the contribution of flow in the coal matrix to Darcy flow can be neglected. Substituting Eq. This model is derived based on the fundamental principles of poroelasticity with the following assumptions When the mean confining pressure remains unchanged, When the effective stress remains unchanged, According to Eqs. According to the solutions of single poroelasticity as illustrated in As shown in As shown in As shown in The analysis above has proved that permeability measurements were conducted under the non-equilibrium condition. This suggests that the interactions between matrixes and fractures must be taken into consideration to fully understand the distribution of permeability ratios. We use the injection of an adsorbing gas (such as CO As illustrated in When the matrix permeability is very high (micro-crack developed or matrix permeability high), gas can diffuse from fractures into matrixes. Under this condition, the time from the initial equilibrium to the final one is short, and can be neglected. This represents the upper bound of the permeability change. When the matrix permeability is extremely low, the time from the initial equilibrium to the final one is long and cannot be neglected. If this time is extremely long, gas diffusion-induced swelling may take place only in the vicinity of fracture walls. Under this condition, coal permeability is controlled primarily by the local deformation. 100% of coal swelling/shrinkage would contribute to the reduction of coal permeability provided that the fractures are much more compliant than the coal matrix. Substituting Eq. The permeability ratio is controlled by the gas sorption-induced volumetric strain (Δ where the Langmuir volumetric strain, Comparing Permeability is a function of effective stress (effective strain). In CES tests, the effective stress in the fracture was maintained as constant while the effective stress in the matrix evolves as the interaction between matrix and fracture progresses. This interaction determines the permeability map. In CCP tests, we can find that the distribution of permeability ratios for high confining pressures is more closely to the constant volume behavior, while the distribution of that for low confining pressures is more closely to the free swelling behavior. Through comparing the experimental data of coal permeability evolutions under both constant confining pressures and constant effective stresses, the following conclusions can be drawn: Experimental permeability data were obtained under the common assumption of the equilibrium between coal matrix and fracture pressures, but not consistent with the analytical solutions under the same assumption. For a constant fracture pressure, coal permeability still changes due to the gas diffusion from fractures into matrixes. The permeability stabilizes when the fracture pressure is equalized with the matrix pressure. This process may take a very long time because of low matrix permeability, and the equilibrium condition may never be met in all of these laboratory tests. Permeability data for both constant confining tests and constant effective stress tests are confined within the poroelastic solutions for two extreme boundary conditions: free-swelling and zero-swelling. Evolutions of coal permeability between these poroelastic solutions are primarily determined by the matrix-fracture interactions, including sorption-induced swelling/shrinking, through transient effective stresses in matrixes and fractures. This work is a partial result of funding by