Steel fibre reinforced concrete (SFRC) is widely used in the construction concrete industry as it partakes an important role of evolving concrete technology. It consists of steel fibres of various shapes, sizes and geometries that influence the concrete mix composition and mechanical properties. However, compared to traditional concrete, it is difficult to design the mix proportions because more influencing variables need to be considered to optimise multiple properties including ultimate compressive strength, tensile or flexural strength and cost. Therefore, the present study proposes an artificial intelligence based multi-objective optimization model to enable an efficient method of finding the optimum mix design for SFRC. A large dataset including 299 instances for uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) test and 269 instances for flexural strength (FS) test were collected from previous literature. Support vector regression (SVR) model was applied to predict UCS and FS for SFRC. The hyper parameters of SVR models were tuned using a firefly algorithm (FA) and a sensitivity study was conducted to understand the importance of the inputs on the output variables for the algorithms. High correlation coefficients (0.91 for UCS and 0.85 for FS) were achieved on the test dataset. The FA-SVR model was then applied as the objective function for a developed multi-objective FA to search for the optimal SFRC mixture proportion. Pareto optimal solutions were obtained and served as a design guide to determine the optimal SFRC mixtures.Steel Fibre Reinforced Concrete (SFRC) represents a new class of construction concrete that combines a cementitious matrix and a discontinuous reinforcement, consisting of steel fibres randomly distributed in the matrix Traditional mixture proportion designs are often trial and error processes which can be time- and cost-consuming To tackle the issues behind traditional methods, recent studies have focused more on using computational optimisation methods for predicting mechanical properties of SFRC, e.g. the use of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) to predict concrete compressive or shear strength Although the SVR model shows the high effectiveness in solving prediction problems, one of its major weakness is that SVR performance is highly dependent on its hyper parameters which are difficult to tune using traditional optimization methods SFRC mixture optimization is a two-step approach. The first step is to model the compressive strength of concrete, while the second step is to search for optimal mixture proportions using metaheuristic algorithms Therefore, in this study, a MOO model using both FA-SVR and MOFA is developed to predict mechanical properties and search optimal mixtures for SFRC. A large dataset including 299 instances for uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) test and 269 instances for flexural strength (FS) test were collected for the study. Based on the dataset, the mathematical relationships between input variables and the mechanical properties of SFRC (UCS and FS) were modelled by the FA-SVR algorithm. Consequently, the multi-objective firefly algorithm (MOFA), was applied to obtain the Pareto optimised solutions  The database was collected from published journal articles, including 299 samples for UCS prediction and 269 samples for FS prediction The relationships between the input variables are presented using a correlation matrix in Support vector regression (SVR) developed by Vapnik (1995) has been commonly used in regression. SVR converts nonlinear problems to linear problems by mapping data from sample space to higher dimensional characteristic space A training dataset of To measure the deviation degree, the To resolve the problems with constraints, Lagrange multipliers can be used as follows Firefly algorithm (FA) is inspired by the social behaviour of fireflies as it simulates the flashing characteristics of fireflies. The following three rules are used for this algorithm Fireflies are attracted to each other by the amount of brightness regardless of gender. The attractiveness corresponds to the brightness of the firefly, which both decreases as the distances increases between the two fireflies. If there are no brighter firefly than oneself, the firefly will fly randomly in the neighbourhood. The brightness of the firefly is governed by the objective function of a specific problem. A firefly travels towards one with higher brightness based on the following equation This study uses FA to tune two essential hyperparameters when using SVR: the penalty coefficient This study uses the following performance measures to evaluate the prediction accuracy of the SVR model: Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), and correlation coefficient (R). These performance measures are calculated as follows A machine learning model (e.g. SVR) can be highly complex, and as a result, its relationships between inputs and outputs may be poorly understood. In such cases, the model can be viewed as a black box, i.e. the output is an “opaque” function of its inputs. To increase interpretability from black box machine learning models, we applies a novel visualization approach based on a Sensitivity Analysis (SA) that is able to measure the influence on the output of the proposed SVR when the inputs are varied through their range of values The procedure is as follows: Input and output variables are designed in the probability space. By changing one variable at each time and setting the remaining parameters are at their mean values, the equivalent sensitivity index for each input variable is calculated. A gradient metric was used to measure the changes produced by the output based on previous research Solving a MOO problem is more complicated than solving a single-objective optimisation problem As mentioned above, the FA-SVR model is used as the objective function for UCS and FS. The third objective function (cost) is calculated by polynomial equations as follows: To solve the MOO problems, constraints must be set as follows: Range constraints There should be a variance amongst decision variables within a definite range set by the datasets for SFRC mixture optimisation which are as follow: Concrete volume constraints The sum of the concrete must add up to one cubic meter as follow: Ratio constraints To solve for SFRC mixture optimisation issues, there is a need to constrain a series of ratios such as water-to-cement ratio, superplasticiser-to-cement ratio and fine aggregate-to-total aggregate ratio.  There are a variety of ways to dealing with MOO problems using well-established single-objective optimization algorithms. Perhaps, the simplest one is to combine all the multiple objectives ( For this study, the multi-objective functions using the weighted sum method are as follow: If The Pareto optimal solution ( By this weighted sum method, the FA can be extended to MOFA to search for Pareto optimal solutions for multi-objective optimization problems The process for searching the optimal mixture design of SFRC using SVR and MOFA can be stated as follows and displayed in Train two SVR models by employing UCS and FS databases respectively and apply the 10-fold CV and FA to find the optimal hyperparameters for SVR. Decide on the cost of each SFRC mixture. Develop MOFA using the weighted sum method. Explore the optimum outcomes that can minimise Acquire Pareto fronts of the dual-objective optimum SFRC mixture design. As discussed above, the hyperparameters of SVR were tuned using FA and 10-fold cross-validation and the optimal fold obtains the minimum RMSE. It is observed in   By using MOFA, solutions that minimise the objective functions are obtained. As shown in  To find the most cost-effective point in the Pareto front, an efficiency ratio was calculated using the difference in cost divided by the difference in strength. With the lower the efficiency ratio, it indicates that an increase in strength is possible for a slight increase in cost; hence, being more economical.  For the FS Pareto front as presented in In general, it is up to the decision-maker to decide their budget and type of strength and type of mechanical property they would want to achieve, otherwise, the option of using the most cost-effective point based on the efficiency ratio is available. The results from the sensitivity study show the measurement of influences of the variables for both UCS and FS as shown in For FS input variables shown in SFRC mixture design is a fundamental yet difficult task for civil engineers. To help with the tough process, this study takes the opportunity to predict the optimised mixture design of SFRC using the FA-SVR based model. This model is trained using a wide-ranging database. The following conclusions are drawn from this study: FA is competent in the tuning of hyper parameters of the SVR model. The obtained RSME versus iteration curve is able to converge within several iterations (for UCS: 11 iterations, for FS: 25 iterations). The FA-SVR based model can effectively and accurately predict both UCS and FS based on performance evaluation on the test set (for UCS, R: 0.91, for FS, R: 0.85). The proposed MOO model can obtain successful Pareto solutions based on the set constraints for this study but more iterations could be done to produce more Pareto solutions. The variable importance measure shows that for the most influencing variables are the volume of steel fibres and SP for FS and UCS, respectively. Overall, this is a promising study on AI application towards prediction of mechanical properties of SFRC and optimisation of mixture design. It is a possible cost-effective and sustainable design process that can be employed without the usage of as much time, resources and labour when compared to traditional methods. However, it currently only has the basic input variables and a basic dataset used for the application. In the future work, more input variables (e.g. types of steel fibres) should be incorporated in the dataset to enhance the generalizability of the proposed model. Furthermore, the outcomes are based on experimental results from journal articles. As such, set constraints could be altered to make it more suitable and reasonable for real works in the civil engineering industry. Hence, more investigations must be done to refine the application of the FA-SVR based model and the dataset.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work is financially supported by