Modern metallurgical plants are experiencing the effects of rapid staff turnaround, which include the relearning of plant-specific nuances as well as the gradual attrition of this knowledge. The loss of experience impacts detrimentally on ramp-up time for new plants and on operating efficiencies for existing ones.
                  An approach to assist resource companies with this issue entails building a suite of custom-built interactive models that combine to provide both a training and simulation framework to aid the decision-making process. Integration of process parameter calculations with computational fluid dynamic and 3D models can provide a powerful and effective base for the ongoing capture of metallurgical plant performance prediction and rapid knowledge transfer to newly assigned staff.
                  This paper examines one component that could be considered the most critical in both plant design and operating practice. As more complex ores are being processed, an increased variety of mineral phases are being presented to extractive metallurgical unit operations in a given plant. The advent of automated mineralogical instruments is making large amounts of quantitative mineralogical data more readily available to the operator. Whilst a range of graphic and tabular reporting formats are often available, translation of this important information into the world of practical extractive metallurgical decision-making can require time and other resources that may not be readily available to operators focused on maintaining throughput and maintenance schedules.
                  Routes for the integration of quantitative mineralogical data with process parameter calculations are considered, with the emphasis on providing simple yet effective practical models for specific extractive metallurgical applications. Case studies considered include: (i) variability in levels of gravity-recoverable gold in the mineral types at a gold plant, (ii) complex distribution of reactive sulfides and cyanide-soluble copper at a gold–copper plant and (iii) impact of ore types on acid consumption and other performance factors at a nickel laterite high-pressure acid leach plant.Whilst automated control systems are becoming standard additions to modern metallurgical process plants, it is seldom that they integrate any more than parameter setpoint control loops and interlocks into a distributed control system (DCS). This control setpoint is generally established manually, after consideration by process staff of the mine plan, current feed and process water characteristics, as well as other softer issues. Many current operations, however, suffer from the effects of rapid staff turnover coupled with a general under-availability of skilled personnel in the required metallurgical and process areas. The result can be a poorly controlled operation that sidesteps important metallurgical setpoint change decisions, opting instead for a simple maximization of throughput or feed grade, resulting in high soluble or insoluble losses, operating costs and other operational inefficiencies that ultimately reflect on the bottom line, safety or environmental impacts. Once the plant has reached the commissioning stage, slow ramp-up to design setpoints and targets has often been flagged as a problem area, particularly for more complex hydrometallurgical circuits ( This paper is the second in a series directed at the concept of a virtual metallurgical plant as one tool that may be useful in addressing these issues. In the first paper ( Several tools are available for consideration as part of an integrated suite that can be deployed in tackling the three case studies cited. While there are undoubtedly various other models, software packages and instrumented methods that may have merit, the current focus is on assessing the principle rather than the optimal solution; hence, the examples will tend to be simple rather than complex, albeit workable solutions. Several approaches are available for obtaining quantitative mineralogical data for input into process models and operations strategy. Optical microscopy with modal analysis, while often time consuming, can provide quantitative data with little more than an optical microscope. X-ray diffractometry (XRD) in combination with multi-element chemical analysis is useful in setting up a basis for plant streams, provided that the bulk mineralogy is not too variable. Additionally, there are a number of more instrumented methods available. QEMSCAN analysis can be carried out in particle mineralogical analysis (PMA), bulk mineralogical analysis (BMA) and trace mineral search (TMS) modes ( While basic metallurgical mass and elemental balancing is a fundamental tool for the process metallurgist, working plant balances are typically the latest version of an organically growing spreadsheet entity that is extended and revised with each passing metallurgist. These tools are nonetheless critical and useful for plant operation. Commercially available mass-balancing software is available but is typically used mainly by engineering contracting companies and research and development departments. Process models are typically applied by the former to determine elemental, mass and flow departments for frozen flowsheets at the design stage; it is comparatively rare for these to be applied in a fully predictive form, particularly for use on operating plants. A further set of tools that are available in a quest for a virtual metallurgical plant are of the visualization variety. Computational fluid dynamic (CFD) calculations can be useful at the design stage but are often expensive, requiring extensive calculational power to provide accurate velocity, pressure and coordinate data, resulting in a still shot or a small number of frames depicting some application. 3D modelling and animation, combined with more visual fluid and particle flow simulation can be a powerful tool to depict the effect of process setpoint changes on the mixing and solid suspension characteristics within an autoclave, for example. The following section briefly outlines the major features of applicability of the methodology to a selected three case studies. Whilst other examples could be considered more dramatic, these are drawn from the experience of the author as real everyday issues at operating plants. They comprise examples of a physical separation process, an atmospheric leach/recovery process, and an autoclave leach process. This example covers application of the concept under consideration to a gravity circuit. The module could be equally applied to consideration of another single unit operation that entails separation of a value component that is present in two or more ore types, one of which presents a significantly greater degree of value recovery than the other. A schematic process flowsheet of a gold plant with different generic sulfide mineral types is shown in This example considers a gold plant with two basic sulfide ore types, primarily dioritic (D) and banded ironstone formation (BIF), together making up some 80% of the ore blend as hard sulfide, with the remaining 20% as soft oxide. Indicative mineralogical compositions of the gravity concentrate, leach feed and CIL tail are shown in An opportunity exists with this type of circuit to utilize geological and mineralogical data to provide mill feed D:BIF blends that result in more consistent gravity and CIL feed grades. Run-of-mine (ROM) practice is to blend only according to grade and bulk ore type (hard, fresh sulfide ore or soft, oxide ore). Whilst one may be tempted to also blend in terms of gross sulfide/oxide components, in reality the mill is of fixed throughput capacity and will generally be operating at maximum design capacity, if not higher, to maximize profits. Gross blending is typically driven by grade; assuming that the mill is designed to reduce the hard rock to a certain screen size (say, P80 of 75 Control of blend to maintain a consistent ratio of D:BIF sulfide will result in a more consistent gravity pull and hence, more consistent feed to CIL. Feeding a portion of feed directly to crusher instead of via the ROM pad may produce a tighter control on feed grade and ore type. This would result in more consistent feed to mill, thus optimizing mill retention time, as well as more consistent feed to the gravity circuit, resulting in more consistent feed to CIL. The net result will be lower reagent consumption and gold losses. The impact of feed grade fluctuations can be seen in Variability in ore feed is such that running the gravity-intensive leach-electrowinning circuit is potentially an expensive option when the feed is consistently low in GRG. Moreover, sporadic high-GRG pockets may flood the current circuit, resulting in gold losses as coarse particles that require longer leach residence time than is available. Knowledge of the current and past ore types, based on readily available mineralogical information, coupled with historical plant operating data, suggests that one of two optimized operational strategies may be deployed: (i) blending of ore types to produce a feed that is consistent in GRG and gold grade, resulting in good gravity gold recoveries and elimination of coarse gold spikes to CIL, or (ii) campaigning of different ore types, requiring switching the operation of the gravity circuit on and off, as required. The latter strategy is applicable to periods of lower overall GRG, to ensure that the circuit does not flood, while the former is more appropriate to consistently higher GRG intervals. The ultimate benefits of adopting such a strategy can be estimated on the basis of historical insoluble gold losses and gravity circuit operating costs. The appropriate calculations could be used to justify deployment of the appropriate systems and techniques. This second example covers application to a gold circuit with highly variable reactive sulfides as well as copper. In this case, the orebody is quite complex, further compounding the control and operability issues. A schematic process flowsheet of this type of gold plant is shown in Reactive sulfides in this example comprise mainly pyrrhotite (2.3%), with the much less reactive pyrite making up another ∼2.3%. Whilst copper mainly reports as chalcopyrite (∼1%) and is poorly leached, cyanide-soluble copper-bearing minerals other than chalcopyrite account for a small amount (∼0.02%) of the ore (see The high variability in both reactive sulfides and cyanide-soluble copper in this example results in: (i) high soluble gold losses, owing to copper co-adsorption on carbon under periods of poor cyanide dosing control ( Examples of typical plant variabilities in dissolved oxygen (DO) levels are illustrated in While in this example the complexity of the geological setting of the orebody makes it difficult to manage the mine plan, it is not inconceivable that automated mineralogical analysis of grade control samples may assist the operators in achieving a more consistent blend of pyrrhotitic ores, thus enabling tighter control of the leach circuit and avoiding spikes in oxygen demand that exceed supply, resulting in potential gold losses. Whilst copper phases other than chalcopyrite are relatively low level in the ore (∼200 The benefits of adopting such a strategy can be estimated on the basis of historical soluble and insoluble gold losses and cyanide consumption costs. Calculations again could be used to justify deployment of the appropriate systems and techniques to effect better control on the process. This final example covers application to a nickel laterite HPAL circuit with variable acid-consuming minerals. Advance knowledge of this parameter may result in tighter blending of constituent ores, enabling safer and stabler operation of the HPAL process. Greater consistency of feed may conceivably also result in improved metal extractions to pregnant leach solution (PLS) and lower acid consumptions. A schematic process flowsheet of a typical nickel laterite HPAL circuit is shown in Lateritic nickel is typically present as saprolitic and limonitic ore types. Saprolites generally contain higher magnesium and carbonate levels, resulting in higher acid demands than limonites, illustrated in The major factor of interest in determining metal extraction efficiencies and acid consumptions lies in the mineralogy of the feed blend. Other factors, such as autoclave residence time requirements, and amenability to atmospheric leaching, are also important considerations. While in this instance silicon levels are similar for both ore types, variations in gangue mineralogy are of importance in beneficiation upgrading. Moreover, these variations will have an impact on leach extractions and acid consumptions (which can be critical for the economic viability of these plants). Other factors include iron levels, which impact both on these issues and on the downstream purification circuits. Of critical importance also is the presence of clays and other minerals that may affect rheological and solid/liquid separation properties of the slurries. In some cases the different ore types are to some degree visually discernable; however advance knowledge of the ore characteristics would be of benefit to blending and operation throughout the circuit. Acid requirement can be calculated based on either the chemical assay or mineralogical analysis; other factors discussed above may require automated mineralogical analysis to provide a useful indicator of expected plant performance in these areas. The eventual benefits of adopting such a strategy can be estimated on the basis of historical insoluble nickel and cobalt losses and acid consumption costs. Further hidden costs lie in the additional neutralizing agent that must be added for the excess acid addition beyond the stoichiometric requirement, to achieve the set residual free acid. Once again, simple calculations could be used to justify deployment of the appropriate systems and techniques to better control the blending and the process itself, with tangible economic, safety and potentially environmental benefits. The potential benefit of ‘virtual plant’ mineralogical-based process simulation is shown for three operational-level applications.    While in some cases the different ore types are to some degree visually discernable, advance knowledge of the ore characteristics would be of benefit to blending and operation, resulting in stabilization throughout the circuit, and potentially higher extraction efficiencies with lower reagent consumptions. The author wishes to acknowledge the various minesite and plant personnel with whom discussions have been held regarding specific and general operational and process strategies and criteria. While the specific examples used in the case studies are held anonymous to respect client confidentiality individuals involved with these sites are particularly thanked. The numerous discussions with various mineralogists, employing both conventional and automated techniques, are gratefully acknowledged; Alan Butcher of Intellection Pty Ltd is particularly thanked for detailed discussions on the QEMSCAN work done for some of the case studies. The author is grateful to Carol Adams for the 3D modelling and animation components used in the presentation.