Vast quantities of logging residue are left behind on clearcut areas. Given the suitable transportation distance, environmental and economic circumstances, they provide a possible alternative for fossil fuels. However, distribution of residual biomass over large areas during the logging operation and trampling by machines hinders the recovery. The recovery enhancing effect of three single-grip harvester work techniques on the productivity of logging residue recovery for energy was studied. Forwarder productivity, distribution of effective work time, forwarding distance, load size and the residue yield were studied.
                  A heavy forwarder with an enlarged 22m3 load space was used. The average load size was 9 tonnes. More than 50% of the forwarder's work time was spent on loading the residues. The recovery output of the trampled residues from the strip road after a conventional harvesting method was 11.4t/E0-h for a 9 tonnes load and a 300m transportation distance. In contrast, the single-grip harvester methods that aimed at the post-logging residue recovery increased the recovery output to 12.0–13.3t/E0-h. The load size was a more significant factor than the forwarding distance in terms of machine productivity. The yield of residue recovery after the conventional roundwood harvesting method was 58.4% and from 66.8% to 78.7% for the alternative single-grip-harvester methods.Ratification of the Kyoto Agreement is forcing nations to convert away from the use of fossil fuels for energy. This task can be tackled by decreasing fuel consumption by converting into more effective technology or replacing fossil fuels with renewable or nuclear energy. Renewable fuels are biomass based, or wind and solar powers. There are many sources of both land and aquatic biomass. Forestry includes three alternative biomass sources for energy production. These are mill residues, harvesting residues and cultivated short rotation woody crops. This paper deals with residues from conventional clearcut operations. The above ground residues include crown mass, unmerchantable stem sections and small diameter understory trees. This material contains wood, bark and considerable quantities of nutrient-rich needles. When the cut-to-length method is the chosen harvesting method, the residues are left on the strip roads to increase ground bearing capacity. However, when the aim is to recover the residual biomass for energy the single-grip-harvester method should be altered in such a manner that the residues are piled along the strip road for easy recovery. Residue recovery from clearcut areas was studied intensively in joint Nordic studies already in 1970 and 1980. At the time, the main issue was residue collection and recovery after manual final felling Utilization of this biomass by combustion or other forms of conversion presumes contaminant free material. The prerequisite of the recovery is a clean, soil free residual biomass that is well positioned along the strip road for easy grasping, and not driven over by heavy machinery. The aim of this study was to find out how (a) forwarder productivity in residue recovery and (b) residue yield are affected by the modification of a single-grip harvester work method, and (c) what effect forwarding distance and load size have on forwarding productivity. The study area was a 11.0 M1, felling and delimbing on one side of the strip road, M2, felling and delimbing on both sides of the strip road, MC, felling and delimbing in a conventional manner. MC, the conventional method, is the most commonly used single-grip harvester method where felling is done from one side of the machine, and delimbing and bucking take place in front of the machine over the strip road. The residues accumulate on the strip road and are eventually compressed by machine wheels ( Residue recovery was carried out with a heavy Kockums 850 forwarder. Its nominal weight was 13,500 The mass of each residue load was measured at the landing with a grapple scale model Kajaani-60 provided by Ponsse Oy of Finland. The scale was positioned between the boom and the grapple and is connected to the central measuring unit located in the operator cabin via a 12.5 Five moisture samples were taken from each load. They were randomly taken using a chain saw after unloading the material at the landing. Each sample contained branch wood, branch bark and needle matter. A section from the top of the stem was included in every fifth sample. A total of 450 samples weighing 250–500 The yield of residue removal was studied by making a survey of the site after the residue recovery. This was carried out by placing 2×2 Time and productivity studies were carried out to find out the effect of single-grip harvester work method on the forwarder productivity of logging residue recovery. The work study data are composed of 65 effective machine hours (E The effective work time of the forwarder was divided into sub-times in a following manner:   Boom out: From the moment the boom starts to move to the moment it starts to grasp the residue pile. Grasping the residue: From the moment the grapple starts to close to the moment the boom starts to move towards the load space. This phase might include several grasps. Boom in: From the moment the boom starts to move to the moment the grapple is opened or the boom is resting in a transportation position. This phase includes the time spent placing the grapple contents in the load space. Driving when loading: Driving time from the moment the boom is in a transportation position until another ‘boom out’-phase (2a).   The share of the loading phase was more than 50% for each of the three work methods (  There is a very limited amount of published data on the division of work time in residue forwarding from a post-single-grip harvester operation. Laitila et al. Harvesting method, forwarding distance, load weight, driving speed and the residue density are among the major factors affecting forwarding productivity. The average driving speed when driving empty was recorded at 3.61 and 2.64 This result could be explained by the variability in the load size. Unlike normal roundwood loads, which are rather uniform in size, the weight of residue loads varied from 4 to 12 tonnes and the average was 9 tonnes, the average size being greater than in other studies reviewed. In similar conditions in Sweden Brunberg This result has to be interpreted in such a manner that the size of load space and the carrying capacity of the forwarder is of vital importance when forwarding logging residues. This has previously been shown by simulation trials In the next analysis two independent variables, Considering the average load weight of 9 tonnes and a 300 The productivity of the loading phase was also analyzed separately as harvesting method is thought to have a specific impact on it. The average weight of a grapple load was for M1, M2 and MC, respectively, 236, 226 and 220 In spite of the fact that the statistical analysis did not show significant difference in the volumes recovered at loading points, the loading productivity was significantly more effective from the bigger piles created by the alternative harvesting methods M1 and M2 ( When contemplating the overall productivity of forwarding, it is also important to consider the residue yield from a given land area. Accumulation of residual biomass in integrated harvesting operations is of key importance when planning recovery. The single-grip harvester work method had a statistically significant effect on the output of different stages of residue recovery. Grasping, collection phase and the whole procurement operation were more effective when the harvester operator had used either one of the two alternative methods where residues are accumulated in heaps along the strip road. Also the yield rates were improved by the alternative methods. Furthermore, load size proved to be a significant variable when calculating forwarding productivity. It can be increased by increasing load space or by loading the residues in a more compact way. Positioning the long tops perpendicular to the load space will not only balance the load but will also make it possible to extend the load outside the nominal load space.