Cyanide used as a depressant for pyrite in the flotation of chalcopyrite from a polymetallic ore was found to result in flotation (activation) of sphalerite. This was thought to be due to leaching of copper ions from chalcopyrite by the cyanide. Copper leached from specimen chalcopyrite and from a Cu-ore sample treated with cyanide was determined for a variety of conditions. A significant increase in Cu release at elevated pulp potential is shown which also enhanced uptake of Cu ions by sphalerite. Activation, it is suggested, is related to release of copper as cuprocyanide and subsequent oxidation to cupric cyanide, which supplies the Cu2+ ions.In the selective flotation of chalcopyrite from a polymetallic ore, cyanide is sometimes used to depress pyrite. A plant in Canada observed that this practice often led to increased deportment of sphalerite in the chalcopyrite concentrate. The extent of inadvertent flotation of sphalerite appeared to reduce at lower pulp potentials. Similar observations were reported nearly 50 High grade chalcopyrite (Cp) and sphalerite (Sp) specimens from Ward’s establishment were used for basic experiments. The chalcopyrite analyzed (by AA) 31% Cu and 28% Fe, the sphalerite 65% Zn. An ore sample from Agnico-Eagle’s Laronde mine (Quebec, Canada) was ground to isolate a −74 Experiments were performed with the specimen Cp sample (‘basic tests’) and ore. An exact weight of sample was mixed with the chosen amount of cyanide in a 100 One set of measurements was made using a synthetic solution prepared by mixing cupric sulphate with stoichiometric amount of sodium cyanide to form cuprocyanide, – [Cu(CN) The two media types were immersed in cupric sulphate solution, 50 Tests used a 50 For a 45–74 For the 45–74  The results for synthetic cyanide solution and leach extract are given in There was an exchange of Cu with Fe in the case of copper sulphate solution, indicative of cementation, but there was no significant exchange with the leach extract (not shown). The results ( The findings show that activation of sphalerite in polymetallic ores treated with cyanide could result from some leaching of Cu from chalcopyrite. Leaching intially produces cuprocyanide ions: If the potential is raised, for example by aeration, cuprocyanide is oxidized to cupric cyanide: The quantity of Cu ion produced from the ore is higher compared to the specimen Cp. Apart from the oxidation products providing a source, pyrite in the ore can promote chalcopyrite oxidation through galvanic interaction.  The results have implications for flotation: when cyanide is used, it could inadvertently activate sphalerite via Cu ions leached from chalcopyrite. Other Cu-minerals, chalcocite, bornite and covellite, may be even more susceptible. The reaction, however, is sensitive to pulp potential. Under conditions where the pulp potential is sufficiently negative (<−400 The results show that when cyanide is used as depressant in a polymetallic ore, it could lead to inadvertent activation of sphalerite by cupric ions produced by the action of cyanide on copper minerals. The action can be suppressed by maintaining cathodic potential using a reducing agent to prevent oxidation of the Cu(I) complex (cuprocyanide) to the Cu(II) complex (cupricyanide). This work was done under NSERC-CRD grant with support from the following sponsors: Teck, Vale, Xstrata Process Support, Barrick, Agnico-Eagle, Corem, SGS Lakefield, Flottec. The authors thank Agnico-Eagle Mines (Laronde operations) for initiating the project, providing material samples and much useful discussion.