The theoretical formulas were firstly derived to quantitatively assess the relative velocity around a circular tunnel induced by blasting loads, and the influence of wavelength-to-tunnel-diameter ratio (λ/D) on the amplification effect of vibration velocity was theoretically investigated in detail. A two-dimensional numerical model was then established by the discrete element code PFC2D to further investigate how the λ/D ratio and the in situ stress (including the lateral pressure coefficient and the stress level) influence the failure mode of underground tunnels subjected to blasting loads. The theoretical results reveal that the relative velocity in the incident side of the tunnel decreases with the increase of λ/D ratio, while the relative velocity in the shadow side increases as the λ/D ratio increases. When the λ/D ratio is larger than 20, the amplification effect of vibration velocity becomes negligible, and the loading condition of whole tunnel can be viewed as “quasi-static” loading. The numerical simulation results indicate that the λ/D ratio has a large effect on the failure mode of underground tunnels subjected to blasting loads. For the λ/D ratios smaller than 1, the blasting load mainly induces spalling crack in the incident side of the tunnel. For the λ/D ratios larger than 2, the dynamic failures mainly emerge in the roof and floor of the tunnel. The blasting load with larger amplitude can induce larger damage zone in tunnel surrounding rock. In addition, the spalling crack in the incident side of the tunnel shortens gradually with the increase of lateral pressure coefficient and buried depth of the tunnel, while the damage zone in the roof and floor of the tunnel enlarges with the increase of lateral pressure coefficient and buried depth of the tunnel.The drill and blast (D&B) method is still a common and economic excavation technique of rock mass in tunneling, hydropower and mining engineering due to its adaptability to different geological conditions. The dynamic response and failure mechanism of underground tunnels subjected to blasting loads have been extensively studied by various researchers with the methods of field test, theoretical analysis and numerical simulation. Field blast tests are usually carried out to study the dynamic response of underground tunnels and caves under blast-induced vibration. For example, Singh In theoretical studies on dynamic response of tunnels under blasting stress wave, the blasting-induced stress wave was usually considered as a plan P wave. Thus, the dynamic response of tunnels subjected to blasting stress waves can be simplified as a plane problem of the dynamic response around a hole induced by P wave incidence. The theoretical analysis of dynamic response of a circular cavity subjected to plane waves can be date back to 1960s. Baron and Mathews In recent years, with the rapid development of computer technology, numerical simulation has become an effective and economic method for investigating the dynamic response of underground tunnels under blasting loads. Yu et al. The dynamic response of underground tunnels under blasting loads is associated with various factors such as tunnel dimension, in situ stress, physical properties of rock mass and waveform of blasting stress wave, and is generally influenced by several factors simultaneously. In this study, the unsupported circular tunnel was considered to investigate the influence of In this study, an infinitely long circular tunnel locating in the infinite rock mass was considered in theoretical analysis, and it is assumed that the rock mass is linearly elastic, homogenous and isotropic. A plane P wave propagates along the direction perpendicular to the tunnel axial, so the problem can be approximately regarded as a plane strain case, as show in According to the wave function expansion method, a plane harmonic P wave propagating along the positive direction of When an incident plane P wave impinges on a circular tunnel, there are two types of waves reflected from the tunnel boundary. One is the reflected P wave and the other is the reflected SV wave, and they can be expressed as: Thus the total wave in the rock mass can be obtained by adding the reflected wave to the incident wave: The stresses and displacements in rock mass can be obtained in terms of displacement potentials of total waves: The velocities in rock mass can be obtained by taking the derivative of the displacement with respect to time: The boundary condition at When an incident P wave propagates in the intact rock mass without tunnel, the stress intensity of the P wave in the propagation direction is given by According to Wang and Cai, In the model, time begins when the incident wave arrives at the tunnel boundary (i.e., time is zero at For any aperiodic input function In this section, we are mainly concerned about the vibration velocity around a circular tunnel, and then the frequency response part of Eqs. When the input For a causal function, the transient response can be expressed alternatively in terms of sine or cosine transforms, thus the impulse response can be expressed as: Then the response induced by a Heaviside step input can be obtained from the integral of the impulse response: According to the Duhamel integral, the response due to an arbitrary input function After integrating by parts, we obtain: In this study, we focus on the transient response induced by blasting stress wave, thus the input function can be described as: When When When Theoretically, the vibration velocity around a circular tunnel can be determined by using Eq. In this study, the physical properties of rock mass in the Kaiyang Phosphate Mine in China were adopted to investigate the dynamic vibration velocity around tunnel boundary, and the density, Yong's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the rock mass are 2750 kg/m The peak value of relative velocity ( In the above analysis, the The influence of wavelength-to-tunnel-diameter ratio on dynamic vibration velocity of a circular tunnel subjected to blasting loads has been investigated in terms of theoretical formulas in above section. However, only the dynamic part was taken into consideration when deriving the theoretical formulas, the underground tunnel is actually subjected to the coupled static and dynamic loads during blasting stress wave incidence. Moreover, the rock mass was regarded as the ideal elastic material in theoretical calculation, in which no damage can be generated. In practice, the dynamic failures may occur in the surrounding rock of existing tunnels under blasting loads. In this section, a two-dimensional numerical simulation model established by the particle flow code (PFC) was employed to explore the failure characteristics of underground tunnels subjected to the coupled static in situ stress and dynamic blasting loads, and further to investigate the influence of wavelength-to-tunnel-diameter ratio on the failure mode of underground tunnels under blasting loads. There are two kinds of micro-bond models in PFC2D: the contact-bond model (CBM) and the parallel-bond model (PBM). The parallel-bond model is proved to be more realistic for modeling the rock-like material, in which the bonds may break in either tension or shearing with an associated reduction in stiffness. In the simulation, a two-dimensional numerical model with the geometry of 10 m × 10 m was established by PFC as shown in The in situ stress of the Kaiyang Phosphate Mine was employed in this simulation, and it is assumed that the tunnel was excavated along the direction of the maximum horizontal principal stress. Thus the in situ stress in this simulation is given by: In this simulation, the simulation process consists of two stages: in situ stress initialization and dynamic loading. In order to cope with different boundary conditions, a strip of particles at model boundary is identified as boundary particles as shown in In order to investigate the evolution law of stress and strain energy around the tunnel during dynamic loading process, three stress measurement circles (A1, A2 and A3) and an energy measurement circle (B) were set at the left sidewall and roof of the tunnel as shown in In this section, the dynamic failure processes of underground tunnels buried in 800 m ( As shown in In PFC model, the development of micro crack numbers of the model during failure process can be obtained by using the embedded FISH function, which is presented in The numerical results in this section show that the When In this section, the combined effect of amplitude of blasting load and For Taking the case of  In this section, the underground tunnels buried in 800 m with different lateral pressure coefficients (i.e., For the cases of In order to interpret the influence of lateral pressure coefficient on the failure mode of the tunnel, The total micro crack numbers of the model under different lateral pressure coefficients are summarized in In this section, four buried depths of the tunnel (i.e., depth = 50, 500, 1000 and 1500 m) and four As shown in As shown in  In this study, the vibration velocity around tunnel boundary triggered by blasting loads can be determined by the theoretical formulas presented in In addition, the failure processes of underground tunnels triggered by blasting loads were modeled using the discrete element method. The numerical simulation results show that the wavelength-to-tunnel-diameter ratio can affect the failure mode of underground tunnels subjected to blasting loads. The blasting load with different wavelengths can induce different failure modes of underground tunnels. When the blasting stress wave with a short wavelength impinges on an underground tunnel, the tunnel boundary can be approximately regarded as the free boundary. Thus, the compressive incident stress wave is reflected from the “free boundary” as the tensile stress wave, leading to spalling failure in the incident side of the tunnel. On the contrary, the dynamic failures induced by the blasting stress wave with a long wavelength mainly emerge in roof and floor of the tunnel. It indicates that the blasting stress wave with short wavelength (for example, The numerical simulation results in In the numerical simulation, the tunnel was excavated before in situ stress initialization in order to avoid the excavation effect, and almost no micro crack was found in the model before blasting loads were applied to the model. It indicates that the rock mass can be approximately considered as an intact and isotropic medium in the simulation. In this regard, more elastic strain energy can be stored in the tunnel surrounding rock under in situ stress, which may lead to more violent rockburst occurring in the periphery of the tunnel under blasting loads. However, the excavation-induced damage zone (EDZ) will emerge around underground tunnels during tunnel excavation, especially for underground tunnels subjected to high levels of in situ stress. The intrinsic properties of the rock may have a significant effect on dynamic responses of underground tunnels under blasting loads. In this study, the physical properties of rock mass in the Kaiyang Phosphate Mine were used as a typical hard rock case to study the dynamic response of underground tunnels under blasting loads. In this case, the hard rock tends to remain intact with large modulus and can store a large amount of elastic strain energy in the tunnel surrounding rock under in situ stress. Once the failure was triggered by blasting stress wave, the dramatic rockburst will occur around the tunnel with massive elastic strain energy release. In addition, the blasting stress wave propagating in hard rock attenuates less due to the fewer fractures and smaller damping effect, especially for the blasting stress wave with longer wavelength, thus inducing larger damage zone in tunnel surrounding rock. However, the hard rock with higher strength can resist more strong impact unless the tunnel was under high levels of in situ stress. As for the soft rock, the severe rockburst is hard to occur around the tunnel due to the low levels of modulus. In general, the fractured soft rock has a larger damping effect than the intact hard rock, so the blasting stress wave propagating in soft rock attenuates more, and more blasting energy is absorbed during propagation process, thus inducing smaller dynamic responses around underground tunnels. However, the tunnel excavation in soft rock is more likely to induce damaged zone and large deformation due to the low strength of soft rock. It means that the influence of the intrinsic properties of rock on dynamic response of underground tunnels under basting stress wave has two sides. In our future study, we will take the EDZ and the intrinsic properties of the rock into account, and consider the damping effect of different rock type on the propagation process of blasting stress wave with different wavelengths, in order to further investigate the dynamic responses of underground tunnels under blasting loads. In this study, the theoretical analysis based on elastodynamics and the numerical simulations implemented in PFC2D were carried out to investigate the influence of wavelength-to-tunnel-diameter ratio ( Theoretical formulas for relative velocity around a circular tunnel boundary were obtained to explore the amplification effect of vibration velocity under different Numerical simulation results show that the The in situ stress can affect the failure characteristics of underground tunnels under blasting loads. The spalling crack in the incident side of the tunnel shortens gradually with the increase of lateral pressure coefficient and buried depth of the tunnel, while the damage zone in the roof and floor expands gradually with the increase of lateral pressure coefficient and buried depth of the tunnel. The increase of lateral pressure coefficient or buried depth of the tunnel does not always cause more damage to the underground tunnel, which sometimes can restrain the occurrence of spalling crack and cause less damage to the tunnel surrounding rock. This work was financially supported by the