A desktop type batch reverse jig and prototype bench scale continuous reverse jig were designed by installing a top screen to the chamber of the RETAC jig. Shredded plastics of polypropylene (specific density 0.91) and high density polyethylene (specific density 0.96) were used for the tests and operating conditions were investigated using a desktop type batch jig. Waveform and screen design affected the separation results. Wettability control of feed sample is also important and 100% separation was achieved for the top and bottom layer products. The prototype bench scale continuous jig could obtain a high grade product, 99% pure as a bottom product.The TACUB jig (Takakuwa air chamber under bed) has been developed by professor emeritus Takakuwa of Hokkaido University To separate plastics lighter than water, Plastics generated from a waste plastic treatment plant, Shineikasei Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, were used for the reverse jig tests. Polypropylene (PP, specific gravity 0.91) and high density polyethylene (HDPE, specific gravity 0.96) of waste containers were crushed by a cutting mill, Orient mill VH16, Seishin enterprise Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan. Crushed samples of PP and HDPE were sieved at 2.80, 4.75, and 8.00 Equal settling ratios and concentration criterion for predicting jigging difficulty with conventional jigs are used, since it is difficult to define and calculate the settling velocity of the particles at the jig separation. When the equal settling ratio is above 1.58 (in laminar flow) or the concentration criterion is greater than 2.5 (in turbulent flow), gravity separation has been shown to be relatively simple The concentration criterion of the samples (specific gravity 0.91 and 0.96) is 2.25, this value is smaller than 2.5, and suggests that separation is not very easy. Reverse jig tests were carried out under several conditions and after the jig tests the product was divided into six fractions from top to bottom (top layer: 1) and the grade was determined by hand picking. The desktop type batch reverse jig was modified by installing a top screen in the chamber of a desktop type batch RETAC jig, R&E Co., Ltd., Hokkaido, Japan. Reverse jig tests were carried out under various displacements and frequencies and The PP grade of the top layer in Wettability of the samples affects the wet separation results. The authors have reported that reagent addition such as AOT (diisooctyl sodium sulfosuccinate) decreases surface tension of solutions and plastic samples immerse in the solutions, since an increase in the cosθ of a sample is caused by a decrease in the surface tension of the solutions Reverse jig tests (displacement 15 A prototype of the bench scale continuous reverse jig was manufactured by modifying a continuous type RETAC jig, R&E Co., Ltd., Hokkaido, Japan, and a top screen, metal mesh with 1 Plastics crushed by a cutting mill, Orient mill VH16, Seishin Enterprise Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan, were used for the tests and Particles are fed under the top screen and the thickness of the particle layer was 10 Shredded PP and HDPE plastics, concentration criterion 2.25, were used for the separation tests and operating conditions were investigated using a desktop type batch jig. Waveform and screen design affected the separation results. Wettability control of the feed sample is also important, with these conditions at optimum values, product grades of 100% were obtained for the top and bottom layer products. The prototype bench scale continuous jig could obtain the high grade of the product of 99% as the underflow product. We express our gratitude to Shineikasei Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan for assistance with this research.