A new technology was developed to recover multiple valuable elements in the spent Al2O3-based catalyst by X-ray phase analysis and exploratory experiments. The experiment results showed: In the condition of roasting temperature of 750°C and roasting time of 30min, mol ratio of Na2O: Al2O3 1.2, the leaching rate of alumina, vanadium and molybdenum in the spent catalyst is 97.2%, 95.8% and 98.9%, respectively. Vanadium and molybdenum in sodium aluminate solution can be recovered by barium hydroxide and barium aluminate, the precipitation rate of vanadium and molybdenum is 94.8% and 92.6%. Al(OH)3 is prepared from sodium aluminate solution with carbonation decomposition process, and the purity of Al2O3 is 99.9% after calcinations, the recovery of alumina can reach 90.6% in the whole process. The Ni–Co concentrate was leached by sulfuric acid, a nickel recovery of 98.2% and over 98.5% cobalt recovery was obtained respectively under the experimental condition of 30% (w/w) H2SO4, 80°C, reaction time 4h, liquid:solid ratio (8:1) by weight, stirring rate of 800rpm.Spent catalysts contribute a significant amount of the solid wastes generated in the petrochemical industry ( During the past decade, considerable research was devoted to the comprehensive utilization of spent Al Spent catalyst (Ni 4.77%, Co 0.35%, Mo 0.48%, V 0.55%, Al Mixing the catalyst and alkali in a certain proportion and then put the mixture in a furnace, roasting it and then dissolve it in water, this leads to the formation of sodium aluminate solution, filter the solution. The Ni–Co concentrate after filtering is leached with the sulfuric acid; the impurity of V and Mo in sodium aluminate solution is recovered by barium hydroxide and barium aluminate, and then Al(OH) Mixing spent catalyst with alkali and roasting it at high temperature, vanadium, molybdenum and nickel turn into the oxide at first, and then these metal oxides react with alkali. In this process, sodium hydroxide was chosen to react with spent catalyst at high temperature because the main form of alumina in catalyst is alpha-Al After roasting with alkali at high temperature, vanadium and molybdenum are dissolved in sodium aluminate solution in the dissolving process. In order to get high quality product of alumina, the impurity of V and Mo in sodium aluminate solution must be removed. Considering the low solubility of BaMoO After the recovery of V and Mo by precipitation, the sodium aluminate solution was purified, the carbonation decomposition process was applied to the production of Al(OH) The Ni–Co concentrate is a kind of metallurgical raw materials with high content of nickel and cobalt (Ni: 30.15%, Co: 2.21%). In each leaching experiment, 10 According to the results of exploratory experiments, the suitable leaching condition was 30% (w/w) H The catalyst wastes have rapidly been increasing worldwide. Recovering of valuable elements of spent catalyst became an unavoidable task not only for lowering the catalyst cost but also for reducing the catalyst waste to prevent the environmental pollution. Based on results obtained from the current work, the following conclusions are made: By this novel process, the purity of alumina is 99.9% produced with carbonation decomposition process, the recovery of alumina can reach 90.6% in the whole process. Under the suitable condition, with barium hydroxide and barium aluminate, the precipitation rate of vanadium and molybdenum is 94.8% and 92.6%, the precipitate can be sold as chemical product or further deep-processed. The Ni–Co concentrate was leached by sulfuric acid, a nickel recovery of 98.2% and over 98.5% cobalt recovery was obtained respectively under the experimental condition of 30% (w/w) H