Wagyu beef products are marketed as luxury goods to discerning consumers and the lipid content and composition are important drivers of wagyu product value. Wagyu beef is an extensively marbled meat product, well characterised for its tenderness and flavour. In New Zealand, pasture-fed Wagyu-dairy beef production is increasing to meet demand for ultra-premium meat products. Important for these characteristics is the composition of lipid species and their distribution across the carcass. The aim of this study was to analyse the distribution of fatty acids and phospholipids in 26 table cuts, nine co-products and three fat deposits of carcasses from New Zealand pasture-fed Wagyu-dairy cross beef carcasses (n = 5). Phospholipid and fatty acid levels varied across different cuts of the carcass, but typically cuts with high levels of phospholipids also had high levels of omega-3 fatty acids and low levels of saturated fatty acids. This work will be used in the future to examine the potential health aspects of pasture-fed Wagyu beef.Red meat is a major component of many diets and offers a myriad of highly desired consumer attributes such as texture, taste, flavour and aroma. Particularly well regarded for its culinary properties is Wagyu beef. Wagyu are a cattle breed with genetic predisposition to intense marbling, comprising white flecks of adipose tissue (intra-muscular fat) between the bundles of muscle fibres in the skeletal muscles. Typically Wagyu cattle finished for beef are fed a high-energy grain-based diet for the majority of their lives. It is the high degree of marbling resulting from a grain-based diet that makes this breed so recognisable to the consumer and distinctive in taste. However, very little is known about the nutritional value of grass-fed Wagyu beef. One strategy developed in New Zealand has been the breeding of Wagyu-dairy cross cattle. This enables the development of a unique beef product with marbling from the Wagyu genetics, while ensuring that the hybrid cattle can thrive in an extensive production system on a pasture-based diet. It is well established that both genetics and diet, influence the extent and type of lipids deposited in the carcass. The interest in lipids extends beyond eating quality traits, with increasing interest in the role of meat-derived lipids for human health. Whilst it is well established that seafood, including fish species, provide the highest levels of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids, its overall consumption is low ( In addition to these health benefits, there is an increasing need among meat producers and processors to increase utilisation and increase the value of the carcass ( The lipid composition of a beef carcass includes the well-known major fatty acids species (saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids). However, extending beyond this there are many additional phospholipids that contribute to the taste and aroma of meat. Phospholipids are typically cellular membrane lipids, including those surrounding muscle fibres. They are mainly divided into glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids ( Finishing systems (e.g., pasture vs. high grain/concentrates) are known to affect the lipid composition of beef muscles and co-products ( Five commercially-sourced Wagyu-dairy cross beef carcasses (average carcass weight 291 ± 21 kg) were processed into 38 components ( Brain tissue and bone marrow were cut into 4–5 mm cubes, vacuum packaged then frozen. Stored samples were then removed from freezer, dipped into liquid nitrogen and shattered into powder for analysis using a mortar and pestle. For the three fat samples, a domestic blender infused with liquid CO Lipids were extracted using pressurized liquid extraction (Dionex ASE 350 – Thermo Scientific) as described previously ( For liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), 5 μL of phospholipid purified extract was diluted with 95 μL of solvent (methanol:chloroform 2:1) containing 4 μg/mL of 1-palmitoyl(D31)-2-oleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphatidylcholine (Avanti Polar Lipids- Alabaster- AL-USA) as an internal standard. LC-MS separation of phospholipids was performed on an Shimadzu Nexera ×2 HPLC system equipped with a C-8 column (150 mm, 2.1 mm, 3 mm, Shimadzu), using the same conditions described previously ( Fatty acid concentrations were measured using the method described previously ( Data were analysed using a linear mixed model, using cut/co-product as the fixed effect and carcass as the random effect in GenStat (2015; Version 18.1.0.17005). In order to account for phospholipids or fatty acid concentrations that were below detection limits or present at relatively low concentrations, all data were Log Transformed. All averages were back calculated from Log, and are presented on a fresh weight basis. Differences between multiple-means were determined by the Fisher's protected least significant difference test at P < 0.05 in GenStat. Concentrations of phospholipids in the Wagyu-cross carcass are shown in The concentration of PC differed between cuts with brain (8300 μg/g) and liver (7223 μg/g) having the highest levels. Phosphatidylcholine was lowest in tongue (59 μg/g) and navel end brisket (230 μg/g). Phosphatidylethanolamine was generally the second most abundant phospholipid measured, averaging 25% of total phospholipids. Its concentrations were highest in brain (2426 μg/g) and heart (1164 μg/g) and lowest in boneless 1 rib (161 μg/g) and navel end brisket (95 μg/g). On average, PI, PS and SM made up 6–11% of phospholipids. PI was most abundant in hind shank (414 μg/g) and boneless inside skirt (339 μg/g) and lowest in navel end brisket (24 μg/g) and spleen (15 μg/g). Phosphatidylinositol was found in very low concentrations in the brain. Phosphatidylserine was highest in brain (954 μg/g) and spleen (311 μg/g) and lowest in deckle pieces (39 μg/g) and T65 trim (51 μg/g). Phosphatidylserine was detected in very low concentrations in boneless 1 rib and navel end brisket. Sphingomyelin was abundant in brain (5282 μg/g) and lung (1005 μg/g) and lowest in deckle pieces (95 μg/g) and tongue (43 μg/g). The relative abundance of each molecular species of phospholipid are shown in Individual saturated fatty acids ( The concentrations of saturated fatty acids in the Wagyu-cross carcasses are shown in Of the branched-chain fatty acids isoC17 was the dominant fatty acid found across all cuts of meat, with highest concentrations observed in the fat depots (c. 4 mg/g) and bone marrow (4.9 mg/g; Overall, C18:1n-9 was the dominant unsaturated fatty acid in the table cuts and C22:6n-3 the least prevalent ( C18:2n-6 and C18:3n-3 were the dominant PUFA observed in all cuts of the carcass ( This study found that there was a wide distribution of phospholipids and fatty acids across the pasture-fed Wagyu carcass. Generally, co-products had the highest levels of phospholipids and unsaturated fatty acids (including the long chain omega-3 fatty acids) and the lowest levels of saturated fatty acids. In contrast, primal cuts (striploin, tenderloin and cube roll) had lowest levels of complex lipids and higher levels of saturated fatty acids. Beef lipids arise as a consequence of microbial fermentation of plant material into short chain fatty acids and transformation of dietary lipids in the rumen and are highly influenced by the finishing diet of the animal; these processes have been reviewed recently ( While potentially mitigating health risk, the high levels of omega-3 fatty acids are unlikely to fully offset the potential downsides to what remains a relatively saturated source of dietary lipids. However, it is interesting to note that a study conducted by ( The fatty acid data presented in the current study were in agreement with other literature indicating a dominance of 16:0, C18:0 and 18:1c9 fatty acids in the muscle of Wagyu ( Fatty acid composition also differs between co-products ( Despite interest in the levels of fatty acids in meat on health, the appreciable quantities of phospholipids found in the carcass cuts, and their subsequent health benefits, have been almost completely ignored to date. Phospholipids play crucial roles in many aspects of human health, particularly in the cardiovascular system ( While the levels of phospholipids in beef have been reported on a number of occasions ( Legako et al., ( Storage time and temperature has been observed to affect the levels of phospholipids in beef ( The levels of phospholipids in beef co-products have only been reported on a few occasions to our knowledge (e.g. ( The levels of total phospholipid estimated in a 170 g serving of tenderloin, the table cut with the highest total phospholipid levels, from the current study are estimated to be approximately 495 mg/day. Other table cuts from grass-fed Wagyu-dairy cross beef, such as boneless inside skirt, boneless knuckle and hindshank, would provide around 500–640 mg phospholipids per day. A 100 g serving of liver would supply over 900 mg phospholipids per day. These levels, combined with the relatively high levels of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids may have the potential to reduce cholesterol levels in humans and this is of interest for future studies. Fatty acid composition of the phospholipids in beef muscle have been described previously ( Co-products such as liver, heart, lung, kidney and spleen had the highest levels of phospholipids (3000–9000 μg/g fresh weight) and long-chain omega-3 fatty acids (1.3–4.2 mg/g fresh weight). It is estimated that common table cuts such as tenderloin, boneless inside skirt, boneless knuckle and hindshank obtained from grass-fed Wagyu-dairy cross could contribute to the recommended daily intakes of omega-3 fatty acids, especially EPA and DPA. Additionally, while there are no defined requirements of dietary phospholipids, the levels of phospholipids in tenderloin, boneless inside skirt, boneless knuckle and hindshank from grass-fed Wagyu-dairy cross could contribute to an overall reduction in cholesterol, in line with previous studies in humans. This work will be used to direct research to examine the impact of diet (e.g. grass versus concentrate) on the composition of phospholipids in beef. Ultimately, as part of on-going research we aim to assess the impacts of beef-derived phospholipids on human health. This study was funded by a grant from