Orbital fractures occur less frequently in the pediatric population than in the adult population. Due to the elasticity of the bones that comprise the orbital floor it is not uncommon for the orbital floor to fracture and immediately self-reduce. This puts the muscles and soft tissues of the orbital floor at an increased risk of entrapment. There is no exact agreement in the literature as to the ideal timing of surgical intervention for these types of injuries. However, there are many surgeons who advise early intervention in the first few days of the injury. This article describes a case of a non-displaced orbital fracture with displacement of the inferior rectus into the maxillary sinus that was treated in the first 24h and resulted in an excellent outcome.Pediatric facial fractures are less common than in the adult population, accounting for 3–6% of all facial fractures. There are few facial fractures that require urgent surgical intervention. Pediatric orbital fractures can be one of them. A boy aged 8 years and 1 month was struck by a car while riding his bike. The patient's past medical history was significant for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The child was not wearing a helmet at the time of the traumatic event and there was no reported loss of consciousness. The patient was brought to the emergency department and was diagnosed with lower extremity fractures, left facial abrasions, and a left orbital fracture. The following day Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery was consulted for facial trauma evaluation. The patient had persistent nausea and vomiting that was unsuccessfully treated with ondansetron. The child also complained of severe left eye pain. On examination there was mild left peri-orbital swelling, the pupils were equally round and reactive to light, there was profound vision loss in the left eye, binocular diplopia, and restricted superior motility accompanied by severe pain. The patient was seen by ophthalmology and the decreased visual acuity in the left eye was attributed to traumatic optic neuropathy. Pain with superior movement of the left globe was suspicious for entrapment given the history of blunt facial trauma. Because of the severe eye pain, a retrobulbar hematoma was also considered on the differential diagnosis. This was however less likely, as there was no proptosis present. Computed tomography (CT) of the facial bones ( Children 7 years and younger are more likely to have orbital roof fractures than orbital floor fractures due to the protection of the floor from the thick sinus walls, larger cheek fat pads, and a smaller midface. In conclusion, in reviewing the literature many authors recommend early surgical intervention for children with trapdoor orbital floor fractures with signs and symptoms of entrapment. This report presents a case of a pediatric orbital fracture with inferior rectus muscle displacement into the maxillary sinus treated with immediate surgical intervention that had an excellent outcome with no restriction of extraocular movements and no diplopia. The author agrees that pediatric patients with trapdoor orbital fractures showing signs and symptoms of entrapment should have early surgical intervention to prevent ischemia of the inferior rectus and increase the chances of a positive outcome in eliminating diplopia and regaining full ocular motility. None. None declared. Not required.