Nucleation, growth and coalescence of micro-voids result in the fracture of materials. Most mathematical models neglect nucleation and introduce initial damage, assuming it as a material constant. However, the original damage, which is formed during material working, is a material constant. The initial damage is a model parameter and depends on the load. Apparently, the predictability of such a model is poor.
                  This paper made comparison and analysis of the four classical void growth models and showed their similarities. At the beginning of damage evolution, all the models follow a linear relationship in the form 
                        
                           
                              
                                 c
                              
                              
                                 ˙
                              
                           
                           =
                           kc
                        
                     , where c is the size of micro voids and k is a parameter which relates the material and loading condition. With the concept of statistical micro-damage and the assumption of uniform void radius for new voids, a damage evolution equation was deduced based on the above void growth model. With this equation the effects of nucleation and growth at the beginning of the damage stage on the whole process of damage evolution can be calculated. The transition time from the nucleation dominant phase to the growth dominant phase can be determined. When the transition time is applied to the damage failure model of ductile material proposed by Johnson, the initial damage (f
                     0), a model parameter in the original model, can also be determined. The results of the derived damage evolution equation agree well with the previous research results.Many experiments and metallographic observations for metals at ductile failure show that fracture in ductile materials generally results from the nucleation, growth and coalescence of micro-voids. In these three sequential stages, nucleation is the predominant process at the first stage of damage evolution. During the middle and the last stages of damage evolution, the effect of nucleation is relatively small and can be neglected when compared with void growth and coalescence. Void growth lasts the longest period of time and is therefore the most important of the three stages. Coalescence predominates the process in the last stage and is very short in time. In order to simplify development of mathematical models for failure of ductile materials, two parameters are introduced in most models, namely the initial damage ( From In the early stage of damage evolution, the distance between voids is relatively large and the interaction of voids can be ignored. Thus the statistical relation between different voids is independent. In such case, damage has little influence on the local stress. As a result, it may be easy to get an analytical solution. In this article, we will apply the theory of statistical micro-damage to calculate the effect of nucleation on the whole process of damage evolution and to establish the value of initial damage A framework of statistical micro damage mechanics was established by Eqs. Integrating Eq. As Based on the theory of differential equation, when the radii of micro-voids are the same the original Eq. The format of function In the following, we will analyze four classical void growth models to deduce the general growth model at the early stage of damage evolution. Curran and co-workers ( According to the differential theory, if is small, it can be simplified approximatively to If radius For the case of an empty spherical void of radius The classical yield function for porous solids was presented by Using the above formula and considering a relatively small If radius Based on the work of When In all of the four classical void growth models, whether the void is surrounded by infinite matrix (Rice and Tracey’s), or by a holly ball cell (Gurson’s and Johnson’s), or represented by pure statistical observation result (NAG), the void growth model can be represented by a linear equation when the damage degree is relatively small. The following generalized growth equation can therefore be used at the early stage of damage evolution: In the NAG model, the following nucleation equation was presented by In the above equation, except Considering the boundary condition, the function Therefore, the number density of the micro-voids is It can be proved that Eq. The final aim of statistical damage analysis is to discover the relationship between the process of damage evolution in the material and its mechanics performance. Thus it is necessary to obtain the damage variable based on statistical average. The general damage function is If the volume of micro-voids is regarded as damage variable, then At a given time, the biggest void in the material is the void which nucleates at Assuming Considering the right hand side of Eq. In order to calculate the effects of growth and nucleation during damage evolution, the damage evolution Eq. Considering Eq. Substituting Eq. The above equation indicates that the initial damage is a function of the material and stress. At time Eq. In the NAG model the damage accumulation at time From Eq. The above two equations are only identical when Δ If the damage degree ( Differentiating the above equation against time, we have Neglecting the effect of nucleation and substituting Eq. The above damage degree evolution equation is similar to the equation developed by Damage and fracture of material result from damage nucleation, growth and coalescence. Nucleation, growth and coalescence have different effects at different stages during damage evolution. Nucleation is dominant at the beginning of damage evolution. After a period of time the growth becomes dominant, and nucleation can be ignored. The transition time between the two stages is related to the material and loading conditions. Given the fact that the duration of nucleation is much shorter than the duration of growth, it is reasonable to use initial damage to replace nucleation, but the initial damage must take the effects of loading into consideration. The authors would like to thank the technician C.L. Liu and the Ph.D. student T. Jiao at the explosive experiment laboratory in Beijing Institute of Technology for their assistance. They also appreciate the two graduate students, Mr. W. Megenda and P. Frempong at Dalhousie University for their assistance in editing and proofreading the manuscript.