An investigation into the possibility of using infrared techniques to quantify serpentine in nickel laterite ores was carried out. Results obtained from this preliminary study confirmed that high confidence in serpentine content prediction is possible obtaining RMSEP and R
                     2 values of 1.76 and 0.97 respectively.
                  One hundred and forty mineral mixtures simulating limonite, transition and saprolite horizons of a Western Australian nickel laterite deposit were prepared. Diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy spectra obtained from these mixtures were used as a training set to prepare a quantitative model for serpentine content using Partial least squares multivariate analysis.
                  The model in turn was validated by predicting the serpentine content of 20 synthetic mixtures with confidence. The model was applied to 10 natural ores from various deposits, diversity between the synthetic and natural ore assemblages meant the analysis was qualitative. Model development using real ore samples would be required to enable incorporation of the intrinsic properties of the natural serpentine and the ore mineralogy in general.Serpentine ( Oxide nickel ore deposits are steadily becoming more prospective for mining as the technology and knowledge required to extract nickel from these ores continues to improve ( Data provided by infrared analysis, then modelled via chemometrics, has the potential to provide rapidly acquired information of sufficient precision. This has been a common analysis tool, for example the alumina industry employs IR based techniques to analyse bauxite ore for alumina content viable to mine ( Whilst the mineralogy and chemistry of bauxite and nickel laterite deposits are distinct from one another, the weathering processes responsible for their geology produces broad similarities (e.g. grain size, phyllosilicate/iron oxide species, textural complexity). Being subject to localised heterogeneity (e.g. parent rock geology, topography and climate), there can be significant differences between separate deposits and indeed within single ore bodies. Hence, an accurate technique to determine processing related variables such as serpentine content is required. It is believed that a similar method used by the alumina industry may prove to be equally successful for serpentine quantification in nickel laterite deposits. Many nickel laterite minerals are IR active, and have been studied qualitatively ( It is predicted that in the near future the amount of sulphide sourced nickel supplied will remain constant and that laterite-sourced nickel supplies will increase ( Natural minerals typical of a nickel laterite assemblage were used as component standards within synthetic mixtures ( An experimental design composed of 140 experiments was developed, with varying quantities of the ten mineral standards as components for each experiment. An ‘experiment’ involved preparing a sample with mixture compositions calculated by the design. Antigorite was the serpentine mineral used in the model samples. The prepared mixtures were separated into three divisions, according to typical arid-type nickel laterite horizons; Limonite with 60 samples, transition (or clay rich) with 20 samples and saprolite with 60 samples. An experimental design utilising distance optimality spreads samples uniformly over the design space with equal ‘distance’ between component values. The design maximises the information retained whilst minimising the number of experiments to a manageable number. In this case the design chose 140 differing mixtures of the 10 components which best represent the various component abundances in a natural deposit. This is especially useful when attempting to create complex mixture designs as there are fixed abundance ranges for each component. The mixture design was developed using Minitab® v 15 (Minitab Inc A further five mixtures with the same concentration of components as previously described were prepared using an alternate antigorite serpentine standard, (Antigorite B). This was in order to determine whether the model created through multivariate analysis can compensate for different serpentine minerals. To validate for ruggedness of the model ten samples from the training set were re-analysed. Ten natural laterite ores were also used as a validation set. The exact component abundance was not known, although the particular horizon from where the mineral was mined had been recorded. Each sample was analysed using a Perkin Elmer Spectrum 100 FTIR with DRIFTS attachment. A variety of different chemometrics algorithms were employed to assist in determining whether the serpentine content of nickel laterite samples could be predicted and if so, to what degree of accuracy. Spectral data is highly collinear, which causes issues with conventional regression techniques. For this reason a number of multivariate techniques were employed, including principal components analysis (PCA), regularised discriminant analysis (RDA) and partial least squares (PLS). PCA was carried out using Minitab v.15 (Minitab Inc PCA is an unsupervised technique, the algorithm attempts to condense the data set to a reduced set of Principal components (PCs). These PCs include relevant data and less of the redundant data which hamper a technique’s model development. Each PC is orthogonal to its predecessor, i.e. the second PC is orthogonal to the first PC, etc. By reducing the data into uncorrelated PCs and rotating the data matrix, maximum variance can be achieved ( PCs with the largest proportions of relevant data are then plotted against each other producing a Score plot. Score plots can reveal inherent structures in the data that may not have been elucidated otherwise. The score plot projects the data onto two dimensions using the PCs with uncorrelated variables which best carry the variation in the original data, which allows for the clustering of similar samples. Score plots are commonly used to classify outliers and groupings of samples, as samples in a data set tend to cluster according to relationships between their variables, leading to the identification of either similarities or differences between samples. Prior to performing PCA, two types of pre-treatment are commonly used, standardisation or mean-centring. Mean-centring is the method commonly used for spectral data as all the variables share the same units (wavenumbers) and did provide a better model. Principal component analysis was carried out on the spectra of the synthetic mixtures. RDA is especially useful when predictors are collinear. For this reason the spectral data was also analysed using RDA, a supervised technique allowing a compromise between Nearest means classifier (NMC), Linear discriminant analysis (LDC) and Quadratic discriminant analysis (QDC) ( A misclassification plot is a representation for the true class of each sample versus the assigned class by the RDA model. True class represents the actual horizon upon which the sample components were modelled and the assigned class represents the horizon in which the algorithm classifies a sample to belong. The RDA algorithm does so by applying two regularisation parameters which mutually maximise the classification. The first parameter, Eq. The second parameter, Eq. The first regularisation is controlled by the parameter Using RDA, a ‘perfect’ classification would involve all the off-diagonal elements in the misclassification matrix to be zero and all samples would be assigned to their correct groups. The error rate and risk values signify the ‘goodness’ of the class recognition, whereas the cross-validated error rate and the cross-validated risk are measures of the ‘goodness’ of class prediction for the model. For the purpose of developing a quick and efficient characterisation technique for serpentine content within nickel laterites, segmented cross validation was chosen for RDA predictive experiments. The inputs used in this screening technique were the 1st and 2nd PCs which contained 79% of the variability of the data. Partial least squares (PLS) was used to predict concentrations of serpentine within the synthetic mixtures. PLS models both the Models were created using adjustments to the PLS algorithm, i.e. number of PCs and number of segments used in cross-validation, and were analysed after pre-treatment (Savitzky–Golay 5-point 2nd derivative filter) ( PLS can be used to deal with one response variable at a time (PLS 1) or can be made to handle several responses simultaneously (PLS 2). PLS 1 algorithms were used in experiments as they provide results for a single variable, in this case the content of serpentine. The best model being based on a treatment that provides a high coefficient of regression ( PCA was applied to the spectral data of the samples to determine whether the limonite and saprolite classes could be separated based on their DRIFTS spectra using either mean-centering or standardisation. The score plot clearly showed mean-centering of the data was better at separating the classes with less uncertainty, see Also it can also be seen in PCA of the entire mixture set and the validation samples (20 synthetic ‘unknown’ mixtures and 10 natural ores), shown in The three natural ores which were clustered within the range of the synthetic mixtures, according to semi-quantitative analysis, have similar amounts of quartz and/or iron oxides such as goethite in their mineralogy to that of the training set samples they are plotted in proximity with. The algorithm may be clustering these three minerals in this manner due to these commonalities in components between the natural ores and synthetic mixtures. However there is still notable difference in the mineralogy between the natural ores and synthetic mixtures, without a thorough investigation and full quantitative analysis this can only be presumed. Regularised discriminant analysis was used in a trial as a screening technique, to determine which horizon a sample had been designed to mimic; limonite, transition (nontronite) or saprolite. Misclassification plots for the synthetic mixtures data analysed using regularised discriminant analysis, are shown in It should be noted that RDA treats the data as if it consisted of discrete classes, whereas in reality the model design was created with extensive overlap in mixture concentration between horizons. This is unavoidable when attempting to recreate a natural nickel laterite deposit. Due to this assumption of the technique, it was expected that RDA would misclassify a number of the limonite and saprolite mixtures as transition mixtures. The transition mixtures were designed to have concentrations of components which have an extensive amount of overlap with both the limonite and saprolite horizons. One limonite mixture and six transition mixtures were misclassified by RDA. Investigation of the mixture design determined that the mixtures misclassified through RDA were those composed of mineral concentrations typical of two horizons, e.g. saprolite and transition. When applying this model to the natural laterites, six out of the ten sample’s mineralogy were correctly predicted, these six belonging to samples of a saprolite horizon (this is undoubtedly due to the differences in mineralogy which are not accounted for within the training set which can be seen in However, of more significance to this study, the origin of 15 out of the 20 synthetic validation mixtures were correctly predicted using RDA. Each error in the prediction for the synthetic ‘unknown’ mixtures class involved the transition mixtures, whereby a saprolite or limonite simulated mixture were wrongly categorised as transition mixtures. As previously mentioned, RDA assumes samples belong to discrete classes, and such errors are expected to occur with the high degree of overlap in the mixture design. Therefore RDA could provide a screening process for whether a sample is of a limonite or saprolite horizon. Whilst limonite and saprolite horizons are reasonably well identified in the field, RDA may be beneficial for identifying whether less tangible ore classes exist within the ore body. Results showed that regression via the PLS algorithm proved quite effective at providing a calibration model to predict serpentine content within synthetic samples. When calibrating the model using training set samples RMSEC of 1.76 and Using the established model validation was performed and measured by the accuracies of the Validation using the training set samples gave sufficient Accurate predictions for validation of the five alternate serpentine validation samples (Antigorite B) demonstrates that the multivariate model has the capability of predicting serpentine content in nickel laterites ( PLS was able to model synthetic nickel laterites and predict serpentine content within mixtures including the model components. Although Antigorite B serpentine validation samples were misclassified as having higher serpentine content, this was expected and consistent with XRD data which indicated high purity. This owes to the two standards exhibiting different spectral band intensities due to impurities. Further proof of impurity is seen in the overlaid spectra shown in In the case of the natural ore samples there is no way to calculate RMSEP and Unsupervised pattern recognition via PCA was employed to determine how a score plot would arrange the synthetic mixtures. This proved to be quite useful in distinguishing between those mixtures modelled from limonite and saprolite horizons. However, it is through supervised pattern recognition that a screening model and prediction model have been developed. Results projected through RDA show some promise that the technique may be used as a statistical tool for the screening of nickel laterites, thus allowing RDA to complement a geologist’s assessment for which horizon a sample has been mined from. However, further work is still required in order to adequately determine abundance serpentine for specific laterite deposits. It is through PLS that the model’s enhanced predictive ability was achieved, with a positive degree of success. This is especially the case when data was derived for such a complex and large data set, especially when analysed through a spectroscopic technique. Confidence of prediction for unknowns measured The discrepancies found when predicting serpentine content in the natural nickel laterite ore validation set does not discredit the validity of this research. In fact the more-than-satisfactory predictive abilities of the synthetic nickel laterite model still stand. However, it does demonstrate that in order to adequately predict serpentine content in natural ore further work is required, through the characterisation of serpentine in nickel laterites by FTIR spectroscopy coupled with chemometrics. The study has demonstrated that IR analysis has the potential to provide rapid quantitative analysis of serpentine content in nickel laterites to a moderate degree of accuracy. In order to progress this towards a level where the method can be utilised routinely, work is required to carefully quantify the actual serpentine content of natural ore samples. This data could then be compared with estimates from an updated synthetic model and the data used to guide the development of a calibration model for serpentine which is specifically based on natural ores.