In previous study, it has been found that the grinding conditions have a great effect on the flotation of chalcopyrite and galena as well as their separation from pyrite (Peng et al., 2003a,b). In this study, the effect of the grinding conditions on the activation of pyrite by Cu2+ and Pb2+ were investigated. Based on flotation behaviour, EDTA (ethylene diamine-tetra acid) extraction, pulp potential measurement and electrokinetic study, it is found that the activation of pyrite flotation by Cu2+ and Pb2+ involves different mechanisms. Reduction of copper(II) to copper(I) and the formation of new copper sulphide phases are responsible for the activation of pyrite flotation by Cu2+. This is an electrochemical process. However, adsorption of lead hydroxide on pyrite surface is principally responsible for the activation of pyrite flotation by Pb2+. The effect of grinding media on the flotation of pyrite activated by Cu2+ or Pb2+ is through the change of pulp potential and iron oxidation species emanating from the media. The iron oxidation species from grinding media is electrostatically repulsive with respect to copper-activated pyrite and therefore, reducing conditions produced by mild steel medium promotes pyrite flotation in the presence of Cu2+. However, iron oxidation species from grinding media is electrostatically attractive with respect to lead-activated pyrite and therefore inert grinding medium favours pyrite flotation in the presence of Pb2+. This study provides a clear picture of how to increase or decrease pyrite flotation through a smart selection of grinding media.Industry is well aware of the role that grinding circuits play in mineral activation. For example, zinc sulphate, cyanide and sodium sulphide are usually added to grinding circuits prior to Cu/Pb flotation to avoid activation of sphalerite and pyrite during grinding. However, there have been no systematic studies on the effect of grinding conditions on mineral activation. In a previous study, it was found that grinding conditions had a great effect on pyrite flotation in the presence of chalcopyrite and galena ( From the literature, a number of fundamental studies have been carried out to investigate the mechanism of pyrite activation by Cu  Pyrite activation by Cu In this study the effect of grinding media on the flotation of pyrite activated by Cu Pyrite samples were obtained from Huanzala Mine (Peru). These samples were crushed through a roll crusher and then screened to collect the +0.6–3.2 Two types of grinding media were used in this study. The tapered cylinder mild steel grinding medium (cylpebs as cast high carbon low alloy steel with high iron content) was supplied from Pasminco Mining Co., Elura, Australia and the spherical chromium grinding medium (30 DBPhos (Diisobutyldithiophosphinate, AR grade) and DTP (sodium diisobutyl dithiophosphate, AR grade) were obtained from Cytec, Sydney, Australia. DBPhos was used as a collector in pyrite flotation in the presence of lead ions, while DTP was used as a collector in pyrite flotation in the presence of copper ions. DBphos is usually used in selective flotation of lead sulphide against pyrite where pyrite activation by lead ions occurs ( Pyrite single mineral (100 After grinding, the pulp was transferred to a 1.5 The Eh (pulp potential) was measured during grinding at room temperature using a HANNA meter combined with a platinum electrode and expressed relative to the standard hydrogen electrode, SHE. A 3 Zeta potential measurements were performed by Logical Zetaphoremeter IV equipped with a microprocessor unit to directly calculate the zeta potentials. Pyrite (0.2 The effect of grinding media on pyrite flotation in the presence of collector was tested in the absence of Pb The mill discharge from the grinding of pyrite with both chromium and mild steel media were analysed by EDTA extraction. The amount of EDTA extractable iron produced by chromium and mild steel media is 3.85  Similarly, the effect of Cu To identify the effect of medium type on the activation of pyrite flotation, mild steel medium was examined. As discussed previously, iron oxidation species produced from grinding medium corrosion was found to have the dominant role in depressing chalcopyrite flotation ( The specialised mill allowed continuous measurement of pulp potential during grinding. Samples after grinding of pyrite in the presence of Pb The amount of EDTA extractable lead and copper in Mild steel medium produces a higher amount of iron oxidation species than 30% chromium medium during grinding. This is the reason why lower galena or chalcopyrite recovery is obtained with mild steel medium ( In this study, the zeta potential of iron hydroxide and pyrite in the absence and presence of 10 The presence of Pb The presence of Cu The results presented above show that pyrite displays poor flotation behaviour at pH 9, but Pb In the presence of Pb Grinding media affects pyrite activation by Cu Grinding media have different effects on the flotation of pyrite activated by Pb The recovery of other iron sulphide minerals such as pyrrhotite may also be enhanced possibly through both changing the activating species (i.e. Pb The first author gratefully acknowledges financial support of this work from AMIRA International from 1999 to 2002 in Australia and NSERC-COREM Industry Fellowship from 2003 to 2005 in Canada.