Automobile exhaust catalysts and electronic equipment, for instance, are rich in platinum group metals (PGMs). At the end of their lifecycles catalytic converters are smelted in electric arc furnaces (EAF) for PGM recovery. With approx. 40ppm, PGM depleted EAF slags still contain significantly higher amounts of PGMs than common primary sources (3–10ppm), in contrast to which the material is oxidic or elementary. Until present, there is no utilisation potential for oxidic EAF slag material. Flotation emerged as a possible option for enriching PGMs from EAF slag. Highest enrichment factor (107±9) was determined for Pt by flotation with sodium O,O′-diethyl dithiophosphate (Na-DEDTP) as collector and polypropylene glycol (PPG) as frother. The Pt content of the concentrate was approx. 1500ppm at a recovery rate up to 17±4%.Platinum group metals (PGMs) are characterised by numerous applications, of which catalysis is most meaningful. However, raw material situation is critical due to global demand and their high geographic concentration of deposits, combined with the generally rather low content of ~ In pyrometallurgical PGM recycling the crude material is smelted in an electric arc furnace (EAF) using a liquid collecting metal like copper or iron and quicklime to catch silicates as slag ( EAF slag was provided by FNE Entsorgungsdienste GmbH, Germany. Sodium O,O′-diethyl dithiophosphate (Na-DEDTP), sodium O,O′-diisobutyl dithiophosphate (Na-DIDTP) and sodium mercaptobenzothiazole (Na-MBT) collectors, as well as the frother mixture Montanol 800® (M800) were provided by Clariant AG, Switzerland. Chemicals and standards were purchased from VWR International GmbH, Germany. Laboratory scale flotation experiments were carried out in a 1.5 Reference acid digestions of EAF slag as well as digestions of flotation concentrates and tailings were carried out by adding 10 0.05 The EAF slag contained ~ Particle size distribution measurements ( Nevertheless, the PGM content of 39.7 A variety of collectors and frothers were tested because of the unpredictable flotation behaviour of the slag. To begin with, fatty acids and amines were examined as collectors for oxidic material. However, as enrichment was negligible (< A variety of collectors and frothers were tested because of the unpredictable flotation behaviour of the slag. To begin with, fatty acids and amines were examined as collectors for oxidic material. However, as enrichment was negligible (< When comparing affinities of the tested collectors towards PGMs, Pt turned out to be significantly higher enriched by Na-DEDTP. Although the reasons have not been fully understood so far, this may be owed to a lower steric demand of the collector as well as the soft/soft interaction between Pt and the thiol group of Na-DEDTP. Ion size and softness appear to possibly become effective with Pd and Rh, too, where Pd displays a somewhat stronger interaction with Na-DEDTP compared to Rh. As shown in Combinations of Na-DIDTP and Na-MBT with PPG or M800 were found less effective. The different flotation behaviour of Na-DEDTP and Na-DIDTP might be consequence of the isopropyl groups in Na-DIDTP. The steric effects reduce interfacial interactions with the different metals ( Even more important than the enrichment factor is the recovery rate, thus allowing for to evaluating process economy. The rather high PGM content is in somewhat contrast to PGM recovery (≤ The EAF slag has shown interesting flotation behaviour, allowing for enriching PGMs from a siliceous matrix. Here, the content of PGMs in the slag is roughly tenfold the minimum concentration of primary ores (3 Pt, Pd and Rh from EAF slag are enriched with Na-DEDPT/PPG by factor 45 to 1850 Oxidic EAF slag is a promising source for Pt, Pd and Rh. The PGM content of the investigated EAF slag charge of approx. 40 With DEDPT/PPG there was considerable enrichment up to 1850 The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at We wish to thank Jaques Collin Bezuidenhout, Clariant GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany useful discussions, Clariant GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany for providing chemicals and FNE Entsorgungsdienste Freiberg GmbH, Germany for EAF slag samples. Anja Obst, Institute of Geology is owed thanks for SEM-EDX measurements.