Rock fragmentation is considered the most important aspect of production blasting because of its direct effects on the costs of drilling and blasting and on the economics of the subsequent operations of loading, hauling and crushing. Over the past three decades, significant progress has been made in the development of new technologies for blasting applications. These technologies include increasingly sophisticated computer models for blast design and blast performance prediction. Rock fragmentation depends on many variables such as rock mass properties, site geology, in situ fracturing and blasting parameters and as such has no complete theoretical solution for its prediction. However, empirical models for the estimation of size distribution of rock fragments have been developed. In this study, a blast fragmentation Monte Carlo-based simulator, based on the Kuz–Ram fragmentation model, has been developed to predict the entire fragmentation size distribution, taking into account intact and joints rock properties, the type and properties of explosives and the drilling pattern. Results produced by this simulator were quite favorable when compared with real fragmentation data obtained from a blast quarry. It is anticipated that the use of Monte Carlo simulation will increase our understanding of the effects of rock mass and explosive properties on the rock fragmentation by blasting, as well as increase our confidence in these empirical models. This understanding will translate into improvements in blasting operations, its corresponding costs and the overall economics of open pit mines and rock quarries.Some 30 years ago, Drilling Blasting Loading Hauling Crushing Mackenzie's objective was to determine the cost curves based on the mean fragmentation size. MacKenzie showed that loading, hauling and crushing costs decreased with increasing rock fragmentation while drilling and blasting costs increased with increasing rock fragmentation. As shown in Mechanical crushing and grinding are particularly expensive operations at a mine and considerable cost and throughput benefits can be obtained by breaking the rock using explosives effectively instead ( The Kuz–Ram model is an empirical fragmentation model ( The model predicts fragmentation from blasting in terms of mass percent passing a given mesh size: Smaller fragmentation occurs with higher explosive energy input, weaker rock types and smaller blasthole diameters. More regular fragmentation sizing results from the uniform distribution of explosives in the rock mass, smaller burdens and greater spacing/burden ratios. The problem areas in any specifically predictive blasting model are typically: definition of relevant rock mass properties, selection of appropriate explosives performance indices, determination of actual blast fragmentation. This work is meant to particularly address the issue of variation and uncertainty in rock mass properties through the use of Monte Carlo simulation. Because rock mass conditions vary across a blast, the resulting fragmentation should vary as well.   The equation can also be stated as a function of the powder factor or specific charge Eqs. The Rosin–Rammler equation is used to characterize the partial-size distribution of a material for use in a variety of applications ( The characteristic size, Since the Kuznetsov formula gives the screen size Given that the Kuznetsov equation accounts for explosive strength and rock mass characteristics, and that the mean size is related to the characteristic size of the Rosin–Rammler distribution, the only unknown left is the uniformity coefficient. Cunningham established the applicable uniformity coefficient through several investigations, taking into consideration the impact of such factors as: blast geometry, hole diameter, burden, spacing, hole lengths and drilling accuracy. The exponent The above parameters are illustrated in It is normally desired to have uniform fragmentation; so high values of The modified Kuznetsov Eq. First coined by It is generally recognized that natural materials like rock tend to show considerable variety of properties. Rock strength, fracture spacing and orientation within a given rock mass can and do vary. Drilling itself can introduce variability with deviations in drill hole spacing, burden and alignment. The end result of such a variation is that the resulting fragmentation size predicted by the Kuz–Ram model will also show variability. This observation is particularly important if blasting is meant to achieve a specific purpose other that breaking up the rock mass. For example, the width of conveyor systems is typically dimensioned using the typical fragment size to be moved. If rock oversize is encountered more frequently than expected, the conveyor system will not perform as expected. Another example involves the sizing of the throat for a rock crusher. If the blasted material is coarser than expected, the crusher will be undersized, if the material is finer than expected, the crusher will be underutilized. One last example involves the production of riprap, a rock-based erosion control measure used in dam and water channel construction. A contractor wishing to blast riprap that must meet design specifications might find that the rock mass is incapable of producing such material, or that crushing and screening might be required after blasting. The extra handling will be costly and should be factored in the contractual bid. Monte Carlo-based simulation using the Kuz–Ram model can provide insight into all of these problems and help the engineer create a suitable blast design to meet a required goal. Blasting is as much an art as it is a science. Although much work has been done in the area of modeling fracture development and stress wave propagation in an isotropic/anisotropic medium, the natural variability of the rock mass often precludes such complex approaches to blast design and therefore considerable blasting design is based on relatively simple rules-of-thumb. Blast design must consider the following parameters ( Blasthole diameter Bench height Blasthole burden Blasthole spacing Blasthole subdrilling Blasthole stemming length Blasthole deviation and alignment Blasthole pattern (staggered or rectangular) Rock mass properties and discontinuities Explosive properties The most critical and important dimension in blasting is that of the burden The distance between adjacent blastholes, measured perpendicular to the burden, is defined as the spacing For most conditions, the required subdrilling ( Stemming is the portion of blasthole that has been packed with inert material above the charge so as to confine and retain the gases produced by the explosion, thus improving the fragmentation process. Field experience shows that a It has been found that fragmentation is significantly affected by local geological conditions. The strike and dip direction of joint sets and their frequency in the rock mass are of great importance, since the stress waves produced by the detonation of the explosive charges will be reflected at the joint surfaces. Rock mass discontinuities that are perpendicular to the blasthole axis have little effect on fragmentation. However, if they are parallel to the axis of the borehole, energy is wasted in excessive crushing in the area close to the borehole while little work is done away from the blasthole. The direction of the blast with respect to the structural conditions is of paramount importance in practice. Microsoft's Visual Basic.Net offers a strong software platform for developing a Monte Carlo-based simulator. Although, there exists other dedicated commercial applications for performing Monte Carlo-based simulation, Visual Basic offers the capability to create a stand-alone program as well as the possibility of future enhancements and integration into other applications. The Monte Carlo simulation model requires the following seven parameters that have a range of possible values: Unconfined compressive strength of the intact rock Elastic modulus of the intact rock Joint's dip Joint's dip direction Joint's spacing Drilling accuracy Bench's face dip direction To describe the behaviors, triangular distributions were utilized for all parameters except the joint spacing, where both triangular and exponential distributions were used. The UCS parameter will be modeled to serve as a general example of the approach taken. A similar approach can be applied to all remaining parameters. The unconfined compressive strength value (UCS) is typically determined by an unconfined compression test where a cylindrical core sample is loaded axially to failure, with no confinement (lateral support). Conceptually, the peak value of the axial stress is taken as the unconfined compressive strength of the sample. In view of the variability of rock properties, when adequate samples are available, repeated testing may be warranted to determine average values. Unfortunately, we rarely have a unique value but a range. The histogram shows an approximate triangular distribution with the following characteristics: Most Likely=405 with 0.238 probability Lower Bound=375 with 0.095 probability Upper Bound=455 with 0.047 probability A linear relationship is assumed between lower bound and most likely value as well as upper bound and most likely value. Also, the cumulative frequency (from zero to 1) can be calculated. Using a random-number generator with a range set between zero and 1, it is possible to work backwards and calculate UCS values for substitution into the Monte Carlo simulator and the analysis of one scenario. To guarantee the maximum randomness of this “scenario” and the independence between the parameters, seven values were generated from the seven triangular distributions, producing seven different random numbers. The Kuz–Ram model produces three parameters for defining the degree of fragmentation and the relative percentage for each size: Oversize as the upper bound of the fragmentation; its percentage will represent the coarser part after blasting of the fragmentation curve. Optimum-size as the most likely size; it is the size through which will pass value to the mineral processing chain (loading, crushing, hauling) Undersize as the lower bound size and it is the finer part of the fragmentation curve. The simulation application has been designed to answer two types of problems regarding the application of the Kuz–Ram model: Calculate the powder factor required to obtain a certain mean fragment size Calculate fragment size distribution while the powder factor is held constant As described above, the first approach is referred to as the “constant mean fragmentation” and the second one as the “constant powder factor”. To validate the model, the simulator was compared to data obtained from a quarry, the Costiolo open-pit in Italy. Costiolo is an open pit mine located near Bergamo (Milano). The Ghisalberti Lime S.p.a. Company has a concession to mine Triassic limestone for producing hydrated lime. The data consist of five specific gravity tests, 19 elastic modulus and UCS tests, as well as discontinuity analysis and the blast design itself. The actual fragmentation obtained from the blast design was measured using screen (sieve) analysis. On average, the specific gravity value is estimated to be 2.68 (g/cm In this approach, the fragment size distribution and the mean fragment after blasting is predicted using a constant and known powder factor (i.e. calculated from a defined drilling pattern (burden, spacing) and mass of explosive). Under the “constant powder factor” analysis, the simulator uses the powder factor as an input. The results of the simulation are compared with those observed in the field to verify that the simulator predictions are essentially congruent and physically correct.  Within the simulator, a drop box named “explosive properties” contains the relative weight strength and the density (kg/m The simulator offers an “initial blast design” as another helper tool to aid the user in selecting the appropriate blasthole burden or spacing. The number of simulations was set to 100,000 and the results of each simulation stored into a temporary array for later statistical analysis. The resulting population tends to be normally distributed, a consequence of the Central Limit Theorem. The results indicate a mean of 7.12 and a standard deviation of 0.738. It is of course possible to specify the range of values to either the 68%, 95% and 99% confidence limits. The simulator then calculates the mean fragment size using Eq. Using Eq. Using Eq. The mean case takes into account all mean Kuz–Ram values like the mean fragment size The simulator calculated the mean fragment size as 42 As shown in The simulator can also be used to design a blast to achieve a given fragmentation distribution. Using the rock mass data previously defined and taking into account the explosive properties, the simulator can execute, in reverse, the constant powder factor process. Both the mean fragment size and the percent passing are defined. It is possible to also define the undersize or oversize percent passing, depending on the cumulative distribution that is desirable after blasting. In fact, by fixing two points, it is possible to define the entire cumulative distribution. In this application, a constant mean and undersize passing will be specified (listed in Several burden–spacing combinations are capable of meeting the required fragmentation distribution. It is upto the blasting engineer to make the final selection based on experience. The purpose of this work was to develop a Monte Carlo-based simulation program that would provide a reasonable estimate of blasting fragmentation for surface mine and quarry blast design. The initial work done to date suggests that this approach is applicable. The Monte Carlo simulator can be used to target an optimized feed size distribution for a mill or minimize fines production. By using the simulator, the blasting can be adapted to achieve consistent fragmentation designs for different rock masses or to optimize the fragmentation to maximize the throughput and performance of crushing and mill circuits. One of the drawbacks of simulation is that field data are required. It can be difficult to fit certain parameters to triangular distributions when there is not enough data. Collecting this data can also be costly and time consuming. However, with a little effort, much of this information can be gathered and accumulated during regular drilling and blasting operations. One benefit of this simulator is that the triangular distribution approach is quite amenable to the “expert” opinion where the blasting engineer defines the “worst-case scenario” or a suitable range of parameters. At this stage of development, it appears that the simulator program does its job reasonably well, based on a real case study. However, further work is required to fully validate this approach and to verify its long-term usefulness and applicability. Over time, a more sophisticated fragmentation model could be defined and integrated within this simulator.