Extractive and separation of Pr/Ce using a Y-junction serpentine microreactor, with 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHEHPA, P507), has been investigated. The results clearly indicate separation factor of Pr/Ce (>3) is to be higher in the microfluidic extraction as compared to separation factor of around 2 to 3 for batch systems. The optimized residence time of 12s in micro-flow is much less than that in batch system (≅300s). The extraction rates for Pr and Ce are found to match first order kinetics with the rate constants being 0.2649s−1 and 0.2279s−1, respectively, which are >20 times higher than those for batch extraction. The volumetric mass transfer coefficients (K
                     L
                     a) for various operating conditions vary between 0.007 and 0.57s−1, which decrease with increase in channel size (channel width and length). The experimentally mass transfer coefficients are compared with those with conventional extractors such as mixer settler and centrifugal extractors.In the conventional rare earth industry, solvent extraction (SX) is employed to separate rare earths based on the solubility in aqueous phase and organic phase. Industrial-scale SX is commonly operated in thousands of mineral processing industries known as mixing settler, wherein the aqueous phase and organic phase are mixed and finally separated ( Recently, microfluidic SX (μSX) as an alternative approach for the SX process, was proposed by Priest et al. ( Nishihama et al. have conducted the separation of lanthanides in a micro solvent extraction, and reported achieving extraction equilibrium quickly in the narrow micro flow channel ( In our previous studies, the extraction and separation of rare earths from chloride solution in the presence of lactic acid using the conventional method was conducted to eliminate ammonia pollution from the resources, and the results showed that the extraction efficiency and separation of Ce/Pr are nearly equal to the saponified P507 system without lactic acid ( The extractant 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-(2-ethylhexyl) ester (HEH/EHP, P507; Luoyang Aoda Chemical Industry Co., Ltd.) is diluted in sulfonated kerosene to the required concentration of 1.0 A schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Based on literature reports, the Y-type microreactor is chosen as suitable to generate slug flow, with aqueous phase as dispersed phase and extractant as continuous phase (as shown in Lanthanide extraction by P507 also depended on pH, because the phase transfer mechanism involves dissociation of three protons to accommodate a rare earth ion. So it is necessary to control carefully the pH in the aqueous phase, which is a crucial component to the successful operation of extraction system. By changing the pH of feed solution, along channel length 12.5 Residence time is an important factor on the extraction and separation of metals. The reaction time of the batch extraction is the time from the mixing stage to phase separation and the collection of the aqueous phase. The reaction time of microfluidic extraction is the time from the junction of two phases to the exhaustion of the separated phases. The contact time in μSX is variable, and can be precisely controlled by the changes in the flow rate or channel length, even < In Channel width is also known to be an important factor affecting the slug size and mass transfer in microfluidic extraction process. Extraction and separation of Ce/Pr in micro channel width from 300 to 1000 It is reported that the flow structure in microchannel is strongly affected by the internal velocity, as it is known to influence the mass transfer rate. However it is related to the residence time in the microchannel unit. The linear velocity is defined as the ratio of flow rate (m The above presented results clearly exhibit the effect of extraction rate on the separation factor of Pr and Ce. Extraction rate is an important parameter for characterizing the separation effect, as it is related to the flow rate which is inversely proportional to the contact time at a given channel. Volumetric mass transfer coefficient (  The variation of mass transfer coefficient ( Though there are extensive studies on liquid-liquid extraction in microchannel, extraction and separator of rare earths in a microreactor is relatively scarce. Also, studies on the volumetric mass transfer coefficients for extraction of rare earths in conventional equipment such as mixer settlers and centrifugal extractors could not be found. The volumetric mass transfer coefficients of microfluidic units and conventional extractors used to extract rare earths, and list in Liquid-liquid extraction and separation of Pr/Ce has been performed in a Y-junction serpentine microchannel. The following conclusions are listed below: The effects of pH value, residence time, flow rate and channel width on the extraction and separation are studied, and results show that the separation factor of Pr/Ce is higher than that obtained from batch system; the optimized 12 Extraction rates of Pr and Ce are studied, and the rate constants of 0.2649 For the volumetric mass transfer coefficients, it increases with the increasing of linear velocity, while decreases as the channel size increased, and a better mass transfer appears close to the channel inlet where the phases join. Volumetric mass transfer coefficients for the microchannels used in the present study are compared with those reported in literature. And this suggests that Financial aid from the following programs is gratefully acknowledged: