Mechanical alloying by high-energy ball milling is successfully used to produce a metal matrix composite of Al–Mg reinforced with amorphous silica particulate. Four different compositions are chosen with varying Mg content (0.5, 1, 2.5 and 5 by wt.%) by keeping SiO2 content constant at 5wt.% to make nanocomposites by high energy ball milling and microcomposites by mechanical mixing. No new phases are found in 20h mechanically alloyed Al–Mg–SiO2 metal matrix composite. XRD study showed Mg is completely dissolved into the Al matrix. XRD observation also showed decrease in crystallite size and increase in lattice strain with progress of mechanical alloying. SEM micrographs indicate decrease in particle size via fracture and cold welding phenomena. The powders are made in the form of cylindrical pellets of 20mm diameter by Spark Plasma Sintering. X-ray diffraction analysis of the pellets obtained after sintering indicates the evolution of MgAl2O4 spinel structure along with Al2O3. Vickers hardness values observed for nanocomposites are more than twice as high as that of microcomposites.Metal matrix composites (MMCs) have been developed to meet the specific engineering properties which cannot be achieved by monolithic material. Different types of reinforcement in form of particulate, whiskers, or fiber have been used to alter the properties of MMC for specific application. One of the important composites which have received enormous attention is aluminum metal matrix composites (AMCs) reinforced with particulates. Different types of particulates such as SiC, Al It is well known that properties of MMC are controlled by size and volume fraction of reinforcement and matrix material High energy ball milling is carried out in a planetary ball mill (Fritsch pulverisette P-5) at room temperature using WC vials and balls as milling media and toluene as process controlling agent (PCA) for the four different compositions as shown in XRD results of composition Al–0.5%Mg–5% SiO It is also seen from the XRD patterns that there is a continuous decrease in peak intensity with increase in peak broadening indicating reduction in crystallite size and increase in lattice strain with progress of milling. These observations are shown in Addition of Mg plays a crucial role in reduction of crystallite size as can also be seen from bright field TEM images of 20 XRD analysis of SPS consolidated Al–5%Mg–5%SiO Vickers hardness at 100 High-energy ball milling process has been successfully employed to synthesize Al–Mg/SiO One of the authors, J. Bhatt, sincerely thanks the