In this paper, we simulated the complex particle flow-behavior and screening efficiency on a linear vibrating screen using the Discrete Element Method (DEM). The simulations were validated with data from an adjustable experimental prototype screen. Then the novel application of non-linear regression modeling based on Support Vector Machines (SVMs) is used for mapping the sample space of operating parameters and vibrating screen configuration. Lastly, parameter optimization is implemented using Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm. The primary findings proved that the SVM-based nonparametric model is not only feasible, but also highly adaptive to the parameter optimization that requires large-scale iterative computation. The non-parametric model established using the integration of DEM and SVM, combined with PSO algorithm in subsequent parameter optimization offered insights to the design and manufacture of vibrating screens.Sieving is one of the oldest and most extensively employed physical size separation techniques ( Some earlier models based on reaction kinetic theories and probability theories have been presented for batched and continuous sieving ( In recent years, DEM – a method frequently used to model the motion and effect of a large number of small particles, were adopted by Special attentions have been paid to the significant developments in the theoretical understanding of Support Vector Machine (SVM) as well as algorithmic strategies for implementing it and applications of the approach to practical problems. SVM, invented by Pioneering work in the application of DEM was put into effect by SVM was originally developed for classification purposes. Support Vector Regression (SVR) that is a derivation of Support Vector Machines (SVMs), emerged as an efficient regression tool modeling non-linear relations. It results in a global and usually unique solution, avoiding overtraining and the solution is generally sparse. A non-linear function is learned by a linear learning machine in a kernel-induced feature space while the capacity of the system is controlled by a parameter independent of the space dimensions ( In order to control the function complexity, we minimize Under the corresponding Karush–Kuhn–Tucker complementarity conditions ( In engineering applications, the selection of a suitable kernel for SVR concerns the performance of the regression model ( It is well known that SVR generalization performance depends on a good set of parameters As a criterion for evaluating screening efficiency, In this section, a simplified three-dimensional model was used to simulate the screening process ( Usually it is of exceeding difficulty to cover all real physical factors accurately in a virtual model. As numerical simulation mainly concerns collision properties, material properties and input quantity cannot match up with laboratory scale vibrated screens. Especially, By establishing mathematic model between screening efficiency and parameters, the purpose is to improve screening efficiency with the rational design in vibration parameters and structure parameters. The mapping function is given by: The first step in modeling is to generate input and output data for training and testing. Due to the complex mapping function and multiple parameters, a great amount of multi-factor tests were required. Using DEM method, we set and performed a series of reasonable simulations. With the single factor and interactive simulations, we not only obtained the representative samples, but also the number of samples satisfying the need of regression modeling. Simulation results were listed in The method combined the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm and Support Vector Regression (SVR) in the part. The PSO algorithm was used to optimize the SVM radial basis function parameters and penalty factor The sample data which stem from Based on the PSO–SVR mathematic model, the mapping function for searching parameters of vibration screen and screening efficiency can be expressed as: In order to improve the screening efficiency by searching the optimal parameter combination, considering the non-linear, multi-extremum, large-scale, and non-differentiable characteristics of the model, an efficient algorithm is the key to improving the screening efficiency. To optimize the SVM parameters, such as the penalty parameter Due to the complexity of the screening process, there had been no effective screening model to guide the design and manufacture of sieving machine. Improving the screening efficiency of vibrating screen has been pursuing goal unremittingly. Firstly, this paper used the Discrete Element Method to simulate the screening process. Secondly, Physical experiments were implemented to verify the reliability of simulation results. Thirdly, the PSO–SVR was applied to set up the mapping function. Lastly, PSO algorithm was used to search the optimal parameters of vibrating screen. In summary, this methodology could be applied to the research of vibrating screen. Additionally, authors of the scheme are confident that the results will be useful to improve the design and manufacture of vibrating screen. The authors gratefully acknowledged the support from the