Wetting patterns produced by water repellent soils are able to preferentially channel moisture deep into the soil profile, minimising storage in surface layers where it is most susceptible to evaporative loss. Although this effect has been repeatedly described in the literature, the significance of such effects under field conditions remains unclear. In order to quantify the impact of water repellency, preferential flow and evaporation rates were monitored in a series of portable soil tanks packed with soil sourced from a water repellent field site. Tanks were placed outside to expose them to environmental forcing factors and their weights after rainfall and subsequent periods of drying were recorded daily.
                  Increased water repellency across the wettable, low and medium water repellency classes led to increased maximum pathway depths and decreased cumulative evaporation. However, the high repellency class exhibited no difference to the medium repellency class. Soils layered to generate decreasing water repellency over 10–30cm depth in distributions similar to that seen in the field recorded evaporative losses 70–80% lower than that in wettable control soils over 4days of drying in autumn. Shallower layers of 5–15cm examined during winter had evaporation reduced by 40–80% over a 4day period even in a period of much reduced potential evaporation. It is concluded that water repellent surface layers are able to effect significant reductions in net evaporative moisture loss, in patterns which may be particularly beneficial during periods of high moisture stress in summer or during low-rainfall years. Though water repellency substantially breaks down in the field during winter, our results suggest it may continue to aid moisture conservation well into the winter season.Soil water repellency occurs when soil particles become coated with hydrophobic chemicals produced by decaying leaf litter or fungal activity ( In water repellent soils infiltration is typically dominated by preferential flow, with active pathways representing only a small percentage of the soil cross-sectional area ( Field studies have demonstrated that water repellency can also serve to channel and concentrate soil moisture around the base of plants in the field ( Non-wetting characteristics can also reduce evaporative loss both by altering the geometry of the liquid/gas interface in partially saturated regions ( Though effects on evaporation have been widely recognised in reviews of water repellency (e.g., In this study, we seek to quantify water repellent evaporative effects by examining flow pathway formation and subsequent relative evaporation rates in layered soil of various water repellencies, including wettable control soils. To generate data reflective of field conditions, soils have been sourced from a water repellent woodland site, and wetting and evaporation rates monitored under ambient weather conditions. Results provide insight into the magnitude of evaporative reduction produced by water repellent soil layers, and the degree to which this advantage is able to persist through the season. Soils were obtained from a native bushland field site on the Spearwood dune system in Perth, Australia, approximately 2.5 Soil was collected from the field site at a variety of depths during summer and sieved to remove leaf debris and particles larger than 2 Fine river sand sourced from the banks of the Swan River in Nedlands, Perth and thoroughly washed to remove any salt was also collected to provide a perfectly wettable reference material. Evaporation rates were measured in a set of ten portable clear perspex soil tanks of dimensions 0.40 To expose soil to ambient weather conditions and produce internal temperature regimes comparable to field conditions, tanks were placed outside during daylight hours. Tanks were stored in two arrays of 5 tanks each, placed side to side with the base and outer sides of the array covered with a layer of 20 Three tanks were instrumented with ECT temperature sensors (Decagon Devices, Inc), installed at depths of approximately 5, 15 and 30 Potential evaporation and rainfall data were sourced from a nearby weather station at Floreat, Perth, Australia operated by the Department of Agriculture and Food, Western Australia (Foster, I. Personal Communication). Infiltration and evaporation were measured from tanks packed with either uniform or layered soil in different phases of the experiment. Methodology during these phases is discussed in more detail below. Evaporation from soil columns packed with soil of uniform repellency was recorded in summer, during a period from February to March. The uniform soil phase functioned as a relatively simple initial dry run, during which soil was wetted artificially under laboratory conditions, and placed outside during an extended period of maximum evaporative demand. Tanks were stored inside overnight in a temperature-controlled laboratory. Three tanks were packed with soil from each of the high and medium water repellency classes respectively, and two tanks each with soil of the low and non-water repellent classes (see Tanks were wetted by ponding 100 Following the uniform soil experiments, tanks were emptied and repacked with surface layers of decreasing water repellency over a wettable B-horizon sublayer, approximating the variation seen in the field. Evaporation was monitored during autumn and winter, so that soils could be wetted by natural precipitation events, with tanks left outside throughout the experiment. Scheduling during this phase was consequently dependent on ambient weather conditions, with evaporation periods limited by time between significant rain events. Six soil tanks were initially packed with water repellent layers extending to 10, 20 or 30 These tanks were placed outside in late April and wetted by a rainfall event of approximately 8 Six tanks were refilled with dried soil for a second phase of monitoring in June, again including two control tanks filled with wettable soil, as well as four containing water repellent surface layers. As soil layers of 10–30 Infiltration into wettable soils was characterised by primarily horizontal wetting fronts ( Distinct preferential flow pathways of at least 0.15 Pathway formation in LR soil was more variable, reaching a depth of 0.16 Preferential flow pathways visible through the side of the tank in both uniform and layered water repellent soil were often, though not universally, visible on both sides of the tank, indicating that pathways extended through the centre of the soil column at these locations. Narrow flow pathways of typically 0.02–0.10 Although surface layer thickness clearly influenced moisture distribution, it had no obvious effect on maximum pathway depth over the 0.4 The May and June monitoring periods were concluded after unusually large rainfall events of 48 Cumulative evaporation was calculated by monitoring changes to net weight of each soil tank over 22 Daily evaporative losses were consistently higher in tanks containing wettable soil, with both tanks 0–1 and 0–2 losing > Moisture retention in the low water repellency tanks was more variable, with some moisture still visible in LR2 after the first 22 At the conclusion of the first 22 Soil tanks received 8 Rates of evaporation here varied more substantially between the two wettable soil tanks (0–1 and 0–2) than over other measurement periods, attributed to the development of some preferential flow in tank 0–1. By the end of the 11 In light of these results, six of the eight tanks were repacked with dry soil in shallower water repellent layers (see After five days of drying, tanks with water repellent surface layers contained between 1.3 and 1.9 times more moisture than tanks with only wettable soil. Moisture loss in tank 15–1, which contained a 15 Results show a clear association between water repellency and preferential flow, with visible flow pathways forming within 10–20 However, higher water repellency did not necessarily generate deeper flow pathways. Although average pathway depth increased with repellency across the wettable, low and medium categories, high water repellency soil produced shallower pathways and more variable evaporation rates than those seen in medium repellency tanks. Pathways were also slower to form and wider in very strongly water repellent soil, and the greater resistance to wetting appears to have limited pathway propagation relative to that observed in medium water repellency tanks. Where soil was layered such that water repellency decreased with depth, wetting patterns were broadly consistent with the structure outlined by Visible preferential flow was occasionally present in tanks containing only wettable soil, and appears to have influenced evaporation rates in at least once case during the April–May monitoring period. Samples of soil retrieved from the B-horizon at the primary field site was occasionally found to be slightly water repellent, and it is possible that soil used in this phase was initially slightly or subcritically water repellent ( Although the distribution of water repellency in the field may occur as a simplistic product of decreasing organic matter concentrations with depth into the soil profile, results from this study suggest field distributions to be remarkably well-engineered to favour moisture conservation, relative to either stronger or weaker alternatives. Tanks containing uniform, strongly water repellent soil produced generally shallower flow pathways and no obvious improvement in moisture conservation relative to those containing only moderately repellent soil. Shallower or less well-graded water repellent layers of 0.15 In the field, water repellency has been observed to vary on a seasonal cycle, decreasing during winter as flow pathways spread and water repellent compounds are leached from the soil, to be re-established during summer when the soil dries out. Past authors have noted that water repellent soil layers likely confer particular value in conserving moisture after isolated rain events during periods of summer drought, when potential evaporation rates and moisture stress will be at their annual peaks ( Evaporation figures recorded from uniform soil tanks, which were monitored during a prolonged period of summer drying, highlight particularly the benefit of soil water repellency in conserving any moisture received during periods of maximum daily potential evaporation. Tanks containing uniform water repellent soil were able to retain up to 45% of added moisture for three weeks after a simulated wetting event of only 5 In the layered soils examined during the June monitoring period we found that even greatly reduced water repellent soil layers (maximum depth 5–15 Rates of evaporative loss recorded during all phases of this study provide evidence that water repellent soil layers are capable of reducing evaporative moisture loss by promoting deep preferential flow. Tanks containing water repellent soils retained substantial trace moisture even after three weeks of summer drying, while wettable soils lost all added moisture within the first 2–3 Water repellent surface layers are particularly beneficial in conserving moisture following isolated summer rain events, when water repellency, moisture stress and potential evaporation rates coincide at their annual peaks. The advantage of deep water repellent layers is less pronounced during autumn and winter, though the establishment of strong, deep water repellency during summer may prolong the persistence of such layers through winter, during which period water repellency gradually breaks down.