Low-grade ores are becoming increasingly important to metal production due to increasing metal prices and depletion of high-grade, low-impurity sources. Bioleaching can be an option to recover the metallic content present in these tailings. In this work, the bioleaching potential of a low-grade copper ore, containing chalcocite, bornite and chalcopyrite, was demonstrated with a Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans strain, at 50°C. Batch experiments were performed in shake flasks as well as a bioreactor (BioFlo 110), and the effects of pH, metal concentration and air flow rate on copper extraction were determined. The presence of fluoride in the gangue minerals resulted in up to 270mg/L total fluoride in solution, which affected bioleaching. Fluoride toxicity was overcome with aluminium additions and resulted in high copper extraction (up to 100%) at pH 1.9. Speciation calculations were performed with on the aluminium-fluoride systems and indicated AlF2+ as the main complex in the system, whereas HF concentration was reduced to values below 10−4
                     mol/L, which seems to be the threshold for bacterial growth inhibition.The extractive metallurgy industry is facing the challenge of processing low-grade ores, which often contain deleterious elements in their gangue. Bioleaching can be an option to recover the metallic content present in these materials ( Secondary copper sulphides are especially amenable to bioleaching since high extractions at relatively fast kinetics can be achieved. Column bioleaching experiments carried out with an ore in which 80% of the copper was covellite showed different behaviour with both mesophilic and thermophilic microorganisms ( During ore bioleaching the gangue minerals may play an important role on bioleaching performance. Although the microorganisms can be adapted to high metal concentrations, anionic species present in the gangue minerals can impact bioleaching even at low concentrations ( In addition to fluorite and fluorapatite, fluoride can be also associated with silicate minerals such as muscovite (KAl This work reports results from a secondary sulphide ore bioleaching with a moderate thermophilic strain ( The bioleaching experiments were carried out with two secondary sulphide ore samples ( Mineralogical analysis - performed by optical microscopy as well as SEM-EDS and supported by chemical analysis - indicates that the high-grade copper ore sample contains biotite (42.3%), magnetite (21.5%) and silicates, specially amphibole (18.9%) and garnet (6.9%). In addition, the low-grade copper ore presents roughly the same amount of biotite (34.9%) and amphibole (25.2%), less magnetite (9.5%) and more garnet (16.7%). The copper containing minerals comprise bornite (36%) as well as chalcocite (64%) in the high-copper ore, while the low-copper ore contains 39% bornite, 55% chalcocite and 6% chalcopyrite. In both cases, cyanide-soluble copper accounted for 92.2% of the total copper in the high-copper ore and 85.0% in the low-copper ore, which is consistent with the mineralogical characterization. Both ores also contain 0.53-0.85% chloride and 0.53-1.0% fluoride as fluorite (CaF Bioleaching experiments were performed at 50 Aeration experiments were performed in a baffled bioreactor (New Brunswick Scientific - BioFlo 110) with 2 Initially, bacterial growth in the presence of fluoride and aluminium ions was assessed in the absence of solid material. The aluminium/fluoride molar ratio was varied from 0 to 1.40; NaF was used as the fluoride source while aluminium was supplied as Al Cell counts were performed using a Neubauer chamber in a phase contrast microscope (Leica). Ferrous iron concentration was determined by titration with standard potassium dichromate solution in the presence of a 1 H The morphological features of the leach residues were studied by SEM-EDS with a JEOL JSM 501 SEM microscope. The particles investigated were filtered and observed as powder or mounted in epoxy resin and then polished to a flat, mirrored surface. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used for elemental analysis. Initially, selected experiments followed the growth of Chalcocite is believed to be leached in two stages: (i) firstly, a rapid step where there is 50% copper extraction and a form of CuS is produced (the so-called second stage covellite); (ii) in the second stage the reaction is slower and more sensitive to both solution potential and temperature. At 35 The reduced (or lack of) bacterial activity has been observed during bioleaching of many ores and has been ascribed in many instances to the deleterious effect of gangue minerals on bacterial activity ( Fluoride ions toxicity on bacterial growth can be overcome by the presence of soluble aluminium in the leaching systems (  Four different particle size ranges were studied during bioleaching i.e., 150–106 External ferrous iron was not required for bioleaching of either ore as copper extractions were close to 100% (high-grade copper ore) and 80% (low-grade copper ore), even when there was no external ferrous sulphate addition. Under these conditions, iron-containing phase dissolution resulted in some 1.2 Heap leaching operations are designed to treat low-grade sources, such as the ores presently studied. In these operations, the barren solution is recirculated to the heap (or dump) after metal recovery and there is a built up of a series of metals, such as aluminium and magnesium, in the leaching liquor, which can impact bacterial growth, specially at high concentrations. This is because water activity is reduced at high ionic strengths, and therefore the cells lose water to the solution by an osmotic effect ( Finally, a maximum copper extraction at 1% solids in an aerated stirred bioreactor was achieved after 3 to 4 Secondary sulphides are amenable to bioleaching and many industrial operations apply this technology to produce copper ( Many studies have shown the detrimental effects of fluoride on bacterial growth, ascribed to the predominance of the HF form at the pH of bioleaching. Acidophiles maintain a neutral cytoplasmic pH, which is 4–5 units above external solution pH. To achieve that, the cytoplasmic membrane (a lipid bilayer), despite allowing flow of ions and molecules to support metabolism, must hinder protons from entering the cell. This is a specialized process because protons cross the membrane easier than any other monovalent cations. The entry of protons is further reduced by an inverted trans-membrane potential (ΔΨ), which also contributes to the neutral cytoplasmic pH (  Although actual values are somewhat different, due to the different bioleaching temperature and ionic strength, the results from Once the detrimental effects of fluoride have been overcome, bioleaching can be performed provided external aluminium sources are present as the experiments starts. This is important because iron is initially present as Fe During bioleaching the pH can be set at high values as compared to that required for chemical leaching (control). While at the latter condition higher extractions were observed at lower pH (1.4), with an expected higher acid consumption (not determined), bioleaching enables copper extraction at higher pH, which has important implications for process economics. These results are consistent with heap bioleaching studies (columns), which observed substantial reduction in acid consumption as the solution pH was increased ( The bio-leaching of the low-grade copper ore was affected by particle size, with unexpectedly higher extractions for the two coarser ranges. This effect can be explained by considering the mineralogical composition of the low-copper ore, which contains chalcopyrite that is not amenable to leaching by moderate thermophiles ( Bioleaching seems to be a suitable option to recover metallic content from low-grade copper sources, potentially reducing environmental impacts of toxic metals. Moreover, acid mine drainage generated from mining residues is a slow process that can last for decades and pollute waters with metals and sulphate (acid and neutral drainages) as well as acidity (acid drainage). Once started, these processes are hard to stop. Bioleaching can be an viable option to deal with sulphide-containing mining wastes because it accelerates sulphide oxidation in a controlled way, enabling metal recovery from solution and this metallic content can be economically recovered and applied to cover costs associated with solid waste disposal as well as mining water treatment. This work is being conducted through column experiments where the best bioleaching parameters with Fluoride presence in both the high-grade copper and the low-grade copper ores had a negative impact on copper bioleaching from secondary sulphides (chalcocite and bornite). Fluoride toxicity was removed with aluminium additions that enabled the production of AlF The financial support from the funding agencies