The polyaniline (PANi) micro gas sensor was developed for medical application using the silicon process in order to detect ammonia odor of stomach inside. Fabricated sensor can be applied to medical purpose if it can detect the variation of ammonia concentration that is generated by Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) living in stomach. Today, there are many ammonia sensors for various applications. However, no suitable clinical sensor exists. We started to study for fabrication of a suitable sensor. It is possible for PANi microsensor to use clinical application because it has a good sensitivity at room temperature and is harmless to human. For this sensor operated inside stomach, the bulk micromachining and silicon process were used to reduce sensor size. The mechanical well was made of SU-8 photoresistor in order to improve the adhesion of PANi film. The sensor will be introduced to medical filed for competitive power of medical indicators.Gas sensor seems to replace the ability of olfactory organ among several sense organs of human body. The chemical sensor has been used in the industry for the last few years for the quality control of food, drinks, perfumes and many other domains. Recently, the research on the clinical applications of a chemical sensor to diagnose illness has been interested widely Differently from these methods, we select the method of odor detection. Diagnosis of illness based on chemical sensor is possible by detection of smells from the disease. Smells have used as indicators for a variety of diseases. For example, glycosuria and stomach cancer produce an acetone and ammonia odor, respectively. Accordingly, quantitative and qualitative analysis of odor can be used to estimate a disease. New instruments expected for medical diagnosis may revive the use of smell as a powerful tool for medical investigations. One of the causes of stomach cancer is stomach wall attraction by The metal oxide semiconductor materials are widely used for gas sensor membrane because they have many merits such as good sensitivity and fast response as sensing material. Also they have been available for the measurement of NH In this study, we explored the feasibility of developing a conducting polymer as use of clinical gas sensor. The principle of operation of the PANi sensor lies in variation of the film's electrophysical characteristics (conductivity, charge carriers concentration, etc.) that is induced by reversible ammonia adsorption process and chemical interactions. To get a reliable chemical sensor, the fabricated sensor consists of conducting polymer for sensing material as the base material, which is synthesized by chemical polymerization method using monomer and some dopants. The conducting polymer film was fabricated on a silicon substrate by a silicon processing. The sensing membrane consists of polyaniline (PANi). Its properties were analyzed using SPM and SEM. Fabricated sensor was characterized by electrical measurements for various odors. We aim to develop a system, which can detect disease symptom and situation by polymer micro gas sensor. Chemical polymerization method has many merits, such as an easy catalyst addition, short deposition time and uniform surface morphology, and so on. For the purpose of applying to these merits, microsensor is used, chemical polymerization method, for fabrication of sensing membrane. The fabrication method utilizing chemical polymerization is described as follows. A 0.15 The IDT (Inter-Digited) type Pt electrode is used for microsensor. The size is 1 The sensitivity of sensors is measured with gas sampling system after stabilization at 10 The picture of fabricated microsensor is shown in We used chemically polymerized PANi film because of its easy deposition and high sensitivity to ammonia. Chemically polymerized film exhibits higher sensitivity than the film used in other polymerization method. The fabricated film was analyzed to study its surface morphology. The SEM and the SPM picture of the chemically polymerized PANi film are shown in The SiO The shape of conducting polymer film is shown in The response to ammonia odor is investigated. The ammonia concentration of general public is usually 50 On account of detecting the variation of ammonia in the human body, fabricated sensor is required that it has both high sensitivity and good selectivity. Many kinds of gases exist inside human body, such as methanol and ethanol as digested gas, CO and CO The clinical sensor has to require a reversible sensing characteristic because it is applied to the people. For the purpose of investigating reproducibility and response characteristics of microsensor, five measurements are continuously carried out at 50 The results obtained in this work indicated that chemically polymerized PANi is suitable material for NH We confirm the feasibility of PANi micro gas sensor as a stomach cancer diagnosis or prediction. This study can be used as an important technological reference to develop a sensor system to diagnose a human disease by using polymer micro gas sensor in further study. And this technology can improve the quality of human life by easy and chip disease prediction method. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Confrontation to Chemical and Biological Terror and National Research Laboratory Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology.