A high pretilt angle is generated by hydrogenated amorphous carbon (a-C:H) thin films treated with an ion beam method. a-C:H thin films are deposited by remote plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition and are modified by an Ar ion beam at an incidence angle of 45° using an Kaufman ion gun. Ion beam irradiation results in the decrease of the thickness of a-C:H thin films and the increase of the sp2 fraction. The optical transmittance of the ion beam irradiated a-C:H is more affected by thickness than sp2 fraction. An excessive ion beam irradiation, 5 min Ar ion beam, results in the increase of the surface roughness of the a-C:H thin films and the pretilt angle has very low value. The pretilt angle is controlled by the thickness, sp2 fraction and the surface roughness.Liquid crystal displays (LCDs) have become one of the fastest growing information display devices in recent years. They are widely used in notebook computers and desktop monitors. A rubbing method has been widely used to align liquid crystal (LC) molecules on a polyimide surface. LC is aligned due to the induced anisotropy on the substrate surface. Rubbed polyimide surfaces have suitable characteristics such as uniform alignment and a high pretilt angle (3–6°). However, the rubbing method has some drawbacks, such as the generation of electrostatic charges and the creation of contaminating particles Most recently, Chaudharl et al. investigated the hydrogenated amorphous carbon (a-C:H) thin films for new alignment materials a-C:H thin films have properties of high mechanical hardness, high electrical resistivity, low friction coefficient, optical transparency and chemical inertness Preparation of a-C:H thin films can be carried out at low substrate temperature and with high deposition rates using PECVD In this study, we investigated the properties of a-C:H thin films as a function of Ar ion beam energy and irradiation time. Also, we investigated the relationship between the properties of a-C:H thin films and the pretilt angle values. The a-C:H thin films prepared for the present study were deposited on various substrates such as indium–tin-oxide (ITO), single crystalline Si, and glass with remote PECVD. Prior to film deposition all substrates were cleaned ultrasonically; in the case of ITO and glass cleaning was carried out with trichloroethylene (TCE), acetone and alcohol and in the case of single crystalline Si was carried out with TCE, acetone, alcohol, buffered oxide etchant, and DI water. The samples were sputter cleaned for 10 min in Ar plasma. a-C:H thin films were deposited using a mixture of C The LC cells were assembled by an anti-parallel structure to measure the pretilt angle. The thickness of the LC layer was 60 μm. The LC cell filled with a fluorinated mixture type nematic (N) LC without a chiral dopont (   Kobayashi et al. reported on Ar sputtering of the a-C:H and diamond thin films in the r.f. plasma system Also, ion beam irradiation increased the roughness of ion beam irradiated a-C:H thin films. The surface image of the ion beam irradiated a-C:H thin films are shown in  The LC pretilt angle has the maximum value at 1 min, and then the pretilt angle rapidly decrease with increasing ion beam irradiation time. Ion beam irradiation results in the increase of sp We studied LC alignment capabilities and the variation of pretilt angles with ion beam irradiation on a-C:H thin films. A high pretilt angle of 3.5° via ion beam irradiation on a-C:H thin films was measured. Ion beam irradiation on a-C:H thin films results in the increase of the transmittance and the decrease of the optical bandgap. The decrease of the optical bandgap means the increase of sp This work was supported by BK21 program.