Surface acoustic wave (SAW) biosensors are highly sensitive for mass binding and are therefore used to detect protein–protein and protein–antibody interactions. Whilst the standard surface of the chips is a thin gold film, measurements on implant- or bone-like surfaces could significantly enhance the range of possible applications for this technique. The aim of this study was to establish methods to coat biosensor chips with Ti, TiN, and silver-doped TiN using physical vapor deposition as well as with hydroxyapatite by electrophoresis. To demonstrate that protein adsorption can be detected on these surfaces, binding experiments with fibronectin and fibronectin-specific antibodies have been performed with the coatings, which successfully proved the applicability of PVD and EPD for SAW biosensor functionalization.Surface acoustic wave (SAW) technology – as it has been adapted to biochemical applications – is based on the propagation of EPD provides the possibility to thoroughly characterize the coating material prior to deposition and to maintain the chemical properties such as stoichiometry and phase composition during the process. The coating material can be prepared with well-defined particle sizes and hence be deposited with controllable film density. Furthermore, electrophoresis of ceramic materials is usually carried out in non-aqueous media, which significantly reduces the electrical current between the electrodes and eliminates the problem of gas bubble formation. Besides bone-like calcium phosphate coatings, also metallic implant surfaces are interesting subjects for protein adsorption experiments. Particularly titanium is widely used as implant material because of its excellent biocompatibility and its advantageous mechanical properties The coating material for the electrophoretic deposition process was hydroxyapatite and was fabricated by the following reaction: 20 Commercially available gold-coated SAW biosensor chips (SAW Instruments GmbH, Bonn, Germany) were used as substrates. Prior to coating the chips were thoroughly pre-cleaned in phosphoric acid, Extran®, SDS, isopropanol, water, and ethanol. Subsequently the chips were treated with a UV/ozone lamp (HNG-Germany) for surface activation. The negative voltage (− Deposition of Ti, TiAgN and TiN coatings on the gold surfaces of the SAW biosensor chips was carried out by magnetron sputtering (Pfeiffer Vacuum, Asslar, Germany). Ti and TiN coatings were obtained with a pure Ti target; TiAgN coatings were deposited by sputtering modular TiAg targets Adsorption measurements were performed with a Sam5 Blue biosensor (SAW Instruments GmbH, Bonn, Germany) using phosphate buffered saline (PBS) as running buffer. The test solutions were prepared by dissolution in PBS: fibronectin: 50 The HA powder obtained from the acid–base reaction was characterized by XRD prior to electrophoretic deposition. The as-precipitated powder showed all peaks characteristic for HA of moderate crystallinity (  The surface roughness parameters S Fibronectin was used as a model protein for adsorption experiments. The SAW technique was successfully applied to metallic and CaP coatings produced by PVD and EPD on SAW biosensor chips. Chips were coated with Ti, TiN, TiAgN, and hydroxyapatite. An EPD setup was developed and a standard coating routine was established, suitable for the reproducible deposition of a variety of ceramic films. This novel technique enables the SAW device to be applied to manifold interesting systems, combining its high sensitivity to liquid-surface interactions with the possibility of time-resolved adsorption studies. Hence, the SAW technique can be regarded as a highly promising tool for studying complex interactions between metallic and ceramic surfaces and biochemical and biological species with high sensitivity. However, further studies are necessary, in order to thoroughly investigate the characteristics of wave propagation in deposited films and the influences of surface crystallography and topography on the resulting phase shift. This could make the surface acoustic wave technique a suitable method for exact quantitative adsorption analysis. We gratefully acknowledge financial support by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at