To study the role of surface oxides in the adsorption of polysaccharide depressant on sulfides, the depression behavior of locust bean gum on sphalerite flotation in the presence of H2O2 was studied. The flotation results indicated that locust bean gum has depression effect on sphalerite but the reagent dosage needed is large. The addition of H2O2 can strength the depression effect of locust bean gum as H2O2 can increase the adsorption amount of locust bean gum on sphalerite greatly. The XPS analysis results illustrated that the locust bean gum adsorbed on sphalerite surface through chemical interaction with the oxides that formed on sphalerite surface. More oxides formed on sphalerite surface after the addition of H2O2 and this is the main reason why oxidizer can increase the depression effect of locust bean gum.Sulfide ores are the major sources of base metals such as copper, lead, zinc, nickel, etc. In most cases, copper-lead-zinc sulfide ores are grouped together in the deposits. Froth flotation is often used to improve the content of a specific sulfide mineral in an ore. In froth flotation, flotation reagents are added to modify the surface properties of mineral particles ( At present, inorganic reagents, such as sodium cyanide (NaCN), potassium dichromate (K Natural polysaccharides, such as carboxymethyl chitosan, starch, tragacanth gume, and guar gum, have been tested or used as selective depressants by many researchers ( Many studies have proposed that the oxides and hydroxides formed on the sulfide surface play an important role in the adsorption of polysaccharides on sulfides ( Natural sphalerite sample was purchased from Mineral Specimens Laboratory of Zhejiang University, China. Mineral compositions of the sample was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and no impurities were found (see Locust bean gum (molecular weight 2,50,000–3,00,000) and collector PBX were purchased from Shanghai Siyu Chemical Technology Co. Ltd. All the reagents used in this study were of pure analytical grade. HCl (hydrochloric acid) and KOH (potassium hydroxide) were used as pH regulators. Distilled water was used for all tests. In single mineral flotation test, 2 g sphalerite were pre-cleaned in 0.1 mol/L HCL solution with stirring for 5 min. After several times rinsing and filtration with distilled water, the mineral samples were suspended in 40 mL distilled water and conditioned for 2 min while the desired pH value was adjusted by HCl and KOH. Then oxidation reagent H For the adsorption tests, 1 g sphalerite powder was mixed with 100 mL distilled water and stirred for 3 min, then the locust bean gum solution of desired concentration was added and mixed for 1 h, ensuring that the adsorption process had reached equilibrium (when needed, the H X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey scan and high-resolution spectra were acquired on an AXIS 165 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos Analytical). To prepare the mineral sample for the XPS analysis, 1 g sphalerite was mixed with reagent solution at pH 7. The suspension was conditioned for 30 min, and the mineral solids were filtered, washed with distilled water and dried in a desiccator in vacuum before XPS analysis. To minimize oxidation, the analysis was carried out within 12 h after sample preparation. The effect of H The flotation behavior of sphalerite was then tested at different pH at a fixed H The role of oxidizer H The effect of pH on the flotation of sphalerite was studied and the results are shown in The adsorption behavior of locust bean gum on sphalerite at pH 7 are shown in XPS was utilized to investigate why H The narrow scans of S 2p were then performed on sphalerite at different conditions and the results are shown in  Locust bean gum has depression effect on sphalerite flotation and oxidizer H  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support of