Micropores (<2 nm) play an important role in coalbed methane adsorption, desorption, and diffusion. However, the mechanisms of micropore formation and evolution still need further study. This study primarily focuses on molecular structure controls on micropore evolution during coalification. CO2 adsorption experiments were employed to characterize micropore structure in coals, and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (13C NMR) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were employed to characterize the molecular structures of those coal samples. The results demonstrated that micropore evolution during laboratory simulated coalification was similar to that in geo-time-scale natural maturation. This suggests that laboratory simulated coalification can be an effective method for studying micropore evolution during coalification. Micropore evolution in laboratory simulated coalification and natural maturation both exhibited a parabolic curvature with coal rank, with a minimum at ~1.4%. When vitrinite reflectance (R
                     o) was <1.4%, micropores were mainly controlled by the aliphatic part of the coal samples, and micropore volume decreased with decreasing aliphatic functional groups. When R
                     
                        o
                      varied from 1.4% to 4.0%, micropore structure was mainly controlled by aromatic parts and coal crystallite structure. In this coalification stage, micropore volume showed linear correlation with the fraction of aromatic bridgehead carbon, the fraction of protonated aromatic carbon, and the ratio of aromatic bridge carbon to aromatic peripheral carbon (X
                     
                        BP
                     ). Moreover, the increase in lateral sizes (L
                     
                        a
                     ) and the decrease in interlayer spacing (d
                     
                        002
                     ) both resulted in the increase in micropore volume. In conclusion, the coal microporosity and its evolution were primarily determined by coal molecular structure. In different coalification stages, microporosity and its evolution were controlled by different sub-portions of the whole molecular structure. These findings can provide mechanistic insights of gas sorption and diffusion, as gas sorption and diffusion behaviors are simultaneously controlled by both pore structure and molecular structure.Micropores in coal play a vital role in methane storage and transport ( According to experimental data in previous studies, the size of the smallest pores in coal was approximately 0.4 nm, which was much smaller than coal molecular models ( The evolution of pore structures in coal has been extensively investigated previous studies ( When investigating the coalification process, two methods were usually used to obtain coal samples with various ranks: one is collecting naturally matured coal samples at different coal fields, and the other is through pyrolysis experiments ( The specific aim of this study is to investigate the molecular-structure controlled coal micropore evolution during coalification process. CO The raw coal in this study was collected from the Yilan opencast coal mine in China. Yilan coal is sub-bituminous coal and it is known for its richness of vitrinite macerals. The vitrain part accounted for >85% of the raw coal by weight. The maximum reflectance of vitrinite ( Eight naturally matured coal samples of different ranks were collected from different coal fields in China. The Pyrolysis experiments have been demonstrated to be an effective way to investigate the coalification process and to obtain coal samples of different ranks ( An ASAP 2020 sorption instrument by Micromeritics Company (United States) was employed to conduct low pressure CO The XRD experiments were conducted at the Advanced Analysis and Computation center of the China University of Mining and Technology. D8 ADVANCE, manufactured by Bruker Company (Germany), was employed to collect XRD data. Before the experiments, coal samples were pulverized down to 300 mesh. The operating conditions of the X-ray tube were U = 40 kV and As shown in The pore volumes of these samples were estimated based on the DFT model using CO From  NMR parameters were calculated through the peak fitting method, as shown in  It is necessary to discuss the causative relationship between evolution of molecular structure and evolution of micropore structure. During the geological process, the evolution of pores systems in coal is expected to mutually be controlled by coupled mechanical, geochemical and geothermal factors. The mechanical factors include stress and pressures and the geochemical and geothermal factors include temperature evolution, fluid flow alteration and their coupled effects. Intuitively, mechanical factors have great influence on the evolution of macropores. However, for small micropores, the stress and pressure will not play significant role due to the scale of the pores is down to nano-scale. This study focuses on the evolution of micropores (<1.1 nm) measured by low pressure CO It is also important to discuss whether micropore evolution during pyrolysis is similar to that of natural maturation. Several studies reported micropore evolution in natural maturation ( The evolution of coal chemical structures during coalification process has been widely reported in previous studies ( With When  Aromatic carbons can be divided into 3 different types: alkylated aromatic carbon, aromatic bridgehead carbon, and protonated and aromatic carbon. Through From Previous studies also found that micropores were further developed during coalification, and they thought this mainly resulted from the enhanced decomposition of surface groups and the release of volatiles (  It is interesting to study the phenomenon that coal samples around  Micropores are formed in the 3D spatial molecular structure ( The relationship between micropore volume and Through The values of   To determine the formation mechanism of micropores in macromolecular structures, two 3D coal structures were employed: subbituminous coal and anthracite coal ( As seen in Both chemical molecular composition and crystallite structure have great effects on the micropore structure. As documented in previous studies, the enhanced decomposition of molecular composition and graphitization were both accepted as the reasons for the variation of pore structure in coal ( With increasing maturation, crystallites have a greater effect on the micropore structure. When The following conclusions can be drawn: The micropore evolution during pyrolysis experiments is similar to that in natural maturation. The evolution of micropore volume during both pyrolysis experiments and natural maturation exhibit a parabolic curvature, with rank with a minimum at ~1.4%. With Crystallite structures clearly influence the micropore structure when the When The authors are sincerely thankful for the financial support of the