Ulexite, sodium–calcium–borate hydrate, has a chemical formula of Na2O·2CaO·5B2O3·16H2O, and is found in great amounts in Turkey. In this study, the dissolution of ulexite in ammonium acetate solutions was investigated in a batch reactor. The effects of the concentration of solution, particle size, solid-to-liquid ratio, stirring speed and reaction temperature on the dissolution rate were determined. It was found that the dissolution rate increased with an increase in concentration and reaction temperature, and with a decrease in particle size and solid-to-liquid ratio. No effect of stirring speed was observed on the conversion. It was determined that the dissolution rate fit the chemical reaction control model. The activation energy of this dissolution process was found to be 55.7kJ/mol.constants in Eq. stoichiometric coefficient in Eq. concentration of ammonium acetate (mol/cm bulk concentration of the fluid (mol/cm particle diameter (cm) effective diffusion coefficient (cm activation energy (J/mol) apparent rate constant for diffusion through the product layer (s mass-transfer coefficient for the fluid film (cm apparent rate constant for the surface chemical reaction (s rate constant of surface reaction (cm/s) frequency or pre-exponential factor (s apparent rate constant for diffusion through the fluid film (s solid-to-liquid ratio (g/mL) universal gas constant (J/mol average radius of solid particle (cm) reaction time (s) temperature (K) converted fraction molar density of solid reactant (mol/cm From strategic and industrial points of view, Boron is one of the most important elements in the world. Although the element is not used directly, its compounds have a wide range of applications. Boron is found in nature in the form of metal borates, mostly as sodium, calcium and magnesium borates. Boron compounds are produced from boron-containing ores. Commercially, the most-used compound of boron is boric acid. Boric acid is used in many branches of industry, including nuclear technology, production of heat resistant materials (such as refractors and ceramics), heat-resistant polymers, catalysts, and in the medical, pharmaceutical and electronic sectors, among others. Boric acid is also used as the starting material in the preparation of many boron chemicals including synthetic organic borate salts, boron phosphate, fluoroborates, boron tri-halides, borate esters, boron carbide and metal alloys such as ferroboron. Ulexite and colemanite are used as raw materials in the production of boric acid. Ulexite, sodium–calcium–borate hydrate, has a chemical formula of Na The dissolution of minerals in aqueous solutions is the basis of an important operation in hydrometallurgy known as leaching Since the acidity of many of the inorganic acids used as leaching reagents is generally high, it is expected that they have a low selectivity, while simultaneously having a high corrosive effect, making pH control more difficult Organic reagents are usually more selective than inorganic reagents In the literature, there was no study found that ammonium acetate was used as a leaching reagent. Thus, the aims of this study were to investigate the dissolution of ulexite using ammonium acetate solutions, and to determine the effects of the experimental parameters, including solution concentration, solid-to-liquid ratio, particle size, stirring speed and reaction temperature. A kinetic analysis was performed using the shrinking core model. The ulexite samples used in this study were obtained from Kırka, Eskisehir, Turkey. The material was first cleaned of visible impurities, crushed and ground. The samples were sieved to obtain different particle size fractions. The original mineral sample was analyzed, and it was determined that the mineral contained 42.08% B Parameters that were expected to affect the dissolution rate were chosen including the concentration of solution, reaction temperature, solid-to-liquid ratio, particle size and stirring speed. The ranges of parameters are given The dissolution rate of ulexite was determined as a function of time by changing the ammonium acetate concentration, particle size, solid to liquid ratio, stirring speed and reaction temperature. In the experiments, while the effect of one parameter was examined, the values of the other parameters shown with “a” in Ammonium acetate is the salt of a weak acid and a weak base. According to the following reaction, ammonium acetate ionizes in aqueous medium: To investigate the effect of the ammonium acetate concentration on the dissolution rate, the experiments were carried out in the 0.25–1.75 The effect of the particle size on the dissolution rate was studied using the following size fractions: −0.840 The effect of the solid-to-liquid ratio on the dissolution rate was determined by performing all experiments in the range of 0.50/200−2.5/200 Tests were carried out at stirring speeds of 300, 400 and 500 In order to determine the effect of the reaction temperature on the dissolution rate, the experiments were performed with five different reaction temperatures in the range of 298–318 Fluid–solid heterogeneous reaction systems have many applications in chemical and hydrometallurgical processes. This kind of reaction is found in various fields such as mineral leaching or precipitation The reaction between a solid and a fluid may be represented by Diffusion of the fluid reactant from the main body of the fluid film to the surface of the solid. Diffusion of the fluid reactant through the ash layer to the surface of the unreacted core. Reaction on the surface between the fluid reactant and the solid. According to above steps, the rate of a non-catalytic heterogeneous reaction is generally controlled by one of the following steps: diffusion through the fluid film, diffusion through the product layer, or the chemical reaction at the surface of the core of the unreacted particle The activation energy of this process was determined from the Arrhenius equation. The Arrhenius plot of the process is shown in In this study, the dissolution rate of ulexite in ammonium acetate solutions was investigated. The effects of the chosen parameters on the dissolution rate were examined and evaluated. It was determined that the conversion rate increased with an increase ammonium acetate concentration and reaction temperature, and with a decrease solid-to-liquid ratio and particle size. The dissolution rate was not affected by stirring speed. It was observed that the reaction rate was sensitive to both particle size and reaction temperature. The dissolution kinetics follows a shrinking-core model with the chemical reaction control as the rate-controlling step. The activation energy of the dissolution process was found to be about 55.7