Calcaneus fractures in children differ from those in adults. Most calcaneus fractures in children can be managed nonoperatively, with good long-term results expected. The width and height of the calcaneus can remodel with time in children. Recently, there has been a trend toward operative treatment of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus in children to correct the articular deformity. Studies of calcaneal fracture fixation in children used an extended lateral approach, with its possible complications. In the present report, we describe the operative treatment of 2 children (12 and 13 years old), who had a displaced intra-articular fracture of the calcaneus, using a minimally invasive sinus tarsi approach. Adequate reduction was obtained in both cases with no soft tissue complications or implant discomfort. Fixation was obtained using 3.5-mm cortical screws. Anatomic joint alignment was restored. The children were followed up until they had both resumed their full activities with no complications. We recommend this approach for operative treatment of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus, because it addresses the intra-articular displacement, which is the most important element of the deformity in children.Calcaneus fractures in children are different from their counterparts in adults. Unlike adults, calcaneus fractures are rare injuries in children Most calcaneus fractures in children can be managed nonoperatively, because nonoperative treatment has been reported in most cases to provide adequate results In the present report, we describe the use of the minimally invasive sinus tarsi approach to perform open reduction and internal fixation of intra-articular calcaneus fractures in the pediatric patient. We describe the technique used and report the results for 2 children who underwent this procedure. The patient was placed supine with a relatively large “bump” underneath the affected hip to allow for better exposure of the lateral part of the foot. A tourniquet was used over the proximal thigh. A straight incision was done over the subtalar joint just anterior to the tip of the fibula and extending for about 4 cm in the direction of the fourth toe. The sheath of the peroneal tendons was released, and the peroneal tendons were retracted toward the plantar side. The subtalar joint was identified, and the lateral capsule was released to be able to visualize the posterior talus (which will act as guide for reduction). The posterior part of the lateral segment of the calcaneus with the attached articular surface was depressed and tilted down (about 40° to 70°), causing incongruity of the subtalar joint ( Preliminary fixation of the reduced fragments was performed using Kirschner wires, and 3.5-mm cortical screws were used to fix the fragments together (the reduced lateral fragments to the medial sustentaculum part). Washers can be used when the lateral walls have been weakened by comminution. Intraoperative fluoroscopy was used to assess the reduction and ensure that the screws had not penetrated into the subtalar joint. Bone graft substitutes were not used. We did not use screws that go through the tuberosity of the calcaneus to avoid iatrogenic damage to the growth plate. After irrigation, the tendons were allowed to return to their position; no repair of the tendon sheath was done. Closure of the subcutaneous tissues was achieved using Vicryl A 12-year-old male had injured his left foot while skiing. He had a left calcaneus fracture with intra-articular affection (joint depression type). The Bohler angle was −6°. A minimally invasive sinus tarsi approach was used to reduce the articular surface of the subtalar joint, with fixation using three 3.5-mm cortical screws (one of them over a washer). The patient’s fracture had healed by 8 weeks postoperatively, and activity was gradually resumed during the subsequent months. By 3 months postoperatively, the patient had been able to regain full function and was able to participate in all sports activities with no foot pain. The Bohler angle showed improvement to +10°. He had no complaints related to foot pain or limping. No tenderness related to the implant was present. No soft tissue complications or fixation failure occurred. The patient had maintained these findings at the final follow-up visit 1 year postoperatively ( A 13-year-old male with autistic features had jumped from the second floor. The patient had a left calcaneus fracture with disruption of the posterior subtalar joint and a decreased Bohler angle of 13°. The patient also had right second, third, and fourth metatarsal fractures. On the left side, a minimally invasive sinus tarsi approach was used to reduce the articular surface, followed by fixation using three 3.5-mm cortical screws (2 over a washer). The Bohler angle improved to 28°. The metatarsal fractures were managed by percutaneous intramedullary Kirschner wires. By 2 months postoperatively, the patient’s fractures had healed, and he was allowed to begin weightbearing as tolerated. By 3 months postoperatively, he had returned to full activity. No soft tissue complications or fixation failure occurred. No implant discomfort was noted. At the final follow-up visit (9 months postoperatively), the patient continued to be pain free, with full regain of function and no gait abnormality ( Calcaneus fractures are relatively common injuries in adults. Many studies have discussed the operative versus nonoperative treatment choices for these fractures in adult patients Calcaneus fractures have classically been treated nonoperatively. Multiple case series studies have suggested that children with nondisplaced or minimally displaced intra-articular fractures can be treated conservatively, with good clinical results The adult data have suggested that the more accurate articular reduction achieved by open reduction of the joint will achieve better clinical results, which led to greater acceptance of open reduction of the calcaneus fractures in adults The extended lateral approach had been used by the investigators of the 4 studies discussing the surgical treatment of calcaneus fractures in children Owing to the high morbidity associated with the extended lateral approach, a recent increase in interest has occurred in the minimally invasive sinus tarsi approach for open reduction and internal fixation of intra-articular fractures of the calcaneus Our rationale for using this approach for reduction and fixation of intra-articular calcaneus fractures in children is that the main indication for open reduction of calcaneus fractures in children is to reduce the subtalar joint, which can be performed easily using this approach without the need to raise a large flap. The calcaneus deformity in the height and width should remodel with time owing to the presence of the open growth plate on the calcaneus. In both our patients, we had very good reduction of the intra-articular segment of the calcaneus fracture, with good alignment of the posterior subtalar joint and parallel orientation of the calcaneus posterior facet and the talar articular cartilage. In conclusion, the minimally invasive (sinus tarsi) approach allows for adequate reduction of the subtalar joint in cases of a displaced intra-articular fracture of the calcaneus, avoiding the inherent risks of the extended lateral approach. Its use in children is even more justified, because the main indication for open reduction in this population is to reduce the subtalar joint, with less emphasis on the height and width of the calcaneus, which can remodel with growth.