The bioactivity of trans-resveratrol (RSV), an important wine polyphenol, and of its metabolites was investigated in a more relevant setup comprising an in vitro coculture cell model that combines intestinal absorption and conjugation with changes in endothelial function, which is primarily affected in cardiovascular diseases. Caco-2 and endothelial EA.hy926 cells were grown in a coculture, and Caco-2 cells were treated with RSV in the coculture and in two different sequential setups for 4 h and 24 h. Transported metabolites were investigated by UPLC–MS/MSE, and the effects on NO production, ROS inhibition and secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), interleukin-8 (IL-8) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) were evaluated in TNF-α-activated and nonactivated endothelial cells. RSV and four conjugated metabolites, two sulfates and two glucuronides, were identified after intestinal transport. In both coculture and sequential systems, RSV at 20 μM strongly induced NO production. Changes in ROS and NO levels demonstrated a clear effect of crosstalk between cells in the coculture. The secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and VEGF was largely increased by treatment with TNF-α (inflammatory condition). The polyphenol intervention significantly reduced the levels of VEGF, ROS, IL-8 and ICAM-1, with a more pronounced effect in TNF-α-activated endothelial cells. In conclusion, RSV and its metabolites showed accentuated bioactivity on TNF-α-induced inflammation, and the metabolism of endothelial cells as a biological target was not only influenced by these phenolics but also by the communication between distinct cell lines, showing a new perspective for investigations on polyphenol intervention and its biological outcomes. interleukin-8 (PubChem CID: 44357137) Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death and disability in the western world and include several pathological conditions related to dysfunction of blood vessels, including arteries, veins and capillaries Oxidative stress and inflammation in endothelial cells are intimately associated with the development of atherosclerosis. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) act as potent oxidants of key biological molecules causing impairment of various cellular functions. In the endothelium, the activation of the transcription nuclear factor NF- The consumption of polyphenol-rich diets is associated with a reduced risk of chronic diseases. Grape derivatives such as wine and grape juice are highly appreciated worldwide and account for one of the most important sources of polyphenols in the human diet In this work, we have evaluated the use of an The experiments were performed using the continuous cell line Caco-2 (HTB­37™, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), which differentiates into enterocyte-like cells upon confluency and the permanent human endothelial cell line EA.hy926 (CRL2922™, ATCC). This endothelial cell line was chosen because of its continuous character, resulting in a fast and constant growth rate and more consistent response compared to primary cell lines such as HUVEC. The Caco-2 cells (passage 15–27) and endothelial cells (passage 9–15) were grown separately as adherent cultures in 25-cm Cellular mitochondrial activity after treatment with Three types of experimental setups were used: (a) coculture of Caco-2 cells with EA.hy926 cells; (b) sequential culture of Caco-2 cells with EA.hy926 cells; and (c) standard culture which is a monoculture of EA.hy629 cells. (a) For the coculture setup, Caco-2 cells were seeded on 12-well Transwell plates (0.4-μm pore diameter, Elscolab, Kruibeke, Belgium) at a concentration of 250,000 cells per well. Fifteen days after confluency of the Caco-2 cells, EA.hy926 cells were seeded on the basolateral compartment of the Transwell plate, at a cell density of 300,000 cells per well. The EA.hy926 cells were grown in the coculture system until they reached confluency on the third day. On the fourth day of coculture, Caco-2 cells were treated apically with RSV in phenol-red-free and serum-free exposure medium at concentrations of 5 μM and 20 μM, and RSV-free exposure medium was applied in the basolateral compartment. A concentration of 5 μM was chosen because it is in the same range of peak plasma concentrations after moderate wine and juice consumption as reported previously (b) In addition, the same set of experiments was performed in a sequential setup to investigate the effects of RSV on cellular responses in an isolated system. For the sequential setup, Caco-2 cells were cultivated on Transwell inserts and allowed to differentiate for 15 days after confluency, and EA.hy926 cells were seeded in a separate 24-well plate at a concentration of 100,000 cells per well. Prior to treatment at confluency, the endothelial cells were treated with or without TNF- For all transport experiments, the apparent permeability coefficient ( LC–MS/MS analysis was performed with a Waters Acquity UPLC system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) connected to a Synapt HDMS TOF mass spectrometer (Waters Corp.). LC separation was done on a Waters Acquity BEHC18 column (2.1 mm×150 mm, 1.7 m particle size) using gradient elution composed of (A) water (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and (B) methanol (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) as earlier described The inhibition of intracellular ROS was monitored in endothelial cells through the reaction with the oxidant sensitive fluorogenic probe H The production of NO in endothelial cells was monitored using the Griess colorimetric assay (Sigma-Aldrich), as previously described The cellular secretion of IL-8, VEGF and ICAM-1 in the coculture was determined in cell culture media collected at time points 4 h and 24 h from the basolateral compartment and analyzed using the human IL-8 TMB, human VEGF TMB and human ICAM-1 ABTS ELISA kits (Peprotech, London, UK), respectively, following the manufacturer's instructions. Data were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Student's The transport and metabolism of RSV by Caco-2 cells were tested in samples of basolateral media periodically collected between 0 h and 24 h. Upon 2 h exposure to 100-μM RSV, the presence of RSV and a hydrophilic metabolite was detected in the chromatogram. Upon further incubation, RSV and other three metabolites were detected after 24 h incubation (data not shown). Hence, for the MS/MS In To develop an In contrast, changes in mitochondrial activity in response to RSV were largely influenced by cultivation method, with distinct responses observed in the coculture, compared to sequential and standard culture methods ( A second observation is that under standard monoculture conditions, RSV increased mitochondrial activity in a dose-dependent way, which was most probably not the result of cell proliferation, as the total protein content of the wells, as measured with a sulforhodamin B (SRB) test, was not increased in parallel. The mitochondrial increase was not visible in the coculture system, and also in the sequential setup, no clear trend could be seen. This may be a first indication that native RSV, but not the transported conjugated metabolites, increases mitochondrial activity The effect of RSV and its metabolites on cellular NO production is presented in Third, it could be observed that especially under TNF- First, a 1-h treatment of the cells with TNF- Thirdly, the effect of RSV on ROS was dependent on both TNF- The secretion of proinflammatory markers was tested in both TNF- In TNF- Under healthy conditions, the overall concentration of IL-8 (10.95 pg/ml) significantly decreased in a dose-dependent way in cocultured cells treated with RSV at 5 μM (8.09 pg/ml) and 20 μM (9.40 pg/ml). Upon TNF- This study assessed the impact of When comparing our coculture model with the one previously reported Compared to the HUVEC cells in a coculture Concerning the biological endpoints, we have studied endpoints of oxidative stress and inflammation. During absorption, RSV undergoes excessive metabolism by gut epithelial cells, whereas only very low amounts of unconjugated RSV are circulating in the blood stream. The sulfated and glucuronated conjugates are present in larger amounts This study demonstrated that RSV and its metabolites exert a protective effect in endothelial cells against oxidative stress and inflammation, which are intimately associated to cardiovascular diseases. This effect was verified in endothelial cells cultivated in both coculture with intestinal cells (Caco-2) and sequential systems (posttransport), under inflammatory and noninflammatory conditions. Notwithstanding, we demonstrated for the first time the bioactivity of RSV and of its sulfate and glucuronide metabolites in a coculture toward TNF- I.M.T., J.V.C., M.T.B.L. and C.G. contributed to the design of the project, cell experiments and development of the coculture and the manuscript; G.B.G., S.K., G.S., K.R. and E.C. contributed to the methodology of metabolites identification, cell experiments and UPLC-MS/MS analysis of metabolites. All authors contributed to writing and revision of the manuscript. None declared. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the BOF Special Research Fund (project 01B04212), Hercules Project (AUGE028 and AUGE014) and the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) (grant 248460/2013-7 to I.M.T.).