Comparison effect of chemical citric acid and other leaching reagents including inorganic acid and other organic acid on nickel extraction from low-grade Indonesian saprolitic ores was evaluated. Two saprolitic ores from two different mining areas (Sulawesi Island and Halmahera Island) in Indonesia were used to investigate the leaching performance and mineral dissolution behaviors of different ore samples using different leaching reagents. Leaching was performed using citric, sulfuric, nitric, hydrochloric, lactic, and oxalic acids. The saprolitic ore from Sulawesi Island (SS) has higher serpentine and lower goethite contents than the saprolitic ore from Halmahera Island (SH). These differences significantly affect the leaching performances and metal dissolution behaviors. Citric acid and sulfuric acid were more effective than other acid solutions for nickel extraction from both samples. Citric acid was very effective for dissolving nickel from serpentine, but did not recover nickel from goethite. In contrast, inorganic acids, namely sulfuric, nitric, and hydrochloric acids, can extract nickel from lateritic ores by dissolving goethite as well as serpentine, but the nickel recoveries achieved with sulfuric acid were higher than those achieved with other inorganic acids. A comparison of the leaching performances of the two samples shows that nickel recovery from SS was higher than that from SH when citric acid leaching was used, but the samples gave similar nickel recoveries in all inorganic acid and lactic acid leaching processes. Moreover, oxalic acid is the least effective reagent for nickel extraction from both samples, because of nickel oxalate precipitation after nickel dissolution. In addition, the effect of a sulfuric acid–citric acid mixture on the nickel dissolution rate was investigated to confirm the individual influences of citric acid and sulfuric acid on the leaching behavior of each sample. The results show that an increase in the amount of sulfuric acid affected the dissolution rate of nickel in leaching of SH much more than that in leaching of SS. In general, the effect of citric acid in the mixture of sulfuric acid and citric acid is attractive. Moreover, citric acid offers not only high nickel recovery and high selectivity of leaching but also an environmentally safe process and low acid consumption.The high-grade saprolitic deposits in regions such as Indonesia, New Caledonia, and Brazil were first commercialized using pyrometallurgical routes in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. However, as these higher-grade deposits became increasingly difficult to find, the mining industry began to develop techniques that could be used to process the vast amounts of lower-grade nickel laterites around the world using hydrometallurgical routes ( Nitric acid is an acidic lixiviant and a relatively strong oxidant. It can adequately dissolve valuable metals contained in iron minerals and completely oxidize divalent iron for precipitation as hematite ( These inorganic acids still cause environmental problems when the leaching treatment is not performed well. Nowadays, organic acids have been being studied as alternative leaching reagents for nickel extraction from lateritic ores to address those issues and to provide environmentally acceptable techniques. Many researchers have confirmed that citric acid is the most effective organic acid in the leaching of nickel laterites ( The effectiveness of citric acid and other acid solutions, either inorganic acids such as sulfuric, hydrochloric, and nitric acids, or organic acids such as lactic and oxalic acids, in the leaching of nickel laterites has been investigated. However, no studies that compare their effects on the dissolution of nickel and other metals from lateritic ores originating from different mining locations have been reported. The current study therefore focuses on comparing the effects of citric acid with those of other acid solutions (i.e., sulfuric, hydrochloric, nitric, lactic, and oxalic acids) on nickel leaching from low-grade saprolitic ores to investigate whether citric acid performs better than other acid solutions. Saprolitic ores from two different mining areas in Indonesia, namely Sulawesi Island and Halmahera Island, were first jaw-crushed and vibration-milled to <75 Leaching tests were performed in the shaker equipment at a constant shaking speed of 200 The leaching temperature was kept constant at 30 The water used for the experiments was purified using a water super-purification apparatus (Milli-Q, Millipore). The leaching process was monitored by sampling the slurry periodically and determining the amounts of dissolved metals by ICP-OES, using standard procedures. The collected residues were washed with distilled water and dried for 4 Different ore samples from different locations may have different mineral and elemental compositions. These differences can affect the leaching performances of the samples. In addition, the effectiveness of leaching agents for different minerals may differ. Analysis and mineralogical studies of saprolitic samples are therefore important in investigating the leaching mechanism of each sample in various acid solutions. The XRD patterns of the saprolitic ores are shown in TG–DTA was used to confirm the XRD data. The TG–DTA patterns of the samples ( Nickel in lateritic ores is usually associated with, and incorporated in, the mineral constituents of the ore. The XRD patterns ( The results of a comparison of the effects of citric acid with those of inorganic acid solutions (i.e., sulfuric, nitric, and hydrochloric acids) on nickel, iron, and magnesium dissolutions for each saprolitic ore sample are reported in this section. Nickel, iron, and magnesium recoveries were used to investigate the mineral dissolution mechanism in the leaching process with each acid solution, because, as described previously in Section The effects of different leaching agents on the nickel, iron, and magnesium dissolution rates for SS and SH are shown in The mechanism of metal dissolution from minerals by citric acid, which is an organic acid, is different from those when inorganic acid solutions are used. Although citric acid is a weak acid, it is an excellent chelating agent and metal binder. Ligands or chelating agents aid mineral dissolution by specifically adsorbing on mineral surfaces and forming highly soluble complexes with metal ions (e.g., magnesium and nickel in serpentine). The formation of ligand–metal complexes at the mineral surface shifts the electron density toward the metal ion, which destabilizes the Me–O lattice bonds and facilitates detachment of metal ions into solution ( In contrast, sulfuric acid, nitric acid, and hydrochloric acid, which are strong inorganic acids, only use one mechanism for attacking the reactive metals contained in minerals; ions formed by they displace metal ions by hydrogen complete dissociation of the acids. This study used a molar by molar comparative basis for each reagent to compare the systems though the acids used are mono-protic and di-protic because it is a simple way to study the stoichiometric comparison of leaching reaction of each reagent. Nickel dissolution from lateritic ores by acid solutions such as sulfuric acid, nitric acid, and hydrochloric acid can be expressed in the following reactions. Those reactions show that on the stoichiometry basis, 1 Moreover, the changes of pH and Eh during leaching experiments are depicted in The results show that there are differences between the leaching performances of the two samples. When sulfuric acid leaching was used, the nickel recoveries for SS and SH for the same leaching period were similar. However, a different trend was observed for leaching with other acids. When nitric acid and hydrochloric acid leaching were performed, the nickel recovery from SS was slightly greater than that from SH. Citric acid leaching extracted a much larger amount of nickel from SS than from SH. The mineralogical composition of each raw material is an important parameter in the leaching mechanism for each acid solution. The effect of different ore mineralogy on the leaching performance of each acid solution was investigated based on the XRD patterns of the solid residues ( Serpentine and goethite in the samples used in this study were observed to be the main host minerals for nickel. The dissolution behaviors of these minerals therefore need to be investigated in terms of the rate of nickel dissolution. The XRD patterns of the solid residues of SS ( It can be predicted that goethite is more easily dissolved in sulfuric acid, nitric acid, and hydrochloric acid leaching, but goethite is hardly dissolved and is insoluble in citric acid. This conclusion is in accordance with the results in If metabolic citric acid produced by The order of the activities of the organic acids in nickel extraction for both samples was citric acid A comparison of The effects of mineralogical differences on the leaching performance can also be deduced from the XRD patterns of the solid residues after leaching. The leaching abilities of sulfuric acid and citric acid show interesting trends. The nickel recoveries achieved using sulfuric acid leaching was higher than those achieved with other inorganic acids. Although citric acid is a weak organic acid, the nickel dissolution rates with this acid were similar to those for sulfuric acid leaching, especially in the case of SS. The influence of sulfuric acid and citric acid on the nickel-leaching rates and mineral dissolution behaviors of different saprolitic samples were further investigated using mixtures of sulfuric acid and citric acid at various concentrations. Three mixtures of sulfuric acid and citric acid were used: (a) 0.25  Furthermore, XRD patterns of solid residue were also observed to investigate the mineral dissolution behavior in these experiments. It is suggested that the presence of citric acid in the dissolution of nickel from saprolitic ores is significant. This leaching behavior indicates the beneficial interaction between free hydrogen and citrate ions. The protons (free hydrogen ions) produced by citric acid dissociation contribute to proton promoted mineral dissolution. As mentioned in Section In addition, the effects of a mixture of sulfuric acid and citric acid on leaching were further investigated using an acid solution mixture of higher concentrations, namely 1 This last result suggests that for SH, all the serpentine nickel can be extracted using citric acid, and sulfuric acid can be used to recover all the nickel from goethite. The amount of serpentine in SH is small, therefore 1 It is also proposed that citric acid is more suitable than sulfuric acid for leaching serpentine-bearing lateritic ores, although sulfuric acid can dissolve nickel from both goethite and serpentine. The use of sulfuric acid for goethite-containing lateritic ores is preferable. These findings can be applied to leaching at atmospheric pressure and low temperatures of other lateritic ores containing goethite and serpentine. The mineral compositions of raw material ores are crucial in the leaching performances and metal dissolution rates of lateritic ores using various acid solutions. Citric acid and sulfuric acid are more effective than other acid solutions for nickel extraction from SS and SH samples. Citric acid is effective for dissolving nickel from serpentine, but cannot recover nickel from goethite. Inorganic acids, namely sulfuric, nitric, and hydrochloric acids, can extract nickel from lateritic ores by dissolving goethite and serpentine. However, sulfuric acid gives higher nickel recoveries than the other inorganic acids, because a larger number of hydrogen ions are released by sulfuric acid dissociation than by dissociation of the other inorganic acids used. Oxalic acid is the least effective reagent for nickel extraction from both samples, because of nickel oxalate precipitation after nickel dissolution. Sulfuric acid–citric acid mixtures of various concentrations were used in the leaching of both samples to confirm the influence of either sulfuric acid or citric acid on the leaching performance and mineral dissolution behavior of each sample. The effect of a sulfuric acid–citric acid mixture on the nickel dissolution rate in SS leaching is less than that on SH leaching. An increase in the proportion of sulfuric acid in SS leaching did not significantly affect the nickel-leaching rate. Generally, the effect of citric acid in the mixture of sulfuric acid and citric acid is attractive. Moreover, selectivity of nickel dissolution against magnesium and iron dissolution in citric acid leaching is higher than that in sulfuric acid leaching. Citric acid offers not only high nickel recovery and high selectivity of leaching but also an environmentally safe process and low acid consumption. Moreover, citric acid can be produced from fungal metabolism using several types of carbon sources as fungal nutrients. The use of citric acid for nickel extraction from Indonesian laterite ores can therefore be considered for further study in order to be applied in the industry that provides several advantages such as low capital and operational costs owing to the abundance of biodiversity and carbon sources in Indonesia. The authors gratefully acknowledge a