Copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) is a promising material in thin film solar cell production. To make CIGS solar cells more competitive, both economically and environmentally, in comparison to other energy sources, methods for recycling are needed. In addition to the generally high price of the material, significant amounts of the metals are lost in the manufacturing process. The feasibility of recycling selenium from CIGS through oxidation at elevated temperatures was therefore examined. During oxidation gaseous selenium dioxide was formed and could be separated from the other elements, which remained in solid state. Upon cooling, the selenium dioxide sublimes and can be collected as crystals. After oxidation for 1h at 800°C all of the selenium was separated from the CIGS material. Two different reduction methods for reduction of the selenium dioxide to selenium were tested. In the first reduction method an organic molecule was used as the reducing agent in a Riley reaction. In the second reduction method sulphur dioxide gas was used. Both methods resulted in high purity selenium. This proves that the studied selenium separation method could be the first step in a recycling process aimed at the complete separation and recovery of high purity elements from CIGS.One of the most promising semiconductive materials used for the production of high efficiency solar cells is copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS). The technology currently accounts for 2% of the global solar cell market and is growing rapidly ( In the future there will be a need to recycle all solar cells currently being installed ( Selenium is the element in CIGS that is most unlike the other elements ( In this paper the recycling of selenium from CIGS waste materials, using the oxidation and reduction steps described above, is explored. First the feasibility of selenium separation from CIGS was studied and the purity of the recycled selenium was analysed in order to determine if it was of the required purity to be used in new solar cells. In the next step the selenium separation was optimised with respect to temperature and time, to give a more effective process that could potentially be the first step in a recycling process aimed at the complete separation and recovery of high purity elements from CIGS. To study the feasibility of the separation of selenium in the form of selenium dioxide from CIGS by oxidation at elevated temperatures, a series of tests were performed in a tube furnace. After separation the selenium dioxide was reduced to selenium using either an organic reducing agent (in a Riley reaction), or an inorganic reducing agent, namely sulphur dioxide gas. The selenium and the selenium dioxide were analysed to determine the purity of the recycled materials. After the selenium separations the residues were analysed to determine which compounds had been formed. The starting material for the selenium separation experiments, in the form of spent sputtering targets containing CIGS, was provided by a solar cell manufacturer. For the feasibility study a sample from one of the sputtering targets was crushed in an agate mortar. The particle size distribution of the material was determined by sieving through a mesh 10 sieve followed by a mesh 60 sieve and finally a mesh 200 sieve (ASTM E-11, W.S Tyler Inc.). The material passing each sieve was weighed to give the particle size distribution of the starting material. The uncertainty of the particle size distribution in each sample was determined by the sieving of five different 13.5 For the selenium separation study 13.5 To determine the temperature dependence of the selenium separation, oxidation was performed at six different temperatures (500, 600, 700, 800, 900 and 1000 Upon cooling the selenium dioxide sublimed according to Reaction The reaction was allowed to proceed for 24 To confirm that the selenium separation was mainly due to the formation of selenium dioxide and not to distillation of selenium a test was performed under a nitrogen atmosphere. 13.5 The selenium dioxide formed during the selenium separation step was reduced using two different reduction methods. First a Riley reaction, in which the organic reactant deoxybenzoin was used as a reducing agent was tested. The deoxybenzoin was at the same time oxidised to benzil, which is a diketone used in solvent extraction, according to Reaction 2.00 The second reduction agent used was sulphur dioxide. The reduction reaction of selenium dioxide is given in Reaction For these experiments 1.00 Triplicate experiments were performed to determine the uncertainty of the results for all experiments, both from the oxidation and reduction steps. The purity of the selenium dioxide from the oxidation of CIGS and the purity of the selenium from the two reduction experiments was analysed using the method described in the characterisation section. After the feasibility study the selenium separation step was optimised in order to recover more of the selenium from the CIGS material. Optimisation tests were performed both in a fluidized bed reactor and in the tube furnace used for the feasibility study. The fluidized bed reactor was used to improve the contact between the gas and the CIGS material. For the optimisation experiments CIGS from several different sputtering targets were combined to give a representative sample for the entire waste stream. The material was crushed in an agate mortar and sieved to get a particle size of 125–180 The fluidized bed batch reactor was made from a 480 To evaluate the optimisation potential of the oxidation reaction, experiments were performed at 900 As a complement to the optimisation in the fluidized bed reactor a test was performed in the tube furnace using the fraction of the starting material with a particle size of less than 63 Determination of the composition of the CIGS material, before and after the oxidation reactions and the distillation test, was performed using ICP–OES (Thermo Scientific iCAP 6500). The starting material was dissolved in nitric acid (puriss, 69%, Sigma–Aldrich) and the residue was dissolved in hot aqua regia. The aqua regia was prepared by mixing nitric acid (puriss, 69%, Sigma–Aldrich) and hydrochloric acid (puriss, 37%, Sigma–Aldrich) with a molar ratio of 1:3 respectively. Standard solutions containing 0.5 X-ray powder diffraction was used to identify crystalline compounds in the CIGS material, before and after the oxidation. The equipment used was a Bruker D2 Phaser diffractometer using characteristic Cu Kα-radiation ( The amount of selenium dioxide remaining in the reaction liquid after the reduction of selenium dioxide with sulphur dioxide was analysed with ICP–OES (Thermo Scientific iCAP 6500) to determine the selenium content in the liquid. The purity of the recycled selenium with respect to scandium, titanium, vanadium, chromium, manganese, iron, nickel, copper, zinc, gallium and indium was determined using a combination of ICP–MS (Perkin Elmer, ELAN 6000) and ICP–OES (Thermo Scientific iCAP 6500). A solution containing 1000 To further determine the purity of the recycled selenium a neutron activation analysis (NAA) was made in the 2 The purity of the organic product from the Riley oxidation was analysed with GC–MS (Hewlett Packard, GI800A GCD System) using a sp2330 column. Before the analysis the product was dissolved and diluted to a concentration of 16 Before the selenium separation the particle size distribution and the chemical composition of the starting material was examined. The results of the examination of the particle size distribution are presented in The results from the selenium separation study showed that the selenium content in the residues after oxidation decreased with increasing temperature. As can be seen in After each experiment the selenium dioxide collected was weighed. The mass balance for the experiments was used to calculate the selenium yield. Independent of the oxidation temperature approximately 85 When the residues from the oxidation tests were inspected it was noticed that they contained two different layers, a porous grey and blue top layer and a more compact yellow bottom layer. This was more pronounced at high temperatures. To explore the differences between these two layers, a sample from each layer was taken from the 1000 Analysis of the residues from the additional tests at 800 The crystalline composition was given by the XRD analysis of the starting material and the residues after treatment at 800 and 1000 Heating the CIGS starting material in an inert atmosphere did not result in any selenium separation at relatively low temperatures. When the temperature reached 960 After the oxidation reaction the selenium dioxide was reduced using the Riley reaction. The reaction resulted in 1.19 The sulphur dioxide reduction reaction was first performed at room temperature and red selenium was formed. Due to the ability of the red selenium particles to stick to the surfaces of the reaction vials the selenium was very difficult to collect. However, upon heating to 80 The purity of selenium from both reduction experiments was analysed along with the purity of the selenium dioxide from the oxidation test at 1000 The concentration of scandium, titanium, vanadium, chromium, manganese, cobalt, nickel and zinc in the selenium was determined to be low in both the selenium dioxide and in the reduced selenium from both reduction reactions. The iron concentration was higher for the reduced selenium than for the selenium dioxide, which shows that the contamination was introduced during the reduction step. The concentrations of copper, indium and gallium were determined to be higher than for the other elements, but the separation was still very good. Using the concentrations of the analysed impurities the purity of the recycled selenium was calculated and can be seen in The purity with respect to the critical elements, scandium, titanium, vanadium, chromium, manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel and zinc, was higher than 5N (99.999 The particle size distribution of the material prepared for the optimisation study is presented in The chemical composition of the starting material was determined to be 17.7 Before the experiments in the fluidized bed reactor the fluidization gas flow for the different particle size fractions was determined at 22 The major drawback discovered while performing these experiments was that during the oxidation the residue sintered and the particles clumped together. This meant that the residue was difficult to remove from the reactor and that the advantage of using a fluidized bed decreased. During some tests a core of CIGS material that had not reacted formed in the middle of the bed. This is the reason for the relatively large standard deviations seen in The oxidation of particles with a size of less than <63 In the optimisation study two different methods, the fluidised bed reactor and the tube furnace, was investigated. The fluidized bed reactor was chosen since fluidization gives an optimal contact between the solid particles and the gas. The tube furnace was chosen for treatment of particle that was too small for treatment in the fluidized bed reactor. In the tube furnace the gas is only passed over the CIGS material and not through it, giving a less effective contact with the gas. The fluidized bed reactor was therefore expected to give a higher selenium recovery compared to the tube furnace. However, due to the sintering of the particles during the oxidation the fluidized bed did not work as predicted and the expected benefit of better contact between the CIGS particles and the oxygen gas was not achieved. The sintering did not affect the selenium recovery in the same way when the tube furnace was used and it was concluded that the best method for the separation of selenium was to use small CIGS particles (<63 It has been shown that it is possible to separate selenium, as selenium dioxide, from CIGS materials through oxidation at temperatures above 500 This study has shown that it is possible to recycle high purity selenium from CIGS materials and that this method could be the first step in a recycling process aimed at the complete separation and recovery of high purity elements from CIGS. In the future, work on the separation of the remaining elements will be performed. This work was funded by The Swedish Energy Agency (No. 2008-002388) and The Swedish Research Council FORMAS (No. 2008-2162).