Traditionally, Pareto analysis has been used to select the most critical components and failure modes of a system. A clear disadvantage of this technique is that it requires preselecting a single criterion to establish priorities. More recently, a graphical log-scatter diagram technique has been proposed. It considers three key performance indicators simultaneously: reliability (MTBF), maintainability (MTTR), and unavailability (D). This technique considers only times and does not include economical effects explicitly. This article extends both techniques to explicitly consider both direct and indirect costs to prioritize from the point of view of an asset manager or from a maintenance decision-maker, as required. Due to the economic-based approach of this article, cost discounting is also considered inside financial costs such as—but not limited to—reliability-related investments. Also, the results are displayed on simple and accessible graphs which make them particularly useful for conveying results to non-technical managers. The methodology is illustrated by analyzing a shovel from the copper mine industry, and it clearly shows how the proposed technique facilitates business oriented decisions and how they should change under different market conditions.To meet the increasing challenges of current industrial reality, organizations require to continuously enhance their capability to add value and improve the cost-effectiveness of their decision processes. The decision process includes the selection of those systems and actions that may render the highest overall savings, and then, their associated policy resolutions. Decision making in physical asset management (PAM) is generally focused on two levels: strategic and tactic. Strategic level analysis is of greater interest because it involves: (i) identifying and ranking of candidate systems for improvements; (ii) system level budgeting and budget forecasts; (iii) system level performance evaluation; (iv) forecast of future market and operational conditions. The tactical level, on the other hand, concerns more specific technical management decisions for the individual projects. It includes: (i) assessing the causes of deterioration and determining/selecting candidate solutions; (ii) assessing benefits of the alternatives by life-cycle costing; (iii) selecting and designing the desired solutions. The prioritization technique introduced in this work deals with both strategic and tactical decision making, as selection of critical systems is present at both management horizons. The paper is organized as follows: first, we present a general review of priority setting in engineering problems and then to PAM problems. From there, we consider Pareto and Jack knife diagrams (JKD), which justify the introduction of the so-called cost scatter diagrams (CSD). An extended case study from a previous reference is used to illustrate the advantages of the new technique. Discussion and future work is presented in Decision problems in engineering can be classified as evaluation or design problems. When facing an evaluation problem, the decision maker analyzes a set of discretely predefined alternatives. The evaluation step can be done using aggregate value function approaches and/or outranking approaches. In the first group we may mention general techniques such as multi-attribute utility theory methods Previously mentioned generic evaluation techniques have been used previously in PAM. Bevilacqua Cooke et al. In an engineering design problem, the decision maker also faces the identification of the preferred alternative from a infinite set defined by a set of constraints. The latter case is usually solved by using mathematical programming techniques. Examples of design problems in the context of PAM are the multicriteria project selection Although previously mentioned methods have been used in the context of PAM, there are more intuitive techniques that use the particular properties that relate common use key performance indicators (KPIs) and facilitate decision making (further described below). In order to perform the systems selection, a holistic, life-cycle centered approach can be used. By doing so, the analysis is not limited to points of view of the maintenance function. PAM considers five sequential steps of the life cycle To overcome this, other classification schemes have been proposed, i.e., risk priority numbers To be able to assess savings, a cost estimation process is needed. Consequently, a cost structure is required. In this article the global cost is used, as defined in Jourden et al. The total downtime If all codes are displayed in an Unavailability ( Eq. We observe that, in general, codes related to preventive maintenance affect the position of corrective codes. If this is not occurring, the preventive action is not being technically effective. Let us take for example the inspection of a hose of a shovel. If is not done well or with enough frequency, the failure rate of this component will probably increase. A modified version of the JKD is proposed in Karim et al. As mentioned before, JKD consider only times and frequencies, and correspondingly, no economic effect is explicitly taken into account. In what follows, we propose the CSD. The intention is to enhance the graphical analysis by adding the cost dimension. The expected maintenance global cost per unit time Notice that there are two terms that acknowledge investments, Let us observe in Eqs.  The JKD is shown in The analysis can also be made using only intervention costs (   The methodology has been implemented in a open-access Web-based decision support system called Another benefit from CSD is that they permit visualizing trends in physical asset performance. Uncertainty in the parameters for each code (i.e., the economical effect on production or the frequency of occurrence) can be easily handled by using circles instead of dots or lines. Of course, that would require at least two extra parameters for the A CSD shows several advantages over existing prioritization schemes: It is business oriented, as it considers the global costs. This helps to align the maintenance function with the organizations’ strategic goals. Priority changes produced by changes in the business cycle are clearly observed. It is intuitive, all axes in the graphic represent physical, commonly used KPIs in maintenance and PAM. It is easy to implement, input data can be found in standard maintenance information systems and ERPs. It is graphical, and explicitly shows the relationships between key variables in the asset decision-making processes. It is multicriteria, different points of view are taken into account simply by changing the view angle of the CSD. It allows trend analysis, and by doing so, analyze the effect of decisions made in time. It is a sensitivity analysis tool, as it can easily show the impact of a given measure on the KPIs. This work has introduced a novel decision support tool to select systems and failure modes from a business oriented point of view. CSD provide an opportunity to graphically explore improvement opportunities using business oriented KPIs such as global costs, intervention costs, availability, frequency, and time-out-of-service. The technique overcomes the disadvantages of both Pareto and JKD as it includes them but also adds a global-cost centered perspective. CSD provide additional information concerning the economical, both direct and indirect, of maintenance interventions. Unlike more generic multicriteria decision aid techniques such as AHP and other outranking methods, it is easy to understand CSD in terms of standard KPIs. CSD are based on a cost and reliability model that is closely related to PAM and is based on equations that relate all KPIs. The application of the proposed technique can range from strategic to operational levels as it is fairly general and easy to implement and use. Thanks are due to the reviewers of the paper for their constructive criticism, which were useful to improve an earlier version of this manuscript. The authors wish to acknowledge the partial financial support of this study by the FOndo Nacional de DEsarrollo Cientifico Y Tecnologico (FONDECYT) of the Chilean government (project 1090079).