In this paper, a new boundary condition accounting for energy radiation at the far end of covered reservoirs is proposed. Using boundary element modelling (BEM), the boundary condition is investigated through analysis of the hydrodynamic pressure within a two-dimensional ice-covered reservoir impounded by a gravity dam. The proposed boundary condition accounts for reservoir bottom absorption effects and the presence of an ice cover at infinity. Seismic excitation is introduced by subjecting the dam and the reservoir to a horizontal harmonic ground motion. The effectiveness of the proposed method and the accuracy of the boundary condition are examined through a parametric study. The boundary condition is shown to be accurate even when placed near the dam upstream face, and the results obtained are in excellent agreement when compared to those from a mathematical model developed by the authors in a previous work. Some fundamental aspects of hydrodynamic pressure within ice-covered reservoirs are also discussed.Possible failure of dams under earthquake loading can lead to catastrophic consequences, extending far beyond the immediate neighbourhood of the dam site as a result of sudden reservoir release or overtopping. During the last three decades, many researchers have devoted their work to understanding dam–reservoir–foundation interactions such as in Refs. On the other hand, considerable progress has been made in developing the boundary element method (BEM) and its applications to various engineering fields over recent decades, Many researchers proposed boundary element solutions to calculate earthquake-induced hydrodynamic pressure in reservoirs impounded by gravity or arch dams. Hanna  All system substructures are assumed to have a linear, elastic, isotropic and homogeneous behaviour. Therefore, non-linear phenomena such as material cracking and water cavitation are not considered in this study. Although it is known that dam and foundation flexibility affect the hydrodynamic forces applied on a dam face, the study presented herein assumes a rigid dam wall, and a rigid foundation, the focus being on developing the radiation boundary condition and studying the effect of the presence of an ice cover on the overall dynamic response of the system. The boundary element procedure used is described in detail elsewhere Hydrodynamic pressure    the parameter     Considering For the need of the present work, this boundary element formulation was implemented in a computer program. The integrals in Eqs. Problem well-posedness requires boundary conditions to be specified at each node of the discretized reservoir boundary. Under horizontal harmonic motion with a unit acceleration of e Previous studies have shown that the ice cover may be approximated as a field of broken ice Note that for an ice cover with zero thickness, Eq. A summary of the prescribed boundary conditions on the solid boundaries   The type of boundary condition to be imposed at the reservoir upstream end depends on whether the reservoir is finite or infinite. As mentioned before, practical modelling of an infinitely large reservoir type I: a stationary boundary, i.e. the horizontal acceleration of points at the boundary type II: a moving boundary, i.e. the horizontal acceleration of points at the boundary type III: the hydrodynamic pressure at points at the boundary type IV: a special non-reflecting boundary is imposed at points of the boundary In this earlier research, it has been shown that under the boundary conditions stated by Eqs. It was shown that The radiation boundary at the upstream far end is developed here based on these results, which already include the effects of an ice cover as well as bottom wave absorption. Differentiation of Eq. Extensive numerical tests using this expression show that the relation between the hydrodynamic pressure and its derivative can be approximated without great loss of accuracy by considering only the first-term of the infinite series in Eq. It is worth to mention that the proposed boundary condition is valid for all vibration frequencies and that it includes the effects of both the ice cover and the foundation damping at infinity. Its effectiveness and accuracy are investigated through a parametric study described in The boundary element formulation presented above was implemented in a computer program. The hydrodynamic pressure exerted on a rigid dam face was calculated under harmonic ground motion excitation using the program developed. Although the proposed procedure can be applied to a dam–reservoir system of arbitrary geometry, the numerical study is conducted here using a rectangular reservoir geometry to enable comparison with the analytical solution mentioned previously. The 70-m high dam–reservoir illustrated in  To account for different absorption conditions at the reservoir bottom, the effect of different values of the wave reflection coefficient The normalized hydrodynamic pressure First, the accuracy of each of the four boundary conditions given by Eqs. The reservoir extent to be discretized using the boundary or finite elements depends on the location of the fictitious truncation boundary where the radiation condition is enforced. To investigate the effect of this location on the accuracy of the results, the hydrodynamic pressure distribution on the dam face was determined using two different boundary locations In order to examine the validity of this result for different vibration frequencies, hydrodynamic responses are determined for frequency ratios Getting back to A new boundary condition is developed to account for energy radiation in covered reservoirs. The radiation condition, which can be applied at a truncation surface of a large reservoir, includes the effects of an ice cover at reservoir surface as well as bottom wave absorption. A boundary element program incorporating the proposed boundary condition is developed to evaluate its effectiveness and accuracy through an extensive parametric study of a typical dam–reservoir system. By comparing the results obtained using the new approach to those from other classical methods, it is shown that the proposed boundary condition is very accurate even when placed in the near field of the dam face, thus leading to an economy in computation time and modelling. It was also observed that the proposed boundary condition performs well on a wide practical frequency range up to the third cut-off frequency of the dam–reservoir system. The programmed boundary element method was also used to study the hydrodynamic pressure and hydrodynamic forces in the ice-covered reservoir. It is shown that due to the presence of an ice cover, the hydrodynamic pressure is amplified at ice–reservoir level. However, the magnitude of this amplification and the effect on the hydrodynamic pressure distribution at lower levels depend on the reflection coefficient at the reservoir bottom as well as on the surface density of the ice cover. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and Hydro – Québec.