Bioleaching of valuable metals (Ga, Ge, V, Sc, La, Eu, Yb) from red mud was examined. Batch and continuous leaching experiments were deployed by using the filamentous fungi, Aspergillus niger. The leaching results showed that there was a strong negative relation between biomass and pH value. In batch leaching test, the best leaching performance was achieved under spent medium process at 2% pulp density. And in continuous leaching test, the system can reach a steady state at high red mud pulp densities (10%) with a pH value below 3.0. Comparing to organic and inorganic acids leaching, the continuous leaching mode which produces organic acids through glycometabolism by using A. niger is cost effective in a laboratory scale.Red mud is a chemical waste generated by the alkaline extraction of Alumina from bauxite in the refinery. The global red mud storage is estimated to be over 2.7 billion tonnes nowadays, and still increasing rapidly ( Red mud is regarded as a “polymetallic raw material” or an “artificial ore” with high amounts of valuable metals, e.g., gallium, germanium, vanadium and rare earth elements (REEs) ( Therefore, the objective of this study is to investigate the leaching of red mud by using The fresh red mud samples were collected from the bauxite residue storage area (26°41′N, 106°35′E) of Chinalco by using sterile laminated stainless steel containers. They were transported to the library, dried to constant weight in the oven at 80  2 The continuous leaching were performed in a round-bottomed glass tank with 30 Chemical leaching tests were conducted in 500 All the analytical methods were described in detail in our previous studies ( The weight concentration of valuable metals in red mud (ppm): Ga (570); Ge (53); V (4220); Sc (158); La (416); Eu (110); Yb (28). La, Eu and Yb were chosen as the representatives of light, middle and heavy rare earth elements, respectively. The pH and biomass changes in batch leaching tests are shown in When increased the pulp densities of red mud, the biomass decreased, and the lag phase of fungal growth increased. This phenomenon indicates that red mud has a drastically adverse impact on fungal growth. Comparing to one-step process,  The previous study believed that the valuable metals were worth to be recovered when a uniform total concentration exceeded 0.1% ( The high performance liquid chromatography tests showed that A discontinuous leaching stage is necessary for fungi to obtain a steady growth in the reactor. Therefore, a discontinuous stage was designed before continuous leaching. The sucrose medium with 2% (w/v) of red mud was feed into the reactor, and 200 The initial experimental parameters of continuous leaching were the same as discontinuous leaching, but the residence time was set as 48 When increased the red mud concentration to 10%, the pH of liquid medium in the reactor drastically increased. Therefore the experimental parameters were adjusted. After 15 Based on our experiments results, prolonging residence time was beneficial to fungi growth at high red mud concentration. But when over 6 In order to survey the cost performance of continuous leaching by using fungi, it was compared with organic and inorganic acids leaching ( The continuous leaching mode by using fungi had almost the same metal leaching efficiencies as citric acid leaching. But the estimated cost of continuous leaching was only half of that of citric acid leaching, and it was also lower than that of oxalic and HCl leaching. This result indicates that the continuous leaching mode which produces organic acids through glycometabolism by using However, this is only a preliminary study on continuous bioleaching of red mud. In view of the applied potentiality of continuous leaching by using fungi, deeper research need to be carried out. This work was supported by the youth research funding of