Biomineralization of metal organic frameworks (MOFs) using biomolecules has recently attracted significant interest because of the benign process including room temperature, neutral pH and without the requirement of any other chemical reagents. Also, these biomolecule incorporated MOFs (biomolecules@MOFs) have demonstrated their potential in biomolecule encapsulation, protection and controlled release. This work aims to develop a general strategy to make biomolecules@MOFs via a biomimetic mineralization process. A library of biomolecules (peptides and proteins) with different charges were systematically studied to fundamentally understand the role of biomolecules and their proprieties in biomolecule-mediated MOF biomineralization. Biomolecule charge, amino acid sequence and stirring speed have been demonstrated to play important roles in controlling biomineralization reaction rate, particle shape and morphology.Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of porous materials made by linking inorganic and organic units with strong bonds [ Zeolite imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) represent a class of MOFs for various potential applications due to their excellent properties [ The simple synthesis method, good stability and mild reaction conditions (e.g. room temperature, in water) make ZIF-8 colloidal particles attractive for encapsulating and controlling the release of biomolecules. Many studies have demonstrated the successful encapsulation of various biomolecules including enzymes, antibodies, oligonucleotides, etc. [ Here we investigate the effect of peptide or protein sequence on biomimetic mineralization of ZIFs, and propose a general approach to make peptide@ZIFs via a biomimetic mineralization process. The reaction rate of peptide@ZIFs formation was investigated and compared using different types of peptides with different isoelectric point (pI). The effect of peptide sequence, peptide charge, and mixing on ZIF particle size, charge and particle morphology was studied using dynamic light scattering (DLS) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). The biomolecule@ZIF particles were also characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). 2-methylimidazole, zinc acetate dihydrate, bovine serum albumin (BSA), lysozyme and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) dye were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (Australia). The peptides, SurSi [ Various amount of SurSi peptide was dissolved in water to make SurSi solutions of 0.2 mL with concentrations of 10, 20, 50, 100, 500 and 1000 μM. Then 0.2 mL SurSi was added to 0.2 mL of 240 mM 2-methylimidazole and then vortex for 10 s. Next 0.2 mL, 60 mM zinc acetate was added to the solution and stirred with different speeds for 12 h. Finally, the complex was washed using 1.5 mL water twice and 1.5 mL ethanol, and then resuspended in 0.5 mL water. To obtain other biomolecules@ZIFs, 0.2 mL of 100 mM pexiganan, lysozyme, Lac21 K, PS-pexiganan-HH, AM1, Lac21, DAMP4, BSA, Lac21E and M6A were used. 0.2 mL of these biomolecule solutions were added to 0.2 mL of 240 mM 2-methylimidazole and then vortex for 10 s. Next, 0.2 mL of 60 mM zinc acetate was added to the solution and stirred for 12 h. Finally, the complex was washed using 1.5 mL water twice and 1.5 mL ethanol, and then resuspended in 0.5 mL water. All experiments were conducted at room temperature with a stirring at 500 rpm for 12 h. FITC was dissolved in water and mixed with SurSi and reacted for 12 h in darkness at 4 °C under gentle stirring. The solution was dialyzed against water using a dialysis membrane having a cut-off molecular weight of 3 kDa (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Australia) for 40 h at 4 °C to remove the remaining free dye. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken using a JEOL 1010 (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) operated at 100 kV. To prepare samples, 2 μL of the ZIFs suspensions were placed on Formvar-coated copper grids (ProSciTech, Townsville, Australia) and dried in air. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were taken using a JEOL 6610 (JEOL Tokyo, Japan) with an operating voltage of 10 kV. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images were recorded on a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal laser scanning microscope (Jena, Germany). The FITC-tagged biomolecules were excited at 488 nm, and the fluorescence signal was collected in a spectral window from 495 to 545 nm. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on a Rigaku R-Axis Spider diffractometer with an image plate detector using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) and a graphite monochromator. XRD samples were prepared by mixing a small amount of dried framework with a droplet of mineral oil followed by mounting on a cryoloop. Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) Spectroscopy experiments were performed using a Fourier transform infrared instrument (iSTM50 ATR-FTIR, Nicolet) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Scoresby, Australia). To prepare FTIR samples, the washed ZIF suspensions were centrifuged (10,000× ZIFs represent a subclass of MOFs comprised of imidazolate linkers and metal ions, with structures similar to conventional aluminosilicate zeolites [ Many studies claimed that only biomolecules with low isoelectric point (pI) or with negative charge can make biomolecules@ZIFs [ Similarly, the biomineralization process of DAMP4, M6A and Lac21E under the same reaction conditions as of BSA was very quick (within seconds), as expected [ To systematically compare the speed of ZIF formation in the presence of different biomolecules, changes of the optical density of the solution containing the biomolecule, zinc acetate and 2-methylimidazole at 600 nm (OD600) was monitored over time.  SurSi, a designed peptide (Ac-MKQLAHSVSRLEH ARKKRKKRKKRKKGGGY−CONH We further examined the effect of peptide concentration on SurSi@ZIF particles formation. The XRD patterns of negatively, near neutral and positively charged biomolecule biomineralized ZIFs, including two negatively charged BSA@ZIF and M6A@ZIF, and two near neutral AM1@ZIF and DAMP4@ZIF, as well as one highly positively charged SurSi@ZIF, were analyzed and compared to that of the ZIF-8. As expected, both negatively charged biomolecule induced ZIFs, BSA@ZIF and M6A@ZIF are nearly identical to ZIF-8 ( The FT-IR spectra ( Furthermore, biomolecules@ZIFs were characterized using SEM-energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) ( To further confirm that whether the peptides are encapsulated in the ZIF crystals, SurSi peptide was labeled with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and purified by dialysis. After biomimetic mineralization reaction and washing, CLSM was used for characterizing the products. The fluorescence images ( In this study we systematically investigated the effect of biomolecule charge on ZIF formation and established a general approach to fabricate peptide and protein encapsulated MOF particles. We demonstrated that biomolecule charge, amino acid sequence and stirring speed played key roles in regulating the biomineralization reaction rate, particle shape and morphology. Peptides or proteins with negatively charges are able to induce the formation of biomineralized ZIF-8 colloid particles, while near neutral or positively charged biomolecules lead to the formation of a new phase There are no conflicts to declare.  This work was supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: