The hydrodynamic transport of particles of different densities along inclined channels was examined using the reflux classifier (RC), a novel system consisting of a set of parallel inclined plates above a fluidized bed. Fluidization water is passed through the base of the vessel, suspending the system of particles, in turn entraining the particles through a set of inclined channels. Sand, ilmenite and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) particles were used in separate investigations. Faster settling particles tended to deposit onto the inclined surfaces and slide back down, and hence return to the fluidized bed. Slower settling particles remained suspended and hence reported with the overflow water. Over time, a semi-batch separation was achieved and a partition curve produced. A generalized empirical relationship which takes into account the superficial fluidization velocity, aspect ratio of the channels, angle of inclination of the channels and particle Reynolds number was developed in order to describe the broad range of experimental data. The relationship should prove useful in predicting the separations from the RC under specific conditions and the likely throughput advantage of the RC over a conventional fluidized bed. The asymptotic form of the relationship, obtained for an infinite channel aspect ratio, provides a description relevant to hydraulic conveying, especially in the area of directional drilling in which particles are conveyed up the inclines. This relationship also indicates the strong potential for separating particles on the basis of density, with the analysis indicating no particle size dependence when the particle Reynolds number is relatively high.In the processing of minerals, it is often necessary to separate particles on the basis of size and density. Increasingly, hydraulic devices such as fluidized beds are being used because of its uniform separation conditions and the opportunity of adjusting the separation condition by either changing the superficial fluid velocity or changing the discharge rate through the base ( The reflux classifier (RC), which is shown schematically in Consider the operation of the RC shown in Consider now the effect of increasing the number of inclined channels, Much of the previous work concerned with inclined sedimentation has been concerned with solid–liquid separation, in which only exceedingly fine particles are permitted to report to the overflow. Under these conditions the segregation efficiency remains high and hence the traditional kinematic description has been generally satisfactory. The work presented in this paper, however, considers conditions that yield a major departure from those examined in the past, with exceedingly low levels of segregation efficiency produced under certain circumstances, to the extent that the particles are hydraulically conveyed. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the transition from particle segregation onto inclined channels to hydraulic conveying of particles using the RC as the experimental system. The objective of the study is to quantify this transition in terms of a new term, the segregation efficiency of the inclined surfaces. This study will enable the development of a generalized relationship for predicting the separation achieved by the RC for a specific system geometry and operating condition, and for accurately predicting the likely throughput advantage. A generalized description has never previously been reported. Such a relationship should indicate the benefits of using longer and more closely spaced plates in thickeners, and also improve our understanding of the wider problem of hydraulic conveying, especially in terms of quantifying the rate of particle re-suspension in inclined channels. In As noted in the Introduction, as the aspect ratio increases the effectiveness of the inclined plates in promoting particle segregation should gradually decrease. Based on the work of An objective of this study is to develop a generalized expression for the segregation efficiency, A standard RC system was made of Perspex and consisted of a vertical column of cross-sectional area In the standard test rig, experiments were performed using 1, 2, 3, 6 and 12 equally spaced channels and a broad range of water flow rates. Fluidization water was pumped into the rig using a displacement pump supplemented with mains water. The experiments were conducted using a single particle species with a distribution of particle sizes. Different particle species were employed in order to study the effect of particle density. The particle species used were sand of density Once the inventory of particles was added to the vessel and fully wetted by the water, the fluidization rate was raised to the level required in the experiment. The system of particles then expanded into the inclined channels. Here the slow settling particles were removed from the system with the overflow. The overflow was filtered and the overflow particles were collected, dried and sized. The experiment was allowed to run for a period sufficient to remove all of the particles that could be removed at the flow rate used, and an additional 10 To quantify a given separation, the results were presented in the form of a partition curve. The ratio of the mass of particles within a narrow size range remaining in the system relative to the initial mass of particles in the same size range was plotted versus the average size of the particles within the narrow size range. This ratio represents the partition number or probability of a particle remaining in the vessel. The imperfection value, The partition curve for the ilmenite particles obtained using a flow rate of In the semi-batch experiments the initial volume fraction of solids at the top of the vertical section was approximately the same in all of the experiments, at 0.050. Over time, the volume fractions decreased due to the loss of particles to the overflow. Because different separation sizes were produced, different proportions of the original feed reported to the overflow, and hence different final volume fractions were obtained. It is noted, however, that the final volume fractions just below the inclined section decreased typically by only 0.01 to 0.02. Thus in general, the relevant volume fraction of solids just below the inclined channel was typically 0.04 and hence the level of hindered settling and the variation in the level of hindered settling was not significant. It is noted that the volume fraction of solids is often found to be uniform in the vertical section of the vessel. However, as the vertical section is made longer and or the volume fractions in the vertical section become lower, an axial gradient in the concentration can develop, with the volume fraction virtually zero at the base of the vessel. Indeed, this axial gradient developed in this study, which in turn resulted in the maintenance of volume fractions just below the inclined channels that were higher than expected. Consequently the variation in the volume fraction of solids just below the inclined channels was relatively low, as indicated above. The volume fraction of solids just below the inclined channels governs the concentration of the suspension that enters the inclined channels and hence the level of hindered settling within the channels. It is estimated that the reduction in the particle slip velocities due to hindered settling was between 7% and 10%, which is arguably less than the accuracy of the equation used to calculate the terminal velocities. Hence it was appropriate to neglect hindered settling and simply use the calculated terminal velocity as a measure of the slip velocity. Clearly, the results obtained from a given experiment are affected to some degree by the variable system conditions. However, the variations within a given experiment need to be considered relative to the significant changes made between different experiments, with up to an order of magnitude variation in the channel spacing, for example. The significant range of conditions used between different experiments provides a means for ensuring sufficient accuracy in the scaling exponents of the dimensionless groups. There is a simple explanation for the development of an axial concentration gradient in the vertical section. Usually the fluidization velocity is well in excess of the terminal velocities of the particles, and hence if it were not for the inclined section there would be no solids left in the system. The sliding sediment that returns from the inclined section mixes with the fluidization water, often in a turbulent fashion. This mixing, coupled with dispersion leads to the presence of particles a significant distance down the vertical section. However, if the vertical section is sufficiently long, a concentration gradient will be observed, with the concentration decreasing from that which exists just below the inclined channel to zero some distance below. Partition curves similar to those reported in The results obtained from all of the experiments are summarized in  A thorough investigation covering all possible permutations of the relevant dimensionless groups in Eq.  The actual throughput advantage achieved using the RC is obtained by combining Eq.  It is interesting to consider how Eq. Eq.  Finally, it is noted that the study did not examine systems consisting of particles of different density or systems with a very broad range of particle size. At the relatively low solids concentrations used in this study it is expected that the empirical correlation should provide some indication of the particle segregation efficiency for these more heterogeneous systems covering a broad range of particle size and density. However, care should be taken in extrapolating the findings to such systems. The RC, which consists of a fluidized bed attached to a set of parallel inclined channels, was used to examine the tendency for particle re-suspension, and hence hydraulic conveying of the particles up inclined surfaces. This tendency leads to a reduction in the segregation efficiency of the inclined channels and, ultimately, an asymptotic value in the throughput advantage of the RC. A generalized relationship for predicting the segregation efficiency and hence the actual throughput advantage of the RC was developed and found to be effective. It was shown that the loss of the segregation efficiency was dependent upon the product of the particle Reynolds number and the aspect ratio of the inclined channels. One advantage of the loss in segregation efficiency is that the potential to separate particles on the basis of density is significantly improved. Indeed, for relatively high particle Reynolds numbers, the separation condition appears to be independent of the particle size altogether, and hence dependent only on the particle density. Further work, however, is warranted to confirm this prediction.  The kinematic approach of