The sample will burst into fragment when the thermal stress induced by thermal expansion greater than the ultimate strength of the rock after microwave irradiation. Microwave-assisted rock fragmentation has been illustrated to be potentially beneficial for mineral processing, mining and geotechnical engineering. In order to have a comprehensive understanding on the influence of microwave on thermo-mechanical properties of rocks, it is necessary to investigate the interaction effect between microwaves and the main rock-forming minerals. In this work, eleven rock-forming minerals were tested in a multimode cavity at 2.45GHz with a power of 2kW, subsequently, the Scanning Electron Microscopy–Energy Dispersive X-ray (SEM-EDX) was used to determine the elemental distribution and mineralogical composition of the tested samples. It was observed that different rock-forming minerals present very different susceptibility induced by microwave treatment. Enstatite presents the strongest microwave absorption capacity by a large margin and most of the rock-forming minerals are weak microwave absorbers. It is significant that the results can be used to predict the heating behaviors of rocks subjected to microwave energy. Furthermore, the SEM-EDX elemental analysis demonstrates that the microwave absorption capacity of rock-forming minerals could link to the contribution of the ferrum, which may influence the interacting mechanisms between microwaves and the rock-forming minerals.The sample will burst into fragment when the occurred thermal stress induced by thermal expansion greater than the ultimate strength of the rock after microwave irradiation. Microwave-assisted rock fragmentation has been illustrated to be potentially beneficial for mineral processing, mining and geotechnical engineering Different rocks have different degree of absorption to microwave energy have been reported in the literatures From Eq. Conventional methods for the dielectric properties measurement of rocks is at centimetre scale and the main limitation of these techniques is that they cannot quantify the properties of the individual minerals However, in order to understand the full process from microwave propagation in rocks, to absorption, heating, thermal expansion and finally stress, it is therefore essential to investigate the respective influence of microwave irradiation on the main rock-forming minerals. In this work eleven rock-forming minerals were tested in a multimode cavity at 2.45 Lots of minerals in nature, but only twenty or thirty rock-forming minerals that is the main mineralogical compositions to form rocks, related to silicate minerals, carbonate minerals and simple oxides Microwave is an electromagnetic wave with a frequency range from 300 The microwave irradiation tests were performed with a power of 2 Scanning Electron Microscopy–Energy Dispersive X-ray (SEM-EDX) spectroscopy characterization was undertaken using the Japan SHIMADZU SSX-550 scanning electron microscope equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy. The EDX information was obtained using the matched software which was equipped to produce elemental information in the form of mineral maps (maps of the various elements identified in the sample via X-ray microanalysis) and elemental spectra from which the mineralogical composition was determined. The surface morphology and complex chemical and elemental composition of the mineral samples were obtained. Various elements in the sample could be identified based on the characteristic element X-ray wavelengths and relative amount of the elements could be measured by the element X-ray intensity. Different mineral phases can be characterized from the backscatter (BSE) images of the samples which are presented in grey scale images with different brightness intensity values. The surface temperatures as a function of irradiation time of the 11 rock-forming minerals, 2 Assuming that the heating rate and temperature increment could indicate the microwave absorption capacity of the test minerals, so the test results were divided into three groups ( Otherwise, potassium feldspar 2# contains ferrum impurities which have stronger microwave absorption than potassium feldspar 1#, and different microwave absorption was observed by white mica 1# and white mica 2# which were from different origins. Therefore, the same mineral would have different microwave absorption due to the different origins or the kinds and content of the impurities. Strong interaction occurred in enstatite sample when it exposed to microwave. The sample started to melt after microwave treatment for 2 As shown in In addition, the surface temperature of basalt, granite sandstone and marble were measured in this literature for 180 Quantitative data of chemical element contents of the rock-forming minerals was obtained from the SEM–EDX technique. Approximate values were obtained from the average of five test areas of each sample because of the heterogeneous rock materials. The results of the weight percentage of several rock-forming minerals were shown in Enstatite has the strongest microwave absorption ability and the content of ferrum is approximate 18%, black mica has medium microwave absorption ability which is with approximate 13% ferrum. The ferrum content of potassium feldspar 2# was not obtained because of the extremely heterogeneity that EDX analysis could not obtain the accurate value. But ferrum was detected in partial area of potassium feldspar 2# sample, as shown in  In In The element distribution of potassium feldspar 2# was shown in A novel method was proposed by Monti et al. It is particularly important that the values of In Section According to the above description, the rock-forming minerals containing ferrum had stronger microwave absorption capacity than those do not, and the more ferrum, the stronger microwave absorption. It illustrates that the microwave absorption capacity of the main rock-forming minerals is probably related to ferrum content, in other words, ferrum content will influence the interaction between microwave and the main rock-forming minerals. However, more research is needed on the influence of valence of ferrum on the microwave absorption capacity of the main rock-forming minerals, as well as the mineral composition structure. The results show the influence of microwave irradiation on thermal properties of selected rock-forming minerals. It is obvious that different rock-forming minerals present very different microwave absorption capacity to microwave energy. Basing on the heating rate and temperature increment of microwave irradiation on the 11 rock-forming minerals, the test results were divided into three groups that: (1) enstatite had the maximal heating rate and temperature increment, which was defined as the strong microwave absorber, (2) black mica had the medium heating rate and temperature increment, which was regarded as the medium microwave absorber, and (3) potassium feldspar 2#, white mica 2#, hornblende, olivine, albite, potassium feldspar 1#, white mica 1#, quartz and calcite had the small or very little heating rate and the temperature increments, in consequence, they were considered to be the weak microwave absorbers. Therefore, most of the main rock-forming minerals are weak microwave absorbers. The same kind of mineral will has different microwave absorption because of the different origins or the kinds and content of the impurities. And what’s more, the heating behavior of rocks to microwave irradiation can be estimated depending on the test results of the main rock-forming minerals. The dielectric properties in the zone of ferrum rich is higher than that surrounding other mineral component in terms of the SEM-EDX elemental analysis, microwave heating and microcrack onsets the zone of ferrum rich as well. The work presented in this paper is supported by the