Yttria-stabilized dental zirconia ceramic powders were synthesized by chemical precipitation method and then sintered at 1350 °C. 3 wt% and 5 wt% PVA were added as a binder. Chemical, phasic, thermogravimetric, and differential thermal and grain size, as well as distribution analyses were performed on synthesized and commercial dental ceramic powders. The synthesized and commercial samples containing different binder ratios were molded using different cold isostatic presses (200, 300, and 400 MPa). Final sintering was performed at 1450 °C for 2 h. Density, microhardness, and fracture toughness analyses were performed on all the block samples. In addition, the fracture behavior of sintered blocks was evaluated by electron microscopy. The results showed that the molding force of 400 MPa with 3% binder content was sufficient to achieve the desired mechanical value, and this sample had 6.02 g/cm3 density, 10.44 GPa hardness, and 6.34 MPa m1/2 fracture toughness. As the molding force increased, the density and mechanical values of the synthesized powder also increased, yet no marginal changes were observed in the commercial sample.Full ceramic restorations have good properties compared to the metal-based ones, and 3 mol% yttria-stabilized zirconia has gained attention in full ceramic restorations in dental applications [ Magnesium partially stabilized zirconia (Mg-PSZ), zirconium-reinforced alumina (ZTA), and yttria tetragonal zirconia polycrystals (Y-TZP) are the most common zirconium-based structures used in dentistry [ Zirconia has three possible crystal structures: monoclinic (m), tetragonal (t), and cubic (c) [ Commercially available zirconia blocks are typically manufactured through cold isostatic pressing (CIP); however, there are some other manufacturing methods to produce dental blocks such as hot isostatic, hydraulic, or slip casting [ To put in a nutshell, the purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of the moldability parameters on Y-TZP blocks. In this study, 3 mol% yttrium oxide stabilized tetragonal zirconia powders (Y-TZP) were synthesized, and the moldability parameters of Y-TZP (Y Zirconium (IV) oxynitrate hydrate, [ZrO(NO For the zirconia block preparation, YSZP and polyvinyl acetate [CH The powders were processed with CIP (Istanbul Technical University, Faculty of Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering, Custom-made) under 200, 300, and 400 MPa. The mold was 32 mm in diameter and 16 mm in height, its wall thickness was 5 mm. Zirconia powders were sealed in a resilient rubber mold and compressed isostatically with hydraulic oil in a pressure vessel in a cold isostatic process. The resulting green blocks were sintered in a Protherm furnace at 1450 °C for 2 h. Sample codes and process parameters of the commercial and synthesized blocks are given in The mineralogical analysis of YSZ powders was performed using XRD (Rigaku - Rint 2000). The analysis was conducted with Cu-Kα radiation in the 2θ range of 10–90°, a step width of 0.02°. (λ = 1.54056 α). Investigations of all the samples were carried out at a scanning speed of 2/min. The results were compared with the data on the ICDD PDF Card No: 42–1164. The amount of monoclinic phase was determined by the X-ray Powder pattern fitting technique for Y The volumetric fraction (V XRF (Hitachi Seiko SEA6000vx) was used to determine the chemical composition of YSZ powders. TG-DTA (SII Nanotechnology - SII6000 Exstar TG/DTA 6300 model) was performed up to 1300 °C to determine the mass loss, reaction type, and conversion temperatures of zirconia ceramic powder samples. The grain size of the powders was analyzed by Mastersizer (Malvern - Hydro 2000MU). The relative density of the zirconia blocks was measured before and after sintering through Archimedes’ method and calculated according to Eq. Vickers Hardness (Zwick) of the zirconia blocks was measured under 10 kg loading for 10 s and calculated according to Eq. The fracture toughness (Kıc) of sintered blocks was calculated based on Vickers hardness using Eq. Micro-analysis of fractured surfaces of sintered block samples after molding was determined by Zeiss-Evo LS10 scanning electron microscope (SEM). SEM images of the fractured surfaces of the block samples were measured at 20.00 kV, 7–11 mm W.D. and at magnifications of 1.00 K, 3.00 K, and 5.00 K. In order to perform the cracked surface and fracture behavior analyses, non-conductive samples were coated with gold-palladium at a current density of 10 mA for 120 s in a Quarum coating device.  Tetragonal: Monoclinic phase ratio of the C and YSZ powders was calculated according to the Toraya equation (Eq. As a result, low monoclinic phase ratio can be achieved by the determination of optimum sintering parameters. According to ISO 13356, maximum monoclinic phase ratio should be 5 wt% [ Chemical structures of C and YSZ powders are reported in According to ISO 13356 and ASTM The grain size distributions of the C and YSZ samples are given in TGA/DTA curves of the samples are given in The TG/DTA analysis graphs of both samples are given in In the previous studies, one or two types of binders were used for molding yttria-doped zirconium ceramics. Günhan [ According to ASTM Vickers hardness, fracture toughness, and crack length values of sintered zirconia block samples are given in The obtained density and hardness values are consistent with the literature. The hardness of the C specimens, YSZ3, and YSZ5 ceramic blocks which were molded at 400 MPa showed higher values compared with lower molding forces. The increase in the molding forces did not affect the hardness of the C specimens dramatically due to their narrow particle size distribution. On the other hand, there was a distinct increase in the hardness values of the YSZ3 and YSZ5 samples as the molding forces were increased. Moreover, increasing the amount of binder used in the YSZ samples increased the hardness under similar molding forces. It was observed that increasing the molding force decreased the crack propagation in all the samples. This could be a result of increased transformation from tetragonal to monoclinic phase at high molding forces. Due to the increase in the surface area in the monoclinic phase, the hardness was calculated as slightly higher. Fracture toughness (FT) was calculated using crack length measurement from Vicker's hardness. According to the data, a very high FT of the C sample under 400 MPa molding was found to reach 8.5 MPa m Microstructure and fracture behavior of zirconia ceramic blocks was determined by scanning electron microscope (SEM). The fractured surfaces of C-200, C-300 and C-400 are given in It can be observed that all the samples of the C and YSZ which were shaped with high molding force have sharper and dense fracture surfaces. The obtained hardness, fracture toughness, and density values are supported by the SEM images. In particular, the fracture surfaces of the samples with low density were found to be heterogeneous. In the case of the YSZ samples, the effect of increasing the amount of binder and molding force was determined in the SEM images. The desired microstructures were not observed in the samples with low binders and low strength molded samples. More homogeneous microstructures emerged with high density fracture surfaces which were similar to the C samples with increased molding strength and binder ratio. In this study, the effect of cold isostatic press force and binder amount on the molding of synthesized (YSZ) and commercial (C) powders was investigated. Yttria-stabilized tetragonal zirconia dental ceramics with the desired chemical composition were synthesized successfully by chemical precipitation. The main difference between the powder produced and the commercial sample was observed within the grain size distribution. The commercial sample with a homogeneous grain size distribution reached high-density values under each molding force, and changing the molding force did not cause a marginal change in the analysis results. However, the desired density values could not be obtained at low molding forces (200 MPa and 300 MPa) in the synthesized dental ceramics because of the broader particle size distribution. 400 MPa cold isostatic press force gave the ideal result for block formation of powders. Increasing the cold isostatic press pressure also increased the mechanical properties of the synthesized zirconia powders. Similarly, the hardness and fracture toughness values of the synthesized samples increased as the binder ratio increased. The density and mechanical strength of the YSZ samples without binder were lower than the ones with the binder. The SEM images were in agreement with the determined mechanical values. The samples with high strength were found to have a homogeneous fracture surface and microstructure. In this study, the optimum binder amount was determined to be 3 wt%. The results showed that 400 MPa molding force, 3 wt% binder, and 1450 °C sintering temperature were the optimum values to obtain zirconia ceramic blocks with the desired features. This study suggests that future studies should investigate the effect of particle size distribution and morphologies of ceramic powders on the molding parameters. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was supported by