There exists a rule of thumb of mines, which requires that the cut-off grade, that is the lowest grade of extracted ore, should decrease (increase) when the present value price of metal increases (decreases). Theoretically, it was shown that the mining rule is optimal, if the deposit has a disorderly ore quality distribution. Conversely, if the deposit has an orderly ore quality distribution, the reverse rule is optimal, where the reverse rule requires that the cut-off grade should increase (decrease) when the present value price of metal increases (decreases). In this paper, the theoretical results are tested empirically from the data of 51 copper mines during 1970–1992. It is found that they are supported by the data.One important issue in the management of mining firms is how the cut-off grade (the lowest grade of extracted ore) should change in response to a change in the price of the metal. Associated with this issue, there exists “a rule of thumb” of mines. It requires that the cut-off grade should decrease (increase) when the rate of metal price increase is greater (smaller) than the rate of discount. Originally, Next, three balancing cut-off grades are defined. These are the grades which just balance the capacities of each pair of stages. Finally, he shows that the optimal cut-off grade is one of these six, either a limiting economic grade or a balancing grade. Since the limiting economic grades, which are candidates of the optimal cut-off grade, are decreasing functions of the metal price, the mining rule can be supported by the Lane model. In this paper, however, we consider the decision making on the cut-off grade in a slightly different framework from the Lane model, that is, the optimal control theory (see Some mining engineers have questioned the optimality of the mining rule from a theoretical point of view (e.g.,   In this paper, we will empirically examine the results obtained in  The firm decides how much ore body should be developed and what part of the developed ore body should actually be extracted. If We examine the firm's problem in order to generate testable conditions for the optimality of the mining rule versus the reverse rule. Before solving the model, for convenience, the mining rule and the reverse rule obtained in If If The problem of the firm is formulated in the following way:  (MP) (PB) Transversality condition on Differentiating Now it is possible to consider the relationships between the ore grade selection rule and the signs of Conversely, if Δ We try to test the sufficient conditions for the optimality of the reverse rule and the mining rule stated above, using the following total cost function: Using the total cost function Firstly, it is easily verified that Two parameters of the total cost function, Ore quality distribution can be thought to affect the size of the parameters, that is, Secondly, Under an ideal ore quality distribution as the one described in His cost function is a special case of our cost function, Under a disorderly ore quality distribution as the one described in The results will be summarized in proposition form as follows. Propositions: If the deposit has an orderly ore quality distribution (that is, If the deposit has a disorderly ore quality distribution (that is, In this section the theoretical results will be examined using the MIS database, which includes the time series data on average grade of the extracted ore of more than 300 mines. 51 copper mines are chosen in the United States, Canada, Chile, Zaire, Zambia, Australia and Japan.  This type corresponds to an orderly ore quality distribution. Since the reverse rule and the weakly reverse rule can not be recognized as independent types from empirical view points, they are classified into the same group. Note that the sign of Δ  Since the sign of Δ  Similarly, the average grade and the price change in the opposite direction in the short run. The average grade, however, has the tendency to increase in the long run, since the sign of We need two representative indexes in order to know how ore grade is distributed in the deposit. Firstly, in mining engineering, coefficient of variation (COV) is defined as the standard deviation of sampled ore grades divided by average grade ( Secondly, according to In general, deposits with low COV and simple geometry have orderly ore quality distributions. Conversely, deposits with high COV and complex geometry have disorderly ore quality distributions. In The time series data on the copper price and the average grade of the extracted ore are classified into four patterns, that is, 12 mines of 23 porphyry copper mines are classified as type 5 mines of 7 volcanogenic massive sulfide mines are classified as type It can be seen that the theoretical results obtained in the previous section are supported empirically. That is, the reverse rule is optimal for deposits with orderly ore quality distributions (porphyry copper and sedimentary deposits), and the mining rule is optimal for deposits with disorderly ore quality distributions (skarn and volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits). We examined empirically the theoretical results on the grade selection rule. That is, the mining rule is optimal, if the deposit has a disorderly ore quality distribution. Conversely, if the deposit has an orderly ore quality distribution, the reverse rule is optimal. 51 copper mines were chosen in MIS database, and these copper ore deposits were classified into four groups, porphyry, sedimentary, skarn and volcanogenic massive sulfide copper deposit based on the geological point of view. The following empirical results were obtained. Many deposits of the porphyry copper and the sedimentary deposits, which have orderly ore quality distributions, are subject to the reverse rule. Conversely, many deposits of the skarn and the volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits, which have disorderly ore quality distributions, are subject to the mining rule. It can be, therefore, considered that the theoretical results on grade selection rule have been supported by data obtained from 51 copper mines. We would like to acknowledge Yoshihusa Kitabatake, Yosuke Mamiya and Takeshi Yamanaka for helpful comments and discussions. We are also grateful to Sumitomo Kinzoku Kozan Co. Ltd, for providing the MIS database. Any remaining errors are our responsibility. To see this we apply the idea of ray scales economies ( Note that It is easy to show the following relations between To see this, note that the slope of the iso-cost curve can be written as It can be found that if