Risks of fire occurrence in underground mines are known for a long time. Evacuation and rescue plans allow to each underground mine to respond and establish control in case of emergency. The primary goal of this paper is to determine the optimal system for evacuation in case of fire in underground mines and through a process of computer simulation to be presented to all workers that are affected by this issue. In this study is developed a system that allows by using available software to work out the complete evacuation plans that include analysis of fire scenarios and optimal routes for evacuation. With development of database of fire scenarios, it is possible to plan routes for evacuation in all situations. This presented methodology can serve to make effective system for evacuation and rescue in case of fire and to help save lives and protect the financial investment in the mine. This methodology represents the most economical option of making an effective system for evacuation and also can serve as an idea of making a software package that includes all the steps of making a system for evacuation and rescue in case of fire in underground mines. This presented model will have increased accuracy compared to other models presented so far, because of the prepared 3D model of the underground mine which includes the actual dimensions of the mine along with its associated elements from which the fire dynamics and system for evacuation depends.To successfully deal and reduce the consequences that can arise from fires in underground mines, it is necessary to previously prepare plan for evacuation and rescue in emergencies situations which will be presented to all workers in the mine ( For the purposes of this research paper is used PyroSim and MINEFIRE PRO + software packages. Computer program PyroSim is a graphical user interface for the Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) ( Computer program MINEFIRE PRO + is designed to simulate a mine ventilation system's response to external influences such as fires ( The modeled fire scenario is necessary to describe the assumed characteristics of the fire such as: heat release rate, generation of harmful fire gases, smoke, burning rate of the material, generated heat from fire, etc. To determine the characteristics of fire parameters that represent the basic data of modeling a fire scenario, we will be using the computer program Pyrosim ( Accumulation of flammable liquids (oil, diesel fuel, lubricants, hydraulic fluids); Working machinery; Conveyors; Tires; Cables. Each of these areas where these flammable materials are present must be examined by experts and engineering personnel and the seriousness of each fire scenario are determined by the potential frequency of the hazard, number of people affected, potential spread of contaminants, cost of damage etc. The more formal, team-based risk assessment for identification of potential fire location scenarios, include the following: Reviewing an entire work area; Reviewing statistical data of past injuries; Observing introduction to new working process; Implementing of new equipment; Reviewing manuals for working processes; Observing sources of danger associated to the process' tasks/activities. Spread and movement of smoke and fire gases in underground mines will determine the security of evacuation and the operation of rescue services. To make an effective system for evacuation it is necessary first to determine and calculate the movement of smoke and fire gases for every predicted and identified fire scenario and to use this information to calculate the optimal routes for evacuation and rescue in the underground mine. For calculation of the movement of smoke and fire gases for specified fire scenario in previously identify location in underground mine will use the computer program MINEFIRE PRO+ ( 3D mine ventilation network which can be prepared in the same software; Volume flow of smoke and fire gases generated by the fire, (m Concentration of carbon monoxide in the volume flow of smoke and fire gases CO, (%); Heat flow from fire, (kW); Concentration of oxygen in the fire place O Volume flow of air in the branch Q, (m Time for complete development of the fire (min). All necessary fire input parameters for the computer program MINEFIRE PRO+ will be calculated in the software package for modeling fires Pyrosim ( To calculate the optimal routes for evacuation in case of fire in underground mines, we need more data related to the character of the mine. In case of fire, the factors that affect the evacuation process is complicated and complex. Some of these factors in the underground mines include the following data ( Mining roadway type; Mining roadway slope; The impact of smoke and fire gases. First, in each mining roadway branch is calculated coefficient of influence of each of these factors. These factors influence human escape speed. The influences of these factors to the escape speed are transformed to the mining roadway's equivalent length. Equation The impact of these factors on the speed of evacuation is transformed into an equivalent length of routes for evacuation and also represent a total weight of evacuation route (Equation      We denote the human normal walking speed by Through Equation The type of underground mining facility can affect the speed of evacuation in case of emergency situation. For example if people faced with an emergency situation are in a mining facility where is transportation systems, then the speed of evacuation will be equal to the speed of the available transportation system. Mining roadway type influence coefficient can be calculated as ( where:   Gradient of the mining roadway, greatly influences the human walking speed. Greater the value of slope, greater the resistance of movement. To calculate the impact ratio of the mining roadway slope influence coefficient we use the following equation ( m – standard human mass, kg (we will assume m = 80 kg); g – gravitational acceleration, m/s    When workers move to down slope and horizontal mining roadways, we assume normal speed of movement of human, and the coefficient is. Harmful and toxic properties of the smoke has long been known and defined as one of the main causes of death consequences in case of fire. The concentration of smoke and fire gases have a major impact in the safe evacuation and the speed of withdrawal. Coefficient of the impact of smoke and fire gases are calculated using the following equation (   Fire models describes the fire characteristics, such as for example ( For the purposes of this research paper, in computer program PyroSim is prepared 3D computer underground mining drift with the following dimensions: width of 4 m, height of 3 m and length of 50 m, in which is simulated fire scenario from mechanical problem of the working machinery Boomer 281 ( actual (dx) size is 0.148(x), 0.139(y) 0.15(z), m; distances are 4(x), 50(y), 3(z), m; total number of cells is 194,400. At low air velocity in case of fire in underground mines, the effect of smoke rollback is often present ( From the computer program for modeling fires Pyrosim ( From the analyzes and calculations from computer program Pyrosim, for complete combustion of 124 L of hydraulic fluid we get fire time length of 36.8 min. To calculate the movement of smoke and fire gases in previously specified location in underground mine, we used the computer program MINEFIRE PRO+ ( From the analysis and calculations of this fire scenario 1, in computer program MINEFIRE PRO+, for movement and spread of smoke and fire gases, we get the following results: After the analysis and calculations for the movement of smoke and fire gases generated by the fire scenario 1, next process is locating the position of all workers in the underground mine “Sasa” – R. Macedonia ( To calculate the time required for evacuation, we will assume an average speed for normal movement of workers in all horizontal corridors and down slopes in the underground mine of 1.19 m/s. For movement through shaft using skip hoist we will assume average speed of 10 m/s and for movement through raise we will assume average speed of 0.3 m/s. According to the analysis and calculations for the movement of smoke and fire gases made in computer program MINEFIRE PRO+, for fire scenario 1 ( The impacts of the previously defined factors for optimization will affect the speed of evacuation and those factors are transformed into an equivalent length of routes and represent a total weight of evacuation route. One evacuation route that will have the smallest weight calculated by previously mentioned methodology, will be the optimal route for evacuation ( Analyzing and calculating ( Disadvantage of this system is that it is constantly exposed to changes due to the rapid advancement and opening of new underground mining facilities that directly affect the ventilation system and also require introduction of new working activities that introduce new and different fire scenarios. Due to constant changes in the underground mining layout if we want this system to be efficient and accurate we need to constantly modify and customize this system, depending on the progress of mining activities as well as with introduction of new machinery and new work processes. The risks of fire occurrence in underground mines have been known for a long time. Fires that occur in underground mines can pose a considerable threat and cause a number of problems, both for people who are affected by the fire and for rescue teams. Plans for evacuation and rescue in case of fire scenario in underground mines outline the procedures and preventive measures that are necessary for effective handling of this emergency situation. In this research paper is developed a model for modern approach of the planning system for evacuation and rescue in case of fire in underground mines, and this model can be used for training, research and practical purposes. This methodology represents the most economical option of making an effective system for evacuation and rescue in case of fire in underground mines. The main objective of this research paper is using this quick actions and precautions concerning this kind of emergency is to help save lives and protect the financial investment in the mine. This work was financially supported by the Faculty of Natural and Technical Sciences – Mining engineering, “Goce Delchev” University, Shtip, Republic of Macedonia.