The carbonaceous chondrite meteorites are fragments of asteroids that have remained relatively unprocessed since the formation of the Solar System 4.56 billion years ago. The major organic component in these meteorites is a macromolecular phase that is resistant to solvent extraction. The information contained within macromolecular material can be accessed by degradative techniques such as pyrolysis. Hydropyrolysis refers to pyrolysis assisted by high hydrogen gas pressures and a dispersed sulphided molybdenum catalyst. Hydropyrolysis of the Murchison macromolecular material successfully releases much greater quantities of hydrocarbons than traditional pyrolysis techniques (twofold greater than hydrous pyrolysis) including significant amounts of high molecular weight polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) such as phenanthrene, carbazole, fluoranthene, pyrene, chrysene, perylene, benzoperylene and coronene units with varying degrees of alkylation. When hydropyrolysis products are collected using a silica trap immersed in liquid nitrogen, the technique enables the solubilisation and retention of compounds with a wide range of volatilities (i.e. benzene to coronene). This report describes the hydropyrolysis method and the information it can provide about meteorite macromolecular material constitution.Meteorites are overwhelmingly dominated by fragments of asteroids coerced into Earth-crossing orbits by relatively recent collisions in the asteroid belt and the perturbing effect of gravitational interactions with Jupiter ( The macromolecular material in Murchison has been investigated using non-destructive techniques such as infra-red spectroscopy ( Pyrolysis thermally decomposes macromolecular organic material and the products (the pyrolysate) are then identified, usually with a mass spectrometer, and carefully studied to reveal the constitution of the parent material. Initially, this approach entailed introducing the pyrolysate directly into the mass spectrometer (e.g. Recently, the meteoritic macromolecular material has been fragmented using hydrous pyrolysis where the sample remains in contact with water for the duration of the experiment ( Most recently, hydropyrolysis has been applied to the study of meteorites ( Crushed whole meteorite was prepared for hydropyrolysis treatment by performing solvent-extraction (ultrasonication with a solvent mixture of 93:7 dichloromethane(DCM)/methanol followed by removal of the supernatant, ×3), a process which removes any free organic matter ( The hydropyrolysis products (the hydropyrolysate) were collected in a trap cooled with dry ice and recovered in DCM. In an attempt to retain volatile products more efficiently, a second analysis was performed using silica as a trap adsorbent and liquid nitrogen as a coolant. This procedure has been shown to improve the recovery of volatile molecules such as benzene and heptane from 0% to over 40%, while molecules with higher molecular masses than decane are almost completely retained ( To reduce levels of background contamination, a cleaning run was performed prior to the sample run whereby the apparatus was heated to 520 Compound detection and identification was performed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). For the hydropyrolysate trapped without silica, an Agilent Technologies 6890 gas chromatograph interfaced with a 5973 mass selective detector was employed ( Following hydropyrolysis, analysis of the experimental residue (  Although significant amounts of carbon and nitrogen are solubilised from the macromolecular materials by hydropyrolysis, analysis of the hydropyrolysis residue indicates that a substantial amount of carbon and nitrogen is not liberated (66    A previous A common Sodium dichromate oxidation has been used to selectively remove aliphatic side chains and therefore release any aromatic cores present. This procedure liberated a significant amount of two- to four-ring aromatic entities bound to the Murchison macromolecular materials by a number of aliphatic linkages ( Sodium dichromate oxidation has also released carbazole units from the Murchison macromolecular material, where they appear to be bound by two or three linking bonds, in addition to pyridine ( Established theories of meteorite macromolecular material structure point to condensed aromatic cores connected to various functional groups and heteroatomic rings, all cross-linked by aliphatic, ether and sulphide linkages (e.g. With the release of hitherto unobserved organic units (PAH with >5 rings) from the macromolecular material, it is interesting to consider that meteoritic organic matter is often compared with that observed in the interstellar medium. It is generally accepted that the molecular cloud which collapsed to form the Solar System bequeathed a significant amount of interstellar organic matter, aliquots of which are preserved in primitive asteroids and the meteorites derived from them (e.g. The success of hydropyrolysis in solubilising sizeable aromatic units from Murchison has important implications for the analysis of carbonaceous chondrites in general. The greater the molecular mass of a pyrolysis product, the more it reveals about the internal molecular architecture of its organic parent. The ideal product of pyrolysis methods is just large enough to pass through GC-based systems thereby combining maximum information with analytical amenability. This, combined with the high yields associated with hydropyrolysis, ensures that the technique can provide more comprehensive information on complex extraterrestrial macromolecular materials than traditional pyrolysis methods.  Hydropyrolysis releases substantial amounts of PAH from the Murchison macromolecular material. The yield is greater than previously applied pyrolysis techniques (e.g. a twofold increase over hydropyrolysis, Combining hydropyrolysis with a new silica trap immersed in liquid nitrogen enables the solubilisation and then retention of compounds with a wide range of volatilities (i.e. benzene to coronene). The aromatic units in the in the macromolecular material which can be released by hydropyrolysis consists of benzene, toluene, naphthalene, phenanthrene, carbazole, fluoranthene, pyrene, chrysene, perylene, benzoperylene and coronene units with varying degrees of alklyation. The release of up to seven-ring PAH units during hydropyrolysis, in conjunction with interpretations that the experimental residue must contain further amounts of large PAH, decreases the apparent incongruence between meteoritic PAH and the greater than 20-ring PAH proposed for the interstellar medium ( The authors are grateful to three anonymous reviewers whose efforts significantly improved the manuscript. This work was supported by NERC Grant NER/T/S/2001/01153 and PPARC. This paper is Impacts and Astromaterials Research Centre (IARC) contribution number 2005-0620.