Objectives
                  To compare the outcomes of intramedullary fibular allograft (IFA) with locking compression plates (LCPs) versus shoulder hemi-arthroplasty (HA) in osteoporotic four-part proximal humeral fracture (PHF).
               
                  Methods
                  Between January 2010 and December 2012, totally 60 cases with osteoporotic four-part PHF were enrolled in this study and were randomly separated into IFA and LCPs group and HA group (n
                     =30). Additionally, surgery indexes for patients in the two groups, such as Constant-Murley score (CMS), the Disability of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score, individual subject evaluation of the outcomes, plain X-ray, and computer tomography (CT) scanning were evaluated and compared.
               
                  Results
                  CMS, DASH score, activities of daily living (ADL), and range of motion (ROM) were statistically higher in the IFA and LCPs group than those in the HA group at the last follow-up, whereas the pain were obviously lower than that in the HA group. Besides, patients in the IFA and LCPs group had higher abduction, external rotation with elbow, strength, and satisfactory rating compared with HA group at the last follow-up. However, one case developed avascular necrosis (AVN), one case encountered screw perforation, and one case experienced varus displacement in the IFA and LCPs group, while there were 2, 4, and 2 cases suffered from superficial infection, shoulder stiffness, tuberosity migration in the HA group, respectively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  IFA with LCP have an advantage in functional outcomes than shoulder HA.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level II. Prospective cohort study.Proximal humerus fracture (PHF), the third common injuries among older people, is second to the hip and distal redius fractures and accounts for about 4–5% of the whole body bone fractures Previous study referred that the newly reported locking compression plate (LCP) was the most promising method for severe displaced osteoporotic PHF compared to the conventional plating method This study aimed to compare the outcomes of intramedullary fibular allograft (IFA) and LCP with shoulder HA in osteoporotic four-part PHF. We attempted to evaluate and analyze the outcomes according to Constant-Murley score (CMS), the Disability of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score, individual subject evaluation of the outcomes, plain X-ray and computer tomography (CT) scanning. Our study may provide basis for the future surgery selection on PHF patients. All procedures were conducted with the approval of the institutional review board of the General Hospital of People's Liberation Army (301 Hospital). The informed consent form was obtained from each patient prior to this study. A total of 60 patients who were diagnosed with a four-part PHF were enrolled in this study between January 2010 and December 2012. The patient whose bone mineral density (BMD) was less than –3.0, and suffered from an acute four-part PHF, and/or fracture dislocation were in accordance with the inclusive criteria. The four-part PHF was diagnosed preoperatively by well-experienced orthopedic surgeons ( The operation was carried out by one of the authors (HC, PT) based on a standardized manner, and all patients received cefuroxime (1.5 The deep-frozen and freeze-dried IFA was obtained from the bone bank. After the fracture site was exposed thoroughly, the long head of biceps was identified and the fracture configuration was checked. Humeral shaft was found to impact into the humeral head, greater tuberosity displacing posteriorly, lesser tuberosity displacing anteriorly. Then, laminar spreader was put into intramedullary canal through lateral cortical window of tuberosity fracture sites with retroversion of 30°, the elbow kept anteriorly. The humeral head and shaft was reduced with laminar spreader under fluoroscopy, especially restoring the medial calcar continuation and the normal neck-shaft angle. The articular segment to scapular fossa was done extra-capsularly with kiswire to avoid varus displacement of the humeral head. Shaft traction was maintained by surgical assistant. The intramedullary strut was inserted into the intramedullary canal distal to fracture site and then driven back to the proximal humeral bone. Intramedullary strut allograft was pushed onto the medial calcar to support the humeral head for prevention of varus displacement and deformity of the humeral head. Then, the greater tuberosity fragment was reduced and sutured with No. 5 Ethibond sutures to maintain the reduction. The LCP was placed 5–10 The HA prosthesis (LINK, Germany) was used for patients in HA group. Surgery was conducted in the beach-chair position. After being exposed of fracture site, the tuberosity was localized by long head of biceps. Then, the humeral head was removed and its diameter was measured. When the tuberosity was isolated, No. 5 Ethibond sutures were placed at the bone–tendon junction. After the humeral canal being reamed, a trial stem was inserted to assess the height and version. Then, the tuberosity was reduced, and the position and height of implants were determined by fluoroscopy. A bone graft was placed in the tuberosity to restore the humeral offset. The tuberosities were then sutured to one another and to the humeral shaft with non-absorbable horizontal and vertical sutures. A suction drain was placed in the wound after meticulous irrigation. Patients in HA group were immobilized in a sling and were given the physiotherapy postoperatively, which was gradually ceased around 3 The outcomes of surgery on patients’ subjective rating were recorded as follows: excellent, good, fair, and poor. The pain status was assessed based on a visual analogue scale (VAS) BMD was measured by dual-emission X-ray absorptiometry (Lunar iDXA, GE Healthcare). Initial preoperative radiographs including standard true anteroposterior (AP), axillary and scapular Y views were observed immediately after operation and at routine follow-up postoperatively at 4, 8, and 13 Continuous variables, shown as the mean The baseline information and demographic characteristics of the patients were showed in The mean follow-up period was 36.3 Previous studies have referred that IFA with LCP or HA surgery played key roles in old patients with PHF Shoulder HA has been recommended to be beneficial for the elderly displaced four-part PHF due to high AVN risk and varus collapse and deformity The introduction of LCPs has presented an advantage over conventional non-locking plates in PHF Peng et al. found that adjuvant use of intramedullary strut allograft can significantly enhance bone union in elderly and osteoporotic fractures of severe Neer 3- and 4-part with 92.7% union rate, but with 40% in the non-bone graft group In our series, there was only one patient with screw penetrating into articular surface in the IFA and LCPs group. The patient suffered from falling from standing height and severe osteoporosis. At 9 However, there were some limitations in the current study. First, it was a single-center study. Second, the number of cases enrolled in our study was relative small because it was hard to obtain the four-part PHF samples. Third, the multi-surgeon design was often an inevitable limitation. Based on the listed limitations, we thought that a multicenter, randomized, controlled study of the various methods for this type of displaced and comminuted PHF should be conducted in the future experimental studies. In conclusion, our data shows that IFA with LCPs may perform excellent radiologic and functional outcomes for four-part PHF compared with shoulder HA. Our study may provide experimental basis for the application of meticulous technique of LCP and allograft for treatment aging four-part PHF around the shoulder. None. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.