Purpose
                  To present our experience in the management of acute large bone defects treated with the use of vascularized fibular grafts supported by Ilizarov circular external frames.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  During a period of 6 years (from 2007 to 2013) 8 patients with acute large bone defects (IVB according to Winquist modified classification) were treated at our institution with early bone reconstruction by means of microvascular fibular grafts. All patients were evaluated by the use of the following parameters: X-ray consolidation, discharge time, duration of treatment, malalignment of the lower limb and final leg length discrepancy, knee and ankle mobility (ROM), pain (VAS), number of eventual additive treatments (plastic surgery, etc.), walking independence (use of crutches), possibility to get back to work, subjective evaluation about the treatment and the result (SF-36, personal feelings about circular external fixator dressing)
               
                  Results
                  The mean treatment time, often connected to the mean consolidation time, was 61 weeks and the mean number of operations was 7.6. Six of the eight patients got back to their previous daily activities and work, without any further issues.
               
                  Discussion
                  based on our experience, Ilizarov and fibular vascular grafts are not alternatives, as often reported in literature. Their combined use, especially in lesions as those classified as Winquist IV B, can represent an effective tool in the surgeon's hands to solve the most difficult cases of acute bone loss caused by severe high-energy traumas.Lower limbs diaphyseal fractures with segmental bone defect due to comminution, bone pieces loss in open fractures or removal of highly contaminated fragments represent an important challenge for trauma surgeons. We can find such bone defects in the presence of good soft tissues conditions, or in presence of a poor or absent skin coverage, these latter conditions generally classified according to Gustilo Winquist In the case of a partial bone loss (grade 1 or 2) autologous/homologous cancellous bone grafts with or without osteoinductive materials and a definitive osteosynthesis are generally used. For more extensive bone problems with real defects (grade 3 and 4) the fractures are treated by means of more sophisticated methods. In these cases, an accurate planning of the surgical approaches and of the fixation device for the definitive treatment is mandatory to obtain the best results. Non-unions may be the consequence of a poor primary stability or a violated biology. In our experience, after a further careful debridement, we often choose an Ilizarov frame. The bone reconstruction is obtained by means of bone transport. In cases where skin problems are minor, massive bone grafts and locking plates may also play a role The use of vascular fibular grafts is also a good option for severe bone gaps in acute cases (>10–15 cm) During a period of 6 years (from 2007 to 2013) 8 (6 males) patients with acute large bone defects were treated at our institution by means of vascularized bone grafts. Two of them presented with femoral shaft bone defects and 6 with tibial shaft defects. The mean age was 39.57 years (29–79). All of them received temporary stabilization and eventual debridement and/or plastic reconstruction of soft tissues in case of bony exposure before the definitive treatment with the microvascular graft. The mean initial gap in this group was 9,9 cm (range 5–20 cm), ( Trauma mechanism, type of fracture (classified according to AO), soft tissue lesions (according to Gustilo and Tscherne classifications), vascular and nervous system assessment and other associated lesions were crucial in the decision making. Eventually, the definitive treatment was led by means of vascularized fibular graft to fill the gap, and the combined use of Ilizarov frames. In two cases we associated the use of fibular vascular graft with the distraction technique in order to restore the leg length discrepancy. We decided to evaluate the treatment outcomes by focusing on the following parameters: X-ray consolidation, discharge time, duration of treatment, malalignment of the lower limb and final leg length discrepancy, knee and ankle mobility (ROM), pain (VAS), number of eventual additive treatments (plastic surgery, etc.), walking independence (use of crutches), possibility to get back to work, subjective evaluation about the treatment and the result (SF-36, personal feelings about circular external fixator dressing). The mean treatment time, which is often connected to the mean consolidation time, was 61 weeks. It is important to be noted that 6 patients had infection at the lesion site prior to the intervention, thus justifying the long period of treatment (Staphylococcus Aureus, Epidermidis, Pseudomonas Aeruginosa, Staphylococcus Capitis were the main involved pathogens). One of these patients, who was drug addicted, underwent amputation for massive infection during the hospitalization after the definitive treatment. Delayed consolidation at the grafted site was seen in all patients of the group but, with the exclusion of the patient who underwent amputation, only another patient didn't reach complete consolidation and needed one further intervention on one of the graft ends. The mean number of operations per patient was 7.6. The malalignments and the leg length discrepancies are reported in Many methods of bone defects reconstruction are reported in the literature: vascularised/non vascularised – autologous/homologous bone grafts, (massive) cancellous bone grafts using Papineau or Masquelet techniques and distraction osteogenesis supported by circular external fixators All these techniques lead to satisfactory results in many cases. In our department, when treating severe acute traumas to lower limbs with bone (and often soft tissues) loss, we generally focus on two of these techniques and, if needed, we use their combination in the same patient. The distraction osteogenesis technique has been supported by many positive results along the last years in literature The advantages of using Ilizarov bone transport are the possibility to correct deformities and shortenings and to allow immediate mobilization and early weight bearing. The disadvantages are the long duration of treatment, especially when facing large bone defects, the pain accompanying the transport, the high rate of pin tract infection, the occurrence of non-union at the docking site in some cases. The use of vascularized fibular grafts has many advantages: vascularity and viability of the graft are maintained. Moreover, creeping-substitution is bypassed allowing stronger immediate mechanical properties and faster incorporation and graft hypertrophy in response to axial load. Furthermore, we may treat concomitant soft tissue defects by combined osteocutaneous flaps, allowing more radical initial debridement The results of our series show a long treatment time and a high number of operations per patient, reported to the simple use of bone transport by means of circular frames The acquired experience has leaded us to a more and more frequent choice of a combined technique with vascularized fibular grafts and external fixators. This approach allows the patient a fast post-operative weight-bearing on the injured leg as the frame protects the graft. As the load increases throughout the treatment, the initial stiff coupling of the frame wires to the bone gets more and more elastic, causing the “automatic dynamization” of the external frame. This way, the fibular graft is more and more stressed and, along with the Wolff's laws, gets hypertrophic. In some cases the Ilizarov system allows for a contemporary length discrepancy correction through the distraction at the interface tibia - fibular graft like it happens in callotasis. One of the ring holds the fibula that runs inside the medullary canal of the reconstructed femur or tibia if a distraction is applied. The good results of our experience lead to a proposal for a guideline in the treatment of these infrequent but severe lesions. All the treatments should start with damage control surgery by means of a temporary external fixator, associated to a debridement when needed. Soft tissues reconstruction and active collaboration with plastic surgeons is crucial: dermo-epidermal grafts, simple or composite local flaps, free flaps, VAC therapy are useful tools to obtain a good coverage. When a large soft-tissue and bone repair is needed, combined osteocutaneous fibular flaps can be performed after a thorough debridement in order to obtain an early coverage to protect the contemporary bone reconstruction. In the other cases, as local conditions get better and the vascularization improves, the bone reconstruction is planned at an early stage. A traditional fixation that counts on miraculous gap filling, thus waiting too much time, jeopardizes the correct timing of the treatment and the possibilities of bone healing. If, after the debridement of the non vascularized bone, some remaining fragments may serve as scaffolds for the bone healing, traditional auto- or allografts are used together with a stable osteosynthesis (Winquist grade I-II and even III with Tscherne class C0 to 3 or O1). In case of complete bone gap, bone transport by means of a circular external frame is planned when the bone loss is less than 5 cm (Winquist grade IVA). When the defect is larger than 5 cm (Winquist grade IVB) a microvascular fibular graft is preferred, often stabilized with circular frames. Antibiotics are a fundamental issue: our protocol is based on broad spectrum medications in the first phase, to shift to a focused, intravenous, antibiogram-based therapy after the results from the emergent samples are obtained. We never use antibiotic beads In conclusion we think that, in those infrequent acute trauma cases with relevant bone defect, Ilizarov concepts and the fibula vascular grafts are not alternatives as often reported in literature All authors declare no conflict of interest.