The TIG pulse welding parameters of AISI 316L stainless steel plate of 3mm thickness at the welding positions of 6–12h were investigated. The weld bead profiles corresponded to DIN 8563 class BS. The studied parameters were welding speed, pulse/base currents, pulse frequency, and % on time. Pure argon and argon with nitrogen contents of 1–4vol.% were used as shielding gas with a flow rate of 8l/min at both the top and the back sides of welds. Preliminary welding results at the 6h welding position showed that the appropriate parameters were: base current of 61A, pulse frequency of 5Hz, and 65% on time. With these constant parameters the effects of welding speeds of 2–8mm/s and nitrogen contents of 0–4vol.% in argon shielding gas on pulse currents were examined to attain acceptable weld bead profile corresponding to DIN 8563 class BS with complete penetration. The results showed that the lowest pulse currents were observed at the 9h welding position. Increasing nitrogen content in argon gas decreases the pulse currents. At the welding positions of 6 and 12h, the maximum welding speed is limited to 6mm/s, and with a welding speed of 7mm/s the formation of slag inclusion at the top of weld metal was observed. The maximum welding speed of 5mm/s is found for the welding positions of 8, 9, 10h, but the welding speed of 6mm/s is not applicable because of incomplete filled groove. The depth/width ratios (D/W) are between 0.34 and 0.40. Increasing welding speed decreases in the weld width and increases in the D/W ratio. The delta-ferrite contents of the weld metal are about 6–10vol.%, and are minimum at the welding position of 9h, because of the high nitrogen content of the cover gas and lowest pulse currents compared to all other welding positions. Radiography showed acceptable weld beads free of porosity.In the fabrication of equipment made from stainless steels such as pipe, automotive exhaust gas system, chemical industrial equipment, etc., arc welding using shielding gas is often used. TIG pulse welding is one of the generally applied welding methods. In the previous work  The delta-ferrite contents of the acceptable welds were quantitative analyzed as per the ASM method  The pulse current for different welding speeds and different nitrogen contents in argon shielding gas (0–4  The welding results at the 8, 9 and 10 From The welding results are shown in It is well known that the delta-ferrite contents in the austenitic stainless steel welds should be controlled in the range of 3–12 Kobayashi et al.  All acceptable welds have The welding parameters for TIG pulse welding of AISI 316L stainless steel plate of 3 Increasing welding speed will increase the pulse current. Increasing nitrogen contents in argon gas decreases the pulse currents, and then the solubility of nitrogen in the weld decreases. The welding speed is limited to 6 The welding speed is limited to 5 From the 6 to 12 The delta-ferrite content in the weld ranges from 6 to 10% by volume. The The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to the Thailand Research Fund, for the financial support and Faculty of Engineering, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand, for the facilities.