The ordering transformation in a stoichiometric Ni-25at.%V alloy involves a cubic (A1) to a tetragonal (DO22) transformation. The microstructure essentially comprises cells (or colonies) of transformation twins corresponding to different variants of the ordered phase. Whereas it is well established that the formation of transformation twins reduces the strain energy associated with such cubic to noncubic transformations, the role of the interface separating two contiguous cells in further reducing the strain energy is generally overlooked. This paper presents some evidences of accommodation of strain at and in the vicinity of the intercell interfaces.A disordered Ni-25at.%V alloy undergoes a cubic (A1) to tetragonal (DO Fingers of a polycrystalline alloy corresponding to the composition Ni-25at.%V were prepared from pure nickel and vanadium by electron beam melting followed by arc melting under argon atmosphere for homogenization. Repeated melting was carried out to homogenize the finger. Thin slices, cut from the fingers, were encapsulated in silica tubes filled with helium gas. The sealed slices were solution treated at 1100 °C for 5 h followed by water quenching. The water-quenched samples were aged at 800 °C for 1 h. For making transmission electron microscopy (TEM) specimens, heat-treated slices were first mechanically ground to a thickness of about 0.1–0.2 mm. Discs of 3 mm diameter were punched out from these foils. The discs were then electropolished to perforation in a dual jet Tenupol unit using an electrolyte containing 1 part perchloric acid and 4 parts ethanol. The jet-thinned samples were examined in a JEOL JEM 2000 FX transmission electron microscope. Different variants of the Ni The typical microstructure of the Ni A significant result of this investigation pertains to the accommodation of strain at and in the vicinity of cell interfaces during the evolution of the ordered Ni The formation of faults and dislocations near the cell interfaces could also occur due to the accommodation of the transformation strain as the twin lamellae grow. When a twin lamella nucleates, it tapers to an edge at its sides in order to accommodate the shape change brought about by the twinning. The resulting twin has a lens shape The observations presented here indicate that despite the generation of transformation twins, a considerable amount of transformation strain gets accumulated at and in the vicinity of cell interfaces. In the case of the ordered Ni The authors wish to thank Drs. S. Banerjee (Director, Materials Group) and P.K. De (Head, Materials Science Division) for their keen interest in this study. They also thank Mrs. Pushpa S. Agashe for her help in the preparation of the manuscript.