Anaerobically digested sludge filtrate after thermal hydrolysis pretreatment (THP-AD) requires large plant and operational costs for post-treatment and re-utilization. This paper reports the innovative forward osmosis (FO) membrane process to enrich organic matter from such a digested sludge filtrate. The proposed membrane separation process can reduce the operational load and environmental dependence of waste sewage treatment plants and may provide a new way for the treatment of THP-AD sludge filtrate. In this study, a cost-effective draw NaCl solution was selected for the FO process. The sensitivity of membrane operational conditions including membrane orientation, system temperature, system flow rate and concentrations of draw solution was investigated and correlated with the FO processing performance. FO mode is a clever choice to reduce the deposition of pollutants on the membrane’s surface, and improve the recovery performance of the membrane. The permeation flux of the THP-AD sludge digestion system decreased more rapidly due to the membrane pollution as well as to the decreasing of driving force caused by the dilution of the draw solution and the concentration of the feed solution. The concentration factor of digested sludge filtrate after FO process was more than five, and the rejection rates of organic and inorganic matter were above 92.5%. The membrane permeability recovery after the offline washing reached up to 98.4% and showed high efficiency at removing membrane fouling substances and at reactivating the membrane. The proposed FO process has potential as an alternative and practical method for treating and utilizing intractable sludge filtrates, conducive to the development of sustainable wastewater plants.Thermal hydrolysis pretreatment (THP) is an effective sludge pretreatment methodology that can improve the dewatering performance of sludge, reduce sludge volume [ Membrane separation technology has attracted more and more attention in wastewater treatment [ Analytic grades of NaCl KCl, MgCl Figure S1 presents the digital and scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi, S-3000 N, Japan) images of the FO membranes. The membranes turned into light brown color after immersing them into the brown protective solution (Fig. S1i). The pristine membranes are white (Fig. S2ii). Before use, the membrane was immersed in deionized water for 24 h to remove the protective solution. Then, the membrane was pre-filtered for 24 h using deionized water as the feed solution and 2 M NaCl as the draw solution to stabilize the membrane flux. The membrane’s active layer (AL) was made of cellulose triacetate (Fig. S1i) and the supporting layer (SL) was made of polyester. THP-AD sludge filtrate (from GaoBeiDian Reclaimed Wastewater Treatment Plant, China, pH 6.4–6.8) was used as feed solution (FS), it was roughly filtered with a 45 um filter paper before the FO process. The average characteristics of THP-AD sludge filtrate were shown in A lab-scale FO membrane separation set-up was utilized in this study (Fig. S2), comprising a feed reservoir, a draw reservoir and a membrane module with an active surface of 195 cm The membrane water flux ( The rejection ( The osmotic pressure of the solutions was measured by means of an osmometer (Osmomat 3000, Germany). Three-dimensional fluorescence excitation-emission matrices analyzer (3D-EEM, F-7000, Hitachi, Japan) was used at a controlled excitation wavelength (EX) between 200 and 400 nm, emission wavelength (EM) between 220 and 550 nm, and at 5 nm sampling intervals to analyze the component of the dissolved natural organic matters (NOMs) in the solutions. A suitable draw solution is critical for the successful development of FO technologies. Inorganic salts are commonly used as draw solutions due to their small molecular weights, good solubility, large osmotic pressure, and ease of separation by single or multiple membrane treatment technologies [ By considering the material cost, the osmotic pressure that each solution can provide was normalized with respect to the solute’s price  Membrane orientation can be either FO mode (active layer facing the feed solution, AL-FS) or PRO mode (active layer facing the draw solution, AL-DS). In the experiment, 2 M sodium chloride solution was used as the draw solution, digested THP-AD sludge filtrate was used as the feed solution, and the set flow rate was 1.5 L/min. The experimental results are shown in Figure S3. After fitting, the initial membrane flux in PRO mode was 8.5 LMH, while that in FO mode was 6.8 LMH. The slope of the curve in PRO mode was −0.00473, whereas in FO mode was −0.00414. The flux attenuation in FO mode was slower than that in PRO mode, which should be attributed to the following reasons: 1) The dilution ratio of the draw solution decreases at a slower pace because of the lower permeate flux, which results in the higher osmotic pressure of the draw solution in FO mode than that in PRO mode at the same time lapse. 2) The antifouling performance in FO mode was superior to that in PRO mode, leads to a higher extent of ion concentration polarization [   The effect of temperature on the membrane flux is shown in The influence of feed flow rate on permeate flux is shown in The concentration of the draw solution has the greatest effect on the permeation flux, while the velocity has less of an effect. Both the deionized water system and the THP-AD sludge digestion system have similar permeability trends under different conditions. The permeation flux of the THP-AD sludge digestion system decreased more rapidly due to the membrane pollution as well as to the decreasing of driving force caused by the dilution of the draw solution and the concentration of the feed solution. With the passing of time, pollutants will get deposited on the membrane surface, increasing mass transfer resistance and reducing membrane flux. Therefore, it is very important to choose an effective membrane cleaning method to ensure water production and prolonged the membrane service life in the production process. The effect of different cleaning agents, e.g., online water-washing, online alkali-washing (500 ppm, NaClO) and online acid-washing (0.05% citric acid), on the removal of membrane fouling, was assessed by SEM. In PRO mode, In order to enhance the effects of physical cleaning, the membrane was cleaned by online air-water washing, the flush ratio of air to water is 10:1. The dynamic permeation flux by consecutive filtrations and different washing cycles is shown in Both online air-water washing and offline washing had a good recovery effect, the recovery of membrane flux was poor in single online water washing. In order to compare the effects of cleaning methods on flux recovery more intuitively, online air-water washing, online water washing and offline washing were applied and compared, as shown in Protein and microbial metabolites were the main organic pollutants, calcium and magnesium were the main inorganics causing membrane pollution. As the membrane is not resistant to chemical cleaning, online air-water washing is a better choice for online maintenance, offline washing has the best recovery effect, it can be used as a periodic cleaning method. This study proposes the first trial of forward osmosis in organic enrichment processing from THP-AD sludge filtrate. NaCl was found to be the most affordable solute to prepare the draw solution over KCl, MgCl Lei Ge and Jiang Chang conceived and designed the research. Jiang Chang and Haoran Qiu conducted the membrane preparation and material characterizations. Jiawei Wang, Chunmiao Ji, Guoliang Liu, Rijia Lin and Byron Villacorta Hernandez performed the membrane characterizations. All authors discussed and analysed the data. Jiang Chang, Haoran Qiu, Xuan Zhao and Lei Ge co-wrote the manuscript and all other authors commented on and contributed to the revision of the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: