Solute analysis of bauxite residue filter cakes is an important but not very well understood operation carried out at refineries and in scientific research. As more and more refineries rely currently on dry cake disposal after filtration, washing and deliquoring of the cakes, the importance of correctly performed cake analysis will increase. Chemical analysis of bauxite residue filter cakes regarding their soluble compounds, such as the total caustic, soda and aluminate, is performed after forming a slurry from the cake and pure water by using a selected liquid/solid (L/S) ratio. This paper shows that there is currently no cake analysis procedure which could be used without unexpected variation in the results. This is because several factors affect the analysis result at the filtration and sample preparation stages. The factors discussed in this paper are divided into two groups, including the filtration and washing conditions and the sample preparation procedures. In the filtration stage, the filtration temperature and pressure were found to have a considerable effect on the solute recovery. On the other hand, the sample preparation procedure was observed to be affected by factors like the L/S ratio, the composition of the diluting liquid (with respect to its Na2CO3 concentration), the temperature, and the cake leaching time. In addition to the cake solute analysis, particle size measurements and calculation of alkali recovery for the solid-liquid separation stage are discussed as well. To summarize the main findings, it can be stated that significant differences in the results can be seen when any detail in the sample preparation procedure is changed.Bauxite residue is the largest waste fraction generated in the alumina industry. According to the recent online statistics of The disposal of bauxite residue in the form of filter cakes, i.e. dry cake disposal, is an emerging method, which enables disposal of the residue in landfills, instead of lagooning ( The objective of this article is to initiate discussion on the factors affecting the analysis results of bauxite residue filter cakes. One of the most important long-term objectives of the paper is to disclose the need for developing a universal, reliable and comparable procedure for the solute analysis of bauxite residue cakes. The paper summarizes the most important findings of the authors, obtained during several years of filtration research with a large number of different bauxite residues. The aim is to demonstrate, mainly by using dimensionless values, that the analysis results are highly sensitive to a number of factors in each stage of sample preparation. Industrial bauxite residue samples from most continents were used as raw materials in the studies. The cakes were obtained either directly from refineries or as a result of filtration and cake washing experiments performed at Outotec Filters and Lappeenranta University of Technology, both located in Lappeenranta, Finland. The first part of the study was targeted at illustrating the effect of process temperature and pressure on the leaching out of solutes from bauxite residue filter cakes. The study was performed by using two different filters, a Nutsche filter (A ≈ 20 cm The effect of the L/S ratio in the sample preparation stage was studied by using a washed and homogenized filter cake with a total solids content of 78 wt%. In this case, the cake was obtained directly from an alumina refinery. The cake samples were reslurried and mixed with a VWR orbital shaker at the speed of 250 rpm. A wide range of weight-based liquid/solid (L/S) ratios from 1 to 49 was used. The L/S ratios can be converted to wt.% according to Eq. The influence of the composition of the dilution liquid was evaluated by using the same cake material as above in the L/S ratio-related investigations. The aim of this series of experiments was to study if it is possible to avoid desorption and dissolution of the suspended solids content of the cake by using a Na When a bauxite residue filter cake is suspended in water, the resulting reactions never take place immediately. To demonstrate the importance of the sample stabilization time in the analysis of the cake, experiments were performed by using short and long stabilization times (75 s and 2 d) and two L/S ratios (1 and 9). For comparison, the effect of the dilution liquid was also studied by using both water and mother liquor, in this case the filtrate, as the dilution liquids. At the end of the stabilization time, the sample was centrifuged at 1700 G with a Jouan GT 422 bucket centrifuge for 2 min. The clear supernatant was separated for analysis immediately after the centrifugation. The analytical operations were performed with AAS for Na and Al, and with a thermometric titrator capable of measuring e.g. the total caustic and aluminate. The sodium concentrations were measured with AAS by using a Thermo Scientific iCE 3000 atomic absorption spectrometer. The thermometric titrations were carried out with a Metrohm 859 Titrotherm device, according to Metrohm Application Bulletin 313 e (Determination of total caustic, total soda and alumina in Bayer process liquors with 859 Titrotherm). The total caustic is defined as follows: the total hydroxyl ion content, which comprises the free hydroxyl ion (OH The pH values of the cake sample slurries were measured with a WTW pH 340i pH meter and a WTW SenTix 41 electrode. Particle size distributions of a washed filter cake sample were measured at different conditions with a Malvern Mastersizer 3000 laser diffraction particle size analyzer and a Hydro EV particle dispersion unit. The particle size analyses were performed both with and without ultrasonication and without dispersing agents by using the stirring rate of 3500 rpm. The Fraunhofer optical model was utilized, and each measurement was performed at least three times. Averaged particle size distributions were then calculated from the data. The calculation of caustic recovery in the filtration of bauxite residue and washing of the formed filter cakes can be performed by relying on the solute concentrations of the slurry, wash liquid, filtrates, and the cake, as presented in In this study, the solute recovery is defined in two alternative ways, according to Eqs. Recovery R1 (%) is based on slurry (A), wash liquid (B) and filtrate (C): As can be seen in Eq. The Na The solids content A comparison of the washing of the bauxite residue cakes in pressure filters and the washing/leaching of the same material in the form of slurry with water at atmospheric pressure is presented in Section  The washing of filter cakes in pressure filters is an operation which requires lots of experimental work to be even close to optimal. It is practically impossible to reach a complete removal of solutes from the cake, although displacement washing at high wash ratios may result in excellent washing efficiency. When bauxite residue filter cakes are washed with hot liquid in pressurized conditions, the results often look better than they actually are. There are solids in the cake which are dissolved due to the combination of elevated temperature and dilution, resulting in a decrease of the pH and ionic strength of the cake liquor. This phenomenon is explained in closer detail the Discussion section of the paper. The influence of the applied L/S ratio in the sample preparation step when the filter cake is mixed with water should not be underestimated, as the graphs in Water and aqueous sodium carbonate solutions were used as dilution liquids in order to study how the solute content and temperature of the dilution liquid would affect the measured total caustic contents of the filter cakes, expressed as Na  The results of filtration and cake washing experiments with respect to the solute recovery depend on the definition of recovery. Solute recovery can be calculated on the basis of the filtrate and the feed (Eq. Which definition of solute recovery would then be the most relevant to be used as a new standard of solute recovery calculation? There is no universal answer to this question, due to the influence of the filtration and cake washing conditions ( Particle size measurement of bauxite residues, in particular bauxite residue filter cakes, is also complicated, due to the flocculation of solids in the counter current washing process at Bayer plants. The key findings presented in this paper can be summarized in a few bullet points: The conditions in pressure filters leach lots of extra sodium aluminate out of the cake. Leaching equal amounts of the same components out of the slurry solids at ambient pressure requires over 10 times higher wash ratios. A more complete study on the effect of wash water temperature and pressure should be performed with different bauxite residue samples in the future. The leaching of caustic and alumina out of filter cakes in the sample preparation stage increases with the L/S ratio. No end to leaching was observed when the L/S ratio was gradually increased to 49. The composition of the dilution liquid has also an influence on the leaching of suspended solids from the cake. Water dissolves more material than Na There is a need for the development of a standard method for cake analysis and solute recovery calculations for investigations where the mass balance calculations are performed considering the filtration plant only. When the whole plant is considered, the changes in the caustic inventory should be in agreement with the Na Additionally, the measurement of particle size distribution should be performed according to the same procedure, by using long sample dilution time, strong mixing and ultrasonication, because the size distributions vary depending e.g. on the particle dispersing conditions. According to the existing literature, the main reason for the increased leaching from the solid phase is desorption and/or dissolution of desilication products (DSP). The phenomenon was observed for almost two decades ago by The pH decrease caused by dilution correlates well with the dissolution of Na, Al and caustic. The solid phase of a well washed and deliquored filter cake has an especially strong tendency to dissolve in the sample preparation stage. This is due to the low residual caustic content of such a cake, which consequently means that the cake does not have the buffering capacity required to persist the pH decrease. Many metals present in bauxite residues have low solubility, unless acid is used to adjust the pH to the acidic range. Metals such as Na, Ca, Mg, Fe, Cu, Al, Mn, Ti and Cr are increasingly leached out from the material with a decreasing pH (  Additionally, solid reaction products resulting from lime addition in the Bayer process may have an influence on the cake analyses. As regards the changes in the particle size distribution when bauxite residue solids are dispersed and kept mixed in water, it is obvious that the breakage of flocs plays a major role, the dissolution of particles being less important. The aim of this paper was to present some selected results of the authors’ experimental work performed with various filter cakes during the past years. All bauxite residue filter cakes have been observed to have a more or less similar behavior in the sample preparation stage prior to chemical analyses: dilution with a large amount of water makes the solute content look higher than it actually is, due to partial dissolution of the suspended solids content. When the L/S ratio used in order to re-slurry the cake for analysis has been increased from 1 to about 50, the dissolution of Na has been observed to increase by over 40% and that of Al by over 30%. This result depends on the refinery and the fraction of desilication products in the cake. On the other hand, the dissolution of surplus Na and Al can be prevented by diluting the cake samples with a filtrate collected from the same experiment. Increasing the pressure and temperature will inevitably increase the leaching of Na and Al from the solids. The most important factor having an influence on these dissolution phenomena is the decreasing pH of the liquid. However, a short dilution time prior to liquid analysis should not be used, because reaching the equilibrium between the solids and liquid phases may take a long time, which makes the differences between the samples become larger when the cake sample is prepared promptly. Temperature has a strong effect on the dissolution of solutes, especially when water is used as the dilution liquid, but this factor is not likely to cause significant variation in the analysis results in cases where the samples can be prepared at a constant room temperature.