Since for granulation processes the crusher operation has a decisive influence on the system stability, a reliable mathematical model to represent an industrial double-roll crusher of a urea granulation circuit is provided in this work. The crusher was described by the model given by Austin et al. [Austin L.G., Van Orden D.R., Perez J.W. A Preliminary Analysis of Smooth Roll Crushers, International Journal of Mineral Processing, 6 (1980), 321–336.] for mineral processing. The breakage parameters estimation was based on industrial data. The experimental particle size distributions of the feed, intermediate and product streams were obtained from large-scale crushers belonging to a urea granulation plant with a nominal capacity of 1 million tons/year. The results indicate that the model reproduces in a very accurate way the performance of this type of crushers, being a useful tool to: a) optimize the gap setting to meet specific crushed particle size distribution requirements and b) be included as a mathematical module in a plant simulator of the whole urea granulation circuit.Granulation converts fine powder and/or sprayable liquids (eg. suspensions, solutions or melts) into granular solid products with more desirable physical and/or chemical properties than the original feed material. This size enlargement technique constitutes a key process in many industries such as the pharmaceutical, food, ore processing and fertilizers ones Regarding the fertilizer industry, on a worldwide basis urea is the most popular solid nitrogen fertilizer and its use grows much more rapidly than that of other products. The granulation process is considered as the most important technology for urea production because the product has high resistance, low tendency to caking, and flexibility to be combined with other type of fertilizers. All these features, together with the increasing demand of grains due to the continuous world demographic growth, make necessary to do as much research as possible in this field The production of urea granules is a complex operation that cannot be carried out in a single process unit; it is rather achieved by a combination of process units with specific functions constituting the granulation circuit (see The operation of granulation plants is difficult, often a relative small fraction of the granules that leave the size enlargement unit are in the required size range. Therefore high recycle ratios are commonly found It was recently reported that the crushing of the screen oversize material has a decisive influence on the circuit stability and duration of the unsteady start-up stage. In fact, a very slight variation in the average diameter of the stream that leaves the crusher may cause the instability of the system There are many size reduction equipment that find applicability in a wide variety of industries, especially in the mineral processing one. Among others the ball, hammer and autogenous mills as well as the jaw, gyratory and roll crushers can be mentioned. Usually the double-roll type of crusher is used as the size reduction unit in urea granulation circuits. This device is constituted by two pairs of rolls that rotate in opposite directions at different speeds. The rolls can be smooth, corrugated or toothed and the distance between them (gap) is a key variable parameter. In the breakage of urea, the double-roll crusher is preferred over other comminuting equipment because narrow size distributions, low dust and limited noise generation are expected In this work, a model for a large-scale crusher of an industrial urea granulation plant is presented. The breakage parameters needed for the complete representation of the crusher are fitted using industrial data from a plant of high capacity (1 million tons of granulated urea/year). In order to predict the performance of the crusher, the particle size distribution of the feed (oversize fraction) and the gaps settings are the only required inputs. The model reported in this contribution is a useful tool to: a) understand the influence of the crusher operating variables (i.e., gaps of the upper and lower pairs of rolls) on the crushed particle size distributions and b) develop reliable simulators of industrial urea plants, which are essential to improve the granulation circuits performance. Most of the actual size reduction devices have been widely studied because of their applicability in the well-known mineral processing industry. Many of them, like the ball and hammer mills, are represented by mathematical models that accurately describe their performances As it was aforementioned, the fertilizer industry also requires comminution equipment. Many authors have developed entire granulation circuit simulations, modeling in all cases a hammer mill as the size reduction device The crusher model here presented is the one developed by Austin et al. The double-roll crusher model, first proposed by Austin et al. When a fed particle of size The mass balance for the crushed product of size The first term of the right hand side of Eq. Both expressions The crushed mass of each size According to the geometric sequence chosen to represent the size intervals, the quotient Austin et al. According to Austin et al. For a given feed size distribution and a set gap, Eq. Austin et al. Once all the Rogers and Shoji The global aim of the present work is to apply the previously described model to the breakage of urea in large-scale double-roll crushers from an industrial granulation plant. To do this, experimental data from an industrial double-roll crusher belonging to a urea granulation circuit under normal operation were used. That is, no laboratory estimations were performed and the parameters were fitted all at once. This implies that the obtained values may not have strictly the intrinsic physical meaning given by Austin et al. The parameter estimation was performed by using the Athena Visual Studio Software ( The experimental data were collected in two large-scale double-roll crushers of identical characteristics belonging to one of the two parallel circuits of an industrial urea plant. As shown in Samples, by duplicate, of the crusher feed (A), the product of the upper pair of rolls (B) and the product of the lower pair of rolls (C) for both crushers were collected and granulometrically analyzed every 4 and 12 h for two independent experiments (Tests 1 and 2) that lasted 36 and 72 h, respectively. During these plant experiments just the gaps between the rolls were modified, the remaining operating variables of the whole circuit were kept constant. The industrial data were represented on nine size intervals according to a For Test 1 the gap of the upper pair of rolls was fixed at 2.50 mm while for the lower pair two different settings were imposed: 1.60 and 1.40 mm. Regarding Test 2, the gap between the upper pair of rolls was set firstly at 2.50 and secondly at 2.10 mm while the gap of the lower pair was fixed at 1.40 mm. About 200 samples were collected and analyzed; i.e. 34 samples per sampling point and per crusher. The feed was sampled from the free falling stream entering to the crushers while the crushed material from the upper and lower pair of rolls were collected, due to safety reasons, through relatively small sampling ports located beneath each pair of rolls. As mentioned, replicates were available for all the samples. An example of the overall operation performance of the studied crusher is presented in  The same analysis was performed for the lower pair of rolls. Plant experiments are often difficult to be implemented due to production requirements; they are too time consuming and very expensive. Hence, the availability of industrial data is not frequent. As the studied plant has two parallel urea granulation circuits, the disturbances introduced in one of them did not damage the overall product quality. The generation of dust in crushers is unavoidable; however it has to be minimized in order to prevent the addition of many nuclei to the granulation unit. On the other hand the crushed product always contains material coarser than the desired size, which also has to be limited in order to have good sphericity of the granular product. Therefore, frequently the crushed material has to meet a given specification. In this work, the crushed material is divided into three fractions: The mathematical model developed by Austin et al. The performed parameter estimation generates valuable information for the understanding of the urea size reduction process. The fitted mathematical model presented in this work can be used as an accurate module in a plant simulator for future modeling and optimization of the complete granulation circuit. The proposed model does not only predict the product size distribution of industrial double-roll crushers, furthermore it can be used to determine the gaps settings required to obtain a desired crushed product with a particle size distribution that guarantees stable operation of the granulation plant.  Probability of a particle of size Probability of a particle of size Breakage function, mass fraction of particles of size Cumulative breakage function, mass fraction of particles smaller than size Feed mass percent of size Least-square objective function [−]. Gap of the lower pair rolls [mm]. Gap of the upper pair rolls [mm]. Number of size interval, Number of size interval corresponding to Product mass fraction of size lower than 1 mm [%]. Product mass fraction within the desired sizes (1 mm Product mass fraction of size higher than 2 mm [%]. Sink class, number of total classes in which the particle size distribution is divided [−]. Calculated product mass percent of size Experimental product mass percent of size Product mass percent of size Mass percent of material generated by breakage of Geometric ratio, two consecutive size intervals quotient Regression coefficient [−]. Size of class Gap dimension [mm]. Dimensionless particle size Feed median particle size, defined as the particle size for which 50% by weight of the sample is coarser and 50% is finer [mm]. Adjustable parameter corresponding to the Adjustable parameter corresponding to the Adjustable parameter corresponding to the Adjustable parameter corresponding to the Adjustable parameter corresponding to the The authors express their gratitude for the financial support by the Consejo de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica (ANPCyT) and Universidad Nacional del Sur (UNS) of Argentina. The experimental data provided by Profertil S.A. are gratefully acknowledged.