Composites with ferromagnetic nanoparticles, Fe and Fe50Ni50, dispersed in Al2O3 have been synthesized by a solution phase technique. The structure and magnetic properties of these composites with varying fractions of Al2O3 have been investigated. Both Fe and Fe50Ni50 nanoparticles are amorphous in the as-prepared state and become crystalline on heat treating with near equilibrium lattice parameters of 0.287nm and 0.358nm respectively. The interparticle distance increases with increasing Al2O3 from 0wt.% to 20wt.%. The size of Fe nanoparticles is ∼40nm while the Fe50Ni50 nanoparticles are ∼20nm in size. The Fe and Fe50Ni50 nanoparticles dispersed composites are found to be ferromagnetic at room temperature both in the as-prepared and heat treated conditions with clear coercive fields of 5.5–35×103
                     Am−1. The saturation magnetization increases by orders of magnitude on heat treatment, for e.g. from <1.0emug−1 to 143.4emug−1 for Fe–15wt.% Al2O3 and 95.6emug−1 for Fe50Ni50–15wt.% Al2O3. The Fe-composites exhibit a Curie transition at ∼1000K while the Fe50Ni50 composites exhibit a transition at 880K, both temperatures close to bulk values.The requirements of recording media with ever increasing areal density are leading the search for materials with stable magnetization in smallest possible volume. As the size of the particles decreases thermal and magnetostatic energies tend to destabilize the magnetization. As a result the magnetic behavior transforms from a ferromagnetic state to superparamagnetic state A range of magnetic nanocomposites with varying amounts of amorphous Al The structural characterization of both the as-prepared and annealed nanocomposite powders was performed by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis and transmission electron microscopy. The X-ray diffraction was done using monochromatic Cu-K The X-ray diffraction patterns from as-prepared Fe A detailed chemical analysis of the nanocomposites was performed by EDX in the scanning electron microscope and the results are given in The formation of randomly distributed Fe and Fe The variation of magnetization with magnetic field at room temperature for the various composite structures in the as-prepared state is shown in The magnetization values in the as-prepared state of all the different nanocomposites are far below the equivalent bulk values. This can be rationalized by the structural information, X-ray diffraction and chemical composition. The metal/alloy is amorphous in the as-prepared form and this structural disorder will lead to a highly disordered magnetic structure even at large fields The temperature dependence of magnetization The ferromagnetic behavior is a strong function of physical size and changes with decreasing size from a multi-domain to single domain to superparamagnetic states. The critical sizes of these transformations depend on the anisotropy energy constant of the material. The multi-domain to single domain transformation in the case of Fe which has an anisotropy energy constant of 4.5 The magnetic behavior of Fe The authors wish to acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India for financial assistance.