In the present study, the X-ray diffraction line profile analysis was used for the characterization of structural changes in mechanically activated pyrite by a planetary ball mill. Applying the Williamson-Hall integral breadth and Warren-Averbach methods, comprehensive investigations were carried out on the XRD patterns in order to separate the crystallite size and microstrain contributions in XRD broadened patterns. The analysis of XRD patterns of mechanically activated pyrite indicated that no phase transformation occurred during milling operation. The results revealed that crystallite size and microstrain decreased and increased, respectively, during mechanical activation process. Volume weighted crystallite size (Dv), surface weighted crystallite size (Ds), strain (ε) and root mean square strain (RMSS) changed from 316nm, 103.6nm, 0.05% and 0.04% in initial pyrite to 57.73nm, 25.1nm, 0.224% and 0.117%, respectively, in mechanically activated pyrite for 100min. In addition, the lattice parameter of mechanically activated pyrite increased as a function of milling time, implying that pyrite lattice volumes were expanded probably due to vacancy formation. Regarding to shape parameter study, the crystallite size broadening portion is more than the strain broadening portion on the broadened peaks in the XRD patterns of mechanically activated pyrite. This may be related to the fracture toughness of pyrite lattice, implying that pyrite structure is refined mainly by decreasing crystallite size rather than lattice strain. From surface area and particle size analysis, it can be confirmed that the agglomeration begins after 50min mechanical activation. The X-ray amorphization degree increases to about 70% after 100min intensive milling, reflecting the refractory nature of pyrite.Mechanical activation is a branch of mechanochemistry science with a wide range of potential applications. It has been proved that mechanical activation of minerals can accelerate reaction rate and leachability of activated minerals in lower reaction temperatures. These are associated with a large number of positive influences on the hydrometallurgical processes. In addition, mechanical activation changes the properties of minerals such as sorption properties ( Some researchers employed the mechanical activation pretreatment of minerals to improve their hydrometallurgical processing. The obtained results demonstrate that the mechanical activation pretreatment brings about the enhanced dissolution of the minerals due to crystalline disorders and new surface formation ( Pyrite (FeS The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis is an indirect and non-destructive method providing detailed information about structural changes in subjected minerals and materials to high energy ball milling. The microstructural analysis is based on XRD peak broadening. The broadened peak of activated materials reflects imperfections in the crystal structure subdivided into crystallite size and microstrain portions after the removal of instrumental effects. The present study aimed to investigate the structural changes of mechanically activated pyrite using the XRD line profile analysis. Different approaches such as the Williamson-Hall and Warren-Averbach methods were employed to extract the structural characters of mechanically activated pyrite (e.g. microstrain and crystallite size). A high purity concentrate was prepared through conventional beneficiation methods. An ore bearing high amount of pyrite mineral as raw sample was crushed and milled manually to a particle size of − The XRD analysis was applied for the examination of pyrite, milled samples and the standard sample, LaB The mechanical activation of pyrite was conducted in a planetary ball mill (Pulverisette 6, FRITSCH, Germany) with a rotation speed of 400 Powder diffraction provides different information about the atomic structure of crystalline minerals and materials. The XRD peak positions, intensity of diffraction peaks and the broadening of diffraction peaks are primary input data for extracting structural information such as crystallite size, microstructure, unit cell measurement and amorphization. The sensitivity of microstructural characterization methods depends on the accuracy of input data such as the peak position (2θ), maximum intensity of diffraction peaks (I In order to exactly extract the mentioned parameters, the profile fitting has to be performed on all recorded patterns. First, the Kα The line broadening of XRD patterns is formed with the convolution of three main effecting sources including instrumental, crystallite size and strain contribution while the ideal peak shape have to be sharp and non-broadened ( From the intercept and slop in a plot of B  As an overall trend, the BET surface area increased from 0.32 The mean BET particle size of a powder is calculated using the BET surface area and density of a powder according to the following equation; From The XRD patterns of the initial pyrite and mechanically activated pyrites indicated that all the peaks were matched fairly with the standard XRD pattern of FCC FeS The lattice parameters and unit cell volume of mechanically activated pyrites were plotted against milling time in The XRD patterns of pyrite and milled powders demonstrated that with increasing milling time, the broadening increased and the intensity of reflection peaks decreased ( The methods of Williamson-Hall and Warren-Averbach were applied to investigate microstructural changes of pyrite during mechanical activation based on line profile analysis methods. The Williamson-Hall plot was used to deconvolute the broadening component of crystallite size from microstrain. The results of Williamson-Hall method are summarized in The Williamson-Hall curves were plotted using Eq. The broadening portions of crystallite size and microstrain were investigated through shape parameter study. Crystallite size broadening and strain broadening can be described by a Voigt function with predominant Lorentzian and Gaussian character, respectively ( The Warren-Averbach method was conducted by the Winfit software and the surface weighted crystallite size and the root mean square strain (RMSS) were computed after profile fitting and removal of instrumental effect (  According to the relationship between results obtained by different methods in previous investigations ( For a Voigt size-broadened profile; For other methods; The comparison of outcomes indicated that they agreed with the above equations. The comparison of obtained strains using Williamson-Hall with RMSS proved that the corresponded relationship between them (Eq. The XRD line profile analysis of the Williamson-Hall and Warren-Averbach methods was applied to extract microstructural characteristics of mechanically activated pyrite. The following conclusions can be noted. In contrast to the outcomes of BET surface area analysis, the granulometric surface area reveals that agglomeration begins after 50 The primary XRD studies confirm the FCC crystallographic arrangement of used pyrite. The compression of XRD patterns clarifies that in the progressive milling of pyrite, the intensity of diffraction peaks was reduced indicating the amorphization degree increase. The calculation of XRD amorphization degree confirms the refractory nature of pyrite when the XRD amorphization degree of mechanically activated pyrite did not exceed from 68% after 100 Precise information about structural changes of mechanically activated pyrite was obtained using line profile analysis methods. The volume weighted crystallite size and microstrain were measured 316 The similar results were obtained by the Warren-Averbach method when the surface weighted crystallite size and RMSS changed from 103