Introduction
                  Intraoperative imaging seems to be the next step to improve surgical outcome in the treatment of zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fractures. Many publications have appeared on intraoperative imaging for trauma surgery, but in most hospitals intraoperative imaging is not routinely performed for ZMC fracture repair. The goal of this review was to assess the value of intraoperative imaging in ZMC fracture repair.
               
                  Material and methods
                  The literature was reviewed with focus on the effects of intraoperative imaging on facial symmetry, fracture reduction and the frequency of additional reduction after intraoperative imaging in ZMC fractures.
               
                  Results
                  Six publications were found on the frequency of additional reduction after intraoperative imaging in ZMC fracture repair. Revision of the reduction of the zygoma was performed in 18% (95% CI 10.5%–29.0%), revision of the orbital floor was performed in 9% (95% CI 3.6%–17.2%). No publications were found on the effects of intraoperative imaging on facial symmetry or on the accuracy of fracture reduction.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Information obtained from intraoperative imaging often has consequences on the surgical management of ZMC fractures. However, the effect on restoration of facial symmetry and fracture reduction is yet to be established.Zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fractures are common fractures in facial trauma ( Anatomical reduction at all points of articulation is the most reliable method to ensure a positive outcome. The fractured points of articulation are usually exposed indirectly as to avoid incisions in the face and to reduce the risk of severing branches of the facial nerve. Indirect approach of the fractures and the associated limited visualization makes the anatomical reduction a challenge. Intraoperatively, the reduction is verified by tactile and auditory feedback (the auditory ‘click’) during manipulation, absence of palpable steps at the points of articulation, direct visualization of the fractures through surgical exposure and clinical assessment of malar projection and facial symmetry. However, posttraumatic swelling, surgically induced swelling and comminution of the fractures can hamper the intraoperative clinical assessment of fracture reduction. Consequently, postoperative radiographic images frequently show suboptimal results ( The zygomatic bone, in articulation with the maxilla and the greater wing of the sphenoid, forms the fronto-lateral part of the orbital floor. ZMC fractures are frequently accompanied by a fracture of the maxillary part of the orbital floor. In some cases a fracture of the ethmoid of the medial orbital wall is also involved. Inferior rectus muscle entrapment, orbital content herniating into the maxillary sinus, early enophthalmos or hypoglobus, and large orbital floor defects that are expected to cause late enophthalmos or hypoglobus are indications for primary orbital floor exploration and repair ( The goal of orbital floor repair is restoration of ocular globe position and mobility through restoration of orbital volume and orbital floor continuity. Factors making repair more challenging are large orbital floor defects in which it is difficult to place the orbital floor implant on the posterior ledge, and involvement of the medial orbital wall in which it is necessary to insert an obtuse angled implant with careful placement of the medial bulge between the orbital floor and medial orbital wall. Radiographic imaging is routinely performed postoperatively. However, suboptimal outcomes of the primary intervention rarely lead to a second surgical intervention ( Intraoperative imaging seems to be the next step to improve surgical outcome in ZMC fracture repair. With intraoperative imaging the reduction of the zygoma is assessed immediately, allowing for further reduction in the same session when indicated, thus avoiding the need for a second surgical intervention. C-arm fluoroscopy, ultrasonography, spiral computed tomography (spiral-CT) and cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) are the available imaging modalities. Spiral-CT and CBCT have the additional advantage that the orbital floor and orbital floor repair can be assessed on the acquired images. Intraoperative C-arm fluoroscopy is available in most hospitals. Fluoroscopy can provide both still shots and real-time imaging during manipulation. On the submentovertex view, zygomatic arch contour and malar projection can be assessed. The maxillozygomatic, sphenozygomatic and frontozygomatic articulation may be difficult to assess however due to the effects of superimposition. Adequate assessment of the orbital floor is not possible on fluoroscopy. Intraoperative ultrasonography offers good visualization of the zygomatic arch and possibly the frontozygomatic and infraorbital articulation. The maxillozygomatic and sphenozygomatic articulation are however harder to visualize and malar projection cannot be assessed with ultrasonography. Assessment of the orbital floor is possible with ultrasonography, however accuracy is found to be lower than on CT ( CT has become the standard in preoperative imaging of facial fractures ( Cone beam CT (CBCT) is a relatively new imaging modality. A C-arm CBCT scanner provides accurate intraoperative CT images at low radiation exposure and has approximately the same size and weight as a C-arm fluoroscope ( The value of intraoperative imaging is measured primarily by observable improved esthetic outcome (i.e. improved restoration of facial symmetry) and secondarily by improved reduction of the zygoma and orbital floor on radiographic imaging. Ideally this should be tested comparatively in a randomized controlled trial. Improved reduction of the zygoma and orbital floor on radiographic imaging can also be assessed longitudinally in a cohort study. The comparison of the intraoperative images before and after additional revisions can be used to assess the consequences of intraoperative imaging on the definitive reduction of the zygoma and/or orbital floor. In combination with calculating the percentage of patients who undergo additional reduction of the zygoma or orbital floor following intraoperative imaging, this would allow for an adequate estimate of the value of intraoperative imaging. Using PubMed, MEDLINE-database was searched in December of 2013 for articles focusing on the use of intraoperative imaging for the repair of ZMC fractures. Articles describing the use of intraoperative spiral-CT, C-arm CBCT, ultrasonography or C-arm fluoroscopy in ZMC fracture repair were included. Articles on isolated zygomatic arch fractures were excluded. The references of the included articles were screened for publications that might have been missed in the initial search. The flow of information was managed in compliance with the principles of the PRISMA statement ( Selected for further quantitative analysis were articles that assessed esthetic and/or radiographic outcome of ZMC fracture repair with intraoperative imaging vs. without intraoperative imaging; articles that reported on the frequency of additional reduction of the zygoma or orbital floor during the same procedure following intraoperative imaging; and articles that compared the radiographic images before and after additional reduction following intraoperative imaging. Case reports were excluded from quantitative analysis. In publications where overlap of data was suspected, the authors were contacted and asked for confirmation. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated using the Clopper–Pearson exact method for binomial proportions ( Screening and data extraction were performed by WMMTvH. The search query yielded 153 results on MEDLINE. On title and abstract screening 135 publications did not meet the inclusion criteria, consequently 18 publications were subjected to full-text screening. After full-text screening 13 publications were included, 5 publications were excluded as they focused on isolated zygomatic arch fractures only. Screening of the references of the included publications yielded 2 extra publications that met the selection criteria, bringing the total of included publications to 15. An overlap of data was suspected between 2 publications ( Out of the 15 included publications, 6 publications were suitable for quantitative analysis. These 6 studies reported on the frequency of additional reduction of the zygoma and/or orbital floor during the same procedure following intraoperative imaging in ZMC fracture repair. No comparative studies that assessed esthetic and/or radiographic outcome of ZMC fracture repair with intraoperative imaging vs. without intraoperative imaging were available. No studies were found that compared the intraoperative radiographic images obtained after the initial treatment but before revision of the reduction of the zygoma or orbital floor, with radiographic images obtained after the revisions. The study design, the imaging modality used, the treatment before imaging, and the parameters assessed on intraoperative imaging varied between the included publications ( All publications were cohort or pilot studies. One publication ( Three studies used mobile spiral-CT ( Treatment before imaging consisted of closed reduction of the zygoma, open reduction with internal fixation of the zygoma (ORIF), or ORIF of the zygoma combined with orbital floor exploration and repair. In the studies that used mobile spiral-CT ( The reduction of the zygoma was assessed intraoperatively in a total of 76 patients in 5 different studies. Two studies used mobile spiral-CT ( It should be taken into account that The one study that used ultrasonography ( Extensiveness of the surgical exposition of the zygoma varied between the different studies. The orbital floor was assessed intraoperatively in 80 patients in 4 different studies. Two studies used mobile spiral-CT ( Treatment approach of the orbital floor prior to imaging and consequently the purpose of the intraoperative imaging varied between the different studies. Intraoperative imaging led to additional reduction of the zygoma and/or orbital floor during the same procedure in 22% of the patients with ZMC fractures (95% CI 14.1%–31.5%). The input given by the images was thus considered relevant by the surgeons and often influenced the surgical treatment. Revision of the reduction of the zygoma was performed in 18%. A wide range of revision rates is observed (0%–54%), this is possibly in part explained by a difference in extensiveness of the initial treatment. Revision of the orbital floor was performed in 9%. Assessment of the orbital floor was performed in studies using spiral-CT or CBCT only. Treatment approach to the orbital floor and purpose of the intraoperative imaging with regards to the orbital floor varied between the studies. Either assessment of the indication for exploration of the orbital floor after initial reduction of the zygoma without orbital floor repair, or assessment of the orbital floor repair after initial reduction of the zygoma with orbital floor repair, were performed. A combined approach, as performed by At our center, the C-arm CBCT is used intraoperatively regularly in the treatment of maxillofacial fractures. Its use is found very useful, namely in case of multiple and/or comminuted fractures. In the treatment of ZMC fractures, the authors specifically value the possibility to assess non-exposed buttresses, the orbital floor and orbital implant position. Visualization of the non-exposed buttresses may facilitate less invasive surgery through fewer incisions because it allows for non-invasive visualization of the fracture reduction; this effect is also described by In our experience intraoperative imaging rarely increases patient exposure to ionizing radiation as the intraoperative imaging obviates postoperative imaging. Consequently, only in the cases in which the imaging has therapeutic consequences patient radiation exposure is increased by repeated intraoperative scanning. Justification for the use of intraoperative imaging should ideally be based on scientific evidence of superior treatment results. The level of evidence for the use of intraoperative imaging is still slim ( The lack of comparative studies is likely explained by the high number of patients needed to attain the appropriate study power. As intraoperative imaging has a consequence on the therapy provided in only a small number of the cases, study- and control-group size would have to be substantial to provide significant evidence.  Of course the use of intraoperative imaging for ZMC fracture repair should also be put in an economic context. Hardware purchase and maintenance and a prolonged operating time add to the treatment cost. This should be weighed against the cost reduction achieved by the prevention of revision surgery in inadequately treated cases, and the potential cost reduction achieved by omitting postoperative imaging. Intraoperative imaging for zygomatic fracture repair is found to be useful as it motivated the surgeon to change the reduction of the zygoma and/or orbital floor in 22% of the patients. The clinical relevance of these immediate revisions is yet to be established. No grants were received. None of the authors has a financial interest in any of the products, devices, or drugs mentioned in this manuscript.