A potential cause for kidney stone formation during space flights: Enhanced growth of nanobacteria in microgravity.
               
                  Background
                  Although some information is available regarding the cellular/molecular changes in immune system exposed to microgravity, little is known about the reasons of the increase in the kidney stone formation in astronauts during and/or after long duration missions at zero gravity (0g). In our earlier studies, we have assessed a unique agent, nanobacteria (NB), in kidney stones and hypothesized that NB have an active role in calcium phosphate-carbonate deposition in kidney. In this research we studied effect of microgravity on multiplication and calcification of NB in vitro.
               
                  Methods
                  We examined NB cultures in High Aspect Rotating Vessels (HARVs) designed at the NASA's Johnson Space Center, which are designed to stimulate some aspects of microgravity. Multiplication rate and calcium phosphate composition of those NB were compared with NB cultured on stationary and shaker flasks. Collected aliquots of the cultures from different incubation periods were analyzed using spectrophotometer, SEM, TEM, EDX, and x-ray diffraction techniques.
               
                  Results
                  The results showed that NB multiplied 4.6× faster in HARVs compared to stationary cultures, and 3.2× faster than shaker flask conditions. X-ray diffraction and EDX analysis showed that the degree of apatite crystal formation and the properties of the apatite depend on the specific culture conditions used.
               
                  Conclusion
                  We now report an increased multiplication rate of NB in microgravity-simulated conditions. Thus, NB infection may have a potential role in kidney stone formation in crew members during space flights. For further proof to this hypothesis, screening of the NB antigen and antibody level in flight crew before and after flight would be necessary.Future exploratory missions to the moon and Mars, including the establishment of a permanently crewed base on the lunar surface, will extend the distances traveled, the exposure to radiation, the duration of the mission, and the levels of confinement and isolation to which the crews will be exposed. This will raise several health issues involving microgravity and various stressors that may be limiting factors during these missions. The transition through various levels of gravity, such as from 1 There exists a recently discovered agent (termed nanobacteria or NB) that behaves as a microbe and appears to show a correlation with such diverse conditions as arterial heart disease In a small study, Garcia-Cuerpo The Rotary Cell Culture System™, invented at the US National Aeronautical Space Administration (NASA), was introduced commercially by Houston-based Synthecon in 1990. This culture system uses a HARV attached to rotator base and rotated about its horizontal axis. The vessel is a disk-shaped container, 8.7 We have examined the microgravity effect on multiplication and calcification rate of the unique self-replicating agent, NB, using this simulation system. We used one of the NASA-designed bioreactors, designated HARVs. It consists of a disk-shaped culture vessel with 50 NB (DSM no.5819–5821; Braunschweig, Germany), available from NANOBAC OY (Kuopio, Finland), are cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) under mammalian cell culture conditions (37°C; 5–10%CO The collected samples were analyzed for positive identification of NB and sterility control; optical density measurement; transmission electron microscopic (TEM) analysis with and without negative staining; scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis; and x-ray diffraction and EDS analysis. We checked NB culture quality by applying a double-staining method as previously described For negative staining, NB samples were harvested by centrifugation at 40,000 The samples were prepared for SEM analysis as described earlier Growth curves for the culture conditions of NB are depicted in The criteria for pure NB culture were retractile aggregates of typical coccobacillar shaped particles visible in SEM Negative staining for TEM imaging of all NB cultures revealed typical electron-dense coccobacillus-shaped NB with defined borders ranging in size from approximately 150 to 250 Although some information is available regarding the cellular and molecular changes in immune system exposed to microgravity, little is known about the reasons of the increase in the kidney stone formation in astronauts during/after long duration missions at 0 In a successful space science biology and health maintenance program, the limits of established knowledge and the implied uncertainties of the estimated effects on astronaut health have to be identified and quantified. In particular, our limited knowledge of the microgravity effect on human health creates the greatest uncertainty in planning the future space science operations and missions. Changes in the diet, urinary volume, and urinary biochemistry of crew members during long duration spaceflight demonstrated increases in the supersaturation of the stone-forming salts. The effects of dietary intake, especially fluid intake, may have a significant impact on the potential for renal stone formation If NB cause kidney stone formation, and are potential infectious agents, how might this affect the crew members during and after space flights? Up until now, all the studies performed during space flight have shown that the main sources of microbial contaminants are the crew members themselves We do not fully understand the control mechanism of biomineralization either in primitive or in developed organisms. Recent investigations in space science have demonstrated the ability of living organisms to control crystallization through a biomineralization process that involves application of specialized macromolecules which enable nucleation and growth of crystalline structures of carbonates, phosphates, oxides, oxalates, silicates, and other inorganic materials. This process has been demonstrated in both 1 We propose a model system for the molecular analysis of biomineralization processes in simulated microgravity conditions by using rotating bioreactors and NB cultures. NB cultures are the only known systems that produce apatite-coated particles in identical size (about 150 This model (NB culture in bioreactors) could also be adopted as a drug-screening program for discovery of novel therapeutic agents affecting the biomineralization process in microgravity and similar mechanisms in patients with hypercalcemic conditions. Earlier we have shown that NB was inhibited in vitro at clinically achievable levels in serum and urine by ampicillin, trimethoprim, trimethoprim-sulfomethaxazole, nitrofurantion (a urinary antiseptic), and tetracycline HCl New and rapid testing for the presence of NB in human bodies must be developed. Success in reducing the risk for stone formation in astronauts by using unique approaches and techniques would also be of potential major benefit to the estimated 20 million Americans with nephrolithiasis. We appreciate Dr. Daniel L. Feeback for allowing us to use his molecular biology research facilities. We thank Craig S. Schwandt and Georg Ann Robinson for their expertise and help in electron microscopy.