The physical preconditionings of transmutations are analysed. It has been suggested that one of the most viable incineration concepts is a symbiotic nuclear-energy system, consisting of a transmuter and a number of co-operating light-water reactors (LWRs). Closing of the fuel cycle is not easily achievable, since the minor actinides (MAs), unavoidably then produced in significant quantities, show disadvantageous safety properties (positive void reactivity coefficients). Accelerator-driven subcritical systems (ADSSs), distinct by their remoteness from super prompt criticality, have been attracting more and more attention. The superiority of subcritical ones is shown by comparing their behaviours in the case of a rapid reactivity insertion that brings no risk, in contrast to the fast critical ones. Finally, research problems and difficulties are mentioned. Any form of closed fuel cycle cannot avoid dealing with large quantities of radioactive materials. Yet, a definitive elimination of actinides, with the use of the enormous released energy, is worth this price. Summarising, the concept of nuclear transmutations in accelerator-driven subcritical systems significantly heightens the safety of nuclear-power systems.The constant growth in material consumption (with energy in first place) of humankind as a whole is an unquestionable fact. Also, the forecasted exhaustion of cheap organic fuels (oil and gas) one day, though it is difficult to predict. Yet some signs exist—a radical increase in the prices of energy carriers Therefore, the only option which is simultaneously meaningful and has a potential to increase fast is nuclear energy. Unfortunately, nuclear energy provokes considerable social objections originating from the subjective perception of potential risk associated with nuclear power. These are: Contingency of uncontrolled supercriticality in extreme accidents. Highly radioactive, long-lived nuclear waste. (1) An intuitive measure of safety is the distance of the system state from the super prompt criticality (2) High radiotoxicity of nuclear spent fuel is the reason why finding a way for its neutralisation has become a necessary condition for the social acceptance of nuclear power. Meanwhile the problem is aggravating. At the world's current levels of deployment of nuclear energy (ca. 350 GW The global problem of waste has not been resolved until now in an indisputable way. Spent nuclear fuel at present is stored either at the plant or in interim engineered installations. Up to now, a disposal in geological formations is assumed to be the main way of final solution of the problem. The properties of the repository (its construction and position) should guarantee the retention of radioactive substances during millions of years, which should be sufficient for natural decay even of the longest-lived radioisotopes of the waste. Just the time scale of the necessary efficient functioning of such disposal disqualifies engineered solutions giving rise to a need for disposal in geological formations. This not inexpensive concept assumes drilling of adequate caverns several hundred metres deep in seismically stable, impermeable geological structures, for the secular storage of specially designed containers with nuclear waste. Since this option Therefore, a desirable way of solving this question is fuel recycling, first of all since the open uranium fuel cycle utilises a mere ∼1% of fission energy contained in the mined uranium. Only fissioning is the means of getting rid of radiotoxic actinides, since other nuclear reactions with exchange of only several nucleons leave the nucleus to remain an actinide one. In turn, a major part of the fission products are short-lived or stable. A partially closed fuel cycle has been realised on an industrial scale in France and the UK as the recovery of plutonium from the spent fuel for the mixed oxide (UO Social acceptance of nuclear energy can be facilitated by the possibility of definitive destruction of nuclear waste, thus adding an important social value to this research. The development of the concept of nuclear power including the idea of nuclear transmutations is a major step for this to occur. The trajectories of generation and decays of actinides in the (only at present) U-Pu nuclear-fuel cycle are illustrated in the This figure shows that the exploitation of a nuclear fuel is coupled with a variety of processes generating significant quantities of many nuclides. It is so, since many of them instead of fissioning are transmuted into heavier Minor Actinides (MAs) as a result of successive neutron captures. Quantitatively, this is described in On the basis of One can see (  As concerns transmutations of LLFP, the process though possible in principle (  But first of all one must not forget that there is no way to incinerate spent nuclear fuel without its reprocessing. There is no possibility of destroying completely nuclear waste. The realistic aim is to carry out the recycling in a way preventing a diversion of processed fissile materials. The ambivalence of the properties of More important is to hinder the misuse of recycled Pu. A significant “contamination” of Pu can be done when associating Pu with In general, two primary objectives of transmutations can be considered: (1) Incineration of actinides and if possible, of other radwaste. (2) In addition to current exoergic actinide destruction, a supply of fuel for further (future) use. A number of options of power systems with transmutation unit have been proposed, principally due to different assumptions of primary objectives. One can aim either at a more farsighted objective of designing a self-sustaining nuclear power system, with a closed fuel cycle or confine oneself to the development of technology of incineration of nuclear waste (the global amount of which will continue to grow for a half century). The example (see Another reason results from the French studies indicating a successful admixing of sole In a symbiotic system, two extreme variants can be noted: (1) Conservative—waste-incinerating system (e.g. stored Pu and MA) without regeneration of fissile nuclides; (2) Optimistic—self-sustaining nuclear power system (more precisely, assuming a replenishment of incinerated actinides in the system with natural or depleted uranium or thorium) and restrained to use only self-generated fissile materials (except of the initial inventory). Between these extremes, there are plenty of intermediate options. There are several concepts of devices for transmutations, mostly of a hard spectrum as, e.g. the pool-type reactors cooled with liquid Pb or Pb–Bi eutectics, descending from Russian submarine propulsion units Qualitatively, the principal material flow is as follows: the LWRs can be supplied with both types of fuel—the LEU or the MOX. In spent fuel recycling, U and Pu are separated first, then the MAs from the rest, i.e. from the fission products. In thermal spectra, Pu can be recycled at most twice because of the incineration of fissile isotopes The fundamental advantage of subcritical systems is their significantly higher level of safety of operation, due to a much larger distance of the system from the super prompt criticality, as shown in This feature is an essential difference as compared with typical nuclear reactors, routinely operating in a critical state. It is so, since the negative reactivity of subcritical systems i.e. their, larger distance (by one order of magnitude) from the superprompt criticality practically excludes the latter. The advantage of the higher safety of subcritical systems over those critical ones is illustrated by a computer simulation ( In computer simulations, usually a ramp insertion is assumed (expressed in dollars per second i.e. in With these rather drastic assumptions, the energy release in a fast system is enormous; damage of the fuel will occur as a result of the temperature increase by about 2000 K. In turn, thermal critical systems, where the Doppler reactivity coefficients are larger (due to the greater significance of the resonance regions for softer spectra), demonstrate a much milder power jump. Yet, since the neutron lifetimes are several hundred times longer and the enthalpy of the system larger, which significantly delays the action of negative feedback, the power growth continues long after the end of the reactivity insertion. Yet, finally, a much lower temperature increase (here ca. 400 K) is expected in thermal systems. One should also consider what happens in critical systems on a longer time-scale i.e. after the sequence pictured in the Therefore, independently of any deliberate actions in both LWRs and liquid-metal fast-breeder reactors (LMFBR), another negative feedback effect emerges. It follows the “dilution” of the coolant/moderator (resulting from dilatation) that attenuates the neutron slowing-down process in thermal systems and enhances the neutron leakage mainly from the fast ones. This mechanism finally makes both systems subcritical and thus automatically shuts them down. But, in subcritical systems, the same circumstances do not result in any hazard. Here, the power increase following the reactivity insertion amounts to a mere several dozen per cent, while the temperature rises only by a few degrees: the quick beam shut-off brings the power down to a fraction of the initial value within milliseconds ( Based on the above considerations, one can conclude that subcritical systems promise significantly safer utilisation of transplutonics as a fuel (in spite of their disadvantageous properties) and thus open the way to a practical closed fuel cycle. As could be concluded from all the above, though nuclear fusion could be the external neutron source for a subcritical system (e.g. The primary interaction of hadrons with the above mentioned energy and a heavy nucleus initiates an intranuclear cascade generating a number of high-energy particles, mainly nucleons (i.e. first of all neutrons) and less often pions or light nuclei—deuterons, alphas, tritons, etc. A question may appear, as to whether a direct transmutation with the accelerator beam can perform the task. We presume 1 GeV protons, 10 mA i.e. ∼6·10 Most designs of subcritical devices for transmutations use fast neutrons, e.g. those cooled with liquid Pb ( Nuclear transmutations in accelerator-driven systems sometimes do not comply with present understanding. First of all, their multidisciplinary and applied character should be emphasized. Unfortunately, a comprehensive description of all these fields would exceed the scope of this study. Thus, not forgetting that the system properties are decided at lower energies (i.e. <20 MeV), where over 99% of total energy and ∼99.9% of transmuting neutrons are released, one should recognise the priority of reactor physics. As regards safety, though a subcriticality of the system relaxes the respective requirements (namely, only slightly negative values of reactivity coefficients are desirable), a thorough check of them is necessary. It has to be done in a wide palette of material compositions and spectra. Another objective is not only to keep the neutron multiplication factor The fair agreement of the results obtained here with those given in Refs. Any construction decision must be preceded by detailed studies. Moreover, the requirements regarding reliability and accuracy of information for a future industrial design worth hundreds of millions of dollars must exceed those in most other scientific research. In the field of neutronic problems, the validation of computation tools—codes and nuclear data by appropriate experiments is necessary, particularly for nuclide production and energy release, shielding (at high energies); neutronics of subcritical systems. A need for such validation is confirmed by the still insufficient accuracy (±10%) of some neutronic calculations The hitherto noticeable lack of motivation for research upon subcritical systems can explain why all their properties are as yet not thoroughly known. For instance, weakly-coupled subcritical systems deserve more investigation A need for flexibility in fuel composition (there are options of homo-and-heterogeneous recycling) requires the necessity for separating all actinides (mutually) and from fission products. Meanwhile, the chemical affinity of lanthanides and MA makes these processes difficult with classical chemical methods. Thus, one needs to apply more sophisticated ways, e.g. pyrometallurgy and electrorefining. Yet, the assumption that separation processes can be carried out at exactly 100% efficiency is over-optimistic. Separation factors, though well exceeding 0.99 (even values as high as 0.9995 are quoted in the pertinent bibliography) still do not assure null concentrations in the depleted fractions. Thus one can expect the final reduction of actinide waste by more than two orders of magnitude, but not to zero. Specialists in accelerator technology still are facing the task of assuring a sufficient reliability of the device, high efficiency and adequate shaping of the beam of the required high power (>10 MW). There has been developed a technology of generating 1 GeV proton beams of intensity up to 100 mA (as a military research spin-off), but there is no experience as yet regarding an uninterrupted operation of such a device: this is an indispensable ability for all elements of any power system. The existing research accelerators, though generally very reliable, lack current stability (frequent beam trips), i.e. a fault absolutely inadmissible for electricity production. Finally, not all the pertinent material science problems (e.g., corrosion) in the presence of additional (from high-energy hadrons) radiation have been resolved. It would be an illusion to expect that subcritical systems can be free from all the drawbacks of critical ones. Nevertheless, the problems sketched herewith can be overcome, and since they are not fundamental questions only technological ones, their solutions should come gradually with technological maturity. In the most important aspect—safety—the remoteness of subcritical systems from superprompt criticality is pointed out as the essential advantage of the subcritical systems over critical ones. A superiority of the former ones is shown by comparing their behaviour in the case of a rapid reactivity insertion, that entails no risk, in contrast to the fast critical ones. The symbiotic character of the proposed nuclear-energy system composed of an accelerator-driven subcritical assembly and existing LWRs, does not lead to a revolutionary turning point in the development of nuclear energy by pretending to be able to replace all the present power plants. The ADSS applied for transmutations of actinide waste thus associated with energy production, seem to be the most attractive emerging option for nuclear power. While incinerating the most toxic long-lived actinide waste, this concept can efficiently shorten the duration of the related hazard. The fissioning of materials that could not be licensed in critical systems (i.e. transplutonics) makes this operation safe in subcritical assemblies, thus promising to achieve a closed fuel cycle. Moreover, it must emphasized that radical abatement of actinides, i.e. of the main source of heat, thus leaving in the remaining waste practically only LLFP, facilitates and reduces the cost and scale of the waste disposal in geological repositories. The concept of accelerator-driven subcritical systems for transmutations should help in the deployment of nuclear energy, as being just a technology with less environmental impact and a positive social undertone. This study has been sponsored by the Polish State Committee for Scientific Research. The assistance of Mr. W. Pohorecki with the computations is gratefully appreciated.  A knowledge of the equilibrium state is important since the system unavoidably approaches it in the course of the transmutation process, and so prediction of the system properties (e.g. reactivity coefficients) are essential. The respective lengthy calculations following the fuel evolution during incineration, e.g. This approach is simplified, nevertheless its accuracy seems sufficient, as can be seen in The balance The number of neutrons All components of The present approach, though simplified (e.g. confinement to the most important nuclides and reactions, no fission product evolutions; integral reaction rates instead of local ones) is a fast way of reliably estimating the actinide composition in the given circumstances.