This paper studies the unstable mechanisms of the mechanical system that is composed of the stiff hosts (roof and floor) and the coal pillar using catastrophe theory. It is assumed that the roof is an elastic beam and the coal pillar is a strain-softening medium which can be described by the Weibull’s distribution theory of strength. It is found that the instability leading to coal bump depends mainly on the system’s stiffness ratio k, which is defined as the ratio of the flexural stiffness of the beam to the absolute value of the stiffness at the turning point of the constitutive curve of the coal pillar, and the homogeneity index m or shape parameter of the Weibull’s distribution for the coal pillar. The applicability of the cusp catastrophe is demonstrated by applying the equations to the Mentougou coal mine. A nonlinear dynamical model, which is derived by considering the time-dependent property of the coal pillar, is used to study the physical prediction of coal bumps. An algorithm of inversion for determining the parameters of the nonlinear dynamical model is suggested for seeking the precursory abnormality from the observed series of roof settlement. A case study of the Muchengjian coal mine is conducted and its nonlinear dynamical model is established from the observation series using the algorithm of inversion. An important finding is that the catastrophic characteristic index D (i.e., the bifurcation set of the cusp catastrophe model) drastically increases to a high peak value and then quickly drops close to instability. From the viewpoint of damage mechanics of coal pillar, a dynamical model of acoustic emission (AE) is established for modeling the AE activities in the evolutionary process of the system. It is revealed that the values of m and the evolutionary path (D
                     =0 or D
                     ≠0) of the system have a great impact on the AE activity patterns and characters.Rockbursts and bumps are experienced in underground mining at various locations in the world, causing death and serious injury to underground miners and damage to mine facilities ( Some preventive and monitoring approaches ( In underground openings, seismic activity or acoustic emission (AE) is often a concern because related dynamical effects may lead to violent failure and support damage ( The previous research on judging the occurrence of rockbursts and bumps is based mainly on the conventional strength criterion. However, the rock or coal failures may occur in a progressive manner, which may not always lead to rockbursts and bumps. Thus, the strength criterion may be inappropriate for judging the occurrence of rockburst or bump. It is well known from tests with a stiff, servo-controlled testing machine ( The methods and approaches based on the catastrophe theory developed by This paper is a generalization and extension of the previous studies. The stress–strain constitutive model for the coal pillar is described by the Weibull’s distribution law, which is more general and practical than a negative exponent distribution. A cusp catastrophe model will be presented for the system that is composed of the coal pillar and stiff host rock (roof and floor). The unstable conditions of such a system leading to coal bump will be suggested using the catastrophe theory. Furthermore, by considering the time-dependent and damaged properties of the coal pillar, a nonlinear dynamical model and an AE dynamical model will also be put forward for studying the physical prediction of coal bump and AE characteristics in the deformation process of the system. Some of the coal bumps in underground openings occur in multifarious coal pillars. The coal pillars are usually pre-preserved for supporting the roof under the condition of both hard rock roof and hard rock floor when the pillar-and-room method or the pillar-and-board method is applied for coal mining. While the progressive failures result in coal bumps in the coal pillars, such as Datong and Sanhejian coal mines in China, the rock layers of the roof are unbroken and are concerned only with energy release. Considering that the excavation width According to damage mechanics ( The constitutive model of the coal pillar is a nonlinear one with the strain-softening property. For the coal pillar with a sectional area For the mechanical system that is composed of the beam and coal pillar, as illustrated in The cusp can be solved by the smoothness property of the equilibrium surface. At cusp, Making Taylor series expansion with respect to Substituting Eqs. The cusp catastrophe described by the equilibrium surface containing fold or pleat is illustrated in The bifurcation set ( Clearly, only when It is well known that the mechanical properties of rock or coal specimens are scale dependent. It is seen from  Only when the stiffness ratio and homogeneity index as well as the geometric-mechanical parameter satisfy Eq. Eq. According to field investigations and laboratory experiments for the excavation zone 51 in the Mentougou coal mine, PR China ( Substituting the known parameters into Eq. In the above analysis, we considered the quasi-static motion process of the coal-pillar-and-beam system, but not the dynamical process of instability. To study the physical prediction of coal bump, a nonlinear dynamical model is needed. If the viscosity or creeping (i.e. time-dependent) property of the coal pillar is considered ( The character of the equilibrium state of Eq. Eq. The only information available at present is the observation data and description of deformation and failure phenomena for the complex evolutionary process of rockbursts and bumps. That is to say, we know a series of specific solutions of the dynamical model. If we regard such solutions as a series of discrete values of the dynamical model, the quasi-ideal nonlinear dynamical model for the evolution of the rockburst and bump can, thus, be obtained through an algorithm of inversion. The following gives the analytical procedures and steps. (1) Substituting Eq. (2) The parameters The average coal seam thickness at the excavation zone 741003 in the Qianjuntai pit of the Muchengjian coal mine, PR China, is 2.6 Based on the observed roof settlement data in AE is transient elastic waves generated by the rapid releases of elastic energy due to local micro-rupturing as the results of local damage. For a strong roof and floor, as pointed out by Eq.    For the same values of In order to compare the AER mutative features between the cases when a bump ( The above-mentioned analysis shows that the AE activities rely on not only the homogeneity index This paper presents a theoretical framework that explicitly links observation data of roof settlement or coal-pillar deformation and AE with a nonlinear dynamical model, so that we can improve our way to predict the coal bump. The models and approaches put forward in this paper may open a new way to study the complexity of the bump mechanisms. The following conclusions are obtained from the above analysis: Taking the stiff roof as an elastic beam and the coal pillar as a strain-softening medium, whose constitutive model is described by the Weibull’s theory of the strength of materials, we studied the instability leading to coal bump for the coal-pillar-and-roof system using the catastrophe theory. It is found that the instability of the system depends mainly on the ratio of the flexural stiffness of the beam to the absolute value of the stiffness at the turning point of the constitutive curve of the coal pillar and the homogeneity index (also called the brittleness index) of the coal pillar. The sufficient-necessary conditions leading to coal bump are also presented and are proved to be effective by a case study of the excavation zone 51 in the Mentougou coal mine, PR China. By considering the viscosity property or the time-dependent behavior of the coal pillar medium, a nonlinear dynamical model (or called a physical prediction model) is presented. This model can be used to study the physical prediction of the deformation rule for the coal-pillar-and-roof system according to the mechanical parameters determined from the laboratory experiments and the geometric parameters by the field investigations. The nonlinear dynamical analysis on the observed roof settlement data at the excavation zone 741003 in the Qianjuntai pit of the Muchengjian coal mine, PR China, shows that the catastrophic characteristic index A dynamical model of AE is established from the viewpoint of damage mechanics of a coal pillar. It is found by numerical simulations that the homogeneity index The work was funded by China national 973 programme (No. 2002CB412702).