The adsorption of ethyl, propyl and butyl xanthates on pyrite has been studied through electrokinetics, batch adsorption tests, and quantification of Fe2+ ions in solution. Adsorption isotherms for the three alkyl xanthates indicate that their adsorption to dixanthogen produces Fe2+ ions in solution and decreases the pyrite zeta potential negatively. It seems that the oxidation reaction of xanthates to dixanthogen on pyrite is coupled with the reduction reaction of surface-ferric hydroxide to ferrous ions, leading to the dissolution of hydrophilic ferric hydroxide and growth of hydrophobic dixanthogen on the surface of pyrite. Flotation of pyrite is presented as a function of pH using various ethyl xanthate concentrations. The floatability results are explained in terms of the surface coverage relationship between ferric hydroxide and dixanthogen, which is pH dependent.The adsorption of sulfhydryl collectors on pyrite has been studied extensively in order to establish the reactions that can occur in the flotation systems of sulfides. With reference to xanthate ions as the sulfhydryl collector, various adsorption mechanisms has been advanced namely chemisorption ( Direct evidence of dixanthogen formation on pyrite has been demonstrated by radiometric ( Adsorption of dixanthogen on pyrite has been proposed to occur through chemisorption ( Dixanthogen forms on pyrite in the presence of oxygen through oxidation of the xanthate via an adsorption step ( The oxidation of xanthate to dixanthogen has also been attributed to be coupled with the reduction of oxygen. The oxygen reduction mechanism implies that the surface of pyrite is not chemically involved in the adsorption process, acting only as a catalyst promoting the anodic and cathodic reactions. This mechanism is the most widely accepted ( The aim of this work is to look for a further understanding of the adsorption mechanisms of xanthates at the pyrite/aqueous solution interface, with relevance to the flotation and depression of pyrite when using xanthates as collectors. Adsorption of xanthate ions of various alkyl chain-lengths has been studied with simultaneous measurements of Fe Natural specimens of pyrite from Zacatecas, Mexico were used in this investigation. Quartz and sulfide impurities were removed by hand sorting under an optical microscope. The collected sample was examined mineralogically and chemically assayed for its components. It was found to be composed of 99.3% FeS Microflotation tests were carried out using a modified Hallimond tube, one gram pyrite and 100 ml solution at the desired pH and collector concentration. The mineral was conditioned open to the atmosphere for 30 min. Then the pH was registered and reported as final pH. Following the condition step the pulp was transferred to the Hallimond tube for flotation, which was performed for 1 min using nitrogen at a flow rate of 30 ml/min. Adsorption studies were carried out with one gram − The pyrite/aqueous solution interface has been studied by different techniques in order to elucidate adsorption mechanisms for collectors and depressants and those for surface oxidation. A common technique is electrophoresis, by which the zeta potential at the pyrite/aqueous solution interface can be determined. Changes in the zeta potential reveal the nature of adsorption. As seen pyrite exhibits two isoelectric points, at pH 4.5 and 6.4, which have been accounted for ferric hydroxide on the surface of pyrite ( Considering that the pyrite surface has patches of ferric hydroxide, the electric charge at the pyrite/aqueous solution interface can be accounted for FeOH As noted in It is worth noting that most studies on pyrite have emphasized the solid/water interface and relatively little attention has been given to the equilibriun xanthate concentration and the pyrite solubility. On this line A direct plot of xanthate adsorbed against the concentration remaining in solution would give considerable information on the nature of the mechanism involved. Thus the adsorption isotherms for ethyl, propyl and butyl xanthates on pyrite at pH 5 were determined. The pH 5 was selected because the concentration of Fe The type of adsorption isotherms shown in  Eq. As adsorption of xanthate ions leads to dissolution of surface ferric hydroxide, the equilibria given by Eqs. The Fe In The formation of dixanthogen renders pyrite surface hydrophobic making pyrite floatable. The flotation of pyrite using various ethyl xanthate concentrations as a function of pH is shown in The depression at the pH range of 5 to 9 is not due to a lack of dixanthogen. It has been theoretical and experimentally demonstrated that adsorption of xanthate to dixanthogen occurs under these conditions ( Based on the model presented in Adsorption of xanthate ions on the surface of pyrite occurs through a surface oxidation reaction to dixanthogen coupled with the reduction reaction of surface-ferric hydroxide. Accordingly, ferric hydroxide dissolves and dixanthogen grows on the surface of pyrite enhancing the floatability of pyrite. In addition, the zeta potential of pyrite increases negatively owing to the loss of positive charge associated with surface-ferric hydroxide. The authors acknowledge the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología for the financial support to this project through Grant U39536-Y. Aldo Amir Sánchez López thanks the Fellowship by the Instituto Mexicano del Petroleo and CONACyT for postgraduate studies. Thanks are also extended to M. C. Ojeda Escamilla for her assistance in the preparation and purification of the alkyl xanthates used in this study.