Solvent extraction experiments were performed to separate Mo(VI), V(V), Re(VII), and W(VI) from two types of synthetic solutions. One was 1–5M HCl solution containing Mo(VI), V(V), and Re(VII), and the other was a solution containing these four metals in the pH range 2–10. First, LIX 63 co-extracted Mo(VI) and V(V) from 1M HCl solution, leaving Re(VII) in the raffinate. The two metals in the loaded LIX 63 were separated by selective stripping of V(V) with 6M HCl solution. Second, LIX 63 selectively extracted both Mo(VI) and V(V) from the solution with an initial pH of 2, leaving Re(VII) and W(VI) in the raffinate. W(VI) was selectively extracted over Re(VII) from the Mo(VI) and V(V) free raffinate by Alamine 336. McCabe-Thiele diagrams for the extraction and stripping were constructed. Based on the results of this study, a process was proposed for the separation of the four metals from the second synthetic solution by solvent extraction and stripping.Rhenium, molydenum, vanadium, and tungsten have wide applications in various fields ( In general, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes are employed for the recovery of Mo, V, Re, and W from alloy scraps. The release of hazardous gas and high metal loss during the pyrometallurgical processes are of big concern ( Mo, W, Re, and V from either acid or alkaline leaching solutions are commonly separated by precipitation ( A review on the separation of Mo, W, and V from leach liquors of diverse resources by solvent extraction indicates that complete separation of Mo, V, and W by amine or solvating extractants is difficult from either acidic or alkaline solutions, because of high co-extraction of these metals at a high pH value or precipitation of tungstic acid at low pH value ( A synthetic solution containing Mo(VI), V(V), Re(VII), and W(V) was prepared by dissolving Na Extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by mixing equal volume (10 In the solvent extraction, the information on the distribution of the metal ions is important in choosing an appropriate extractant. According to the distribution diagrams of Mo(VI), V(V), Re(VII), and W(VI) ( In the recovery of valuable metals from super alloy scraps by hydrometallurgical process, acid leaching is employed to dissolve these metals from the scraps ( It has been reported that the cationic species VO According to Since cation exchange reaction is responsible for the extraction of Mo(VI) and V(V) by LIX 63 (see Eqs. The results in The separation factors of V(V) and Mo(VI) with Re(VII) and W(VI) are listed in The separation efficiency of Mo(VI), V(V), Re(VII), and W(VI) by extraction with LIX 63 at initial pH In order to determine the number of extraction stages required for the complete extraction of Mo(VI) and V(V) by LIX 63, the extraction isotherm of Mo(VI) was obtained with the organic solution consisting of 0.1 According to the results in Most of W(VI) and Re(VII) exist as anionic species when the solution pH is from 2 to 10 ( In order to examine the stripping behavior of W(VI) from the loaded Alamine 336, the loaded organic phase was prepared by contacting the synthetic solution containing W(VI) and Re(VII) of initial pH Eq. Based on the obtained results, a process for the separation of Mo(VI), V(V), Re(VII), and W(VI) from hydrochloric acid solution was proposed, as shown in The separation of Mo(VI), V(V), Re(VII), and W(VI) by solvent extraction was investigated. Since tungsten acid precipitates at low pH, the target solutions were divided into high acidity solution with the HCl concentration in the range 1–5 Second, LIX 63 can be used to selectively extract both Mo(VI) and V(V) over Re(VII) and W(VI) from the synthetic solution with an initial solution pH of 2. While Re(VII) was not extracted at all by LIX 63, the concentration of LIX 63 strongly affected the extraction of Mo(VI), V(V), and W(VI). McCabe-Thiele diagrams for the extraction and stripping of Mo(VI) and V(V) were constructed. Although both W(VI) and Re(VII) were extracted by Alamine 336, W(VI) was selectively extracted over Re(VII) from the raffinate after the separation of Mo(VI) and V(V) by adjusting Alamine 336 concentration. The W(VI) in the loaded Alamine 336 was successfully stripped using NaOH solution. In conclusion, an optimized process for separating Mo(VI), V(V), Re(VI), and W(VI) from the solution with an initial pH of 2 by solvent extraction is proposed. This work was supported by the Global Excellent Technology Innovation of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP), granted financial resource from the