 September 2016, and my fourth book Our return was scheduled on January 7, 2017. The same morning I received a mail from Ms. Amy Shapiro, Acquisitions Editor, Earth and Planetary Sciences, asking if was interested in working on a proposal for a second edition of Prof. Martin Hale, formerly ITC, Netherlands, enriched me with a few valuable changes. Similar suggestions were received from Prof. E.C. Nehru, Emeritus, Brooklyn College, New York, Prof. B.C. Sarkar, IIT Dhanbad, India, Mr. Finn Barrette, Consultant, IMX Resources Ltd., Australia, and Dr. Tom Evans, Executive Manager, Lonmin Plc, UK. I am grateful to each one. Dr. D.B. Sikka from Canada, my friend, philosopher, and guide, wished to review the manuscript from his hospital bed, but when it reached him he had left for heaven. May his soul rest in peace! Appreciative suggestions and wishful gratitude from learned reviewers, professional colleagues from academia and industry, and finally from students have enriched the topics and inspired me in my long journey. I have critically reread the entire manuscript and made necessary edits to and additions of texts and 385 colored diagrams and images. The new edition is an essential standard textbook for undergraduate university students taking modules in economic geology, and postgraduates specializing in mineral exploration. Practicing exploration geologists may well keep a copy as a ready reference. Students need a good insight into the way professionals work and the needs of the professions with which they interface. The chapters are planned with a comprehensive and holistic approach, and address the needs of students and professionals alike. The relevance is global with sufficient emphasis on regions/countries in which university education includes economic geology, and where mineral exploration is an important activity: the Americas, Australia, India, China, South Africa, and Western Europe. The book is intended to become an industry standard, having comprehensive reference to study all aspects of mineral exploration, mining, and mineral processing/extraction, from the handling of run-of-mine ore to separation strategies and removal of waste products. The book incorporates state-of-the-art developments in the fields of engineering, chemistry, software applications, and environmental sustainability, and explains how these disciplines contribute to the ultimate goal of producing minerals and metals economically from ores. Eleven global case studies cover all aspects of activities, and are a practical reference for seasoned industry professionals interested in improving operational efficiencies. All faculty members of the Applied Geology Department, Presidency University, extended full support over one and half decades for my academic growth. Students from Presidency and Calcutta University, IIT Dhanbad, I will be indebted forever to M/s Hindustan Copper Limited, Hindustan Zinc Limited, India, and IMX Resources Limited (Mr. Finn Barrett), Australia, for extending ample opportunity to enrich me with overall aspects of the mineral industry in general and mineral exploration in particular. I am happy to mention that my two little grandchildren, Srishti and Srishta, never allow me to work when we meet, but infuse tremendous energy for my good health and mind. Srishti composed the poem March 13, 2018