The effect of porosity, pore size and pore distribution on rock deformational and strength characteristics is studied in this paper, using a bonded particle model. Several uniaxial compressive and tensile strength tests were conducted on the numerical specimens with different sizes. Different pore distributions and pore sizes were used. It is shown that in addition to porosity, the pore size can have drastic effects on the elastic modulus, crack initiation stress and rock strength. The ratio of uniaxial compressive to uniaxial tensile strength of the simulated material is affected by the pore size as well. The simulated material shows statistical size effect in tension and crack initiation stress, but this phenomenon is not ideally captured in compression. The size effect in tensile tests was attempted to be modeled by Weibull distribution with relative success. It is shown that the size of representative elemental volume depends on the rock property which is being investigated. For example, the size of representative elemental volume for rock elastic modulus is much smaller than that for the crack initiation stress. It appears that the size of representative elemental volume is a function of macro-pore size.Rock is a quasi-brittle material that contains pores, flaws and micro-cracks. The presence of pores has a considerable effect on engineering properties of rock such as its Young’s modulus, crack initiation stress and uniaxial compressive strength. Several experimental and numerical studies have been conducted to investigate the effect of porosity on mechanical behavior of rock. Al-Harthi et al. The way that pores are distributed in a specimen can cause some scatter in mechanical properties of rock. For example, random changes of location of voids or pores in a specimen can result in variation of the specimen stiffness and strength. On the other hand, by increasing the specimen size, the scatter of the data reduces gradually. Representative elemental volume (REV) is defined as the minimum size of the sampling domain beyond which the characteristic properties of the material remain constant In this paper, the role of macro-void or macro-pore size and its distribution on the mechanical behavior of rock is investigated. The effect of pores in rock engineering is normally captured through the introduction of porosity (a dimensionless parameter) in the constitutive equations such as those of poroelasticity In this study, CA2 computer program Uniaxial tests were performed on the numerical samples 2×4, 4×8, 8×16, 16×32 and 32×64 The micro-mechanical constants adopted for the numerical model are: normal spring stiffness (  The stress–strain curves for two uniaxial compressive tests and two uniaxial tensile tests are shown in The histograms for Young’s modulus and compressive strength values for one hundred specimens, 4×8 The histograms of normalized crack initiation stress in compression tests for samples with small and large macro-pore sizes are shown in To study the effect of porosity, uniaxial compressive tests were conducted on samples 4×8 The numerical results for Poisson’s ratio values are shown in Random distribution of macro-pores within a numerical specimen can cause the scatter of the numerical data. A similar situation can exist for a physical rock specimen. To address the combined effect of macro-pore distribution and sample size on the behavior of simulated material, numerical specimens 2×4, 4×8, 8×16, 16×32 and 32×64  A two-dimensional discrete element analysis was used in this research study. In a two-dimensional analysis, the pores are cylindrical in shape, which can introduce more flexibility and weaker spots in the numerical samples compared to the situation with spherical pores in a three-dimensional simulation. Therefore, a two-dimensional model may exaggerate the simulated data scatter. Nevertheless, a two-dimensional analysis can capture the overall data scatter of the parameters studied in this paper and can provide an insight toward understanding the REV size corresponding to different rock properties. Several theoretical schemes have been suggested for evaluation of equivalent or effective properties of heterogeneous materials such as rocks An interesting observation is that the ratio of uniaxial compressive strength to uniaxial tensile strength ( The notion of representative elemental volume is important in rock mechanics. In many cases, the results from experimental and also numerical investigations show significant scatters. One reason for this observation is that an unrepresentative sample size is being used for testing. Also, in numerical simulations, there are many applications where CPU time and memory are issues of concern. Therefore, it would be very important to define the material with the help of the smallest specimen, which is still large enough to be fundamentally valid and representative. The numerical results suggest that the size of representative elemental volume is not a unique property and it depends on the chosen parameter of interest. For example, the size of REV for uniaxial compressive tests is larger than that for the Young’s modulus. Also, as expected, samples with larger pore size suggest greater REV sizes compared to the situation that the pore size is smaller, keeping the porosity the same of about 16% for all the samples. It is worthy to note that the scatter of the data for Young’s modulus is minimal among the data of other parameters studied in this paper, and therefore it needs the smallest representative elemental volume size. In contrast, crack initiation stress has the maximum data scatter and therefore the representative elemental volume size needs to be very large for this parameter. If a coefficient of variation of 5% is chosen for the data scatter of REV, a REV may not exist for the crack initiation stress. The reason for high scatter of crack initiation stresses can be explained as follows. The crack initiation stress like other parameters studied in this paper depends on the porosity and the size of the macro-voids. In addition, it can be affected drastically by the detailed arrangement of the grain cylinders around a macro-void and the distance between the macro-voids. Detailed arrangement of the cylinders around a macro-void should not affect the elastic properties and uniaxial strength of rock substantially. Weibull distribution that is based on the weakest link theory is normally used to model the statistical size effect. While some researchers support the use of Weibull model The gamma function in Eq. From Eq. In order to observe how Weibull distribution with the above A two-dimensional bonded particle model was used to study the effect of porosity, macro-void size and macro-void distribution on rock deformability and strength. It was shown that in addition to porosity, the dimensionless parameter of macro-void size to grain size ratio can affect the mechanical behavior of rock. From numerical specimens with the same porosity of about 16%, specimens with larger macro-pore size have larger mean values of Young’s modulus and uniaxial compressive strength. This observation is opposite for uniaxial tensile strength. Random changes of the locations of macro-pores in a specimen cause variation in specimen stiffness and strength. These variations are greater for specimens with larger macro-pore radius. This suggests that for specimens with larger macro-pore size, the dimensions of a representative elemental volume should be larger. The numerical model shows similar scatter in uniaxial strength values to that from some published physical tests. On the other hand, the scatter of physical elastic modulus values is greater than that of the numerical model. The numerical model suggests that the size of REV is not a unique property and depends on the chosen parameter of interest. For example, the size of REV for crack initiation stress is larger than that for uniaxial compressive strength. The scatter of the data for the Young’s modulus is minimal among the data of other parameters studied in this paper, and therefore it needs the smallest REV size. In contrast, the REV size (if it exists at all) needs to be larger for crack initiation stress. The numerical model shows that the ratio of uniaxial compressive strength to uniaxial tensile strength can be increased in a bonded particle system using large pores and greater sample resolutions. Finally, the analysis of numerical data indicates that even though the Weibull distribution is able to successfully simulate the size effect for the mean tensile strength values, it is not an ideal model for capturing the scatter of uniaxial tensile strength data for the simulated rock.