The intensification of the degradation and mineralization of the azo dye methyl orange (MO) in contaminated water with simultaneous production of renewable electrical energy was achieved in photo-assisted microbial fuel cells (MFCs) operated sequentially under anaerobic - aerobic processes, in the presence of Fe(III) and W and Mo oxides catalytic species. In this novel process, the W and Mo oxides deposited on the graphite felt cathodes accelerated electron transfer and the reductive decolorization of MO. Simultaneously, the mineralization of MO and intermediate products was intensified by the production of hydroxyl radicals (HO
                        
                     ) produced by (i) the photoreduction of Fe(III) to Fe(II), and by (ii) the reaction of the photochemically and electrochemically produced Fe(II) with hydrogen peroxide, which was produced in-situ during the aerobic stage. Under anaerobic conditions, the reductive decolorization of MO was driven by cathodic electrons, while the partial oxidation of the intermediates proceeded through holes oxidation, producing N,N-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine. In contrast, under aerobic conditions superoxide radicals (O2
                     
                        
                     
                     −) were predominant to HO
                        
                     , forming 4-hydroxy-N,N-dimethylaniline. In the presence of Fe(III) and under aerobic conditions, the oxidation of the intermediate products driven by HO
                        
                      superseded that of O2
                     
                        
                     
                     −, yielding phenol and amines, via the oxidation of 4-hydroxy-N,N-dimethylaniline and N,N-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine. These sequential anaerobic and electro-Fenton processes led to the production of benzene and significantly faster oxidation reactions, compared to either the anaerobic or the aerobic operation in the presence of Fe(III). Complete degradation and mineralization (96.8 ± 3.5%) of MO (20 mg/L) with simultaneous electricity production (0.0002 kW h/kg MO) was therefore achieved with sequential anaerobic (20 min) - aerobic (100 min) operation in the presence of Fe(III) (10 mg/L). This study demonstrates an alternative and environmentally benign approach for efficient remediation of azo dye contaminated water with simultaneous production of renewable energy.Azo dyes account for 70–80% of the annual global dyes production. Approximately 10–15% of these dyes are discharged into surface water bodies, causing significant environmental problems associated with their high color and high chemical oxygen demand (COD), and threats to human health due to the carcinogenicity and teratogenicity of their breakdown products [ A range of treatment methods have been proposed for the treatment of azo dye wastewaters including physical, biological, advanced oxidation and electrochemical processes [ Photo-assisted microbial fuel cells (MFCs) have recently emerged as a promising alternative method for simultaneous azo dyes degradation and electricity generation [ In sharp contrast, visible light active W and Mo oxides exhibit a much higher conduction band potential (0.40 V vs. SHE) which may suppress the parasite reaction of hydrogen evolution [ Under aerobic conditions, the presence of Fe(III) in MFCs and other bioelectrochemical systems has been proved to create the conditions for electro-Fenton like reactions involved with in-situ produced H In this study, the decolorization and mineralization of methyl orange (MO) model azo dye was investigated in photo-assisted MFCs comprising W and Mo oxides deposited on graphite felt cathodes irradiated with visible light. The impact of a shift of the operating conditions in the reaction chambers, from anaerobic to aerobic, with simultaneous Fe(III) addition was investigated for increasing the rate of MO decolorization and mineralization. The process parameters, circuital current, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were extensively monitored to explain the results observed and the overall performance of the system. The possible MO degradation pathways were established based on analysis of the resulting reaction intermediates obtained during the MO decolorization and mineralization. Photo-assisted two-chamber MFCs were assembled using two cubic polymethyl methacrylate blocks with an inner cylinder 3 cm in diameter. The two chambers were separated by a cation exchange member (CMI-7000 Membranes International, Glen Rock, NJ). Graphite felt (2.0 cm × 2.0 cm × 0.5 cm, Sanye Co., Beijing, China) anode and cathode electrodes were used due to their suitability for H The cathode electrode in each MFC was irradiated by a 100 W iodine tungsten lamp emitting radiation in the visible-light wavelength range of 400–800 nm, placed in parallel to the electrode at a distance of 15 cm, as shown elsewhere [ The anodes were inoculated with the effluent collected from separate acetate-fed MFCs, with an equivalent volume of nutrient solution as previously reported [ The W and Mo oxides deposited on graphite felt electrodes were prepared in-situ. Briefly, the catholyte was replaced by a mixture of Na Typical concentrations of MO in the tested wastewaters largely vary from 5 mg/L to 1000 mg/L [ Scavengers of ammonium oxalate (AO) for holes, isopropanol (IP) for HO Three control experiments were executed to monitor the performance of the photo-assisted MFCs. In the first control experiment, the MFCs with W and Mo deposited graphite felt cathodes were run in the absence of light irradiation, to illustrate the impact of light irradiation on MO decolorization and mineralization. In the second control experiment, the photo-assisted MFCs with bare graphite felt cathodes were run to demonstrate the effect of the photo-active W and Mo deposits on the cathode on MO decolorization and mineralization. In the third control experiment, the photo-assisted MFCs with W and Mo deposited graphite felt cathodes were operated under open circuit conditions (OCCs) to reflect the roles of current generation in MO decolorization and mineralization. Three duplicate reactors were used in all experiments. Unless otherwise stated, the initial pH of the catholyte was set at 3.0 since this is favorable for the Fenton reaction [ The concentrations of MO were quantified by measuring the absorbance at the maximum visible wavelength of A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (QUANTA450, FEI company, USA) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (X-MAX 20 mm LSV was conducted at the open circuit potential (OCP) to 0 V using a potentiostat (BioLogic, VSP, France) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV/s. Power production and current densities were normalized to the geometric surface of the cathode (mW/m The decolorization of MO was calculated according to Eq. One-way ANOVA in SPSS 19.0 was used to analyze the differences among the data, and all of the data indicated significance levels of Compared to the smooth surface of the bare graphite felt cathodes (Fig. S3), evidenced a number of diffraction peaks at 22.9°, 23.6°, 24.4° and 34.9°, ascribed to the (002), (020), (200) and (202) crystal faces of monoclinic WO Under anaerobic conditions and in the presence of light irradiation, the cathodes with W and Mo deposits achieved a MO decolorization of 93.8 ± 1.2% after 5 min. This decolorization was 1.6-fold larger than the controls without W and Mo catalysts, 2-fold larger than in the absence of light irradiation and 20.4-fold higher than under OCCs ( Complete MO decolorization was observed after 20 min with a rate of 60 mg/L h ( The above results were supported by the higher circuital current observed in the co-presence of light irradiation and W and Mo deposits in comparison to the control experiments ( Under fully aerobic conditions and in the presence of W and Mo catalysts and light irradiation, the MO decolorization was of 87.2 ± 1.4% ( In the presence of Fe(III), W and Mo catalysts and light irradiation, the decolorization of MO decreased to 55.7 ± 1.1% ( Under fully aerobic conditions and in the presence of W and Mo catalysts, light irradiation and Fe(III), the highest circuital current of 0.63 ± 0.04 mA ( The W and Mo deposits on the cathodes catalyzed the reduction of MO, which was evidenced by a shift of the MO reduction onset potentials from 0.62 V to a more positive 0.71 V (Fig. S4A). Light irradiation increased the redox peak currents (‒0.43 mA at 0.35 V to ‒0.55 mA at 0.35 V; 0.63 mA at 0.78 V to 0.65 mA at 0.72 V) (Fig. S4A), indicating the enhanced MO reduction and oxidation by light irradiation, consistent with the kinetics results ( The EIS spectra (Fig. S4B) were analyzed by fitting spectra to an equivalent circuit (Fig. S5A and Table S1). In the absence of light irradiation, the resistance of the solution and the electrode loaded with the W and Mo catalysts ( The direct participation of the holes on the cleavage of azo bond of MO was excluded since the rate of MO decolorization, under fully anaerobic conditions, did not change when AO (hole scavenger) was added to the aqueous solution ( In direct contrast, the dominant active species for the cleavage of azo bond and for the oxidation of the intermediate products, under fully aerobic conditions, was the superoxide radical (O The results presented have shown that higher MO decolorization and negligible mineralization were observed under anaerobic conditions with complete conversion in less than 20 min, while a significantly higher rate of mineralization was observed under fully aerobic conditions, with the addition of Fe(III) further increasing the rate of mineralization. Therefore, the adoption of a sequential operational strategy from anaerobic to aerobic, with simultaneous addition of Fe(III) during the transition phase, should result in the most efficient rates of MO decolorization and mineralization. The MO decolorization with sequential anaerobic to aerobic operational strategy was equivalent to the decolorization achieved in an entire anaerobic cycle ( The reaction intermediate products formed during the cathodic degradation of MO depended on the operational conditions. Anaerobic operation of the cell led to the formation of In contrast, aerobic conditions led to the appearance of 4-hydroxy The decolorization and mineralization of MO at initial pH of 2.0 was always slightly higher than that of pH 3.0, while at pH 4.0 a significant reduction of both values was observed (Fig. S8A and B). Higher pHs therefore unfavorably affected the system performance, in accordance with other electro-Fenton processes for the degradation of other organics [ After 10 consecutive operational cycles, the decolorization and mineralization of MO ( SEM, EDS and XRD further validated these observations. The morphology of the W and Mo deposits on the cathodes after 10 operational cycles was retained at an initial pH 2.0 (Fig. S9A and B), consistent with the stable operation ( Photo-assisted microbial fuel cells (MFCs) and Fenton assisted MFCs have been shown to be efficient systems for azo dyes decolorization with simultaneous production of electricity, but the mineralization of the organic load in these systems is rarely achieved. This study demonstrated a novel strategy for efficient decolorization and mineralization of azo-dyes in wastewater in photo-assisted MFCs by sequential anaerobic - aerobic operation, in the presence of Fe(III), and W and Mo catalytic species. The reductive decolorization achieved during the anaerobic phase was followed by the further oxidation and mineralization of the reaction intermediates at the aerobic phase, augmented by hydroxyl radicals produced by both photoreduction of Fe(III), and electrochemical reduced Fe(II) and in-situ produced H The authors declare no competing financial interest. This Special Issue is dedicated to honor the retirement of Prof. César Pulgarin at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL, Switzerland), a key figure in the area of Catalytic Advanced Oxidation Processes. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: