Classification of mineralised zones is an important factor for the analysis of economic deposits. In this paper, the support vector machine (SVM), a supervised learning algorithm, based on subsurface data is proposed for classification of mineralised zones in the Takht-e-Gonbad porphyry Cu-deposit (SE Iran). The effects of the input features are evaluated via calculating the accuracy rates on the SVM performance. Ultimately, the SVM model, is developed based on input features namely lithology, alteration, mineralisation, the level and, radial basis function (RBF) as a kernel function. Moreover, the optimal amount of parameters λ and C, using n-fold cross-validation method, are calculated at level 0.001 and 0.01 respectively. The accuracy of this model is 0.931 for classification of mineralised zones in the Takht-e-Gonbad porphyry deposit. The results of the study confirm the efficiency of SVM method for classification the mineralised zones.The identification and classification of mineralised zones has an important role for geological purposes such as economic geology, anomaly exploration, resource estimation and mine project management ( Thermometric and isotope element parameters are considered along with other geological characteristics such as fluid inclusion ( There are a number of classification methods that are divided into two groups known as the supervised and unsupervised classification ( The largest source of copper around the world is the porphyry copper deposit which is characterized by low grades and high tonnage of ore mineralisation and also can be a source for gold and molybdenum ( The Takht-e-Gonbad deposit, a part of UDMA, is located 70 km northeast of Sirjan city in SE of Iran (longitudes 56°06′35˝E, 56°28′10˝E and latitude 29°27′19˝E, 29°42′12˝E). This area is covered by volcanic-pyroclastic units of Eocene age, along SE-SW trends ( One of the supervised algorithms namely support vector machine was proposed by Each sample was classified into two classes with each class was labeled Which is equivalent to The separating hyperplane can be rewritten with sgn (x), that is a sign function as a decision function ( Subject to The Lagrange function is constructed and minimized as follows: Then derivatives Lagrange function is taken with respect to Where Subject to Finally, the new decision function based on the rule of optimal hyperplane is as follows ( Afterwards, dual variables are obtained by solving quadratic and the training set. An important assumption is that the data have linear separation potential when using a linear SVM, and it is not correctly classified for nonlinear data by the linear decision ( The linear algorithms depends only on In this function All inner The four important kernel functions are used for this purpose ( The radial basis function (RBF)….….. Where In the Takht–e–Gonbad exploration area, 44 borehole drill data sets were collected that include lithology, alteration and mineralisation. In addition, 3814 samples were collected for lithogeochemical analysis. The amount of Cu in lithogeochemical samples was determined using an Inductively Couple Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The location of boreholes drilled in the study area is shown in Data features, were derived from five datasets namely lithology, alteration, mineralogy, collar coordinate and geochemistry data including the copper grade. The information provided by the 44 drill holes, and the 3D models of mineralisation, using lithology and alteration were constructed using RockWorks™ v. 16 software as illustrated in The alteration effect is another separation controller. Based on the geology of the study area and the results of combined models of zonation and alteration, phyllic and potassic alteration zones were expanded in the hypogene zone, however propylitic alteration exists in the oxide zone. The data on alterations is similar to the lithology data that has been classified, and subsequently with discontinuous amount have been encoded by geoscience experts ( The last applied dataset was grade of Cu. After that lithogeochemical data and Cu grade were transformed to a composite data set, the Cu grade datasets and the sample level were encoded and normalized to between 0 and 1, according to the following equation: The five information layers were combined and stored in 5 separate columns with 3814 rows in a table as the vector data. To evaluate the classifier performance, the dataset must be divided into two major categories which are named the training and testing sets ( In this study, the SVM model was used to separate the mineralised zones in the Takht-e-Gonbad copper porphyry deposit. Additionally, radial basis function (RBF) was used as the kernel function since it can analyze high dimensional data ( The developed SVM model with the optimal values of parameters was applied as classifier to separate the mineralised zones in the study area. A dataset with 763 rows and 5 criteria vectors was used for the separation of mineralised zones. The confusion matrix for the training and testing data is shown in To develop the final model of the mineralised zones, various datasets such as lithology, mineralisation, alteration, the Cu content, and the level (m) were considered. For evaluating the effects of each input dataset on the SVM performance, periodically one dataset was omitted and the SVM was executed using four remaining datasets. Nowadays, geocomputational methods like SVM have become popular for spatial analysis. In this study, the applicability of SVM technique are evaluated for classification of mineralised zones in the Takht-e-Gonbad deposit. The following conclusions were drawn: Accurate separation was generated through SVM technique with high accuracy (0.931). The results obtained by SVM modeling present that the SVM is a potentially useful tool for integrating various datasets in classification mineralised zones. Also, this method is applicable in the Takht-e-Gonbad Cu porphyry deposit with geological factors, therefore this method can be applicable to separate mineralised zones in porphyry deposits which spatial patterns. If the model parameters (λ and C) are selected accurately, the SVM algorithm can classify and separate the mineralised zones satisfactorily. Moreover, this method can model very fast and will help to save time and money. The authors wish to thankfully acknowledge Mr. Sholeh and Takht-e-Gonbad copper company for providing us with the dataset. The authors would also like to acknowledge the editor and reviewers of this paper for their comments and valuable remarks.