Objectives
                  Sulfated glycoconjugates (S-GCs) are essential components of dentinogenesis and osteogenesis, and are involved in the regulation of the mineralization process. The scales of Polypterus senegalus, which are homologous to teeth and phylogenetically derived from ancestral dermal skeleton, comprise true enamel, dentine, and bone. As part of the phylogenic evolutional studies on mesenchyme-derived hard tissues, we investigated the ultrastructural distribution patterns and histochemical properties of S-GCs in the dentine and bone of scales.
               
                  Methods
                  For detection of S-GCs, a high iron diamine–thiocarbohydrazide–silver proteinate (HID–TCH–SP) staining technique was used.
               
                  Results
                  S-GCs were observed in unmineralized predentine and osteoid, mineralized dentine, osteocyte pericellular matrix, but not in mineralized bone and isopedine. Most S-GCs in the dentine and osteoid were susceptible to testicular hyaluronidase, indicating that they are chondroitin sulfates.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Distinct differences in the S-GC distribution pattern between the dentine and bone were observed. The S-GC distribution pattern associated with the dentinogenesis of scales is very similar to that of mammalian mantle dentine.Tooth development is regulated by interactions between epithelial and mesenchymal cells Sulfated glycoconjugates (S-GC) are important extracellular matrix components for dentinogenesis and osteogenesis Ganoine scales were dissected from four The high-iron diamine thiocarbohydrazide-silver proteinate (HID–TCH–SP) staining technique was used to detect S-GCs in ganoine, dentine, and bone. This method was previously described in detail To identify the precise histochemical properties of the HID–TCH–SP stain deposits, some specimens were treated with either testicular hyaluronidase or heparitinase isolated from The ganoine scales of In the posterior margins of the scales, prior to dentine formation, mesenchymal cells that differentiate into odontoblasts were separated from the undifferentiated innermost cells of the epidermis by a basement membrane ( The scales of Testicular hyaluronidase digestion resulted in the removal of most S-GCs in the bone matrix, thus indicating the presence of chondroitin sulfates ( Mineralized tissues such as scales, teeth, and dermal bone of living vertebrates are considered to be evolutionarily derived from the dermal skeleton about 500 million years ago, and appeared on the surface of the head and body of the first jawless vertebrates As previously reported The dentine in the scales of In a study of experimental regeneration of the scales, Sire et al. During osteogenesis of the scales, large amounts of S-GCs were detected in unmineralized osteoid and over the periphery matrix of osteocytes, but few were detected in the mineralized basal bone and isopedine. These findings are similar to those in mammalian osteogenesis. Thus, degradation of S-GCs is required prior to bone mineralization of the scales. Although there is currently no data indicating the presence of bone where abundant S-GCs survive even after mineralization, we have confirmed the existence of S-GCs in cryo-prepared calcified cartilage stained by post-embedding HID technique (unpublished data), which might be due to the presence of more primitive types of bone-containing S-GCs. Testicular hyaluronidase-resistant S-GCs were detected in association with the plasmalemma of osteoblasts ( In conclusion, there were distinct differences in the distribution patterns of S-GCs between the dentine and bone of the scales of The authors have no conflict of interest.