 Centrifugal pumps handle fine solids in suspension in the china clay and cement industries, dredging, slimes disposal and in some mineral extraction processes. In order to design a slurry transportation system based on centrifugal pumps, it is necessary to know the influence of solids on the performance of the pumps. It is important to realise that suspended solid particles cannot absorb, store or transmit pressure energy. Being restricted in their movement by intermolecular cohesion, molecules of solids can neither participate in maintaining or transmitting pressure energy nor increase their own kinetic energy when surrounded with liquid which carrying the pressure energy. The energy imparted to the liquid by the rotating impeller is utilised to move and support the solid particles in suspension. Solid effects on the centrifugal pumps handling slurries have been a subject of industrial and academic interest for many years. Recently, a few correlations for predicting the head reduction factor have presented in the literature [ Both closed and open impellers have been widely used in centrifugal pumps handling slurries. Open impellers have some advantages when compared with closed ones. For instance, low manufacturing cost and low disc friction loss are considerable advantages of these impellers. Furthermore, they are suited for pumping suspensions. This types of impeller have only one shroud and are open on one side where a tip clearance takes place between open side of the impeller and the stationary casing as is seen in Due to pressure difference through the tip clearance, a tip flow occurs between the pressure and suction surface of blades. This flow causes a disturbance in the main flow, which results in additional pressure and flow losses. The most important loss of energy is due to the tip leakage flow in the open impeller pumps.  In this study, efforts have been made to study experimentally individual effects of solid properties, concentration, and tip clearance on a centrifugal pump characteristics. The experimental data were generated by conducting experiments on a specially designed and fabricated experimental set-up. The schematic view of test rig is shown in The flow rate could be varied over a wide range by operating another plug valve (7) provided near the end of the 80 mm delivery pipeline. The suction and discharge pressures were measured with two pressure transmitters with diaphragm (5). In order to prevent choking of gauges, the pressure transmitters with diaphragm are best suit. The calibration of these transmitters was periodically checked using a calibration tester. Flow rate was measured using a Krone electromagnetic flowmeter (4), which was calibrated with water by measuring the rise in the level of water in the flushing tank over a known interval of time. A sampling tube (6) with a valve is provided in the delivery pipe for determination of various slurry properties. The pump (3) is directly coupled to a 5.5 kW-AC motor (2). A conventional centrifugal pump, having specifications: d For an adjusted tip clearance width, after the completion of the pump test with clear water, pre-calculated amount of solid material for a solid concentration was slowly added to water in the mixing tank with the stirrer in operation. The slurry was kept in circulation for approximately 10 minutes for thorough mixing before starting any measurements and then the concentration of solids in the circulation was checked. The delivery valve was adjusted while pump in operation for a constant rotating speed. The power input to motor, flow rate, suction and delivery pressures were taken. The density of the slurry was obtained from a slurry sample collected from sampling tube. Four samples were taken during each measurement and the average of these is taken as the concentration of solids. The measurements were repeated for various settings of the delivery valve. Measurements of pump characteristics with clear water were carried out both before and after the set of measurements with a slurry of any given material. Then, the above test procedure was repeated for the other tip clearances. In order to study the effects of the suspended solids on the centrifugal pump characteristics; (i) beach sand, (ii) perlite, (iii) casting sand were utilised in the experiments. The physical properties of the materials are shown in To determine the effect of particle size on the pump performance perlite-A, perlite-B and perlite-C samples were chosen. To analyse the pump performance test results, the relative reduction in head developed and the efficiency of the pump for different concentrations of three perlites were computed in terms of the head ratio (H  To study the effect of particle specific gravity on the pump performance, two minerals, beach sand and casting sand, of nearly identical particle size distribution were used. In To study the effects of the tip clearance width, perlite-A was used. The pump tests were conducted at 1250 rpm for various concentrations of the material. It was observed that best efficiency point of the pump remains unaltered with increasing in the tip clearance for all the material samples. Thus, it is reasonable to consider this point as basis to analyse the tip clearance loss.  In order to investigate tip clearance effects on the pump performance, the values of H Both H The main conclusions to be drawn from the work may be presented: The presence of solids has an obvious effect on pump performance characteristics and should be considered in design considerations. Most of the previous investigators have also drawn this clear result. Running tip clearance has a considerable impact on the pump performance characteristics when handling solid-liquid mixtures. The relation between the tip clearance loss and disk friction loss plays an important role in the variation of H None of the existing correlations used to predict the head ratio consider the tip clearance effect. As a result of this, they give more accurate predictions for the closed impellers, (see  