Many operative and non-operative treatments of dorsal fracture dislocations of the proximal interphalageal (PIP) joint have been described. Return of good joint function requires anatomical reduction of the articular fragments and restoration of joint congruity and a stable functional arc of motion, with the fixation construct stable enough for early mobilization. To prevent recurrent dorsal subluxation, the attachments of the ligamentous palmar restraints and the bony buttress provided by the palmar lip of the middle phalanx base must be restored. Open reduction and internal interfragmentary screw fixation using 1.5 or 1.3mm screws was employed in 12 fingers in 10 patients with unstable dorsal fracture dislocations of the PIP joints of Schenck grades III and IV. At an average follow-up of 8.7 months, all patients in this series achieved good to excellent results and an average total active interphalangeal motion of 132° (range 105°–165°). Additional benefits over non-operative techniques included improved patient comfort and simplified nursing care and therapy supervision.Dorsal fracture dislocations of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint remain a challenging problem for the hand surgeon. Neglect or inadequate treatment of these fractures often results in secondary joint stiffness, persistent subluxation, degenerative arthritis and pain. This pattern of injury results from a substantial fracture of the palmar base of the middle phalanx ( Our results in 12 fingers in 10 patients with dorsal fracture–dislocations of the PIP joint treated by open reduction and internal fixation using interfragmentary screws were reviewed. The indications, aims, surgical approach and technique are discussed. A total of 12 fingers in 10 patients with dorsal fracture dislocations of the PIP joints were identified retrospectively from our patient database. These patients had been treated by open reduction and internal fixation using interfragmentary screws alone. All of these cases were performed by the same senior hand surgeon. Patients’ demographic data and treatment courses were reviewed from the case notes and the pre- and postoperative radiographs ( There were 8 male and 2 female patients with an average age of 30 (range 15–38) years. Six patients sustained their fractures as a result of sports injuries while two were the result of industrial accidents, one a result of a vehicular accident and one a result of a domestic accident. Most patients recounted an axial impact or hyperextension injury to the affected finger. The ring finger was the most commonly injured (7/12 cases) while the other fingers were injured with the same relative frequency. All patients had a dorsal dislocation of the PIP joint as a result of a fracture of the palmar base of the middle phalanx. Pre- and postoperative anteroposterior and true lateral radiographs were analysed. Pre-operatively, the degree of dislocation/subluxation (Schenck Grade A–D) and the percentage of joint surface involvement (Schenck Grade I–IV) were calculated as a percentage of the entire joint surface from the lateral radiograph and graded according to Schenck's classification ( Surgical management was deemed necessary if there was greater than 35% to 40% articular surface involvement, suggesting significant instability, and for cases in which congruous reduction could not be achieved without maintaining the PIP joint in more than 30° of flexion. Joint surface comminution was quantified on pre-operative anteroposterior and lateral radiographs. Interfragmentary screw fixation was considered only in non-comminuted cases with a single large palmar fragment. Where there was doubt as to the degree of comminution, the finger was placed in Chinese finger traps and traction-reduction X-ray films were taken on-table just prior to surgery. In cases of comminution or where fragment sizes did not permit interfragmentary screw fixation, a static external fixator or a dynamic Suzuki-type external fixator ( The average time from injury to surgery was 9.2 days. This delay was, in part, due to the fact that these cases mostly present first to a primary care physician or general orthopaedic surgeon. Being closed injuries, there often follows a less than urgent approach to referral. Once seen and the problem identified by us, the required surgery was performed on the next available elective surgery list. This was a short-term follow-up study. All patients had a minimum follow-up of at least 6 months with an average of 8 months. All of the operations were performed under general anaesthesia and tourniquet. In delayed cases and cases requiring additional radiographical assessment, Chinese finger traps with longitudinal axial traction were applied to overcome ligamentous shortening and aid manipulation, reduction and further investigation. A dorsal curvi-linear incision was used initially for surgical access. This was combined with a palmar modified Bruner incision in four cases in which reduction of the palmar fragment was not fully achieved through the dorsal incision. Using the dorsal approach ( A periosteal elevator or large bore (18-gauge) hypodermic needle was used to disimpact the palmar bone fragment. Once the reduction had been achieved, it was temporarily maintained using reduction clamps, to facilitate insertion of the screws. In the four cases in which reduction was difficult, additional palmar exposure of the fracture was necessary. This required retraction of the flexor tendons to expose the palmar plate, which was divided longitudinally, preserving its insertion into the base of the middle phalanx bone fragment. AO modular Titanium self-tapping screws of 1.3 The stability of the fixation construct was tested on-table before closure. Intraarticular examination from the lateral aspect was performed while passively moving the joint through a range of motion from full extension to full flexion. Maintenance of joint congruency, fragment reduction and fixation stability through the entire arc of motion, without collapse or gapping, was necessary for a confident assessment of stability. Axial compression of the joint was not performed. Rigid fixation was achieved in 11 joints. In one case ( Rigid stable fixation in 11 joints, allowed immediate postoperative mobilization. The fingers were maintained in full extension in a resting trough splint. Active flexion exercises were performed for 10 In the single case ( Postoperatively, the ranges of active motion of the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints were recorded for each finger and, subsequently, combined to provide a total active range of motion (AROM) of the interphalangeal joints, as utilized by At 6 month follow-up, bony union was achieved in all of the fractures, with no evidence of recurrent subluxation. All six sports related cases had returned to their sport by the third month. Using the Strickland method of assessment, five fingers had excellent outcomes (75–100% return of normal total AROM of the interphalangeal joints), seven fingers had good outcomes (50–74% return of normal total AROM of the interphalangeal joints). The average total AROM of the interphalangeal joints was 132° or 75% of the normal total AROM of the interphalangeal joints. The mean AROM regained at the PIP joint alone, was 85° (range 65–100). Although early mobilization of the PIP joint could not be achieved in case 7 ( Early movement is now acknowledged to be essential to improving the end results of fracture treatment ( The surgeon's judgement is critical in determining whether open reduction and internal fixation can be performed ( Pre-operative assessment of fracture type and comminution is critical. In the majority of cases, radiographs in two views provide satisfactory visualization. However, in cases of doubt, additional traction-reduction views should be obtained just prior to surgery. It is expected that improvements in computerized tomography (CT) imaging resolution and availability of three-dimensional reconstruction technology will allow CT to be used for accurate routine pre-operative assessment of these injuries in the future. Postoperative scar formation can lead to tethering of the extensor tendon to the dorsum of the phalanges with loss of extensor tendon excursion, limiting joint flexion and resulting in extensor lag. Restoration of a functional range of flexion is the priority and requires increased active and passive therapy. Extension lag should be recognized early and treated by interval splinting to minimize its impact on the final outcome. Many non-operative and operative approaches for the treatment of dorsal fracture dislocations of the PIP joint have been described, including dorsal block splints ( Fractures involving more than 35% to 40% of the articular surface of the middle phalanx are associated with complete disruption of the collateral accessory ligament complex ( Only one study has critically examined the technical approach and results of interfragmentary screw fixation for dorsal fracture dislocations of the PIP joint. The most significant benefit to achieving a stable fixation construct is the ability to initiate early motion. Dynamic stability is tested by examination of the passive range of motion of the joint at the end of the operation, and if this is deemed insufficient for early mobilization, the joint is “unloaded”, using an external fixator for several weeks. In our series, one case (case 7) required supplementary static external fixation to augment an unstable fixation. This case was immobilized for 4 weeks before therapy of the PIP joint could be commenced. It is interesting that an excellent final AROM could still be achieved, leading some to question the importance of early motion. Maintenance of traction not only prevents collapse of the fracture fixation construct but also prevents contracture and shortening of the palmar plate, collateral ligaments and other periarticular structures ( This retrospective study was designed to document the results of open reduction and interfragmentary screw fixation in a consecutive series of cases where this could be achieved. In our practice, other forms of internal fixation (e.g. K-wires, circlage or interosseous wiring) are not routinely utilized and no comparisons can be made. In situations were interfragmentary screw fixation is not possible, our preferred approach is a This is a small series, being the collected experience of a single senior surgeon (LCT). It is a short-term outcome study with an average follow-up of 8 months. At 6 months, fracture union may be ascertained and the presence of any recurrent subluxation excluded. Range of motion and symptoms have generally stabilized, or will continue to improve. However, a longer follow-up would be required to assess the incidence of osteoarthritis. Open reduction and internal fixation can provide acceptable functional results in carefully selected cases. However, it is technically demanding and requires accurate pre-operative assessment of fracture type, which can sometimes be difficult. The potential for fixation failure and collapse, as well as postoperative adhesions leading to stiffness, could, potentially, lead to poor outcomes and significant disability. Several authors ( This is an injury that affects a younger, active patient group with high functional demands. The average patient age in our series was 30 (range 15–38) years and the majority sustained their fractures through sport. This series illustrates the successful use of interfragmentary screw fixation in the treatment of Schenck grade III and IV fracture dislocations of the PIP joint. In carefully selected cases, open reduction and interfragmentary screw fixation can achieve (1) anatomical reduction of the articular fragments and restoration of joint congruity, (2) a fixation construct stable enough for early mobilization and (3) prevent recurrent dorsal subluxation. Additional benefits include ease of nursing, patient comfort and simplified therapy supervision.