In the present paper, influence of a lignin-based biopolymer in improving gold and silver recoveries during cyanidation leaching is discussed. Series of laboratory cyanidation leaching testworks at the absences and the presences of the biopolymer were performed under variations of the biopolymer concentration, NaCN concentration, slurry density and particle size distribution. The ore samples used were from Pongkor Gold Mine of PT. Antam, Tbk. in Indonesia. The biopolymer additive was found to reduce slurry viscosity that leads to a higher dissolved oxygen concentration in the leach solution. The testwork results show that the use of biopolymer improves gold and silver recoveries as well as leaching kinetics. At biopolymer dosage of 800mg/L, the increases of gold and silver recoveries were 4.5% and 6.4%, respectively. The lignin-based biopolymer is able to disperse fine solid particles and stabilizes the ore suspension in the leach-slurry that results in a better contact between the ore and the leaching agents. The effect of biopolymer on the gold and silver recoveries was found to be more significant at lower cyanide dosages. The addition of biopolymer resulted in the increase of cyanide consumption, lowering final pH and higher dissolved iron which is associated with gold-bearing pyrite dissolution. Enhanced dissolution of gold-bearing pyrite at higher dissolved oxygen concentration was found as the major factor that improves gold recovery at the presences of the biopolymer in addition to lowering slurry viscosity that leads to higher dissolved oxygen concentration and effect of fine particles dispersion.Cyanidation leaching in aerated alkaline slurry has been selected as process route for gold extraction in industries for more than hundred years. Numerous efforts have been made to improve gold recovery in the cyanidation leaching process that include the optimization of reagents addition (i.e. cyanide, oxygen and lead nitrate), reducing ore particle size and proper control of the operational parameters during cyanidation ( A deficiency in one or both reactants would result in the decrease of leaching rate and lower gold and silver recoveries during cyanidation process. Lead nitrate has been used as additive in gold processing plants for more than 60 In this paper, the effect of a novel additive of lignin-based biopolymer on gold and silver recoveries during cyanidation leaching is discussed. The biopolymer is a natural polymer prepared from wood pulp production. It has fundamental monomer of hydroxyphenyl propane unit with varying substitution patterns. The monomer is linked to other monomers unit with a multitude of different covalent bonds ( The gold ore sample used in the investigation is from Pongkor Gold Mine of PT. Antam, Tbk. in Indonesia. Gold recovery in Pongkor processing plant has been substantially decreased in the recent years due to lowering gold grade in the treated ore and alterations of the ore characteristic. Un-leached fraction of fine entrapped gold within pyrite has been found as one of the major factors for the decrease of gold recovery in Pongkor Mine. In order to recover gold from this typical sulfide mineral, sufficient liberation of gold particle and a high oxidizing potential of the solution is necessary to promote pyrite oxidation that leads to liberation of entrapped gold within the sulfide matrix ( As has been previously stated, the ore sample used in this study was obtained from Pongkor Gold Mine of PT. Antam, Tbk. in West Java Province of Indonesia. Basically, Pongkor’s ores are of free milling type, which can be easily leached directly after comminution. The gangue minerals present in the ore are typically quartz (30–40%), calcite (20–30%), plagioclase (15–25%), microcline (5–10%), clay (5–10%), pyrite (1–3%) and limonite (0.1–0.2%). The ore samples were taken at the mill feed belt conveyor prior to grinding process. The sampling was performed periodically every half hour of eight hour sampling duration. The composite sample obtained was about 25 The lignin-based biopolymer was received from the manufacturer company through it sales representative in Indonesia. The biopolymer is in the form of powder and soluble in water until 40–50% solid. Main functional groups in the lignin-based biopolymer structure can be seen in To evaluate the effect of biopolymer addition on the slurry viscosity and dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration, measurements of the slurry viscosity and DO concentration were carried out at 35% slurry density at the absence and at the presences of 300, 600, 900, 1200 and 1500 To evaluate the reproducibility of the investigation results and the experimental procedure, five bottle roll runs were conducted in the baseline leaching testworks at the presences and absence of the biopolymer, respectively. In this regard, in total 10 experiments were carried out to evaluate the effect of biopolymer addition on the gold and silver recoveries. pH level was not controlled in order to simulate actual condition of Pongkor leaching circuit. Slurry that leaves the last Carbon-in-Leach (CIL) tank of Pongkor plant usually has pH level of about 9.5. This relatively low pH is required for residue treatment in which the liquid waste water must have pH levels in the range of 6–9. Higher pH would consume more neutralizing agent. During the testwork, the parameter that was controlled was the initial pH; the alterations of pH at the presence and the absence of biopolymer were evaluated. After the baseline leaching tests were completed, series of investigations were carried out to study the effects of ore particle size distribution, concentrations of the biopolymer and sodium cyanide as well as slurry density (% solids) on the gold and silver recoveries at the presences of the biopolymer. For kinetics analysis, the roll bottle having 2000 It was found that the addition of lignin-based biopolymer reduces slurry viscosity as illustrated in Results of 5 batch bottle roll tests demonstrate that the addition of the biopolymer consistently increases gold and silver recoveries as can be seen in To study the kinetics of gold dissolution at the absence and the presence of the biopolymer, slurry samples were taken at different periods of time during leaching. Profiles of extracted gold by time at the absence and the presence of biopolymer are presented in The rate of gold dissolution ( Several models have been evaluated to determine the overall rate constant ( Since the purpose of the study was to determine the difference in the rate of gold dissolution at the absence and at the presence of the biopolymer, the above expression is simplified. Assuming that the average particle diameter of the ore, [CN The integrated form of Eq. Results of the bottle roll tests at various biopolymer concentrations at cyanide dosage of 750 To evaluate the influence of the biopolymer at different cyanide concentration, bottle roll tests were also carried out under variations of cyanide dosages at various biopolymer concentrations. Profiles of gold and silver recoveries at various cyanide and biopolymer concentrations at slurry density of 35% are presented in As can be seen in Cyanidation tests were also conducted at various ore particle size distributions. Profiles of gold and silver recoveries as a function of ore particle size distribution at the absence and the presence of 800 Residual cyanide concentrations and solution pH at the ends of the leaching tests at various ore size fraction were measured. Profiles of residual cyanide concentrations and solution pH at the ends of the leaching tests under various ore size fractions are shown in The other key mechanism of gold recovery enhancement at the presence of the biopolymer was found to be associated with dissolution of gold-bearing pyrite. This mechanism is facilitated at higher dissolved oxygen concentration realized by lowering slurry viscosity and better fine particle dispersion at the presence of the biopolymer. As has been earlier presented in Mineragraphy analysis of thin polished section of leach residue was carried out to investigate the existence of gold particle in the leach residue. Although addition of the biopolymer enhances pyrite dissolution, gold interlocked in pyrite was still detected in pyrite (FeS The addition of a lignin-based biopolymer improves gold and silver recoveries and kinetics of gold dissolution during cyanidation leaching. At biopolymer dosage of 800 The authors thank