This paper presents a computer simulation model, namely Cellular Automaton (CA), which aims at investigating the behaviour of normal grain coarsening in 2D that corresponds well to the described physical model. The CA model takes into account the following: the energy barrier of cellular transition depends on the energy of the grain boundary; the energy of boundaries depends on the misorientation of the grains and the energy of the cells follows the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution. The model was tested on both simple geometrical configurations and on real structures. The effect of temperature, orientation difference, activation energy, and boundary energy for the kinetics of grain coarsening were analysed and discussed. The optimal orientation value, q
                     max, was greater than 64, and at smaller q
                     max values non-real structures develop. The rate and kinetics of coarsening depend on a q
                     max value up to 64, the energy barrier and the boundary energy. The rate of coarsening cannot be described by only one exponential function over a wide temperature range.The physical and chemical properties of alloys are significantly influenced not only by their compositions but also by their microstructures. For example, according to the well known Hall–Petch relation, the tensile strength and hardness depend on the average grain size. A finer grain size gives greater strength and hardness. Also, the grain size of austenite significantly influences the course of the solid-state transformations and microstructures developed in steels. Coarser austenite transforms more slowly and gives a coarser final microstructure. During many heat treatment processes (i.e. austenitisation) the average grain size increases. The driving force for such a microstructure coarsening comes from decreasing of the free energy of the total area of the system. The average grain diameter ( Supposing that the average diameter is proportional to the average area ( In The variation of free energy of an atom jumping from one side of the grain boundary to the other side is shown in The probability of an atom jumping from grain 1 to grain 2 is The summarised probability ( It can be seen from The boundary migration velocity ( Increasing Using In some models the energy of the grain boundary does not depend on the misorientation of the grains Reviewing the papers, a model cannot be found which simultaneously involves the conditions as follows: the transition of atoms (cells) depends on the energy barrier (activation free energy) and the free energy difference of atoms before and after jumping, the energy of the grain boundary depends on the misorientation of the grains. The model developed shows the grain coarsening in two dimensions, as this process is generally investigated and modelled on the surface of the sample and also most of the known MC and CA models in 2D In the CA method each cell of the lattice represents a group of atoms, and the evolution of the microstructure is governed by the behaviour of individual cells acting in response to their neighbourhood. The maximum number of lattice sites ( Our purpose in the present work is to develop a 2D computer simulation method based on the cellular automaton approach, which will model normal grain coarsening and corresponds well to the physical model described in the the transition (jumping) of atoms (cells) depends on the energy barrier and the free energy difference of atoms before and after jumping, the energy barrier for transitions must depend on the energy of the grain boundary, reflecting the fact that boundaries of different misorientations have different mobilities, the energy of boundaries depends on the misorientation of the grains, the thermal energy of the cells follows the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, at the calculation of transition the energy values are directly compared instead of the The models in definition of the initial grain structure, definition of the geometry of the cells, definition of the cell surroundings (neighbourhood), assigning states to the cells, specifying the cell transition rules, calculation of the cell transitions, redefinition of the grain structure. The initial grain structure was generated using a tessellation according to the method in The energy of a cell is given by the sum of thermal ( The grain boundary energies are calculated from the Read–Shockley equation as given by Wolf In the reviewed models the transition of cells was determined by probabilities shown in the If Before considering the coarsening of a realistic microstructure it is useful to investigate the behaviour of individual grains. A simple shape (a circle embedded concentricity in a square,  For the investigation of coarsening of realistic grain structures, initially the effect of maximum orientation number ( For the kinetics of grain coarsening, the effects of maximum orientation number, temperature, boundary energy and activation energy were investigated. The optimal value of At small The effect of temperature on the grain coarsening kinetics is shown in Decreasing the maximum boundary energy At high temperatures (above 1000°C) at a constant activation energy, the increase of boundary energy does not have a significant effect on the rate of grain coarsening, while this effect is very significant at lower temperature. During tests on real grain structures, an The activation energy has a significant effect on the rate of thermally activated processes. In The aforementioned simulation method is suitable for describing normal grain coarsening. In the course of testing the model it was stated that the kinetics of coarsening change with the parameters in accordance with the physical model. The present simulation method differs from the previously published approaches in the following aspects: the cells have a thermal energy, the energy distribution following the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, the sum of the thermal energy of the cells and the boundary energy have to be greater than the activation energy in order that the cell can pass through the boundary; independently the boundary energy of the cell increases or decreases as a result of the migration; the boundary energy depends on the orientation difference between the grains. In the course of the investigation of real grain structures the following conclusions have been made: In the case of small maximum orientation number ( The kinetics of coarsening depend on the maximum orientation number. The tests have established that if the The rate of coarsening cannot be described by only one exponential function over a wide temperature range. At the same time, in a smaller temperature interval (in accordance with the practical observations) the ln( The rate of coarsening depends on the energy barrier and the boundary energy. This research work was supported financially by the Hungarian Scientific Academy. The authors would like to thank Dr. A. L. Greer, University of Cambridge (Cambridge, UK) for helpful comments and for reviewing the paper.