Background
                  Annexin A2, a calcium-dependent phospholipid binding protein, is involved in osteogenesis. The objective of the present study was to explore the expression of Annexin A2 in spinal ligament tissues (LT) of ankylosing spondylitis (AS) patients and determine its pathological functions.
               
                  Methods
                  mRNA and protein expression of Annexin A2 was detected by real-time PCR and Western blotting, respectively. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) concentration in serum was assessed by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was measured with ALP activity kit on a microplate reader.
               
                  Results
                  mRNA and protein expression of Annexin A2 in LT, and IL-6 concentration in serum were significantly increased in AS patients. Moreover, exogenous IL-6 treatment significantly up-regulated Annexin A2 expression and ALP activity. Silencing of Annexin A2 expression significantly ameliorated IL-6-induced ossification of fibroblasts from AS patients, as indicated by ALP activity, expression of proteins associated with osteogenic differentiation, including bone morphogenetic protein-2, osteocalcin and osterix, and the ratio of osteoprotegerin to receptor activator of NF-κB ligand. Further MEK inhibitor experiments suggested that Annexin A2 may exert its function through extracellular signal-related kinase pathway.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Annexin A2, up-regulated by IL-6, may promote ligament ossification of AS patients.Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a common inflammatory autoimmune disease with a prevalence of 0.2–0.5% worldwide Annexin A2 belongs to Annexins family, which are known to bind acidic phospholipids with high affinity in a calcium-dependent manner Cytokines including interleukin-6 (IL-6) have been found elevated in the serum of AS patients. Previous studies have reported a correlation between IL-6 levels and the disease activity of AS patients In this study, we hypothesized that Annexin A2 expression was regulated by IL-6, and played a role in fibroblast ossification, thus contributing to the AS pathogenesis. We measured Annexin A2 mRNA and protein level of LT, and IL-6 concentration in the serum of AS patients and controls. Moreover, we isolated primary cultured fibroblasts from AS LT to investigate the role of Annexin A2 in IL-6-induced fibroblast ossification. Thirty patients meeting the modified New York criteria Sera samples were obtained from 30 AS patients before surgery. Sera samples obtained from age matched 30 health volunteers were used as normal control. This study was approved by the independent ethics committee, Changhai Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Total RNA was extracted from tissue samples or cultured cells using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA) and reverse transcribed with cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturers’ instructions. The cDNAs were stored at −80 Protein was extracted from tissue samples or cultured cells by using radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer. After protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), equal amounts of protein were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore, Bredford, MA, USA). Antibodies against BMP-2 (bone morphogenetic protein-2, Ab82511; Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), OCN (osteocalcin, Ab3876; Abcam), OSX (osterix, Sc-22538; Santa Cruz Biotech., Santa Cruz, CA, USA), OPG (osteoprotegerin, Ab183910; Abcam), RANKL (receptor activator of NF-κB ligand, Ab45039; Abcam), ERK1/2(#4695; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), p-ERK1/2 (#4376; Cell Signaling Technology) and GAPDH (#5174; Cell Signaling Technology) were used in Western blot analysis following the manufacturer’s protocol. Signals were detected with enhanced chemiluminescenct substrate (ECL, BioRad, Richmond, CA, USA). Densitometric analysis was performed with Image J software ( Secretions of IL-6 were assessed with ELISA assay kit (Bio-Swamp life science, Shanghai, China) in accordance with the instructions of the manufacturer. Absorbance was read at a wavelength of 450 Spinal ligaments were obtained with the informed consent of patients with AS. After removal of the ossified tissue, fibrous tissues of the ligaments were washed in cold PBS, minced into small pieces and digested with collagenase I (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 5 shRNA targeting human Annexin A2 mRNA (GTCTGTCAAAGCCTATACT, shAnnexin A2) and a non-specific scramble shRNA sequence (CCTAAGGTTAAGTCGCCCTCG, shNC) were cloned into a lentiviral vector pLKO.1-EGFP (Biovector, Beijing, China). The full-length human Annexin A2 were cloned into the expression vector pLVX-puro (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Lentiviral constructs of shAnnexin A2, shNC, pLVX-puro empty vector or pLVX-puro-Annexin A2 were cotransfected with viral packaging plasmids into HEK293T cells by using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) per the manufacture’s instruction. After 48 Fibroblasts isolated from AS patients were plated in 6-well plates (3.0 ALP activity in the cultured medium was measured using ALP activity kit (Jiancheng, Nanjing, China). The integrated absorbance was measured at 520 All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software (San Diego, CA, USA). All data were presented as the mean value We first investigated the expression of Annexin A2 in AS and control LT via real-time PCR and Western blot. Real-time PCR analysis revealed significantly increased Annexin A2 mRNA expression ( Fibroblasts are the most abundant connective tissue cells in LT. In order to explore the effect of IL-6 on Annexin A2 expression, we stimulated primary fibroblast of AS patients with IL-6 (0–20 Fibroblast ossification is implicated in the pathogenesis of AS. In order to study the function of Annexin A2 on IL-6-induced fibroblast ossification, Annexin A2 shRNA (shAnnexin A2) lentivirus was produced and infected primary fibroblasts of AS patients. Lentiviral transduction efficiency was about 80% and no obvious cell death was observed at 48 Treatment with 20 Proteins associated with osteogenic differentiation, including BMP-2, OCN and OSX were detected by Western blot. IL-6 exposure significantly elevated the expression of BMP-2, OCN and OSX. The effects of IL-6 on the detected proteins were reversed by Annexin A2 knockdown ( ERK is one of the components of osteogenic signaling pathways In order to further study the function of Annexin A2, Annexin A2 lentivirus was produced and infected primary fibroblasts of AS patients. Primary fibroblasts were divided into four groups: Group 1, cells infected with Vector virus (Vector) for 48 Annexin A2 plays a critical role during osteogenesis process of osteoblastic cells Firstly, real-time PCR and Western blot analysis demonstrated that Annexin A2 was increased in AS LT compared with control LT although the sample size was relative small. IL-6 concentrations in the serum was higher in AS patients than in normal controls ( MAPK/ERK singling is one component of osteogenic signaling pathways In conclusion, exposure with IL-6 in LT fibroblasts significantly enhanced Annexin A2 expression, activated ERK signaling and induced fibroblast ossification. Silencing of Annexin A2 partially suppressed the effects of IL-6 in ERK signaling and fibroblast ossification. Our findings suggested that an inhibitory strategy against Annexin A2 might be of great help for the treatment of AS. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. This project was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Changhai Hospital (grant no. CH201520) and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (grant no. 14140903802). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: