Phosphate removal from aqueous solution was investigated using ZnCl2-activated carbon developed from coir pith, an agricultural solid waste. Studies were conducted to delineate the effect of contact time, adsorbent dose, phosphate concentration, pH, and temperature. The adsorption equilibrium data followed both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. Langmuir adsorption capacity was found to be 5.1 mg/g. Adsorption followed second-order kinetics. The removal was maximum in the pH range 3–10. pH effect and desorption studies showed that adsorption occurred by both ion exchange and chemisorption mechanisms. Adsorption was found to be spontaneous and endothermic. Effect of foreign ions on adsorption shows that perchlorate, sulfate, and selenite decreased the percent removal of phosphate.In the past few decades, excess phosphate has been recognized as a non-point-source agricultural pollutant throughout the world due to the overapplication of both synthetic and animal-based fertilizers In 1996 the U.S. EPA reported that more than 50% of freshwater eutrophication is attributed to agricultural nutrients such as phosphate. Eutrophication as well as the overgrowth of cyanobacteria due to the excess phosphate in recreational, industrial, and drinking water could greatly threaten human and ecological health. High levels of bioavailable phosphate, often in concert with high concentration of dissolved nitrate, stimulate blooms of aquatic vegetation. These blooms deplete dissolved oxygen, killing fish and other aquatic animals. Therefore wastes containing phosphate must meet discharge limits of 0.5–1.0 mg P/L Typically raw domestic wastewater has a total phosphorus concentration of approximately 10 mg P/L, the principal forms of phosphate being orthophosphate (5 mg P/L), pyrophosphate (1 mg P/L), and tripolyphosphate (3 mg P/L), together with smaller amounts of organic phosphates In wastewater treatment technology, various techniques have been used for phosphate removal. Among these, physicochemical and biological methods have been successfully applied. They are chemical precipitation with lime, alum, and iron salts or advanced biological treatment Adsorption is one of the techniques, which is comparatively more useful and economic for phosphate removal Coir pith is a light fluffy material, which is generated in the process of separation of the fiber from coconut husk. India, the third largest producer of coconuts in the world, produces about 12.8 billion coconuts a year The objective of the present study was to evaluate the potential of ZnCl Coir pith was collected from nearby coir industries. It was dried in sunlight for 5 h and then zinc-chloride-activated coir pith carbon was prepared. Coir pith was stirred into a boiling solution containing zinc chloride at a weight ratio of 2:1. The filtered material was washed, dried, and carbonized at 700 °C under controlled conditions. After cooling, the excess zinc chloride present in the carbonized material was leached out using dilute HCl. Then the carbon was repeatedly washed with water to get rid of traces of HCl and ZnCl Adsorption experiments were carried out by agitating 300 mg of adsorbent with 50 ml of phosphate solution of desired concentration and pH at 200 rpm, 35 °C in a thermostated rotary shaker (ORBITEK, Chennai, India). Concentration of phosphate was estimated spectrophotometrically by stannous chloride method, monitoring the absorbance at 690 nm on UV–vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi, Model U-3210, Tokyo) The adsorbent (300 mg/50 ml) that was used for the adsorption of 10–40 mg/L of phosphate solution was separated from the solution by centrifugation. The phosphate-loaded adsorbent was filtered using Whatman filter paper and washed gently with water to remove any unadsorbed phosphate. Several such samples were prepared. Then the spent adsorbent was mixed with 50 ml of distilled water at different pH values (2–11), adjusted using dilute HCl and NaOH solutions, and agitated at time intervals longer than the equilibrium time. The desorbed phosphate was estimated as before. Preliminary experiments showed that there was no adsorption due to container walls. Experiments were carried out in duplicate and mean values were taken for calculations. Maximum deviation was 3%. The amount of phosphate adsorbed (mg/g) increased with increased phosphate concentration and remained nearly constant after equilibrium time ( The adsorption kinetic data of phosphate are analyzed using the Lagergren first-order rate equation The second-order kinetic model The percent removal increased with increased adsorbent dose due to the increase in the total available surface area of the adsorbent particles ( Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were applied to study the adsorption equilibrium. The Langmuir isotherm is based on the assumption that (i) maximum adsorption corresponds to a saturated monolayer of adsorbate molecules on the adsorbent surface, (ii) that the energy of adsorption is constant, and (iii) that there is no transmigration of adsorbate molecules in the plane of the adsorbent surface. The Langmuir isotherm The Freundlich isotherm equation Increased temperature slightly increased the percent removal ( According to the van't Hoff equation, Linear plots of Assuming spherical geometry for the adsorbent, the time for half adsorption can be correlated to the pore diffusion coefficient Formation of ZnCl Effect of pH on the adsorption of phosphate is shown in Desorption was higher at pH 2 (around 30%) and pH 11 (around 50%) for 10 to 40 mg/L phosphate concentrations ( The adsorption of phosphate was significantly decreased by the equimolar (0.211 mM) addition of other anions such as sulfate, selenite, and perchlorate. Chloride, nitrate, vanadate, and molybdate hardly interfered with phosphate adsorption. The influence of other anions on phosphate removal is in the order ClO This study shows that the zinc-chloride-treated activated carbon developed from the agricultural waste coir pith is an effective and low-cost adsorbent for the removal of phosphate from aqueous solution. Adsorption followed both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. Langmuir adsorption capacity was found to be 5.1 mg/g. Adsorption kinetics obeyed a second-order kinetic model. Adsorption was found to be maximal in the pH range 3–10. Increase in temperature increased the removal. The positive values of