Diagnosis of the surface chemical factors playing a part in flotation separation of a value sulfide phase requires measurement of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic species that are statistically different between the concentrate and tail streams. Statistical methods, based on the monolayer-sensitive time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) technique, have been developed towards this ultimate aim by measuring hydrophobic species (collector ions, dimers and metal complexes, polysulfides) as well as hydrophobic metal ions, precipitates and added depressant species. Reliable identification of specific mineral particles is central to this statistical analysis. A chalcopyrite/pyrite/sphalerite mineral mixture conditioned at pH9 for 20min to study transfer of Cu from chalcopyrite via solution to the other two mineral surfaces, since this mechanism can be responsible for their inadvertent flotation in copper recovery, showed no statistical difference in the copper intensities on pyrite and sphalerite (selected from Fe and Zn images) after this conditioning. Principal component analysis (PCA) identifies combinations of factors strongly correlated (positively or negatively) in images or spectra from sets of data. In images, PCA selects these correlations from the mass spectra recorded at each of 256×256 pixels in a selected area of particles. In the image mode, PCA has proved to be a much better method of selecting particles by mineral phase with clearer definition of particle boundaries due to multi-variable recognition. It has clearly separated a statistical difference in copper intensities between the sphalerite and pyrite phases.
                  The PCA method has been applied to concentrate and tails samples collected from the Inco Matte Concentrator demonstrating extensive CuOH and NiOH transfer between the chalcocite (Cc) and heazlewoodite (Hz) minerals. Statistical differences illustrate the important discriminating depressant action of NiOH in flotation despite the activation of Hz by Cu transfer. The adsorption of the collector at specifically-identified Cu sites has been elucidated by the study. Importantly, the statistical analysis has been able to confirm some mechanisms and deny others proposed to control recovery and selectivity giving more focus on the control factors.İn the selective separation of mineral phases by flotation, surface chemistry is the principal determinant of the average contact angle for a specific mineral phase in a flotation pulp. The average contact angle is, in turn, the principal determinant of the bubble–particle attachment efficiency ( The hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance by particle and its statistical average by mineral phase requires identification of the major species contributing to each category in surface layers ( The action of collector molecules in inducing hydrophobicity can be assisted by activating species such as copper and lead ions that complex the collector on the surface. Previous research has shown that this activation can be inadvertently produced by dissolution and transfer via solution of these ions to mineral phases not intended to float ( The second case examines solution transfer of activating copper ions and depressant nickel ions in a plant study from the Inco Sudbury Matte Concentrator. The PCA analysis identifies the controlling surface chemical mechanisms including collector action. We have been able to extend the PCA analysis to directly compare statistical weightings for surface species between concentrate and tails without the need for particle selection. This method offers major reduction in data processing time and moves the methodology closer to routine diagnostic application. Some of this work has been reported previously at the Fifth UBC–McGill Biennial International Symposium on Fundamentals of Mineral Processing, August 2004 ( The chalcopyrite/pyrite/sphalerite mixed mineral sample was conditioned with a pH 9 solution of sodium hydroxide for 20 The ToF-SIMS technique, used in static mode, involves a very low flux of heavy ions (in this case, Ga Individual phase recognition in a multi mineral mixture was originally accomplished by scanning for regions of high ion yield peculiar to a selected mineral phase. Specific ion images were normalized to the total ion yield removing topographic and/or matrix effects in an attempt to clearly define the phase associated with the selected ion ( Consider a 256 Related to a ToF-SIMS imaging data matrix ( Generally the model is truncated, leaving some small amount of variance in a residual matrix ( PLS_Toolbox 2.1 from Eigenvector Research Ltd. (Manson, WA, USA) running on Matlab 6.0 was the software used for PCA analysis. For each set of data as many significant mass peaks as possible were added to the peak list for analysis. Also included in the peak selection is the total remaining ion image (sum of ion intensity not selected as a specific peak) shown at mass zero in the loadings. Data was either “mean centred” or “autoscaled” prior to PCA. Mean centring is done by subtracting the column mean from each column, thus forming a matrix where each column has a mean of zero. For the “autoscaled” data, the data is first mean centred and each mean centred variable is then divided by its standard deviation resulting in variables with unit variance. This procedure puts all variables on an equal basis in the analysis. Thus, the less intense but more chemically significant higher mass peaks receive the same level of consideration in the analysis as the intense, low mass peaks. ToF-SIMS statistical analysis is reported for a chalcopyrite/pyrite/sphalerite mineral mixture conditioned at pH 9 for 20 The difficulty of phase recognition can be appreciated from In an alternative statistical analysis, principal component analysis (PCA) was used to enhance phase recognition and definition of regions for mass spectral analysis. This is the first application of PCA to flotation surface chemistry. ( PC2 shows positive weightings for zinc mass peaks and negative weighting for iron and copper mass peaks. Thus, bright areas on the image score are indicative of zinc rich (sphalerite) phases. The dark areas are thus rich in iron and copper; however, separation of pyrite and chalcopyrite phases is not yet accomplished. As separation of pyrite and chalcopyrite had not been shown, a second PC analysis was carried out using “mean centred” data ( From the PC analysis, new ROI’s were mapped ( Importantly, using PCA phase identification, we now see a clear statistical separation of Cu distribution in favour of sphalerite ( The Inco Nickel–Copper Matte flotation process ( inadvertent activation of Hz by dissolved copper ions; depression of Cc by dissolved nickel ions; lack of selectivity of the diphenylguanidine (DPG) collector including slow formation of Ni–DPG complexes at Hz surfaces and; possible requirement of oxidation of Cc surfaces before effective DPG adsorption; depressant action of the calcium ions introduced as lime in the control of pH to 11–12 in this circuit. We have used the same PCA methods to study concentrate and tail samples from the operating plant. The principal components gave excellent recognition of the two mineral phases with reliable statistics on the regions selected. The inadvertent flotation of Hz in the concentrate appears to be a result of Cu activation (Cu63 The possible depressant action of Ca ions is not found to be selective. Mass signals for the Cu–DPG complex, represented in the mass 119 fragment, show higher (>1.8×) surface concentrations on Hz in the concentrate compared with the tail ( There is also evidence that DPG may selectively attach to hydroxylated Cu sites. There is considerably higher (>2×) CuOH signal on both Cc and Hz particles in the concentrate than in the tails although more CuO is measured on both minerals in tails than concentrate. This finding is supported by Pearson product moment correlations giving high correlation coefficients between CuOH and DPG (119) on Hz in concentrate (0.70) and tails (0.90) and for Cc in concentrate (0.96). The correlation coefficient for Cc in tails is lower (0.3) presumably due to the high surface concentrations of Ni ions. The most time-consuming steps in this analysis are the post-ToF-SIMS and PCA marking out of the ROIs, the collection of the mass spectra from the pixels in each ROI and the spread sheet statistical analysis of the collected spectra. The PCA analysis has already identified correlations of other species with major elements in particular mineral phases. It may be possible to directly compare PCs identifying specific mineral phases between concentrate and tails as in  Diagnosis of the surface chemical factors playing a part in flotation separation of a valuable sulfide phase requires measurement of activating species that are statistically different between mineral phases. Time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) has been used to identify sufficient particles of a specific mineral phase for reliable statistics determining a mean value for each species with 95% confidence intervals. For a chalcopyrite/pyrite/sphalerite mineral mixture conditioned at pH 9 for 20 The method has been extended to samples from an operating flotation plant again with excellent phase recognition and diagnostic surface chemistry. Both copper and nickel ion transfer via solution have also been demonstrated in this study, the former relating to inadvertent activation of heazlewoodite and the latter to inadvertent depression of chalcocite. The methodology, with PCA phase recognition and statistical analysis, considerably extends the analytical basis of surface chemical control in flotation. This work is supported by a Canadian NSERC Discovery Grant to RStCS and by an exchange program between ACeSSS and Surface Science Western. We are particularly grateful to Prof. Stewart McIntyre (Director, SSW) for the latter arrangement. The assistance of Inco Sudbury with plant sampling (Mr. Jim Truskoski, Ms. Cassandra Valenius, Dr. Dan Legrand) and permission to publish the results (Dr. Peter Wells) has been central to this project and is much appreciated.