Applications of chromatographic and atomic absorption methods are compared with those of electroanalytical techniques. The limitations of electroanalytical procedures and their advantages, such as speed, sensitivity and speciation are discussed. Among applications of polarography and voltammetry to a solution of basic problems, attention has been paid to the possibility to distinguish the degree of conjugation (e.g. of compounds containing the grouping CNNC), to a contribution to understanding of solution chemistry of mitomycin C and to processes involved in the reduction of cephalosporins. Among practical applications, the possibility to analyze suspensions, which can be carried out without separation offers advantages. Examples are interactions in suspensions of bile salts in the presence of metal (II) ions, adsorptions of various pesticides and other toxic materials on lignin and the possibility to follow alkaline cleavage of lignin in buffers pH 8–12 at 25 °C. Most of these studies would not be possible to carry out using other techniques.The invention of polarography in 1922 by Professor J. Heyrovský represented a qualitative change in electroanalytical chemistry, which at this stage was restricted to potentiometry and controlled-current electrolysis. The main contributions of Professor Heyrovský were the recognition of the importance of potential and its control, the opportunities offered by measurement of limiting currents, and the possibility to extend electrochemical studies to irreversible systems. Another aspect made polarography an important pioneering technique: It was the first, and in the 1930s and early 1940s the only, automated technique. The sensitivity of polarographic methods of analysis, enabling determination of electroactive species in up to approximately 10 In the 1970s and 1980s, even such sensitivity was often insufficient, particularly for analyses of samples investigated in environmental chemistry and in analyses of biological material. This led to development of stripping techniques, in which the analyte is first accumulated on the surface of a mercury drop of mercury covered solid electrode either by electrolysis or by adsorption. After a chosen period of time, the accumulated species is electrolyzed and the resulting current–voltage curve is recorded and measured. Using such techniques, ultratrace analysis can be carried out on solutions containing as little as 10 The development of electroanalytical techniques was, in the 1960s and 1970s, paralleled by a meteoric growth of the use and width of applications of separation techniques. Firstly, it was gas chromatography, followed later by variants of liquid chromatography and still later by development of hyphenated techniques which became the growth areas in analytical chemistry. Such techniques were used mostly for determinations of organic compounds and more recently of inorganic anions. Similar revolution occurred also in the determination of inorganic components where atomic absorption and flame-based spectroscopies became the most frequently used techniques. In the 1960s, electroanalytical techniques were the fifth most frequently used techniques in practical analyses. In the 1990s, most analytical laboratories used separation techniques and atomic absorption. In the US, the number of laboratories which routinely used electroanalytical techniques dwindled. These techniques are more often used in practice in Europe, where their practical use differs considerably from country to country. Some reasons for the limited use of electroanalytical methods in practical analyses can be summarized as follows: (i) For HPLC, GC and AA practically the same technique can be used with relatively minor modifications for a large number of analytes. In electrochemistry, it is often necessary to find different optimum conditions for each analyte and each matrix. (ii) The procedures for HPLC, GC and AA are relatively simple and automated. The analysis can be carried out by a technician. It is true that it is possible to train a technician within a week to successfully use electroanalytical techniques, but their use is more demanding on skill and intelligence of the technician. For routine electroanalyses, the contact between technician and supervisor must be closer than is needed for separations. On the other hand, the records obtained by electroanalytical techniques often show more clearly when something went wrong than it is for separation techniques or AA. (iii) Interpretation of experimental results is often more straightforward for HPLC, GC and AA than of electroanalytical data, but problems or errors due to the performance of the technician might not be obvious. In HPLC, GC, and AA the mastery of a single technique is usually a sufficient qualification of a supervisor. On the other hand, the interpretation of results obtained by electroanalysis requires from a supervisor, in addition to a broad knowledge of electrochemistry, also an understanding of solution chemistry (in particular of acid–base processes and complex formation), some surface chemistry (particularly adsorption), as well as knowledge of reaction kinetics and of elucidation of reaction mechanisms. (iv) Validation of separation techniques is gradually adopted, whereas, electroanalytical methods must make first steps in this direction. (v) Availability of education in the given subdiscipline of analytical chemistry is important. In Europe the situation is in a state of flux, but, in the US, university courses in analytical chemistry cover separations well. With the dwindling number of teachers in academia involved in electrochemical research, an in depth understanding of electroanalysis by students is on the decline. In principle, an analytical chemist should be trained to find the best analytical method for the determination of a given component in a given matrix. This is, unfortunately, not often the case anymore. As a result of reasons under (i)–(v) (among others), HPLC, GC and AA are often routinely applied to all analytical problems, notwithstanding whether they are in each individual case (given analyte in a given matrix) really the ‘best method’ or not. Moreover, the instrumentation for HPLC, GC and AA is expensive and the running costs are high. This might be of lesser importance for large companies but plays a role in smaller ones and in particular in developing countries. In some instances, for some analytes and some types of matrices, the electroanalytical methods may be ‘the best method’ and their use is advantageous. To understand when the use of an electroanalytical method is preferable, it is important to know the advantages and limitations of electroanalytical methods. The species to be determined using an electroanalytical method must be electroactive (that is, must undergo electroreduction or oxidation within the available potential windows, or must react with Hg The electroactive species must be soluble in a solvent which is conductive. As with any other analytical technique, interfering materials must be absent. The use of mercury electrodes enables the reaching of negative potentials, and the potential window reaching potentials of −2.5 V or even −3.0 V enables the following of numerous reductions, occurring in this potential range. On the other hand, the dissolving of mercury at approximately +0.4 V prevents the reaching of more positive potentials. Hence, with mercury electrodes, only the more easily oxidized species can be followed. Less easily oxidized species, such as phenols or anilines, cannot be determined using mercury electrodes. The use of mercury itself can be a limitation in some countries. Currently, we live in an age of irrational mercurophobia. This situation involves psychology rather than science. Mercury in small amounts at room temperature is practically innocuous. It is only when heated at approximately 100 °C that mercury vapors are toxic. Inorganic salts of mercury have been used in medicine for centuries without ill effects, it is only organomercury compounds (not formed under laboratory conditions) which are toxic. This author not only worked on a daily basis with mercury for 50 years without ill effects, but met during his life at least 500 polarographers, who lived and worked in laboratories where in spite of care, some mercury has been spilled on desks and floors. None of them reported any ill effects or showed elevated levels of mercury in the blood, with one single exception. Ironically, it was in an Institute of Industrial Hygiene, where during drying of mercury the fan of an exhaust in a hood blew the mercury vapors into the room instead of out. But, even this chemist had completely recovered within two months and continued working in polarography for years. Speed of polarographic and related methods is important. An analysis can be routinely carried out in under 3 min, if necessary, within fractions of a second. This made electroanalytical methods the choice when analyzing large numbers of samples, as it is timesaving. The speed is of particular importance in analysis of samples which deteriorate or otherwise undergo changes with time. In the analyses of reactive compounds it should be remembered that chemical reactions can occur during the passage of a sample through a chromatographic column, where the sample is in contact with a large surface area, which is often rather active and the analyte is under high pressure and/or high temperature, particularly in GC. Because of the speed of analysis and possibility to carry out real time analysis directly in the reaction mixture, electroanalytical methods offer useful applications in kinetic studies, often complementary with spectrophotometry. They are also useful in studies of equilibria, much more than HPLC or GC which can often perturb equilibria in the reaction mixture. Electrochemical methods are often undeservedly perceived as non-selective, but they offer some selectivity other techniques do not. Thus, it is generally possible to determine oxidized forms in the presence of corresponding reduced forms and vice versa. Often, it is possible to determine how much of the species is present in the oxidized form and how much in the reduced form, for example, the ratio [Fe Generally, direct polarographic analyses are often possible without pre-separation steps, when the sample contains one or few Electroanalytical methods often offer high sensitivity, for example, differential pulse and square-wave polarography often have lower limits at 10 For speciation, electrochemical methods offer information about the oxidation state of the analyte, whereas, AA only offers information about the total concentration of the element. As mentioned above, electrochemical measurements offer information about how much chromium is present as Cr (VI), how much as Cr (III), and how much as Cr (II). Examples from organic analyses can be determination of ArNO In the presence of complexing agents, it is possible to determine the free metal ion and metal ion in individual complexes. Both labile and substitution inert complexes can be determined. An example of speciation in organic chemistry is the possibility to determine a conjugated species in the presence of a non-conjugated one with the same electroactive group. Thus, it is possible to determine ArCHO next to ArCH Polarographic determinations can often be carried out in heterogeneous mixtures containing biological materials, proteins, surfactants as well as colloidal or slightly soluble particles. In such solutions or suspensions, it is possible to carry out determination directly in the mixture without pre-separations. Limiting currents as measured in DC, sampled or normal pulse polarography are less affected by colloidal or solid particles than peak currents, as used in differential pulse or square-wave polarography or linear sweep voltammetry. The cost of instrumentation for electrochemistry is usually a small fraction of instrumentation used for HPLC, GC or AA. Also, chemicals used in electroanalysis are usually not costly, for example, high purity solvents are not needed. These factors are of particular importance in developing countries. Electroanalytical methods can be used both in basic and applied research as well as in routine, practical analysis. Some examples of our recent applications in both areas are given below. It is, more or less, a generally accepted view that systems with alternating single and double bonds are conjugated, assuming delocalization of electrons over the entire system XABY. For systems where A and B are carbons, involving groupings like CCCC; CCCO; OCCO; NCCC; NCCO; NCCN, conjugation has been assumed and proved. Similarly, delocalization occurs when X and Y in the above structures are sulfur. The question to be discussed: are the systems where the central bond (which in all above examples is CC) is between two nitrogen atoms in a grouping CNNC conjugated? For some 1,2,4-triazines, in example I, the reduction of the 1,6CN occurs over the entire pH-range at the same potential as the reduction of the 1,6CN in the dihydroderivative On the other hand, in molecules of type I, there is a conjugation in the system (1)NC(6)CONR The absence of conjugation involving the (1)NN(2) bond is further confirmed by the effects of substituents R The absence of conjugation is further supported by X-ray crystallography Similarly, for 5-( J. Ludvı́k The electron density map of I (R The next question to be asked is whether the absence of delocalization is restricted to grouping CNNC in a heterocyclic ring or is the overlap of orbitals on nitrogens prevented even in acyclic compounds. The first indication of the absence of conjugation was the observation by Lund A survey of crystallographic data on acyclic azines From the dependence of limiting currents and half-wave or peak potentials on pH it is possible to identify acid–base equilibria preceding first electron transfer and in some cases obtain information about position of acid–base equilibria and the rate with which they are established. Thus, it has recently been possible to identify acid–base equilibria accompanying reduction of Se (IV) i i i The dianion SeO Maleic hydrazide can exist in principle in three tautomeric forms. Based on a single two-electron reduction wave it was possible to prove that, in aqueous solutions, the dicarbonyl form predominates In sulfometuron methyl: Similar agreement between values of p  In the antibiotic and cancerostatic agent mitomycin A decrease in the height of the quinone wave at pH<5 is accompanied by an increase in wave at more negative potentials. Kinetic character of current at pH 4 indicates that a fast reaction, with τ As the reactive form of mitomycin In aqueous solutions 2-(β-amino)ethyl-1,4-benzoquinones exist in a cyclic (quinol) form. This form is irreversibly reduced at negative potentials. In a base–catalyzed reaction, involving opening of the ring, the quinone form is produced. This quinone form is reversibly reduced at potentials by more than 0.5 V more positive than the reduction of the cyclic quinol form. Effects of substitution on the quinone ring and in the side chain on quinol formation, rates and equilibria involved, was followed Depending on substituents in positions 3 and 7, reduction of cephalosporins involves either the CCCOOH grouping, cleavage of the 3CH The limiting current of the reduction of the protonated form of the antibiotic cefetamet (IV) is lower than corresponds to a four-electron process. The decrease was attributed to a shift in an equilibrium involving covalent addition of water One of the areas, in which polarography can offer advantages, is the analysis of heterogeneous systems, represented by suspensions and colloidal systems. The dropping mercury electrode can be immersed directly in such systems to determine dissolved components without separation. Limiting currents are usually little affected by dispersed material. Polarography enabled the following of changes in concentration of dissolved M Lignin, a three-dimensional polymer, based on combinations of phenyl propyl units, is a natural product widely present in wood and other plant material. It is second only to carbohydrates, the most frequently encountered polymer on the earth's surface. Various preparations of lignin, based on enzymatic cleavage of wood, obtained from rotted wood, but also produced commercially, proved to be an excellent adsorbent. Its adsorption properties depend on its source, but, also on the way it was separated from cellulosics, on the degree of the removal of carbohydrates, on the way of the cutting of wood and on the temperature during the comminution process, as well as on the pH and ionic strength of the medium in which lignin is dispersed. Lignin can adsorb some toxic materials, like When studying the pH-dependences of the binding of various species on lignin, it was observed that whereas at pH<7 lignin is extremely stable, already at pH>8 slow cleavage occurs even at 25 °C On the other hand, cleavage of lignin at pH 10–12 at room temperature, yields simple mixtures of organic, mostly aromatic, species, suitable for application in organic synthesis. As long as any trees, cereals, and grasses are left on Earth, lignin will be renewable material. It offers a green alternative to raw materials for organic chemical industry in the future when oil and coal will be less available. Possibility to achieve cleavage of approximately 30% of the starting material at room temperature and atmospheric pressure offers obvious economic advantages.