The integration of geo-information from multiple sources and of diverse nature in developing mineral favourability indexes (MFIs) is a well-known problem in mineral exploration and mineral resource assessment. Fuzzy set theory provides a convenient framework to combine and analyse qualitative and quantitative data independently of their source or characteristics.
                  A novel, data-driven formulation for calculating MFIs based on fuzzy analysis is developed in this paper. Different geo-variables are considered fuzzy sets and their appropriate membership functions are defined and modelled. A new weighted average-type aggregation operator is then introduced to generate a new fuzzy set representing mineral favourability. The membership grades of the new fuzzy set are considered as the MFI. The weights for the aggregation operation combine the individual membership functions of the geo-variables, and are derived using information from training areas and L
                     1 regression.
                  The technique is demonstrated in a case study of skarn tin deposits and is used to integrate geological, geochemical and magnetic data. The study area covers a total of 22.5km2 and is divided into 349 cells, which include nine control cells. Nine geo-variables are considered in this study. Depending on the nature of the various geo-variables, four different types of membership functions are used to model the fuzzy membership of the geo-variables involved.Advances in computer technologies play an increasingly important role in the exploration and assessment of mineral deposits. Geographic Information Systems are frequently used to evaluate mineral potential in exploration districts ( Previous approaches were based on the spatial mapping of mineral potential or favourability of mineral occurrence over an exploration play. Although not always explicitly defined, these approaches are formulated based on the notion of a mineral favourability index, MFI, Fuzzy sets provide an alternative framework that could improve upon some of the limitations in previous techniques. A fuzzy set-based formulation is used by The present study contributes a new data-driven approach in deriving a fuzzy mineral favourability index (FMFI) of mineral occurrence suitable for mineral exploration and resource assessment. Geological information and data interpretations used in mineral exploration are inherently ambiguous. The quantitative precision of expressions like “relatively high”, “high”, “fair”, “low”, and “relatively low” or “fairly favourable/unfavourable for the mineral occurrence”, as well as the grey areas between these expressions, is difficult to define. Fuzzy set theory ( If A simple example may be the fuzzy set Aggregation operations on fuzzy sets are used to combine them to a single set ( Aggregation operations often used in mineral exploration are outlined in Different aggregation operators may reflect different geological criteria in mineral exploration. For the criterion “if the measurements of geo-variable In mineral exploration, an exploration terrain can be represented by a grid of cells and each cell assessed as a potential exploration target. The mineral favourability index of an exploration cell is assessed from the available geo-variables and characterized by proposition The FMFI of cell This can be expressed as To overcome the limits of common aggregation operations and express the degree of importance and relevance of individual geo-variables to mineral occurrence, the following weighted average is suggested as the suitable aggregation operation for an FMFI: Consider the fuzzy set    If, for example, the related weights are derived from The definition of membership functions { The study area is located in southwestern China near the contact zones of the south margin of the Lugu granitic body ( The Lugu granites are the major magmatic rock type in the study area, with their outcrop occupying about 180 N-E trending faults control the distribution of the ore deposits, and their ages determine the shape and size of ore bodies. The tin deposits in the study area are usually associated with magnetite mineralization; therefore, the presence of magnetite mineralization can be regarded as a favourable direct indicator for the occurrence of tin deposits. Since a magnetic anomaly may also indicate the presence of magnetite mineralization, it is viewed as an indirect index for mineral occurrence. Soil geochemical surveys show that a combination of anomalous tin, copper, lead, and zinc may indicate tin mineralization near the earth's surface. The study area covers a total of 22.5 Variables For each geo (i) (ii) The properties of the model in (iii) (iv) The aggregation operation defined by the system of Control cells in the study area with examples of membership function values for tin, magnetite mineralization, and N-E trending faults are shown in All control cells are distributed along the contact zone of the south margin of the Lugu granitic body. Most control cells have high membership values of the fuzzy set corresponding to the Sn anomaly, indicating the presence of Sn content in these cells. Most control cells exhibit magnetite mineralization. Most control cells contain N-E trending faults. When a set of control cells is well defined and meets the criteria previously described, the weights of the aggregation operation in  The recognition of the relative importance and significance of geo-variables to mineral occurrence is critical to mineral prediction, as stressed earlier. As a result, the weighted average operator in The FMFIs of all 349 cells in the study area are generated from the aggregation operation in In the western section of the study area, there is no cell with high FMFIs except a control cell, suggesting that the potential mineral occurrence is very limited. In the eastern section, there are three cells with relatively high FMFIs ( The fuzzy set framework provides the analytical tools to deal with qualitative and quantitative, multi-source and multi-character geological information, information which may be linguistically ambiguous, imprecise, and incomplete. The present study defines the degree of mineral favourability in terms of a fuzzy mineral favourability index. The proposed FMFI combines favourabilities from individual geo-variables rather than direct measurements of these variables and characterizes the degrees of these favourabilities with membership functions. The character of any pertinent geo-variable is used to define physically meaningful membership functions for the available observation, as shown in the case study. The key element of the proposed approach is the use of an unbiased, weighted average aggregation operator to define the favourability grade of an exploration cell. The data-driven determination of weights for the contribution of individual geo-variables, that is their membership functions, is based on supervised training using control cells and restricted The case study shows the practical aspects of the proposed fuzzy mineral favourability index in identifying exploration targets for skarn tin deposits in the vicinity of the Lugu granite body in southwestern China. The proposed method identifies eleven geologically consistent targets for further detailed exploration. Several improvements of the proposed approach may be considered in the future. When deriving weights for Funding was provided by the National Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada grant OGP0105803 to R. Dimitrakopoulos. Thanks are in order to D. Singer, M. Scott and D. Hedger and the two journal reviewers for their comments on earlier drafts of the manuscript. Some common aggregation operations on fuzzy sets used in mineral exploration are given below. Additional information for aggregation operations used in mineral favourability analysis may be found in The Cartesian product of a series of The algebraic sum The algebraic product The bounded sum The