In the case of grinding of spices, the cryogenic counterpart is commonly used for obtaining a high-quality spice powder retaining the maximum thermo-sensitive flavoring compounds; however, the operational cost restricts its industrial application. Therefore, in a cryogenic grinding system, an insight into the micro-mechanical behavior and heat transfer phenomena of the granules is obligatory in improving the design aspects. The present study aims to represent the three-dimensional thermal transport process for black pepper seeds in a cryogenic grinding system (precooler and mill). The explicit numerical method based on microstructural approaches such as Discrete Element Method (DEM): utilizing a Hertz–Mindlin with conduction contact model was used to corroborate the granular flow and thermal profile of the seeds. The adequacy of the proposed granular heat transfer model was validated by the experimental data such as granular temperature as well as the flow pattern. Concurrently, it confirms the applicability of DEM as a capable tool to model the heat transfer along with a better understanding of particle mechanics in the cryogenic grinding system.Black pepper ( Precooler is the essential component of the cryo-grinding system that removes the desired amount of heat from a spice prior to its entry into the grinding chamber. In practice, precooler brings the temperature of the individual particle (spice granule) well below their glass transition temperature by the application of a cryogen such as liquid nitrogen (LN In cryogenic mill (cryo-mill), the discharged brittle spices from the precooler (feed to mill) can be effectively ground into a high-quality powder. The conventional mills such as hammer/impact, attrition, pin, and ball mills can be used as cryo-mill. Many scientific reports are available claiming the increase in the production rate of the conventional grinder by using precooler before grinding ( Although the cryo-grinding technique has many advantages, it suffers from high operational cost and overall energy consumption. On an industrial scale, the cost of LN Many numerical methods have been reported on the modeling of granular heat transfer applying (i) kinetic theory; (ii) continuum methods; (iii) discrete modeling techniques ( DEM or particle dynamics or distinct element method is one of the important discrete modeling techniques proposed by Moreover, the versatility of DEM using soft particle approach in understanding the micro-mechanical behavior of grain (biological material) such as rapeseed, corn, rice, soybean, wheat, etc. in different post-harvesting operations has been reviewed by The understanding of the granular heat transfer and flow dynamics of black pepper seeds in the cryo-grinding system is required in improving its design aspects such that LN DEM was used as a numerical method to achieve the aim of this article. Details of the materials, contact models used in DEM simulation, methodologies required for experimentations, and validation technique of the granular heat transfer model are presented in this section. Due to practical limitations such as hazy images of particle flow (because of presence of gaseous nitrogen) and breakage of acrylic geometry in cryogenic condition, the study of particle flow was conducted in ambient condition (30 Black pepper (variety Assessment of the heat transport and particle mechanics of black pepper seeds in the cryo-grinding system involves calculation of forces, temperature, and torques acting on particles and material/wall of the system along with the individual follow-up of particle trajectories all around the particulate system. To accomplish this modeling task, DEM was chosen that required selection of the appropriate contact model which further needed an accurate set of input parameters. The combination of Hertz–Mindlin and heat conduction contact models is called Hertz–Mindlin with conduction contact model which was effectively utilized to model granular heat transfer phenomena in particulate systems ( Accordingly, heat transport operations are simulated accounting for final material/black pepper seed temperature, heat transfer coefficient of granules, granular heat capacity, granular flow characteristics (friction and cohesion), and wall temperature in the precooler and hammer mill. The heat flow rate ( Once the values of all the heat flow rate are calculated, the change in temperature of each particle over time is updated explicitly such as, for particle Eqs. Interstitial fluid; i.e., liquid and gaseous nitrogen are neglected in the system. The properties of black pepper seeds such as thermal conductivity, specific heat, and Young’s modulus along with calibrated DEM input parameters are considered to be constant at a certain lower temperature ( Black pepper seeds or particles or granules were assumed to be of spherical in shape which enters at a uniform temperature in: (i) precooler (−196 The temperature of the boundary wall of the precooler and hammer mill remain constant at −50 This section includes detailed methodology used for analyzing the heat transport phenomenon in black pepper seeds or granules in the laboratory scale cryo-grinding system: (i) screw conveyor type precooler; (ii) hammer mill ( In the precooler, the sample size of 200 The Hertz–Mindlin with conduction contact model was used in the EDEM software (EDEM 2.7.1 Academic Version, DEM Solutions Ltd., Edinburgh, UK) to obtain the flow and thermal profile of the seeds in DEM simulations. The DEM simulation started with the filling of spherical black pepper seeds having size 5 After recording the maximal granular temperature at feed and discharge sections of the precooler in actual experimentations, the calibration approach was used to determine the single unknown parameter of the model; i.e., the sum of all heat flow rate associated with the particles (Eq. In the hammer mill, optimal cryo-grinding conditions: feeding seeds at 1.5 Collection of experimental data; i.e., the maximum temperature of granules during cryo-grinding experiments. Taking 5 After 5 Selection of suitable heat transfer contact model in DEM in three regions of the study: (i) 5 The seeds at −50 The proposed hypothesis for modeling of granular heat transfer includes three sub-sections for granular heat transfer analysis: (i) 5 Numerical modeling of heat transfer in black pepper seeds in hammer mill was performed using Hertz–Mindlin with conduction contact model. The heat conduction contact model demonstrates two dominant mechanisms of heat transfer in a granular system, i.e., thermal conduction within the particle and thermal conduction via contact area of the adjacent particles in contact, which was taken in the numerical modeling. The experimental conditions, arrangements, and geometry similar to the actual experiments were utilized in the equivalent DEM simulations. In Hertz–Mindlin with conduction contact model, the calibrated DEM material and interaction parameters for black pepper seeds ( In DEM simulations, the maximum granular temperature was measured by placing geometric bins (equivalent to thermocouples in the actual experiment) as shown in This section presents the findings of the influence of overall heat flow rate on the temperature profile of black pepper seeds (in DEM simulations) in the precooler. Selection of granular heat transfer model and its further analysis is also discussed in detail. It is interesting to observe from The granular temperature profile is shown by coloring the particles according to their instantaneous temperature, with the lowest temperature in blue, intermediate in green, and the highest in red (Figs. The granular heat transfer results are presented in three subsections: (i) 5 Comparison of actual experimental maximum granular temperature with the numerical findings at the right ( The qualitative and quantitative results suggests that the LN Based on the results of the granular heat transfer model the granular temperature can be maintained more precisely even at 16% higher feed temperature (feeding at −43 Granular heat transfer modeling of black pepper seeds in a cryo-grinding system was performed using Hertz–Mindlin with heat conduction contact model of DEM at the optimal cryo-grinding condition. The value of heat flow rate (only unknown parameter) in the heat conduction model was selected by the calibration approach which demonstrated a significant impact on the thermal characteristics of the granules. Research revealed that the black pepper seeds nearby the wall of precooler and mill were relatively at the higher temperature. In the precooler, nearly 3/4th sample of the black pepper seeds was retained in the direction of rotation of the screw shaft. The temperature in different segments of the milling chamber observed the following order: right The authors would like to thank Gopal Carpenter (Scientist, ICAR-Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture, Lucknow, India) and K. Charith Kumar (Assistant Professor, PJTS Agriculture University, India) for sharing their views related to this research. We are grateful to the