The microstructures, the chemical composition and the soluble organic matrices of the aragonitic crossed lamellar layers of the shells of six species of molluscs have been studied. The microstructures and chemical contents are similar, whereas the quantities of organic matrices are variable. All the soluble matrices are glycoproteins, with low S contents. Their molecular weights, the protein-sugar ratios and acidities are variable. Neither a gastropod nor a bivalve pattern is recognized. The diversity of the organic matrices probably plays a main role in the fossilization processes of mollusc shells.Shells of the three major mollusc classes: Cephalopoda, Gastropoda and Bivalvia are characteristically layered structures. They are composed of calcium carbonate (aragonite and/or calcite) and organic material. The crossed lamellar layer is the most widespread in Gastropoda and Bivalvia. Except Gastropoda: Prosobranchia Fractures and polished etched sections have been observed with Philips 505 and XL30 SEM. Acidic etchings were used to reveal the details of the microstructures of the polished sections. Details of the etchings are given in the figure captions. Energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis (EDS) was done using a Philips 505 SEM equipped with a solid state X-ray detector. Quantitative analysis was done on shells by using the Link AN 10 000 ZAF/PB program which estimates peak-to-background ratios. The ZAF/PB method can be applied to bulk specimens with rough surfaces. Small pieces of shells were embedded in an epoxy resin and polished using various grades of diamond paste. A light etching (formic acid, 5%, 15 s) of the polished surfaces was made to reveal the structural details of the samples. The positions of the analysed points with respect to the structural features are, therefore, precisely known. A cobalt sample was used to provide the calibration. Measurements were made using a live time of 100 or 200 s. The electron accelerating voltage applied to the electron gun was 15 kV. The electron beam had a diameter of 100 nm. The elements Na, Mg, Al, P, S, K, Ca, Mn, Fe and Sr were selected to illustrate aspects of shell composition. Several (>10) microprobe analyses were made at various locations on each sample. These punctual analyses have been averaged to obtain an ‘individual’ mean. Some elements are below the detection limit of the microprobe (i.e. Mg, Fe). However, they are accounted because their low levels show a good preservation of the shells. Infrared analyses have been carried out on powdered shells. All spectra were recorded at 4 cm The mineralogy and composition of shells can be obtained by infrared analysis, even if this method is not usual for such samples. The infrared spectrum of aragonite is characterized by three prominent absorption maxima at 1470–1490 cm Shells were immersed in NaClO to remove organic contaminants, rinsed with Milli-Q water, dried and ground into powder. Powdered shells were decalcified in acetic acid at a pH of 4. The entire extract was centrifuged at 21 000× Soluble matrices were dissolved in Milli-Q H Gel filtration chromatography was used to determine the molecular weights of the soluble fraction. High pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) separations were done with three TSK columns, equilibrated in Tris–HCl (0.2 M Tris) pH 7.5. TSK G5000PW and G3000PW polymer based and G2000SWXL silica based were chosen according to their range sorting. The materials to be chromatographed were dissolved in the same eluent. The elution patterns were recorded spectrophotometrically at 226 nm, using a UV2138 detector (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech: APB), and a differential refractometer (APB). The eluent flow was 1 ml/min for polymer based columns and 0.75 ml/min for silica based column. Ion-exchange chromatography was done on Mono-Q (HR5/5, APB) column. Analysis was carried out with eluents A (0.2 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5), and B (eluent A+1 M NaCl). An isocratic period of 5 min with eluent A was followed by a linear gradient of eluent A to eluent B in 35 min. The materials to be chromatographed were dissolved in eluent A. The eluent flow was 1 ml/min and the elution patterns were recorded at 226 nm, using a TSP 4100 detector. In this first attempt to compare and estimate the variation of the crossed lamellar layers in mollusc shells, various parameters are described. However, the scheme used to characterize the soluble organic matrices extracted from the shells is not sequential: each analysis has been done on the complete extract. The three Gastropod and Bivalve shells are composed of crossed lamellar layers. This complex structure is composed of lamellae with alternate orientations. According to the orientation of the sections, the observed aspects seem different ( The whole section of Each shell is composed of several crossed lamellar layers. The number, the orientations of these sub layers are typical of the taxa, but the basic pattern of first, second and third order lamellar seems similar. All the samples are aragonitic, as shown by FTIR analyses ( According to infrared data, the aragonitic crossed lamellar layers have low Sr and Mg contents. Their organic matrix contents are more variable in quantity and structure than the mineral part. The aragonitic composition of all the samples is confirmed by EDS analyses. The Na contents are high, while Mg contents are low ( The comparison between the UV spectra of a protein (BSA: bovine serum albumin) and the soluble matrices shows that the extracts of the crossed lamellar layers are not pure proteins ( One set of elution profiles (TSK G3000) is illustrated in The molecular weights and the composition of the soluble organic matrices extracted from the aragonitic crossed lamellar layers are different in the six studied species. The samples show a large range of non-discrete molecular weights. All the samples show a ‘basic’ fraction in the first part of the elution. The acidic parts are variable in intensity and numbers ( The microstructures and the chemical composition of the crossed lamellar layers of the studied mollusc species are similar. The fourth order lamellae has been previously described in A simple examination with UV spectrometry shows the soluble organic matrices are not pure proteins, and that they are diverse. The molecular weights confirm the variability of the soluble organic matrices, the ratio protein–sugar being different in each species. The molecular weights are not separated in discrete molecules. This result is similar to those obtained with SDS-PAGE electrophoresis in which discrete bands are absent ( The above results suggest that the mineral parts of the crossed lamellar layers are similar in the six studied species, whereas the soluble organic matrices are different. However, common characteristics of the soluble organic matrices are also present: they have low S contents, are glycoproteins with high molecular weights and strong acidity. Gastropoda matrices on the one hand, and Bivalvia matrices on the other hand, do not share obvious common characteristics. It may be suggested that the common features of the organic matrices are responsible for the homogeneity of the microstructures and composition of the mineral parts, whereas the differences are due to taxonomy of the studies samples. According to The organic matrices yielded by the crossed lamellar layers are low relative to nacreous and prismatic layers. The low ‘protein’ content of the crossed lamellar layer of Aragonitic skeletons of Scleractinia show high S contents. In non-denaturing IEF, these matrices are unstained with silver or Coomassie blue and stained with Alcian blue. Alcian blue is characteristic of acidic sulfated mucopolysaccharides. Thus it may be supposed that the main part of S is linked with sugars rather than with proteins. The soluble matrices of molluscan shells are yet very poorly known: interaction between the mineral and organic phases is not fully understood, and the example of the nacreous layer is not sufficient. The studied examples show that the range of variation of the organic matrices seems larger than that of the mineral part of the layers. The mechanisms and rates of the diagenetic changes of the organic matrices are poorly understood. Knowledge of the proteins and sugars contained in carbonate shells will ultimately dictate our understanding of their role in processes of organic degradation and diagenesis, sugars being highly soluble.