Preg-robbing is an important phenomenon that inhibits gold recovery due to the presence of naturally occurring carbonaceous matter. In case of certain ores, gold recovery by cyanidation is limited by the presence of naturally occurring carbonaceous material that adsorbs gold from alkaline cyanide solution unless steps are taken to prevent this adsorption reaction from occurring. Such ores are most often referred to as preg-robbing ores. While they could be termed as refractory carbonaceous ores, being refractory in the sense that gold recovery is made difficult by the adsorption losses that occur; this may be confused with the cases of gold encapsulation within carbonaceous materials, such as kerogen (solid hydrocarbons formed from deposits of spores, pollen, or algae).In the case of certain ores, gold recovery by cyanidation is limited by the presence of naturally occurring carbonaceous material, which adsorbs gold from alkaline cyanide solution unless steps are taken to prevent this adsorption reaction from occurring. Such ores are most often referred to as Also, it should be mentioned that a wide variety of other minerals, including copper-sulfide minerals, clay and silicates can adsorb gold depending on their surface area and surface characteristics. In this section, the preg-robbing behaviour is mainly correlated with the naturally occurring carbon species or carbonaceous matters in the gold ore. Some discussion of this topic is given in The mineralogy associated with carbonaceous gold ores can be quite variable ( The carbon content usually varies significantly, even in the same ore deposit. Data from some studies show ores with less than 1% to over 8% carbon content for deposits in the Carlin trend ( Carbonaceous material occurs in many deposits around the world, as shown in The most renowned examples of carbonaceous ores, in addition to the Carlin trend (USA), are the Ashanti trend (Ghana), Witwatersrand (South Africa), Muruntau (West Uzbekistan), Kumtor (Kyrgyzstan) and Macraes (New Zealand) ( The presence of carbonaceous matter in an ore does not necessarily result in poor gold recovery ( To help geologists to classify ore deposits, the preg-robbing gold analysis (see Carbonaceous matter in a gold ore has been shown to act like activated carbon and adsorb solubilized gold from cyanide solution during leaching. It is thought that the dispersion of the carbonaceous matter and its fineness (less than 20 The most studied preg-robbing ores are those from the Carlin trend (Nevada, USA). According to  a native carbon component capable of acting like activated carbon and therefore able to adsorb gold-cyanide complexes from solution; a heavy hydrocarbon mixture of a high molecular weight usually associated with the native carbon component and which does not appear to adsorb gold, and an organic acid, similar to More recent studies have confirmed no detectable amounts of humic acids or hydrocarbons in either high or low preg-robbing carbonaceous material from Barrick Goldstrike Mine (Carlin trend, Nevada). Rather, it was found that the carbonaceous material consisted of relatively featureless aromatic structures forming an activated carbon or graphite-type matrix with ether or thiocarbonyl functionality ( According to the study of  The addition of native carbon to an oxidized ore produced a detrimental effect on gold recovery, decreasing the recovery by about 20%. This native carbon was not as effective as commercial activated carbon in gold adsorption ( One important point that has been made in recent years is that the carbonaceous material is “relatively featureless with no indication of carboxylic, phenolic or hydryl functionality” ( The comparison between Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra of the carbonaceous matter and commercial activated carbon that has been activated at temperatures above 750°C ( Using an electron microprobe, There has not been much research done recently regarding surface-chemistry issues. Previous research has shown that all carbons with a graphitic structure, regardless of porosity, adsorbed gold to some extent (  Other fundamental studies have suggested that the natural carbon is a combination of amorphous and graphitic structure ( Some authors agree that graphite, commercial activated carbon and mature naturally occurring carbonaceous material are composed of stacked sheets of aromatic carbon rings cross-linked in a random manner. It seems that the micropores of activated carbons are mostly slit-shaped spaces of less than 2 Using X-ray diffractometry,  The extensive porosity of activated carbons has a great effect on gold adsorption, particularly those highly microporous carbons with pore diameters of about 20 Wet ball-mill grinding of carbonaceous ore ( In general, gold adsorption by natural carbonaceous matter present in an ore is believed to be due to the activated carbon type of compounds and gold adsorption is similar to that which occurs with man-made activated carbon typically used for gold recovery by industry. In this regard, gold adsorption by activated carbon from alkaline solution has been studied extensively. It has been proposed that the combined effect of electrostatic and chemical interaction between the gold-cyanide anion and the carbon surface results in the gold adsorption. Another mechanism is the ion-pair adsorption reaction, where gold is adsorbed onto the carbon surface as the neutral ion pair [M From a fundamental point of view, activated carbon has a disordered microcrystalline structure, similar to graphite. The random organization of graphite microcrystals and oxidation during activation creates a porous structure, which accounts for the high surface area of activated carbon and its notable adsorptive capacity. A significant amount of research has been carried out to explain the mechanism of gold adsorption by activated carbon, the nature of the adsorption sites, and the role of specific surface functional groups in gold adsorption ( Currently, the most accepted theories regarding the mechanism of gold adsorption include the adsorption of ion pairs M In 1992, Sibrell and Miller clearly showed that adsorption occurs at the edges (defects) of graphite crystals and that adsorption on the basal plane face of the crystal was insignificant by comparison. This was demonstrated from autoradiographs as shown in These results were later confirmed by It is likely that both of these mechanisms take place at edge defects in the graphite structure. Ion exchange would take place with functional groups that would be found at graphitic carbon edges. For adsorption of ion pairs, van der Waals forces would be involved, and the unsymmetrical distribution of charge at edge defects in the graphite structure could well play a role in the adsorption process. It may also be that the adsorbed complex is stabilized by attachment to more than one plane on the carbon. Although this would not be possible on the flat basal-plane surface, it could be achieved at three-dimensional edge defects in the crystal structure. These cavities created by edges would accommodate or, in effect, These graphite edge-sites or defects in activated carbons and in natural carbonaceous matter are expected to form at high temperatures and a suitable oxidizing potential. For example, defect pits, or Finally, it is interesting to note that Carbonaceous preg-robbing tailings were quantified using positive-ion TOF-LIMS. Results confirmed that the increase in chloride concentrations in solution from 50 to 250 The preg-robbing of carbonaceous ore may be overcome using different techniques, including use of gold adsorbents (activated carbon or resins) to compete with the carbonaceous material, deactivation/passivation by oxidation (roasting, chemical and biochemical oxidation) ( In these cases a stronger adsorbent for gold cyanide is used to compete with the carbonaceous material in the ore such as activated carbon or resin ( The efficiency of the activated carbon used to compete with the naturally occurring carbonaceous material depends on its gold-adsorption capacity, which may be two orders of magnitude higher than that of the natural carbonaceous matter ( In general, utilization of anion-exchange resins or granular activated carbon in cyanidation of preg-robbing ores improves the gold extraction but depends on ore mineralogy and the amount of adsorbents added. One important matter of concern in the case of CIL is the carbon losses because of the duration of the process (∼18 One alternative under research over the past 10 years is the use of powdered magnetic activated carbon (MAC) ( Resin-in-leach (RIL) uses ion-exchange resins in direct contact with the cyanidation pulp to recover gold. Even though resin-in-pulp (RIP) has been used in the former Soviet Union for decades, there have been few applications in the rest of the world. Resins have some advantage over activated carbon, particularly the high specificity for adsorption/elution of desired compounds as well as a high loading capacity and kinetics. Normally, the higher cost compared with activated carbon and the low resilience to breakdown during processing are the most important disadvantages ( Nowadays, new resins in the market, such as T-49P from Thermodyne Systems or Clean-IX Certain chemical reagents passivate the carbonaceous matter by what seems to be selective adsorption or wetting of the carbon surface (  Newmont Metallurgical Services has carried out tests for the passivation of a North America coconut carbon, using 26 different chemicals, inorganic as well as organic. According to the results, 12 of these reagents passivated the carbon to some extent: ammonium Earlier studies regarding blinding of preg-robbing carbonaceous materials indicated that both flotation reagents (xanthates, pine oil) and non-polar hydrocarbons as diesel, light oil, fuel oil and kerosene could be used. Also, lauric acid salt, soap and soap by-products (myristic, stearic and palmitic acids salts), RV-2 ( The roasting technique has been shown to be the most suitable procedure to destroy carbonaceous materials as well as to oxidize the sulfides normally associated with the ore and is widely applied ( A problem associated with some carbonaceous ores has been the presence of mercury and arsenic, which are of environmental concern. Improvement in scrubbing techniques for mercury and SO In the late 1960s the U.S. Bureau of Mines recognized that aqueous chlorination could be used to destroy carbonaceous material ( These compounds all act in the same basic way. The following redox reactions show the fundamentals of this process ( Additionally, these chlorine compounds react with associated sulfides and dissolve most of the free gold ( At Jerritt Canyon in Nevada, milled alkaline slurry was treated by double oxidation, first with air at 70–80°C and 6–8 psig; the sulfuric acid produced was neutralized with lime, and then the second oxidation with chlorine took place. The retention time was about 20 These plants are no longer in operation. Newmont's chlorination plant was gradually discontinued in early 1990s, due to a lack of carbonaceous oxide ore. The increasing sulfide content in the ore also resulted in high chlorine consumption. In addition, the chlorine price increased dramatically in the 1990s. Both changes in ore type and chlorine price caused the chlorination process to become uneconomic. This technique uses autoclave leaching with pure air/oxygen, high pressure and temperature for the treatment of refractory carbonaceous ores treatment ( As tested by Carbonaceous gold ores with low carbonate content from Twin Creeks was treated by pressure oxidation at a pilot-plant scale. These tests showed a reduction in gold recovery by cyanidation due to gold solubilization by chlorine from the processing water and precipitation on the carbonaceous matter, even at low chlorine concentrations (15–20 The Nitrox and Arseno (Redox) processes have been developed to treat sulfide refractory gold ores; however, they may be used for carbonaceous ores since the oxidation with nitric acid has been shown to passivate to some extent the carbonaceous material and reduce gold adsorption (  At present, there are at least three patents related to microbial treatment of sulfidic-carbonaceous gold ores.  According to Ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching has been tested for a variety of complex ores where cyanide does not work effectively, both at the laboratory scale and in a heap-leaching pilot-plant ( One of the most important features of the thiosulfate process is the fact that activated carbon has a very low affinity for the gold-thiosulfate complex, which accounts for the effectiveness of the process in the treatment of carbonaceous ores ( The reasons for the very low loading of gold onto carbon in the thiosulfate system have not been fully elucidated at this point, but various possibilities exist, including the relatively high negative charge of the complex, steric limitations/polarity due to molecular structure, and the lack of specific interactions of the ligand group with active carbon sites (  A recent study on Goldstrike ore (  The leaching of gold with ammoniacal thiosulfate is the subject of Chapter 22. Gangue minerals as well as sulfides have been suggested to have gold preg-robbing characteristics. Preg-robbing mechanisms may be gold reduction, physical adsorption or chemical adsorption (   On the other hand, among sulfide minerals, chalcopyrite was found to be strongly preg-robbing, while pyrrhotite and pyrite have been shown to adsorb gold to a lesser extent. The overall mechanism suggested by The study of  The design of industrial operations for gold recovery depends on the mineralogical complexity of the ore, which determines the metallurgical alternatives for efficient processing. As mentioned before, not all carbonaceous materials are preg-robbers, and also, the severity of the preg-robbing depends mainly on the maturity of the carbon. In addition to natural carbon, the ore can contain sulfides and/or oxides, and gangue. All the components have to be taken into account during the evaluation of process alternatives. The oxidation methods have been found to be the most effective for removal of carbonaceous material and oxidation of sulfides ( Some examples of actual technologies used for refractory sulfidic carbonaceous gold ores are discussed below. The complexity of the Carlin trend ores has caused Newmont, operator of major mines in this deposit, to develop and use several combination processes, like inert gas flotation (N Refractory ore has recently accounted for 66% of the total ore processed by the Newmont operations in Nevada, 52% being treated by Twin Creeks autoclaves, 16% by Lone Tree autoclaves and 32% by the Carlin roaster. Newmont probably possesses the widest variety of processing methods of any gold district in the world. Fourteen active processing facilities, ranging from autoclaves and a roaster to flotation cells and cyanide and thiosulfate heap-leaching, allow Newmont to maximize the economic recovery of gold from a wide variety of ore types and grades. It has been reported that gold recovery from these refractory ores ranges from 85% to 90%. Macraes Gold Project, New Zealand, nowadays is using the Newmont POX technology to treat refractory sulfidic carbonaceous ore, achieving gold recoveries of 84%, higher than the historical 70–75% recovery, according to According to Barrick Goldstrike Mine is treating the refractory sulfidic carbonaceous ore in a “state-of-art” roaster, which is the largest in the world able to treat ore at 16,450 Placer Dome's Cortez Mine has processed 7.8 On the other hand, Placer Dome's Turquoise Ridge, in a joint venture with Newmont, treats 1,800 Kumtor in Kyrgyzstan, central Asia, treats 15,000 The Penjom Gold mine in Malaysia is considered to be the first gold-processing plant in Southeast Asia successfully utilize RIL technology to treat primary gold-bearing carbonaceous ores. In 1999, the RIL process replaced the CIL circuit. Gold recoveries are currently around 90% ( Newmont and other gold-mining companies have used a preg-robbing analytical method to quantify the preg-robbing characteristics of refractory gold ores. The analytical method includes (1) analysis of cyanide-leachable gold of a specific ore sample and (2) spiking a certain amount of gold cyanide into a cyanide leach of the sample (in general, 3.4 For a high preg-robbing carbonaceous ore sample, the AuPR approaches to zero (gold is totally adsorbed or preg-robbed), therefore, the preg-robbing value would be >3.4 Newmont Mining Corporation Technical Facility has established the following laboratory test-procedures for characterizing gold deportment for refractory sulfidic-carbonaceous ores ( The test procedures include: direct cyanide leach to identify free-milling gold in the ore sample; NaCN-CIL with a variable amount of activated carbon addition (20–40 low-temperature nitric acid treatment followed by NaCN leach and/or NaCN-CIL to identify the amount of gold associated with or locked in easily oxidized sulfide minerals such as arsenopyrite and secondary copper minerals; elevated temperature nitric acid treatment followed by cyanide leach and/or NaCN-CIL to examine the amount of gold associated with or locked in sulfide minerals including pyrite; and direct hydrochloric acid leaching followed by cyanide leach and/or NaCN-CIL to examine the amount of gold associated with iron oxides and other acid-soluble minerals. It is extremely important to examine the mineralogy characterization after each test and compare with the feed sample. Barrick Goldstrike Mines (BGMI) uses two standard tests to assess the preg-robbing behaviour of gold ores. The preg-robbing test (%PR) is a simple test using 10 The second test (%REC) involves bench-top autoclaving followed by a CIL process (BTAC-CIL), to measure the gold recovered by commercial activated carbon (AC). A 1:1 solid/liquid ratio (200 Even though standard blinding tests have not been established, some procedures can be mentioned. Blinding laboratory tests carried out by Newmont Metallurgical Services, use different inorganic and organic chemical compounds as blinding reagents. A small-scale laboratory CIL test consists of 20 