A new method, the concentrated sulfuric acid acidolysis and water leaching (SAWL) of nickeliferous oxide ores, is proposed and the optimal conditions for recovery of nickel, cobalt and copper from a low-grade Chinese nickeliferous oxide ore are presented. A series of experiments were conducted which examined the effect of acid charge, acid curing temperature and acid curing time. Recoveries of up to 95%, 83% and 95% for Ni, Cu and Co, respectively were obtained with only the sulfuric acid at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure. Comparing the percolation leaching with agitation leaching showed that percolation leaching was capable of extracting the valuable metals with water. The SAWL method was scaled to three-stages counter-current leaching tests using 1 kg of ore. The results indicate greater than 90% extraction for nickel and cobalt.Nickel is recognized as a useful substance in heavy industry, where it is used as the raw material of cathodes, stainless steels and salts ( Methods for processing nickel laterite ores include atmospheric acid pressure leaching ( A low-grade nickeliferous oxide ore, from a local mining company, has been used for this investigation. The nickel, in the low-grade oxide ore, is predominantly present as nickeliferous serpentine [Mg Before investigation, the oxide ore was ground to − Acidolysis tests were carried out in an evaporating dish of 100 ml, filled with 50 g of ore and adequately mixed with 17 ml of water. The required sulfuric acid charge (g H A scale-up experiment was conducted by using 1000 g of ore; 380 ml of water and 587 g (320 ml) of concentrated sulfuric acid at ambient temperature. After ageing for four days at ambient temperature, the acidolysis product weighed 1623 g (i.e., 81.2 g acidolysis product was obtained from 50 g ore). Agitation leaching experiments with water were performed at ambient temperature, using the amount of acidolysis product generated from 50 g of ore ( Percolation leaching tests were carried out as follows in two stages: 81.2 g of acidolysis products (scale-up one) were mixed with 30 ml of water in a 200 ml Buchner funnel and were leached with 100 ml of dripping water in each stage. The two leachates were combined and measured for metal cations. The simulating percolation leaching tests were carried out as shown in Preliminary experiments used dilute sulfuric acid (1.51 M) to extract the metal value from the oxide ores, during three stages agitation leaching process. With total sulfuric acid charge of 33 g H During the elevated temperature experiments, acidolysis products were aged in the oven at atmospheric pressure, and, then, they were leached, under agitation, with water in three stages, as outlined in  Temperature of ageing the acidolysis products for 2 h: 150,180 and 200 °C ( Ageing time of the acidolysis products at 180 °C: 1, 2 and 3 h ( Sulfuric acid charge of the wet pulp: 18.0, 21.6, 25.2, 30.6, 36.0 g H Optimal Ni, Co, Cu and Fe extractions occur for an ageing temperature of 180 °C ( It can be seen that, in During the ambient temperature experiments, acidolysis products were aged at atmospheric pressure, then three stages agitation leached with water in three consecutive stages, as outlined in  Comparing 1 kg of oxide ore was treated with the simple, effective and less energy-intensive SAWL method, ageing at ambient temperature in air for four days. Two methods were subsequently employed for leaching: three stages agitation leaching or percolation leaching with water. The extraction results shown in So a flow percolation process, the simulating three stages counter-current leaching test ( Effective extraction of nickel, cobalt and copper from a low-grade nickeliferous oxide ore (0.45% Ni) by the SAWL method at atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature was achieved. The recovery values of metals were found to be influenced by ageing time, ageing temperature and sulfuric acid charge. The ageing temperature and acid charge had positive effect on metals extraction. Besides, higher ageing temperature could reduce the ageing time required to achieve the same extraction results. However, it is suggested that, for reasons of economy, that ageing be allowed to take place at ambient temperature. The optimal conditions for the acidolysis process were found to be the following: 50 g ore The nickel, cobalt and copper recoveries achieved during the scaled-up, three stage counter-current SAWL, at optimal conditions, were 95.2%, 94.7% and 82.8%, respectively. The sulfuric acid consumption amounted to 83 kg H The new SAWL method is simple, effective and less energy-intensive for recovering nickel, cobalt and copper from low-grade oxide ores. Further research is being conducted in order to enrich and separate the valuable metals.