Acid fracturing is one of the eligible techniques for increasing productivity of hydrocarbon reservoirs. Laboratory tests are performed on reservoir rock samples to improve understanding of acid fracture performance. Fractures formed by hydraulic fracturing or acid fracturing before acid etching are rough, therefore in this study, an acid injection cell was developed to study surface etching in rough fracture acidizing on Asmari limestone samples (one of Iran's reservoir rocks). In this research, the effects of acidizing at different times on roughness evolution and also conductivity of fractures with rough surfaces were investigated experimentally and numerically. Conductivity of fractures in low stresses was determined using permeability test. In the case of high stresses, conductivity was determined using a penetration model and local aperture (derived from surface scan) and a numerical finite element code developed in MATLAB. Results showed that increase in the initial roughness coefficient and the linear roughness of fracture surface resulted in higher surface etching and higher dissolved rock equivalent conductivity (DREC). With increase in fracture surfaces mismatch, fracture aperture and eventually initial fracture conductivity also increase. In this study, for the first time, mismatch in acidized fracture has been defined as linear roughness difference and roughness coefficient difference of lower and upper fracture surfaces. Increase in acidizing time resulted in higher difference in roughness coefficient, linear roughness of the two surfaces of fractures, and higher initial conductivity. Also, increase in rock embedment strength clearly increased final conductivity for samples with 20 min acidizing time. However, for samples with 10 min of acidizing time, final conductivity of fractures depends on roughness distribution. Measuring normal deformation of fracture emergent from applied normal stress showed that longer durations of acid injection exhibit more normal deformation and lower final conductivity. Final conductivity increases with decrease in kurtosis of roughness distribution and maximum fracture closure. Eventually, a logarithmic relation for decreasing rate of conductivity with closure stress (C
                     
                        2
                      in Nierode and Kruk's equation) was approximated using rock embedment strength for Asmari limestone.Acid fracturing is used to increase productivity of wells, particularly in low permeability of hydrocarbon reservoirs or damaged oil wells. This method includes two stages: fracture formation in rock and etching of fracture surfaces by acidizing. Laboratory tests are performed on reservoir rock samples to better understand the effect of treatment variables and formation properties on the etching of fracture surfaces and final hydraulic conductivity. Some of the tests performed in the literature have only considered treatment parameters such as acid type, temperature, acid-rock contact time (acidizing time), injection rate, formation type and formation strength, and neglected fracture surface characterizations before and after acidizing. In this case, tests are performed on different samples in different conditions of treatment parameters and, finally, conductivity in different normal stresses is investigated. Experimental results clearly showed that retained acid fracture conductivity depends on closure stress and formation strength ( Other experimental studies have focused on surface etching characterizations and emphasized that residual conductivity of a fracture in closure stress also depends on fracture surface etching condition in addition to mechanical properties of the fracture surface and the treatment variable. These experimental studies have considered fracture surface characterizations after etching by acidizing operation. In these aforementioned experiments, the samples were sawed and fracture surfaces were smoothed before tests: therefore, the effect of initial surface conditions was neglected in these studies. Since a fracture formed by hydraulic fracturing or acid fracturing before acid etching has a tensile rough fracture, using a smooth fracture surface may not represent the actual fracture condition. Artificial created fractures by hydraulic fracturing have two symmetrical rough planes which match each other. Roughness height of both fracture surfaces in mated fractures follow almost the same statistical distribution. This results in a small fracture aperture ( The acid fracturing process consists of two stages, fracture creation using a viscous fluid and acid injection into the fracture. In this study, an acid injection cell is developed to simulate the acidizing process into fractures and investigate the fracture surface etching due to acidizing. An acidizing cell is used for acid injection into fractures. The cell is a modified version of the acid injection cell into the rock matrix developed by this research group ( The tests were performed on hard limestone with low permeability from the Asmari formation (one of the oil reservoir formations in Iran). Core samples with 54 mm diameter and 110 mm height are prepared for tests. Physical, mechanical, and hydraulic properties of rock are determined according to the methods suggested by ISRM ( Geometrical properties of fracture surfaces such as fracture surface roughness before and after the acidizing affects the surface etching process and hydraulic conductivity. Also, mechanical properties of fracture surface are important in fracture closure and, consequently, conductivity during the normal loading condition. The heights of asperities were measured by a 3D scanner with precision of Fracture surface data includes independent parameters which can be introduced as statistical parameters ( Considering a longitudinal cross section of the fracture surface, root mean square of first derivative of profile (Prmsd) and roughness coefficient (Pjrc) are used in the profile to evaluate the fracture surface roughness. These statistical parameters are derived from Eq.  As can be seen in Evaluating deformability and strength properties of fracture surface using conventional methods are impossible. Therefore, indentation test methods such as Brinell hardness test and rock embedment strength (SRE) are recommended ( A load cell with 1 N precision is used to measure applied force (  Fracture closure due to normal stress loading was measured in order to evaluate the fracture surface deformation due to normal stress, and the relation of fracture closure amount with fracture hydraulic conductivity was investigated. Samples after acid injection were molded in concrete to measure fracture normal deformation due to applied normal stress. Normal stress was applied and normal deformation was measured by four LVDTs. Normal deformations of concrete cast is separately measured and subtracted from total deformation.  Normal deformations of samples ASM3 and ASM2 under 30 MPa of normal loading are more than the other two fractures (see  Cylindrical samples were covered by a rubber membrane and put into a Hoek's cell to measure hydraulic conductivity. The cell applies a confining pressure using oil pressure. Then confining pressure is kept constant and distilled water is injected with constant pressure into fracture. Water pressure is measured at the fracture entrance point. Using Darcy's law, fracture hydraulic conductivity Ideally, a fracture is modeled as two parallel plates and the cubic law is easily adopted for fluid flow modeling ( Reynolds equation may be written as Eq. These shape functions will now be used to map the square of The matrices [ The above equations were solved by a finite element code developed in MATLAB. Fluid flow pressure in each node, velocity vector, and eventually flow quantity are calculated in each element. Equivalent hydraulic aperture, The local aperture should be measured for flow modeling in fracture. In this study, topography of the upper and lower fracture surfaces are measured as explained in section When a fracture is subjected to a normal stress, fracture aperture is calculated by subtracting fracture deformation due to normal stress loading. Local aperture magnitude is zero when two fracture surfaces are in contact. This method for defining contact point and decrease of aperture due to normal stress loading is known as the penetration model ( Fracture hydraulic conductivity under various stresses may be found by using the penetration model and numerical methods and knowing local aperture. To find local aperture at each element in applied 1000 psi normal stress, the upper face of fracture surface is relocated in  At 6000 psi pressure, sample ASM8 with 10 min acidizing time had the highest hydraulic conductivity though it had lower normal displacement and kurtosis. The least fracture hydraulic conductivity was observed in sample ASM3 with 20 min acidizing time and the most normal displacement. Sample ASM3 had also the least rock embedment strength and highest kurtosis.  Considering initial stress equal to 14.5 psi (1 bar) for samples, one can assume that measured hydraulic conductivity in this confining pressure is fracture hydraulic conductivity at zero stress condition. As can be seen in According to the tests performed by  The results obtained in this research study also show the same trend, as presented in The etched rock volume during acid injection and Dissolved Rock Equivalent Conductivity (DREC) are calculated using surface mapping technique. Test results show that high joint roughness coefficient (P Fracture surfaces mismatch is the key factor after acidizing in creating initial fracture hydraulic conductivity (hydraulic conductivity in zero normal stress). With increase in fracture surfaces mismatch, fracture aperture and eventually initial fracture hydraulic conductivity increase. In this study, mismatch in acidized fracture were defined as linear roughness difference and roughness coefficient difference of lower and upper fracture surfaces. As shown in Final fracture hydraulic conductivity (hydraulic conductivity under 6000 psi normal stress) depends on the surface etching process. Therefore, it depends on initial conductivity, roughness distribution, and fracture surface strength under applied normal stresses (closure of fracture under applied normal stresses). As can be seen in In this study, conductivity of fractures and fracture normal deformation were calculated at different stress levels to investigate the relationship between final conductivity and fracture closure (fracture normal deformation). As can be seen in Success of acid fracturing depends greatly on the created conductivity, which must be retained under closure stress. Fracture acidizing tests at laboratory scale is a necessary step in design of an acid treatment in the field scale. In this case, the effect of intrinsic (such as fracture surface roughness, formation type, and formation strength), treatment (such as acid type and temperature) and environmental (such as field stress) parameters on hydraulic conductivity of acidized fractures should be understood before an acid fracturing treatment is performed in the field. These tests are conducted in different acidizing conditions and,finally, treatment variables with the highest conductivity are used for acid fracturing in oil fields. Because of different rock mechanical properties, each formation has a diverse behavior in tensile failure. Various surface characterizations of tensile fractures can affect the pattern of surface etching and surface roughness. Therefore, the use of tensile rough fractures in these tests is mandatory. According to the results of this study, to choose the best acidizing conditions for an acid fracturing job, laboratory tests are done step by step as shown in In this study, acidizing test into rough fracture of hard limestone were performed and the effect of initial roughness on the etching of fracture surfaces and statistical evolution of asperity heights after acidizing were investigated. The results obtained are as follows: Fracture surface etching and DREC increases with increase in the roughness coefficient and linear roughness of fracture surface before acidizing. Kurtosis of roughness distribution, joint roughness coefficient and joint linear roughness for upper and lower fracture surfaces are similar before acidizing. This mating condition is lost after acid injection. These aforementioned parameter values are reduced in most acidized samples. In this case, fracture surfaces become smoothed after acid injection and hydraulic conductivity is caused by the mismatch condition of two fracture surfaces. In this study, mismatching in the acidized fracture is defined as the difference between linear roughness and roughness coefficient in lower and upper fracture surfaces. The increase in difference between roughness coefficient and linear roughness of two fracture surfaces results in increase of initial hydraulic conductivity of fractures. Also, with increase in acidizing time, difference of roughness coefficient and linear roughness of two fracture surfaces increases. Measurement of fracture normal deformation under normal stress loading showed that fractures with higher acidizing time have higher normal deformations. This increase in normal deformation has occurred due to increase in initial aperture (increase in fracture surfaces mismatching) and decrease in mechanical strength of the fracture surface. In fractures that were acidized at the same time, the fracture with the most closure has the lowest final hydraulic conductivity. The increase in rock embedment strength clearly increased final hydraulic conductivity for samples with 20 min acidizing time. However, for samples with 10 min acidizing time, final hydraulic conductivity of fractures depends on roughness distribution. The final hydraulic conductivity increases with decrease in kurtosis of roughness distribution. The decrease of kurtosis is caused by a more uniform roughness distribution in fracture surface and higher resistance with respect to normal stresses. A logarithmic relation for decreasing rate of conductivity with closure stress (