Well-crystallized anatase thin films were prepared through direct oxidation of metallic titanium with 30mass% hydrogen peroxide solution at 80°C for 5h, followed by soaking in distilled water at 80°C for 3 days. The photodegradation of a dye solution, rhodamine B (RB), assisted by such deposited anatase films was studied. It was found that the well-crystallized anatase thin films induced complete degradation of RB in water with an initial concentration of less than 0.02mM after 4–5h of illumination under a 450W high-pressure mercury lamp. The RB decayed directly to colorless end products of water and mineral acids. However, when the photocatalytic activity of the anatase films decreased after several repeated uses, an N-de-ethylation process producing rhodamine as an intermediate was evident during the photocatalytic degradation of RB.Heterogeneous photocatalysis to eliminate pollutants, especially organic compounds, in water and air has attracted much attention in recent years Except for the approaches to hinder the wasteful recombination of the hole and electron pairs Dye pollutants from the textile industry are main sources of environmental contamination. Their annoying characters such as toxic, non-biodegradable and resistant to destruction by physico-chemical treatments greatly challenge the researchers Titanium sheets with sizes of The X-ray diffraction (XRD) tests were performed using a RAD IIA powder diffractometer. The samples were scanned at a (1/3)° The photoreaction was carried out in a pyrex reactor surrounded with a water-jacket to maintain the reaction temperature at ambient temperature of near 20 To detect the possible organic intermediates, 100  According to the Scherrer formula,   Re-plotting   Mass production of titania films with high photocatalytic activity is one of the main factors inhibiting the wide use of the heterogeneous photocatalysis for removal of contaminations from water or air. Here, we developed a novel procedure to prepare contamination-free anatase thin films, since the hydrogen peroxide was used as an oxidant and hence brought no extra species to the reaction system, which was unavoidable for the methods reported till now. In an attempt to induce apatite deposition on Ti, we have deposited anatase thin films on much smaller Ti pieces with sizes of Under the irradiation of the high-pressure mercury lamp, which produces both ultraviolet light and visible light, assisted by titania, the RB in water undergoes two possible pathways: photocatalytic and photosensitization The photosensitization pathway of RB under visible light has been well characterized In the present experiment, for the first cycle, RB degraded directly to colorless end products ( Interactions between titanium and hydrogen peroxide resulted in abundant superoxide and hydroxyl radicals in the amorphous titania gel With repetitive cycles, the gradual loss of such beneficial radicals can be discerned, which resulted in gradual decrease in the photocatalytic activity. As suggested by Ma and Yao The decrease in the photodegradation rate with the increasing RB initial concentration agreed well with Daneshvar et al. In the view of practical use, the photocatalytic activity is another important point to be considered in addition to the preparation procedure of the catalysts. Unfortunately, direct comparison of the present anatase films to those known titania such as Degussa P-25 is difficult due to the fact that the photocatalytic activity of titania is sensitive to the film thickness as well as the amounts of the titania coated on the substrates. However, a rough comparison can be made based on Ma and Yao Assuming that the photocatalytic reaction fits the pseudo first-order expression, the photodegradation rate of RB molecules d The value of d It is generally accepted that bleaching dyes is easy; whilst complete mineralization of dyes is somewhat difficult. The present prepared anatase films were able to induce thorough photodegradation of RB in water, without any detectable organic species ( A novel procedure suitable for scaled-up production, i.e. oxidizing metallic titanium with 30