Laboratory testing was conducted to evaluate the breakage of bituminous coal in a rod mill. A Pittsburgh seam coal, which had been obtained from the product stream of an operating coal cleaning facility, was used as the feed material. This material had an ash value of 6.7% and had been crushed to a nominal −6.35mm. Grinding tests were carried out on a mono-size (2.38×1.68mm) fraction. The tests were conducted using a 193.5mm diameter and 245.0mm long laboratory rod mill, which contained steel rods at a volume loading of 23%. The mill was operated at 70% of critical speed for various grind times. A locked-cycle test was also performed to simulate continuous grinding conditions.
                  The grinding was characterized using the population (or size–mass) balance model. The breakage distribution and rates of breakage were determined from the grinding data. The results indicated first-order breakage. The locked-cycle results indicated that steady state was achieved in several iterations. The simulated results matched the experimental results very well.While prices for raw materials including petroleum have often shown wide fluctuations, the prices for coal have been relatively stable. Moreover, because the worldwide coal reserves are large, it is likely that coal will be a key energy source for the foreseeable future. According to a report by United States Energy Information Administration, the amount of coal consumed throughout the world is estimated to reach 206.3 quadrillion Btu by 2035 In the gasification process, carbonaceous material, including coal, is partially combusted with insufficient oxygen to generate carbon dioxide and water. Additional water is added to produce synthesized gases composed mainly of carbon monoxide and hydrogen Common gasifiers include the Lurgi, fluidized-bed, and entrained-flow slagging gasifiers. In each unit, the preparation of the feed material, including the particle size distribution, is an important aspect of the overall gasification process. Improperly prepared feed material can lead to reduced gasifier performance. In the case of entrained-flow slagging gasifiers, particles less than approximately 1 Wen and Chaung Prior to gasification, size reduction by grinding is required to produce coal in the desired size range. However, during grinding, only a small fraction of the energy used to rotate the mill and grinding media is involved in the actual breakage of the coal. The rest is lost primarily as heat. Therefore, improvements in the grinding process can lead to reductions in energy use, improving the overall economics of the gasification process. An increase in grinding efficiency can be achieved by selecting the appropriate equipment and establishing the optimum operating conditions. With regards to equipment selection, the ball mill is very effective in producing fine sizes. The energy used to grind the material is created by lifting the balls and then allowing them to fall by gravity over the material. The energy in a given ball is a function of its diameter so that large balls are required to grind large particles. If particles larger than expected are inputted to the mill, the grinding efficiency will be reduced significantly One approach for establishing the correct operating conditions is by modeling, which reduces the need for detailed testing. The most frequently used grinding modeling technique is the size–mass balance approach, often referred to as the population balance model (PBM) In this study, coal grinding experiments were conducted using a laboratory rod mill to obtain the parameters used in the PBM. The tests were carried out using a bituminous coal at various grind times to generate the rates of breakage and breakage distribution. A detailed locked-cycle test was also carried out to simulate continuous grinding. The results were compared to the simulated results using the PBM. The rates of grinding vary with particle size. For a given particle size, this rate is defined as the specific rate of breakage ( The primary breakage distribution ( In a batch process, the mass balance for size interval It is possible to solve Eq. To simulate the continuous grinding process, the concept of residence time is needed. The residence time distribution (RTD) is a probability distribution function that describes the amount of time a The mean residence time, A high-volatile bituminous coal from the Pittsburgh seam was used in this study. The material had been obtained as the clean coal product from an operating coal cleaning facility. The proximate analysis, total sulfur, and Hardgrove grindability index are given in A 193.5 A 385 Another series of tests was conducted for a grinding time of 120 Typically, the specific rate of breakage can be calculated using the “one-size-fraction” method The primary breakage distribution can be determined experimentally using the BII method In addition to determining the breakage parameters experimentally, a back-calculation method was also used. With this approach, the The simplex method The actual and simulated product size distributions are compared in The locked-cycle test is a representative method to simulate the continuous grinding process using a combination of batch grinding and sieving. Six experiments were conducted for a grind time of two minutes, and the process reached a steady state by the fourth iteration. The size distributions for each cycle are shown in Simulation of a continuous grinding process requires a circuit configuration, an RTD model, and a classifier model. The configuration for the normal-closed circuit, which is the most widely used grinding circuit, is shown in The actual size selectivity values, As noted previously, various RTD models can be used to describe the movement of solids through the mill. In this study, the plug flow model, fully mixed model, and 1L/2S model were used. The plug flow model assumes that there is no axial mixing from when the feed enters the mill until it exits. The fully mixed model assumes that all particles are axially diffused as soon as they enter the mill. The 1L/2S model is based on fully mixed reactors in series The simulation results using the three RTD models are shown in  Rod mill grinding tests were carried out using a high-volatile bituminous coal. From the single-size fraction tests, it was found that A locked-cycle test was used to simulate normal closed-circuit grinding. It was found that steady state was obtained by four cycles for a grind time of two minutes. Applying the back-calculated breakage parameters, the locked-cycle product size distribution was simulated for various RTD models. The predicted results agreed with the experimental results when using the plug flow and the 1L/2S RTD models. The fully mixed model under predicted the grinding of the coarser particle sizes. The results from this study indicate that rod mill grinding of coal can be described accurately using the population-balance model. This approach could provide a basis for evaluating various operating and design conditions of the grinding circuits. These simulations in turn can play a role in optimizing the grinding process and improving the overall energy efficiency of the coal gasification process. This work was supported by the Energy and Resources Engineering Program Grant funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy, Korea.