This investigation reports parametric study of electrochemical (DC mode) deep hole drilling in which acidified salt solution replaces acid electrolyte. Depth averaged radial overcut (DAROC) and mass metal removal rate (MRRg) are investigated. Through holes of 26mm depth and diameters ranging from 2.054 to 4.128mm are drilled in nickel-based super alloy. The results show that the best hole is obtained at a voltage of 9V, tool feed rate of 0.9mm/min, bare tip length of 0.9mm, with an electrolyte composition of 12.5wt.% NaCl and 2.5wt.% HCl. These optimum parameters are used to drill holes of much higher aspect ratio, in super alloys.Continuous developments in jet engines to generate higher power for the same unit size, and with improved fuel efficiency have resulted in increased turbine inlet temperature. To allow the turbine to operate at higher temperatures, efficient cooling is required. Modern air pressure turbine rotor and stator assembly may have more than 20,000 small air-cooling holes. Typical cooling hole diameter and aspect ratio are in the range of 1–4 The difficulty in conventional hole producing processes is high toughness of super alloys used in fabrication of the turbine. Usually advanced machining processes (AMPs) are preferred techniques for drilling holes in super alloys. These methods are: (i) electron beam machining, (ii) laser beam machining, (iii) electrical discharge machining, and (iv) electrochemical machining (ECM) A review of literature on electrochemical (EC) drilling  Five independent parameters selected as variables for experimentation are: (i) voltage ( Preliminary experiments showed that machining was not possible at 5 Before starting the experiment, an initial IEG of 0.1 Combinations of operating parameters were determined using central composite rotatable design, with half replicate for five variables The MINITAB statistical software was employed to the experimental data of DAROC and MRR DeBarr and Oliver The side gap is filled with electrolyte of equivalent conductivity This section presents hole profile, DAROC, and MRR  Sr. No. 15 experiment showed uniform current signal (   For the selection of best hole, three constraints were put: (i) uniform hole profile, (ii) minimum standard deviation of hole size, and (iii) minimum depth averaged radial overcut. The other features related to the best hole are: (i) zero tool retraction, and (ii) tool feed rate equal to linear metal removal rate. Thus, the best hole produced is shown in   Conclusions drawn from the above results and discussion are: (i) proposed correction factor for electrolyte conductivity in DeBarr and Oliver model, for deep hole drilling, has shown improvement in DAROC prediction accuracy, (ii) at minimum tool retraction, a uniform hole profile with minimum DAROC was obtained. However, DAROC varies significantly with voltage, bare tip length, and NaCl concentration. Tool feed rate has moderate effect, while HCl has small effect on DAROC, (iii) MRR The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi to the project entitled “Design and Development of Shaped Tube Pulse Electro Chemical Machining (STPECM) for Drilling Deep Microholes in Super Alloys” and by BHEL R&D, Hyderabad. Authors acknowledge the technical assistance of Mrs. Anjali V. Kulkarni, Dr. M.N. Mungole, and Messers Sachin Jain, Tapan Singh Pratihar and Ashish Srivastava.