This work describes the studies carried out with various industrial wastes and natural sub-products based on the SiO2–Al2O3–CaO system, aimed at producing ceramic products of industrial interest. The physical and chemical characterization of the waste materials is reported and their thermal behaviour is described. Several mixtures were prepared and fired at different temperatures. Compositional evolution was assessed by X-ray diffraction and fluorescence and the sintered samples were characterised in terms of density and mechanical strength. For comparison, similar compositions based on high purity grade commercial reagents were also investigated. The presence of impurities in the former waste materials induces changes on functional properties (e.g. refractoriness). However, those variations are easily predicted and can be accounted for.The continuous demand for higher productivity indices in the global competitive world has led to a fast decrease of the available natural resources and, at the same time, to the generation of a high volume of rejects or sub-products, most of them not directly recyclable. Mineral extraction itself is a good example of reject production Traditionally, waste products are disposed of as soil conditioners or in land filling. However, there might be reusing or recycling alternatives that should be investigated and eventually implemented In terms of chemical composition, the dominant oxide in the great majority of waste materials is silica (SiO On the other hand, cements, and hydraulic cements in particular, can also be described in terms of their SiO Although in normal industrial operating conditions thermodynamic equilibrium is usually not reached, the equilibrium phase diagram of the relevant system can still be used to foresee the reactions tendency to completion and be of great assistance while making educated choices of compositions and processing parameters. This work describes the attempts to define the compositions of waste-based mixtures and the corresponding processing conditions suitable to the production of refractory and/or cement-like materials. For comparison, and to clarify the effect of minor components, present in the waste materials, on the final products properties, similar compositions were also prepared with commercial high purity grade raw materials and used as standard samples. Four waste materials were selected and characterised, namely, (i) Al-rich anodising sludge (A-sludge), (ii) sludge from the filtration/clarification of potable water (W-sludge), (iii) sludge generated in marble sawing processes (M-sludge), and (iv) foundry sand (F-sand). The A-sludge was firstly calcined at 1400 After drying at 110 Powders of the raw mixtures were also used to prepare uniaxially pressed test bars, which were sintered at the same temperature used in the calcination of the corresponding powder mixture. Flexural and compressive strengths of the sintered bars were measured (Shimadzu—autograph AG-25TA) and their apparent density was determined using Archimedes method in Hg. Polished surfaces of the sintered microstructures were observed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, HITACHI S-4100), after etching (5  Upon calcination, the hydroxides and sulphates (calcium, sodium and aluminium) present in the A-sludge decompose and pure Al The W-sludge consists basically of calcium and aluminium hydroxides and sulphates and its moisture level can reach 82 M-sludge is basically composed of calcite, as denoted by the CaO content (54.5 Quartz is the only crystalline phase detected in the F-sand ( In terms of major components, W-sludge is obviously a ternary composition (SiO Bearing in mind the general composition range of common and high-alumina mortars and cements, six compositions were prepared with the industrial wastes, as shown in Mixtures C1 and C4 (Portland cement-type) belong to the compatibility triangle C Mixtures C2 and C5 (refractory cement-type) belong to the compatibility triangle CA Mixtures C6 and C3 were purposefully chosen outside the general composition range of interest and are used as a comparison tool. Mixture C6 lies on the Alkemade line between CAS Mixture C3 lies in the primary phase field of lime (CaO), in the compatibility triangle C–C Thus, the major crystalline phases identified were those predicted by the ternary S–A–C diagram, bearing in mind the expected departure from equilibrium. The presence of alien components, which mostly contributes to lowering the initial melting temperatures and, in doing so, promotes sintering and the establishment of equilibrium, does not seem to have a very remarkable effect.  Compositions C2 and C5, lying in the more refractory area of the diagram ( By contrast, compositions C1 and C4 were fired just above the initial melting temperature and both contain little liquid at the firing temperature. Nevertheless, these compositions are less refractory and reach comparatively high relative densities. Again, the low bending strength of composition C1 reveals the small amount of a bonding phase. Sintering of compositions C3 and C6 was carried out at a temperature below liquid formation and their mechanical strength is low. Hence, the comparatively high relative densities reached (  One composition in each group was studied in more detail, to investigate the departure from equilibrium, and the effect of impurities (high purity grade raw materials). Composition C2 was selected to investigate the effect of sintering parameters (temperature and time) on the tendency towards equilibrium. The diffraction patterns in As an attempt to discriminate the effect or minor constituents or impurities in waste-based materials, new compositions C1 and C3 were prepared using high purity grade reagents (standard samples C1-P and C3-P). The diffraction patterns of the new C1-P and C3-P formulations, shown in This is a good indication of the irrelevant role of minor components in the development of major phases, despite its expectable crucial effect on the refractoriness of sintered materials. This clearly demonstrates the potential of the use of wastes in ceramic formulations of industrial interest. Detailed characterisation studies show that the combination of several industrial wastes and conventional ceramic procedures is a promising way to produce refractory and cement-type materials. The use of the equilibrium phase diagram of the relevant system helps defining suitable compositions and processing conditions. Two main classes of materials can be considered: (i) refractories (based on CA Financial support by CAPES–MEC, Brazil, is greatly appreciated (F. Raupp-Pereira, Ph.D. grant).