This paper aims to establish a mathematical model that can analyze the whole leaching kinetics process of ion-adsorption type rare earth ores. This leaching process is composed of three steps: (1) ammonium ions arrive at the ore particle surface through the diffusion layer; (2) ammonium ions exchange with rare earth ions; and (3) rare earth ions enter into the external solution through the diffusion layer. In the leaching process, it is hypothesized that the ore particle size remains constant. The process of ammonium ions and rare earth ions passing through the diffusion layer was described by the Fick law, and the reversible ion exchange process between ammonium ions and rare earth ions was described by the Kerr model. A leaching kinetics model of rare earth ions by ammonium ions was constructed. Accuracy of this kinetics model was verified with laboratory tests. It is found that the correlation coefficients of all data are greater than 0.9000. The proposed kinetics model is therefore feasible for kinetics analysis throughout the leaching process.Ion-adsorption type rare earth ores (IATREO) are important source of heavy rare earth. Currently, kinetic analysis of the leaching process of IATREO primarily uses the shrinking core model. Tian et al. The shrinking core model is a classical model in the field of hydrometallurgy. It is widely applied in kinetic analysis of hydrometallurgical decomposition of uranium ore, copper ore, and tungsten ore. Considering the abovementioned differences, the leaching process of rare earth ions by ammonium ions can be divided into three steps: (1) ammonium ions arrive at the ore particle surface through the diffusion layer; (2) ammonium ions exchange with rare earth ions; and (3) rare earth ions enter into the external solution through the diffusion layer. In the current study, the diffusion process of ammonium ions and rare earth ions was described by the Fick law. The reversible ion exchange process between ammonium ions and rare earth ions was described by the Kerr model. A kinetics model of rare earth ion leaching by ammonium ions was constructed. Reasonability of this kinetics model was verified by laboratory tests. Ore samples were collected from an IATREO in Xunwu County, China. Ore samples were natural dried. Ore samples were screened with a high-frequency sieve shaker (pore diameter of sieve shaker was set at 0.25 mm). Aggregated ore samples with a particle size (<0.25 mm) were obtained. The aggregated ore sample was prepared with 30% mass water content as the test sample for reserve. The rare earth composition of the test sample was analyzed by the Center of Analysis and Testing of Jiangxi University of Science and Technology using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Results are shown in Test samples (20 g) were placed into seven centrifuge bottles (volume of 250 mL), respectively. Next, 80 mL ammonium sulfate solution with varying concentrations (2.0, 3.0, 5.0, 8.0, 10.0, 12.0, and 15.0 g/L) was added into the centrifuge bottles, respectively. The centrifuge bottles were placed on 85-2A constant temperature magnetic agitators (Changzhou Yuexin Instrument Manufacturing Co., Ltd., the temperature was set to 30 °C and the mixing speed was 800 r/min). Two hours later, the centrifugal bottles were placed in TD5 centrifuges (Changsha Yingtai Instrument Co., Ltd., the centrifugal speed was 3000 r/min), and the concentration of RE The test samples, ammonium sulfate solution (3, 5 and 10 g/L), and three-necked bottle (volume of 500 mL) were put in the SHA-C constant temperature water bath (Tianjin Saidelisi Experimental Analytical Instrument Manufacturing Co., Ltd., the temperature was set to 30 °C). 100 g test samples and 400 mL of ammonium sulfate solution was added into the three-necked bottle. At the same time, the JJ-1A electric mixer (Jintan Xicheng Xinrui Instrument Manufacturing Co., Ltd., the mixing speed was 100 r/min) was turn on, and timing was started. After a period of time (2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 20 min), the leachate was taken out using 1 mL (a water system needle filter head was installed in front of syringe, The concentration of RE The second step is to test the concentration of RE It is assumed that ore particles of test samples are spherical with RE The diffusion process of NH The ion exchange reaction between NH NH The system composed of solid phase, diffusion layer, and external solution is the research object. RE The solid phase was chosen as the research object. According to the principle that the number of adsorption sites on the solid phase remains constant before and after leaching, the relationship of the molar number between RE Substituting Eqs. The molar number of leached RE Substituting Eqs. d Eq. Substituting Eqs. The integral of time ( This is the mathematical expression of the established kinetic model of the leaching process of IATREO. The data of balanced leaching experiments are shown in The kinetics test data are presented in With consideration to the reversibility of ion exchange and invariance of ore particle size in the leaching process, a kinetics model of the leaching of RE Fitting results of Both  Considering the reversibility of ion exchange and the invariably of ore particle size in the leaching process, a kinetics leaching model of IATREO is proposed, that is Rationality of the proposed model was verified with leaching kinetics tests. The correlation coefficient of all data for the proposed model are greater than 0.9000. The proposed kinetics model of leaching can describe the whole leaching kinetic process. The parameters