Reactive MgO admixtures are available to counteract drying shrinkage of concrete. However, since excess amounts of MgO in the form of periclase in cements can cause unsoundness, there is a concern whether these admixtures can result in unsoundness. Hence, the volume stability of paste and concrete specimens partially substituted with up to 10 and 15% wt of r-MgO, respectively were subjected to 23, 38, 60, and 80 °C moist curing conditions and expansion monitored for six months. In addition, the ASTM C151 autoclave expansion test (AET) used to assess the soundness of cements was conducted but was found to underestimate the 6-month expansion of cement pastes containing r-MgO admixtures. And, the impact of the MgO admixtures on compressive strength of the concrete cylinders was evaluated at different curing temperatures. It was found that with sufficient moist curing, r-MgO admixtures can effectively limit the drying shrinkage of concrete.Excessive autogenous, drying, and thermal shrinkage of concrete elements can result in cracking. Various methods have been used to reduce shrinkage cracking in concrete, such as incorporation of fibers As a result, reactive MgO (r-MgO) powder admixtures based on periclase, have been developed that can be used as an addition or partial replacement of cement in concrete to compensate for shrinkage. The ability to compensate for shrinkage for a variety of applications depends on the reactivity of the r-MgO powders and that is controlled by the temperature at which they are calcined. Autogenous shrinkage was reported to be effectively compensated in r-MgO concrete mixtures placed in non-wet curing conditions, especially at lower w/c ratios Reactive MgO (r-MgO) has been used in China for the last four decades in dam construction MgO with lower reactivity need more time to neutralize. The reactivities of most MgO powders currently produced in China range from 78 to 264 s A ASTM Type I cement, labeled A, and a ASTM Type II, labeled B, were selected that had similar properties except for their MgO content. X-ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy (XRF) analysis of cementitious materials is shown in 25 × 25 × 285 mm paste bars were cast at cement normal consistency as per ASTM C305 For concrete mixtures, locally available glacial sand of mixed origin with a fineness modulus of 2.71 and crushed dolomitic limestone coarse aggregate with a maximum size of 19 mm, and a dry-rodded density of 1620 kg/m Concrete mixtures were made at a cement content of 420 kg/m The average length change of four prisms was measured to calculate the expansion or shrinkage of paste and concrete prisms at different ages. Prior to exposure to drying in an environmental chamber at 23 ± 2 °C and 50 ± 4% RH, all samples were moist cured in water for 7 days, but in some cases, the curing period was also extended to 28 days. Additionally, the autoclave expansion test (AET) was performed at one day of age as per ASTM C151 (3 h at 2 ± 0.05 MPa and 215.7 ± 1.3 ° C) The two different anhydrous r-MgO powders were examined microscopically in the SEM. Powders were placed in tubes and immersed in florescent dyed epoxy with a resin to hardener ratio of 4:1. As soon as the epoxy began to harden, the samples were placed in a desiccator over silica gel for 24 h. Then the tubular samples were cut into 10 mm slices and attached to glass slides at the top and bottom surfaces. An Electromatic S-System rotating saw cut machine was used to reduce the thickness of each specimen from 10 to 1 mm. During this step, the first glass slide, where the larger portion of the sample was attached, was gently removed. A thin layer left on the second glass slide was then polished using a Lapmaster polishing machine. Logitech PLG lapping jigs were used to hold multiple slides under vacuum simultaneously and were faced on the Lapmaster lapping machine. A mixture of 600 grit silicon carbide and oil was used as an abrasive fluid for this purpose. During the sample preparation, kerosene was used as a coolant. Diamond polishing pastes were applied sequentially to facilitate reaching the desired surface smoothness with finer particle sizes ranged from 9 µm to 0.25 µm. A mild relief polishing cloth placed on a Buehler Ecomet rotating lap diamond disc was used to smooth the surface of the thin sections. Finally, an ultrasonic bath was used to remove dust and slurry from the surface after polishing. To avoid charging during the SEM analysis, polished surfaces were coated with a 200 ångström-thick carbon layer. The SEM was operated at an accelerating voltage of 15 keV with a beam current of 2 nA. To measure porosity of concrete, after testing strength, concrete pieces were vacuum saturated for 3 h in de-aired water and left underwater for 18 ± 2 h. SSD masses of the specimens were then measured. Immediately after, the samples were suspended in water, to obtain the buoyant mass. Finally, each specimen was oven-dried in a 105 ± 5 °C for a week, and the dry mass was measured. Even though the sequence of measurements differed from that described in ASTM C642 An indirect way of determining the setting time of paste mixtures was used, monitoring the onset of the second heat evolution peak using isothermal calorimetry. For these tests, paste mixtures with w/cm ratio of 0.50 were mixed using a handheld kitchen mixer in a 500 mL mixing bowl. Approximately 30 g of the paste was placed into a plastic cup and the heat of hydration was monitored in an Isocal-8000 isothermal calorimeter for seven days at 23 °C following ASTM C1679 To label each sample, an abbreviation format is presented in The microstructure of the two different MgO powders was examined using backscattered electron (BSE) imaging. It is possible that there are two main factors that control the rate of hydration of r-MgO powders which were affected by the calcination temperature In addition, the impact of crack volume fraction (VF) and its distribution inside MgO crystals for both samples were examined. For this purpose, three BSE images of periclase crystals were magnified and analyzed using Image J for the 55sMgO powder, as shown in Similar analysis was done for the 210 s MgO powder, and the average crack volume fraction of periclase varied from 5.9 to 9.2% ( To assess the long-term volume stability of cement A, which is partially replaced with 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 wt% of 55 s and 210 s MgO powder, paste bars were cured in water at 23 and 80 °C with expansions shown in Nonetheless, after six months of curing at 23 °C, samples partially substituted with 10% of either 55 s or 210 r-MgO had 6-month expansions of 0.62%, but no visual cracks were found on the surfaces of the prisms. In contrast, for 80 °C water storage, expansions stabilized at earlier ages, as shown in The Since the ASTM C151 autoclave expansion test is mainly intended to measure potential expansion from the hydration of periclase in cements, it was decided to determine whether this test would be sensitive to the addition of MgO admixtures. For this purpose, the ASTM type II cement B was substituted with 1% wt. 210 s MgO powder. This cement had a 3.4% MgO, which is well below the CSA A3001 (5%) To determine if reactive MgO powders are capable of reducing the drying shrinkage of paste prisms, cement A was replaced with 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 wt% using both the 55 s and 210 s MgO powders. As shown in The volume stability of concrete prisms cured at different temperatures and substituted with r-MgO powders was examined. For this purpose, cement A was replaced with 10, and 15% of the 55 s MgO and specimens were stored in water at 23, 38, 60, and 80 °C, see Unlike paste bars, 7-day water curing of concrete prisms having different levels of 55 s MgO admixtures led to reductions in drying shrinkage with a reduction of more than 50% when 15% MgO was used. However, 210 s MgO did not mitigate shrinkage even at a 15% replacement level ( To evaluate the role of MgO powders on concrete strength, a 10 wt% of the cement content of the A-C(0.5) mixture (control mix) was partially replaced with either sand (diluted mix), 55 s MgO or 210 s MgO. The sand was the same sand as used in the concrete mixtures as shown in However, at 80 °C curing, the control mix had higher strength, due to the reduced cement content and possibly due to excessive MgO expansion potentially lowering the concrete strength It was noted that adding high levels of MgO powder reduced the workability of the mixture and extended its setting time. In For paste bars and concrete prisms having different levels of r-MgO admixture replacing cement, the long-term volume stability appears to be an inverse function of the MgO content and the r-MgO reactivity. Curing the concretes at higher temperatures accelerated the r-MgO reaction and hence, expansions must be carefully monitored Highly reactive MgO may cause a rapid expansion to compensate for long-term shrinkage in concrete structures and limit the autogenous shrinkage at earlier ages The curing period is a key parameter affecting periclase hydration and in its efficacy for limiting drying shrinkage. For paste bars stored in water and then subjected to drying, a 7-day curing period was not sufficient to hydrate the periclase crystals in specimens containing both 55 s and 210 s MgO. However, extending the water curing period from 1 to 4 weeks resulted in partial compensation of drying shrinkage. Replacing cement with r-MgO retarded the setting time as observed from a shift of the main hydration peak measured by isothermal calorimetry. During MgO hydration in high-alkali solutions, small particles of brucite appear to precipitate around the cement grain, forming a protective layer that retards further hydration  Two reactive MgO admixtures were used in this study with similar chemical composition, similar particle size distribution, but different levels of reactivity. Examination of the anhydrous powders by SEM revealed that not only were the MgO particles in the more reactive 55 s powder smaller but also the internal crack volume fraction, and therefore exposed surface area, was higher. Long-term expansion of paste and concrete specimens containing these admixtures was a function of the r-MgO replacement level and the reactivity. For the more reactive 55 s MgO powder, increasing the water storage temperature to 80 °C accelerated the expansion such that it was completed within one week of curing. For prisms containing the less reactive MgO admixture, the expansion continued for one month. Hence, r-MgO admixtures with different reactivities could be used in various applications to compensate for the drying shrinkage of concrete. The ASTM C151 autoclave expansion test (AET) did not provide an accurate estimation of long-term expansion of cement partially substituted with r-MgO. The hydration of reactive MgO admixtures at various temperatures had different impacts on concrete strength. At 23 °C, strengths of MgO-concrete specimens were lower than the control samples due to the dilution effect of cement by the MgO powder. At intermediate curing temperatures, i.e. 38 to 60 °C, the more brucite and M−S−H compounds formed, filling more pore space. However, at 80 and 215 °C, the r-MgO admixtures negatively affected strength. The free shrinkage of one-week cured paste specimens using cements having 10% of 55 s and 210 s MgO content remained unchanged. Additionally, if the water storage period of paste bars was increased from 1 to 4 weeks, the shrinkage was only limited only at higher MgO replacement levels. For concrete specimens, shrinkage was effectively reduced even for one-week cured specimens when the highly reactive 55 s MgO admixture was used.  The authors declare that they have no known competing for financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: