Background
                  In locking plate osteosynthesis of proximal humeral fractures, secondary varus malalignment is a specific complication. Retron nails (Tantum AG, Neumunster, Germany), among others, have been designed to improve medial support of the calcar humeri. The aim of our biomechanical study was to examine whether Retron nails provide increased stiffness for axial loads and adequate stiffness for torsional loads when compared with Philos plates (Synthes AG, Umkirch, Germany).
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Twenty-two fresh-frozen paired humeri were collected. After potting the specimens, intact bones were exposed to sinusoidal axial (10-120 N) and torsional (±2.5 Nm) loading for 8 cycles to calculate the initial stiffness and exclude pairs with differences. Afterward, an unstable proximal humeral fracture (AO 11-A3) was created by means of an oscillating saw, and the respective osteosynthesis devices were implanted. After another 4 cycles, initial changes in stiffness were measured. Subsequently, all specimens were tested for 1,000 cycles of loading before final stiffness was assessed.
               
                  Results
                  We found no statistically significant differences between Retron and Philos specimens after 4 or 1,000 cycles of loading.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our study suggests that retrograde nailing provides sufficient stability for axial and torsional loading in 2-part fractures of proximal humeri.Fractures of the proximal humerus are, along with hip, spine, and distal forearm fractures, referred to as major osteoporotic fractures. A recent trend analysis from Switzerland showed that, between 2000 and 2007, the absolute number of proximal humeral fractures increased by 22.8% in women and 35.5% in men. Because inadequate medial support of the calcar humeri has a significant influence on secondary varus deformities, we investigated the biomechanical properties of a new locking device. Retron nails (Tantum AG, Neumunster, Germany) are implanted through small incisions and have to be inserted near the calcar humeri. To our knowledge, the clinical and biomechanical performances of this new implant have never been investigated. The purpose of our study was to assess the biomechanical properties of this new nail in unstable surgical neck fractures. As a reference implant, the Philos plate (Synthes AG, Umkirch, Germany) was used. The hypothesis was that the nails would provide more stable fixation for axial loads than locking plates and that they would adequately maintain reductions for torsional loads. Ultimate load to failure and fracture alignment with the devices were not subjects of our study. Eleven pairs of fresh-frozen human proximal humeri (22 humeri) were dissected from all soft tissues and shortened to a length of 20 cm from the proximal aspect. Specimens with clinical or radiologic abnormalities were eliminated. Two groups were formed based on paired comparison. In group 1, osteosynthesis was performed with the angular-stable plate, whereas in group 2, the retrograde nail was used. Each pair was randomized for the specific date of the experiment. In each pair, the specimens were randomly assigned to the relevant group. An unstable 2-part fracture of the proximal humerus (AO 11-A3 injury) was simulated by means of an oscillating pneumatic saw. A wedge osteotomy with a 10-mm defect at the humeral neck was created. The base of the resected triangle was at the medial side ( Each specimen was potted proximally in polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) cement. Contact between the PMMA and implant was avoided. To prevent loosening between the articular surface of the proximal humerus and the PMMA, 2 additional screws were inserted into the humeral head. Distally, all specimens were fixed by means of a metal rod ( A Philos plate was used as an example of a locking plate, and a Retron nail was used as an example of a retrograde nail. Both implants are made of titanium. The retrograde nail was placed in the medial third of a humeral head through the lateral aspect of the humeral shaft. The nail is cannulated, has a diameter of 8 mm and a length of 76 or 86 mm, and can be laterally lengthened by a diaphysis anchor. A self-tapping thread at the proximal end of the nail fixes the nail in the subchondral bone of the humeral head. All nails were locked by three 4-mm self-tapping angular-stable locking bolts in the humeral head and two self-tapping angular-stable locking bolts in the proximal humeral shaft. An aiming device was used to insert the locking bolts. All nails were connected to a diaphysis anchor of a particular length. The latter was fixed by a 4-mm self-tapping screw in the humeral shaft. A locking plate of 11.4 mm in length was placed at the lateral aspect of the proximal humerus by use of an aiming device to ensure correct orientation. The plate was fixed in the humeral head by six 3.5-mm self-tapping angular-stable screws. To provide maximum support of the humeral head, these screws are converting in the anteroposterior plane and diverting in the sagittal plane. An additional three 3.5-mm locking screws secured the shaft. All specimens were mounted on a pneumatic testing machine (SyncoTec, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany) ( All intact humeri were pretested (step 1) to rule out intraindividual differences. These measures were used as initial values. Afterward, the specimens were tested after osteotomy and insertion of the respective implant for 4 cycles (step 2). Finally, all specimens were tested for 1,000 cycles (step 3). After potting, all specimens were subjected to 8 cycles of axial and torque loading. First, the specimen was subjected to 10 N of axial loading for 15 seconds while torsion was applied in a sinusoidal manner (0.5-2 Nm). Afterward, the torsion load was constant at 0.5 Nm whereas the axial load was raised in a sinusoidal manner to 120 N. During loading, translation and angles along the testing axes were recorded. The initial stiffness of the specimens was calculated from these values. Humeral pairs with differences in initial stiffness of greater than 20% were excluded. After implantation of the respective osteosynthesis devices, all specimens were tested in an identical manner to step 1 for 4 cycles. The loss of stiffness after osteosynthesis was calculated from these values. All specimens were then subjected to 1,000 cycles of axial and torque loading. The loading parameters remained unchanged. Failure was defined as an irreversible closure of the osteotomy gap, peri-implant fracture, or interruption of the linear loading curve in association with a sudden deviation in the force-deformation diagram. Interindividual comparisons were based on 2-sample Wilcoxon tests. Torsion and axial stiffness were investigated. The values of the implants were computed, and the distribution was described in medians and percentiles. SPSS (release 15.0 for Windows; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) was used for numeric and graphical analyses. Before osteosynthesis, all specimens were potted and tested for axial and torsional stiffness. Of the 11 pairs, 9 showed no statistically significant intraindividual differences in torsion and so were used for further testing. The mean value of torsional stiffness was 0.73 Nm/° (SD, 0.10 Nm/°; minimum, 0.56 Nm/°; maximum, 0.91 Nm/°) for group 1 and 0.72 Nm/° (SD, 0.12 Nm/°; minimum, 0.48 Nm/°; maximum, 0.83 Nm/°) for group 2 ( After pretesting, the specimens in group 1 gained 68.17% of their initial stiffness (SD, 8.61%; minimum, 57.90%; maximum, 84.67%). Humeral specimens with retrograde humeral nails reached 62.94% of their initial stiffness (SD, 11.65%; minimum, 45.45%; maximum, 82.56%). These values were not statistically significant ( After 1,000 cycles, we found no statistically significant differences in torsional stiffness between the 2 groups. Whereas group 1 specimens reached 98.68% of their initial stiffness (SD, 7.62%; minimum, 86.36%; maximum, 112.67%), the specimens in group 2 gained a mean value of 104.48% of their initial stiffness (SD, 8.10%; minimum, 92.28%; maximum, 120.68%). These findings were not statistically relevant ( Before osteosynthesis, all specimens were potted and tested for axial and torsional stiffness. Of the 11 pairs, 9 showed no statistically significant intraindividual differences in axial loading. These specimens were used for further testing. Before osteotomy and osteosynthesis, the mean axial stiffness was 214.94 N/mm for group 1 (SD, 72.50 N/mm; minimum, 126.54 N/mm; maximum, 321.70 N/mm) and 209.17 N/mm for group 2 (SD, 85.97 N/mm; minimum, 129.00 N/mm; maximum, 368.50 N/mm). These findings were not statistically significant ( After 4 cycles of loading, locking plate–treated specimens reached 97.51% (SD, 46.23%; minimum, 45.50%; maximum, 178.20%) of their initial stiffness. Humeri treated with retrograde nails gained 108.79% (SD, 45.21%; minimum, 44.08%; maximum, 167.84%) of their initial stiffness on axial loading. These values were not statistically significant ( After 1,000 cycles, specimens stabilized with locking plates gained 116.33% (SD, 16.60%; minimum, 92.67%; maximum, 140.27%). In group 2 humeri reached 125.16% of their initial stiffness for axial loading (SD, 17.57%; minimum, 108.83%; maximum, 154.20%). These results were not statistically significant ( Because conventional plates showed insufficient biomechanical properties in the treatment of proximal humeral fractures, Because our institution uses locking plates as the standard implant to treat proximal 2-part fractures of the humerus with metaphyseal comminution, and because their biomechanical characteristics have been evaluated in numerous studies, Foruria et al We chose a gap model for simulating a medial comminuted 2-part fracture. Gap models have been widely used for this purpose. Assessing load to failure was not an objective of this study. The specimens were homogeneous. This was confirmed by evaluation of intact humeri. We are aware that intraindividual differences exist. Marti et al Our analysis aimed to assess the primary stability of 2 implants on axial and torsional loading. Primary seating effects could be excluded by subsequent measures. The fracture model and experimental setup were comparable to those used in other studies. We are aware that our study has limitations. The study focuses purely on a specific set of biomechanical outcome measurements. Our simple loading patterns do not match the complex multidirectional forces that are present in reality. A weakness of our study is that we cannot comment on biological aspects. We cannot say whether the Retron nail is superior to the Philos plate for soft-tissue management, avascular necrosis of the humeral head, or irritations of the axillary nerve. Furthermore, fracture alignment with the devices was not tested in our study. These questions should be addressed by future clinical studies. Our study suggests that retrograde nailing of unstable 2-part fractures of the proximal humerus using a Retron nail provides sufficient stability for axial and torsional loading. There are no significant differences with the Philos plate. The hardware for the Retron nail was donated by Tantum AG, and the hardware for the Philos plate was donated by Synthes GmbH. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.