Force interactions between a microsize (m-s) magnetite probe and thin layers of synthesized magnetite particles as well as microsize (m-s) magnetite particles from magnetite concentrate were investigated using atomic force microscopy (AFM). Of special interest was the influence of Ca2+ ions and pH on the interaction between the probe and the two different magnetite particle surfaces. The probe and the magnetite surfaces were immersed in aqueous Ca2+ solutions (100, 10, and 1mM) at various pH values (4, 6, and 10). The colloidal probe technique and a self-made computer program for automatic evaluation of adhesion forces were used. The analysis revealed an increase in adhesion force with increased calcium concentration at pH 6 for both the systems investigated. However, the adhesion behavior between the probe and the m-s and n-s magnetite particle surfaces is different at pH 10. The possible appearance of calcium carbonate precipitated onto the magnetite surfaces as well as the possible influence of already adsorbed silicate on magnetite particles from the concentrate is discussed. In addition to Ca, Cl and Na atoms, added to the working solutions, and the Fe and O detected signals, the SEM-EDS analysis also detected Si atoms on the surface of the m-s particles.Magnetite particles are of great interest in many different applications, such as targeted drug delivery, as a contrast agent for magnetic resonance imaging, in magnetoelectronic devices, and in steel production where pellets from agglomerated magnetite concentrate are used The atomic force microscope (AFM), using the colloidal probe technique Toikka Thus, the aim of the present work was to investigate force interactions between microsize-microsize and microsize-nanosize magnetite particles in Ca Magnetite nanoparticles with an average diameter of 10 The dip-coating technique (using a Nima dip coater, Nima Technology Ltd.) was used for the deposition of n-s magnetite particles on the glass slides. The deposition was performed as described in reference Characterization of natural and synthesized magnetite particles was performed using X-ray diffraction (D5000 X-ray diffractometer, Siemens) confirming the magnetite crystallographic structure. After each experiment the magnetite probe particles were dried and characterized by SEM-EDS (energy dispersive spectroscopy) (Jeol, JSM-6460LV) to detect sorbed species on the magnetite surface. Force measurements were performed with an NTEGRA AFM (NT-MDT). A liquid cell (MP6LCNTF), a scanning measuring head for liquid operation (SFC100LNTF), a fully closed-loop AFM setup and the 100 Because of the complex geometry of the microsize particles the force curves were collected on the same surface spot to eliminate effects from particle geometry imperfections. Also, it was important to statistically confirm the traced changes in force interactions at different ionic strength and pH in aqueous calcium solutions. In each experiment, a newly attached microsize magnetite particle and freshly dip-coated substrates with n-s particles, and microsize particles sprayed onto the substrate were used. An in-house code (programmed in IGOR Pro 6.21 (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR)) was developed for automatic evaluation of the adhesion forces on the retracting curves. This program not only calculates maximum adhesion, but also evaluates all small force steps from retracting curves. The force steps are evaluated either from the virtual level or from the height of the next appearing step on the curve. This allows the investigation of additional force interactions introduced by, for instance, ion concentration change or change of pH. In each experiment the photodetector was calibrated by collecting 30–40 force curves between the m-s magnetite probe and a reference glass surface in water. About 1000 force curves were collected in each experiment to obtain good statistics and to minimize effects from particle geometry and roughness imperfections. The surface of the magnetite particles was characterized by atomic force microscopy in TappingMode. The images obtained on m-s magnetite particles showed two possible types of outermost particle shape. One was triangular (see All retract curves were processed and the adhesion forces were presented as an adhesion histogram for each particular set of data (see At pH 10, however, synthetic magnetite particles have been shown to exhibit a positively charged surface after immersion in a 3.3 At the highest calcium concentration (100 The information obtained from the retract curves ( However, with separations < The dependence of the evaluated adhesion force versus pH for m-s probe and m-s particle interaction is shown in The surface of m-s particles on the substrate and the m-s particle on the tip of the cantilever should be negatively charged in the pH interval studied. At both pH 4 and pH 6, the adhesion force increased with calcium concentration, which is the same tendency as observed for the n-s/m-s system ( The influence of aqueous Ca The surface of the magnetite probe particle was examined by SEM-EDS after being washed with milli-Q water and allowed to dry for 24 The colloidal probe technique was applied to the measurement of force interactions between magnetite particles. Interaction between n-s and m-s magnetite particles in aqueous Ca This research was supported by