A micro-mechanical model is developed to study the fracture propagation process in rocks. The model is represented by an array of bonded particles simulated by the discrete based method. Experimental results of tests using Cracked Chevron Notched Brazilian Discs (CCNBD) with different inclination angles relative to the direction of loading are used to calibrate and validate the model. Dimensional analysis is used to identify and minimise the microscale parameters to be considered. The comparison between experimental and computational results shows a satisfactorily good agreement.Predicting the failure load in brittle materials such as rocks that contain pre-existing cracks, and determining the effect of the load and crack geometry on failure, are important in the design of structures in such materials. In order to study the failure process, the prediction of the trajectory of rqw in the brittle material is an important question that needs to be addressed. Since the fracture process is in principle dis-continuous, the Discrete Element Method (DEM) is considered to be an appropriate numerical approach to investigate the fracture processes in rocks. The use of continuous approaches such as the finite element or finite difference methods for studying the fracturing process in rocks may assist in assessing the weakening zone, but will not allow the quantitative determination of the fracture geometry during crack propagation, after fracture initiation. In fact, in continuum-based methods, the behaviour of discontinuous zones is not well described When rock with a pre-existing crack is subjected to external loading forces, stresses concentrate at the crack tip. If these stresses exceeds the threshold value, the crack starts to propagate resulting in rock failure. Depending on the direction of the applied load regarding the pre-existed crack, a crack propagates through by one of three different modes (modes I, II and III) or mixed mode In 1995, the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) presented the CCNBD test procedure to determine the mode I fracture toughness in rock In the present study, CCNBD samples are simulated to validate DSEM approach for studying the macroscopic behaviour of specimens subjected to static loading, with the crack opening displacement measured as a function of crack inclination. The measured crack opening displacement was successfully simulated using the DSEM. This is achieved by using dimensional analysis to derive relationships between the microscopic parameters and the macroscopic responses and using those relationships to calibrate the DSEM. Finding the microscopic parameters which affect the crack propagation has never been investigated before. Also, the breakage of the specimens at the micro-scale is studied and an open question is proposed on how to connect the micro-damage with the macroscopic modes used in continuous models. In Section The CCNBD test was suggested in 1995 by the ISRM for measuring the fracture toughness of mode I (tensile) fractures For the specimens with pre-existed crack, the stresses at the crack tip can be tensile or shear depending on the crack inclination angle. Tensile stresses, in combination with shear stresses at the crack tip, cause a crack that propagates in a variety of mixed modes I and II failure trajectories. In the experimental studies reported in In the experiments described in In these tests, displacement was controlled and increased with a constant rate until failure occurred. The inclination angles of the loading direction to the notch crack (  Mode I stress intensity factor and fracture toughness for CCNBD samples when In Eq. Chang et al. proposed in 2002 two different equations to find stress intensity factor for CCNBD samples in mode I and mode II (Eq. In this study the Discrete Sphero-polyhedral Element Method (DSEM) is used for the simulation. In three dimensions (3D), a sphero-polyhedra is a polyhedral-shaped particle formed by first eroding a cube, which is then dilated by sweeping the edges by a sphere, as shown in For modelling the specimen using the DSEM, an original 2D triangular mesh of a circle is built. The circle is then extruded in the direction perpendicular to its plane in order to produce a cylinder divided into prism elements  It is worth noting that some features of the CCNBD that cannot be explore with this extruded 2D model, such as the initiation of the crack at the tip of the internal notches, are well recognised in literature As mentioned before in In the following, the key micro-mechanical parameters of the DSEM are going to be briefly introduced. In this study, the simulated sample is assumed to be homogeneous, and the same microscopic parameters are applied to all the particles, however, considering nature of rocks which are mostly categorised as heterogeneous materials, in discrete based methods, there are some distribution functions like Weibull which can be used to apply the inhomogeneous distribution of parameters The normal and tangential elastic moduli ( For a realistic representation of the material behaviour it is absolutely essential to calibrate parameters that affect the fracture propagation process. This was done using dimensional analysis based on the Buckingham The CMOD is used to calibrate the micro-mechanical model. Since the friction coefficient (  To check the validity of the introduced dimensionless numbers based on the microscopic parameters, the CMOD is calculated for Based on these results, it can be said that the relationship between micro- and macro-scale parameters of the material are well understood for studying the fracture propagation in the specimens with pre-existed crack. Following this important calibration and validation step, some microscopic aspects characterising the fracture propagation can be extracted from the simulation results. When the loading on the CCNBD specimen increases, tangential and normal forces between particles at the micro-scale increase, which causes normal and tangential strain in the particles. Therefore, when these strains exceed the threshold value In this paper a disc-type sample with pre-existed crack were modelled using the Discrete Sphero-polyhedral Element Method (DSEM). In the proposed model, a collection of particles was generated from an extruded Delaunay tessellation, which allows the modelling of rock specimens that do not have internal porosity. The breaking process of the disc-type specimen was traced using the DSEM. Simulation results showed that the proposed method was capable of reproducing the results obtained from the experimental tests. Crack propagation trajectory during loading was simulated and showed good agreement with the experimental results. Using the DSEM, the macroscopic behaviour of the material; namely, the trajectory of the crack propagation during loading based on parameters of the material, can be predicted for natural pre-existing cracks in different directions. It has been found that a broad range of parameters reproduce the fracture geometry which makes it an incomplete parameter to calibrate. The Crack Mouth Opening Displacement (CMOD) is the macro-scale feature recorded during CCNBD tests to monitor the deformation of the sample. The simulation model was calibrated using this feature based on a dimensional analysis of microscopic parameters. The simulated CMOD values show good agreement with the experiments for various inclination angles between the direction of loading and the orientation of the cracks. It is important to mention that the CMOD is very sensitive to microscopic parameters, while the fracture geometry is not. Investigating the fracture mode and crack propagation rate is the next stage of this study that will be obtained by using a high speed camera during experiments and Image analysis. These results will help to validate numerical results to find the fracture mode. This work was funded by