Rechargeable batteries used in consumer and hybrid electric vehicle applications rely on lithium-ion and nickel–metal hydride chemistries (so-called ‘advanced batteries’). In its current state, the advanced battery industry does not typically manufacture batteries utilizing recycled material. Pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy are the basis of today’s technology for end-of-life battery decommissioning and materials reclamation; these processes essentially burn, melt, or dissolve advanced materials to recover metals for high-strength alloys, and other cobalt market segments. Diversification of the battery chemistry market may decrease the recoverable value of metals in recycling processes utilized today. Soft-chemical- or green-chemical-based processing is available, which allows for recovery of advanced materials useful in the manufacture of battery materials. The establishment of recycled material specifications is identified as a way to improve the use of recycled material by the advanced battery manufacturing market.angle graphitic carbon European Union electric vehicle hybrid electric vehicle lead–acid battery National Electronics Manufacturing Association Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Portable Rechargeable Battery Association polyvinylidene fluoride Rechargeable Battery Recycling Corporation United States Geological Survey X-ray diffraction This work was supported by the United States Council for Automotive Research, Vehicle Recycling Program, and National Science Foundation Small Business Innovation Research Award #0750552. Lead recovered from lead–acid batteries (LABs) accounts for 88% of lead consumption in the United States. The rate of LAB recycling is reported to be 80–97.5%, which is the highest rate among any type of battery. Reasons for such a high rate of recycling and recovery may include environmental protection regulations, value of lead, and a captive battery market for the commodity. Recycled lead meets a high fraction of the demand for batteries, and is accumulated from recycling generation upon generation of LABs. Some shortfall may exist due to losses of lead in slag when batteries are recycled, misplacement in landfill, or due to the market growth; for example, the demand for starter batteries grew 3.5% in recent years. To make up for the difference between supply and demand, new lead is mined, purchased, and manufactured into new batteries. Even with market growth, the impacts of recycling LABs are to provide a stable source of material for manufacturing LABs, and an environmentally sound solution in lieu of disposal and mining. On the other hand, recycling of advanced rechargeable batteries from cell phones and computers occurs at comparatively low rates. Lithium-ion batteries rely on cobalt for the positive electrode and trends in battery recycling may be inferred from industrial cobalt recycling rates. A 1998 United States Geological Survey (USGS) indicates that 68% of the available cobalt bearing scrap in the United States was recycled, and 32% of the total cobalt consumption is recycle sourced. The most cobalt-rich sources for scrap are industrial catalysts and batteries. Industrial catalysts are used by a few companies with economic and environmental directives to recycle. The task to concentrate scrap from a small number of users is relatively easy, and performed as a matter of business; therefore, catalyst recycling rates are fairly high. Batteries are dispersed and require effort from numerous individuals to concentrate the scrap, which may result in lower recycling rates. From 1998 to 2007 the battery market roughly tripled to use a quarter of all cobalt production, but the recycle-sourced cobalt declined from 32% to 22% of production. The recycling rate for batteries may not have kept pace with catalysts and other segments, which resulted in the decline of recycled cobalt content in cobalt consumption. A Unlike lead, cobalt has many opportunities for use outside of the battery market, including specialty alloys, pigments, or catalysts. The rechargeable battery segment for cobalt includes lithium-ion and nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH) chemistries. Lithium cobalt oxide provides a host lattice for lithium ions to shuttle into and out of during discharge and charge of the battery; the process can repeat for hundreds of cycles. While there are several types of cathode materials utilizing cobalt, lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO Spent battery end-of-life processing is a growing issue for the consumer electronics and electric vehicle (EV) industries. The electronics industry is facing pressure to see that material is recycled efficiently and responsibly as agreed in the Basel Convention. Examples of legislative activities directed at recycling all types of batteries include the European Union’s Battery Directive and the State of California’s recycling mandate. The European Union (EU) battery directive restricts the recycling procedures to exclude incineration, burial, or export to non-OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development) nations. The automotive industry recycles vehicles for environmental and economic reasons. The size and weight of a vehicle makes it an environmental concern for disposal and potentially valuable for materials recovery, which contributes to a high rate of vehicle recycling. The automobile recycling industry uses a suite of materials processing technologies to recycle the plastics, metals, electronics, and glass present in a modern automobile. The automobile manufacturers formulate recycling plans early in the life of a product so that infrastructure is available for the automobile recycling industry to address future generations of vehicles. Vehicle batteries in the future will diversify from lead–acid chemistry and may require diversified recycling approaches to maintain the economic availability of material and minimize the environmental impact of the life of the vehicle. Furthermore, the recyclability of a particular advanced battery may be vital in the long-term sustainability of any battery-reliant vehicle. Both legislative and industrially motivated recycling realize that the cost of metals and energy continues to increase, albeit punctuated with occasional fractious drops. The economic driving force for advanced battery reclamation is based upon high-value metallic recovery. With the diversification of chemistries toward cobalt-dilute or noncobalt electrodes the value potential erodes for pure cobalt recovery with respect to LiCoO In the lead–acid recycling business, consumers may pay a core-fee for the battery to help finance the recycling. Small-format lithium-ion batteries do not have a core-fee. In the United States, battery collection for recycling occurs through activity sponsored by the recycling, electronics manufacturing, and battery manufacturing industries. For example, an industrial recycler may solicit batteries from municipalities, businesses, and electronics manufacturers; an electronics manufacturer may operate a product take-back process, and support a collection organization such as the Rechargeable Battery Recycling Corporation (RBRC), which advertizes recycling and helps to move batteries to a dedicated processor; finally, battery manufacturers may provide financial support to collection organizations and logistical support to a computer manufacturer for product returns and recalls. A consumer may pay directly through service or indirectly through municipalities for collection and disposition of spent batteries. The cost of recycling may include numerous steps such as advertising, collection, handling, shipping, sorting, and other processing. These costs are absorbed by consumers, recyclers, and manufacturers. The National Electronics Manufacturing Association (NEMA) works to develop industrial standards in the best interests of the industry and product users; they note that batteries may be safely disposed of in a proper landfill as an end result of collection and recycling efforts. As battery material recycling may occur, it is largely based upon the value potential present along with the effort of individuals, municipalities, and corporations to develop sustainability. The limited intrinsic value in small cells (2–10 Large-format rechargeable batteries of the future may contain internal value at their end of life on the order of thousands of dollars. A recycling operation, utilizing appropriate technology, may be able to access the material value and recoup the processing costs without the use of a core-fee system. Currently, automobile manufacturers take responsibility for collection of end-of-life HEV packs, which may be decommissioned by processing into steel alloys without recycling as battery materials. If metal prices are low, the profitability of recycling decreases and may lead to proper landfill disposition as the economically viable option. A core-fee may buffer against metal price volatility and assure responsible processing. But the use of highly efficient recycling technology, in which battery materials recycle as battery materials, may best minimize potential core-fees. Rechargeable batteries provide power for portable applications such as cellular telephones, notebook computers, games, and power tools, and for large applications such as HEV. A 2008 estimate for the size of the worldwide rechargeable battery market is US $9 billion, with 5 billion units manufactured, and with the power capability for 22 Most of the developing technology of recycling procedures for LiCoO A lithium-ion battery collected for recycling may contain some residual charge, even if the consumer discharged the pack or cell in their device prior to transfer. Cells discharge to ∼3.5 Commercial scrap, services may utilize a brine solution to perform discharge, which dissipates the energy stored in the battery until equilibrium exists between the chemical potential of the cells and the brine solution ( Scrap battery packs may be fed wholly into a high-temperature chamber for smelting. For the lithium-ion pack, the process exothermically consumes organic components, producing thermal energy sufficient to decompose inorganic compounds and melt metals while transforming the lithium and p-block elements (other than carbon) into solid oxide slag-body. To address emissions from this process, an electric-arc furnace endothermically reduces carbon dioxide to solid carbon-black soot, and scrubbing devices may remove any sulfur or nitrogen oxide by-products. High-temperature processing does not require pack disassembly. It does, however, require sorting, which is a largely manual process to date. Further, there are significant capital and operating expenses for the electric-arc furnace to minimize emissions, and there are significant losses in material. With respect to lithium ions, they become part of a slag-body, which may be added to concrete for stabilization, or disposed of as hazardous waste. If lithium were to be recovered for use in batteries, the slag-body would require significant processing at an energy expense on par with mining lithium-containing ore. With regard to Ni–MH batteries, the high content of nickel in both electrodes and the current collector makes them attractive as nickel sources in the formulation of various grades of steel. Nickel–metal hydride cells collected around the United States may become stainless steel, which offers a safe, relatively inexpensive way to reutilize material, but does not provide the battery market with recycled material as within the lead–acid recycling model. Transformation to steel is not universally applicable to all rechargeable batteries since cobalt in lithium-ion and cadmium in nickel–cadmium are incompatible elements for stainless steel. The cobalt may be handled in various ways, but nickel–cadmium requires a dedicated furnace for the recovery of cadmium; retort furnaces operate in the United States for this application and produce cadmium for use in the battery and chemicals industry. After the cadmium is removed from these cells, the remaining nickel may be used in steel production. The use of cadmium in batteries is on the decline, but its surplus in the overall market deflates the price and makes it attractive for manufacturing, even though it is identified as a toxic metal and faces restriction in the European Union. Hydrometallurgical techniques generally employ aggressive chemicals such as strong acids or strong bases to dissolve metal oxides; strong oxidizing acids such as nitric acid may be necessary to oxidize metals for better dissolution. The aqueous solution may be formed from direct treatment of batteries, or shredder residue. In these cases, the solution contains metals that require separation for further use. Transition metal solutions precipitate with adjustment of pH through addition of hydroxide or carbonates. If the purity of the precipitate is sufficient, a marketable product for use in the pigment market may be readily attainable. Transition metals may be further purified with additional solution techniques. A classic method used to separate Co  Hydrometallurgical methods rely on solution chemistry and therefore require consideration of the aqueous waste stream that may contain lithium, heavy metals, and phosphates. The use of organic solvents, such as Current recycling processes gather only cobalt metal from the active compound in lithium-ion batteries, while plastics, electrolyte, and salts may be lost to flue gas, slag, dross, fly ash or aqueous waste. As metal value diminishes with the use of dilute cobalt compounds in cathode materials, or decline in commodity values, the recovery of the entire bill of materials becomes more important. Green-chemical techniques with minimal environmental impact show promise to economically reclaim advanced solid-state materials and electrolyte. Such a process was used to recover and regenerate LiCoO  The soft-chemical process is flexible to battery chemistry and may be practiced on formulations such as LiNi Electrolyte may be removed from batteries using carbon dioxide as a solvent. The gas is easily compressed into a liquid and has a critical point of 31 The soft-chemical processing of Ni–MH batteries has been examined. This survey of materials from the positive and negative electrodes was made in a laboratory-scale separation of materials from the battery stack ( The electron microscope provided elemental analysis based upon surface material of the samples. The mischmetal negative electrode material is shown in the electron micrograph and elemental analysis is shown in Typical hydrogen absorbing alloys have a general formula of ANi  Preliminary evaluation suggests battery cathodes may be regenerated via soft-chemical processing at a fraction of the energy cost compared with synthesizing the cathode material starting with metallic products from hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical processing. Using low-temperature and mechanical processing, LiCoO Advanced batteries consume a quarter of all cobalt used in the global marketplace, but do not contribute significantly to the mass of recycled cobalt. The shift to less valuable metals in battery formulations eases the pressure on cobalt, and creates a technical mismatch with pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical processing technology, which is the current practice for recycling cobalt-laden lithium-ion batteries. A significant portion of battery materials processed are used in a nonbattery market, so the act of recycling does not contribute toward increasing the volume of advanced battery material, and therefore does not contribute to the decrease in price of battery materials. A pilot-scale process, based upon soft-chemical methods, may recycle advanced battery materials back into battery materials at a fraction of the cost of manufacturing from any constituent metals.   Generally refers to the rechargeable lithium-ion or nickel–metal hydride battery that may broadly be available in consumer or vehicle markets. Refers to organic solvents containing nitrogen or oxygen without a proton. Examples include pyridine, ketones, esters, ethers, and carbonates. An international treaty to address hazardous waste minimization and controls on the movement of wastes, and cleaner production in the waste industry. The equivalent CO A mass of solid impurities that floats on a molten metal: it may be sourced from impurities from packaging, paint, or other coatings present in the lead acid batter (LAB) product. Also see slag and fly ash. Residue captured from the combustion of coal or other solid fuel. It generally contains a mixture of metal oxides. Also see dross and slag. Refers to the design of products and processes to minimize the use of energy and materials so that environmental health and safety is improved on a broad scale. Chemical methods to manipulate metal ions into or from aqueous solutions. These may utilize strong acids or bases to dissolve metals or metal ions from their solid-state structures. A mix of rare earth metals such as lanthanum, cerium, and neodymium. A hydrogen storage alloy may be composed of mischmetal and nickel in an AB5 ratio where A=mischmetal and B=nickel. Chemical methods to reduce metal oxides into metallic ingots or alloys. These methods typically utilize high temperatures to physically melt solids and reduce metallic ions. A by-product of smelting metal salts that may contain metal oxides, sulfides, and metallics. It is glassy in nature with a higher melting point than the molten metal. Also see dross and fly ash. Often referred to as The quantity of electric charge a material may hold with respect to its mass. In this context, the materials transfer lithium ions (in the case of lithium-ion batteries); or protons (in the case of nickel–metal hydride batteries) to deplete any potential electric charge.