The effect of different conditions during the salting and smoking process on the microstructure and the texture of salmon fillets was studied in interaction with different raw salmon material; ocean-ranched Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) from Iceland and two groups of farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) from Norway, one from Northern Norway and one from Western Norway. The ocean-ranched salmon was found to have significantly smaller fiber diameters and higher shear force compared to the farmed fish. The cross-sectional area of the muscle fibers decreased during the salting and smoking process. Small differences were noted in the cross-sectional area between smoked fillets processed by different salting and smoking methods. However, the cross-sectional area of fibers in dry salted fish fillets from the farmed groups were significantly smaller than in the brine salted fillets, as the fibers shrunk more during dry salting than brine salting. The force required to shear the smoked fillets was significantly higher than for the unprocessed fillets, but was not found to be related to the different salting and smoking processes. Yield during smoking was not related to the initial cross-sectional area or the shear force of the unprocessed muscle.The main quality parameters for fresh salmon are fat, color, texture and freshness. Other quality parameters commonly cited are white stripes (myocommata), bloodstains, marbling and melanin spots ( The ionic strength and pH are the important factors that influence water binding of muscle proteins ( The commonly observed loss in weight of fillets during the process is both due to dehydration of the muscle, and lipids leaching from the muscle (personal communication, smoking industry). According to a review by The main goal in this study was to investigate the effects of different parameters in the smoking process on the microstructure and texture of salmon fillets. The parameters selected were brine and dry salting prior to smoking and two different temperatures in the smoking process, 20 and 30°C. Electrostatic smoking ( Three groups of fish of different origin were used with 75 salmon in each origin group. (Farmed Oct 1998) Fish harvested in October 1998 from the commercial fish farm Torris Product Ltd A/S, Nordland (67° N). Samples of 75 salmon (4 kg±150 g) were used for the study. The fish were fed with Bio optimal® and Ecolite TT® (Biomar, Bergen) the last 12 months. The fish density in the sea cages was at maximum 30–35 kg/m (Farmed April 1998) Fish harvested in April 1999 from the commercial fish farm Kvernsmolt A/S, Hordaland (60°). Samples of 75 salmon (3.7 kg±500 g) were used for the study. The fish were fed with Bio optimal 7 mm/TT-9® the last 12 months (Biomar, Bergen). The density in the sea cages was at maximum 10 kg/m (Ocean-ranched) ocean-ranched salmon harvested in July 1999 from Hraunsfjordur in Iceland. Samples of 75 salmon (2.6 kg±300 g). The salmon had been living wild in the sea for 1 year. The fish were harvested by netting, and bled by cutting the gill arches on one side. The fish were allowed to bleed in cold sea water. The dead fish were gutted, cleaned and each individual fish was weighed and tagged. All the fish were transported by courier to Institut Francais de Recherche pour Iéxploitation de la Mer (IFREMER) in Nantes, France. During the transport the fish were stored on ice in sealed boxes. At IFREMER the fish was filleted and trimmed. The trimming removed the rib bones and visible adipose tissue. Yield was calculated for each step in the process. The filleting was done at day six after slaughter. The right fillet was utilized for the smoking experiment and the left fillet was used as samples of the raw material. Five different processing methods (15 salmon in each treatment group) were used with variation in salting method and temperature during smoking. In addition, one group was smoked by a new electrostatic smoking process: a. Brine salted — traditional smoking at 20°C b. Brine salted — traditional smoking at 30°C c. Dry salted — traditional smoking at 20°C d. Dry salted — traditional smoking at 30°C e. Dry salted — electrostatic smoking at 12°C (room temperature) Fish from the three samplings (1, 2, and 3) were processed using the same processing methods (detailed below). Pure refined dry salt was sprinkled on one side of the fillets to cover the surface. Salting was carried out at 12°C, for 6 h. Then the fillets were shortly rinsed and kept in a cold room at 2°C for 12 h. Weight of each fillet was recorded, just before smoking. Saturated (360 g of NaCl/l) brine, at temperature 12°C, for 6 h. The fillets were put in the saturated brine, which was continuously circulated. The fillets were loaded in bulk in the brine. The fillets were withdrawn from the brine, loaded on the trolleys, roughly rinsed and kept overnight in a cold room at 2°C. Weight of each fillet was recorded, just before smoking. Smoking temperature 20 or 30°C: Wood chips of beech were used for smoke generation. The smoking process started with drying in the smoking oven for 30 min at 20°C. Smoking was carried out at 20°C, a humidity of 65% and air velocity 2 m/s for 5 h. Control of smoke density was done with opacimeter 0–100%, smoke extraction cycle was 10 min. After smoking the trolleys were stored at 2°C until packing the next day. Weight of each fillet was recorded, just before vacuum packaging (INV 40 Boulanger, Vaiges, France). Dry salting was used, but no drying was applied. Smoking carried out in a tunnel for 15 min at a temperature 20°C, tension 40 KV, oak beam used for smoking and pyrolysis 350°C ( All fillets were individually tagged with identical numbers for the left and right fillet. Unprocessed left fillets (15 fillets) were compared to salted and smoked right fillets (15 fillets) of the same fish individual. Fifteen fish individuals were in each treatment group (five groups). All samples were collected from the white muscle from the same location on each of the fillets, below the dorsal fin ( The specimens were sectioned (10 μm) frozen at −27°C in a cryostat (Leica CM1800, Heidelberg, Germany) for transverse and longitudinal cuts. Cryo-sections were mounted on slides. The sections were stained for 5 min in Orange G (0.5 g of Orange G, 1 ml acetic acid dissolved in 99 ml distilled water and filtered). The sections were washed with distilled water and stained for 5 min in Methyl blue solution (0.07g Methyl blue, 1 ml acetic acid dissolved in 99 ml distilled water and filtered). The stained samples were washed for 5 min with distilled water before mounting with Mountex (Histolab Products AB). Using this staining method the muscle proteins stain yellow and collagen blue ( The samples were examined in a microscope (Leica DML, Cambridge, UK) at 100×, 200× and 400× magnification. TV camera and LEICA Q500MC image processing analysis software (Cambridge, UK) were used for calculations of diameter, cross-sectional area and number of fibers in the images. Three pictures including 60–100 fibers each were processed and used for calculation. The TA.XT2 Texture Analyzer was used (Stable Micro System, Surrey, UK) with a load cell of 25 kg. Blade (knife-edge, 60°) of a thickness of 3.0 mm and width of 70 mm was used. The shear force was measured according to Fat content and fat distribution was analyzed by non-destructive computer-aided X-ray tomography (CT) as described by Quantitative determination of chloride from water-soluble chlorides, expressed in NaCl. Chlorides were solubilised in water and titrated by a chlorimeter (Chloride analyser 926 Corning). Data sets were compared by multiple comparison ANOVA using all pair wise comparison by Sigmastat 2.03 (Jandel Scientific Software, ON, Canada). Tukey test was used for multiple comparison and Pearson correlation coefficients were determined between variables. The difference was found to be significant at The ocean-ranched fish were leaner (9.4%) than the farmed fish from Norway harvested both in Oct 1998 (24.0%) and in April 1999 (20.2%) ( The cross-sectional area of muscle fibers from the unprocessed ocean-ranched fish fillets were significantly ( Muscle fibers from farmed salmon used in this study both from October 1998 and April 1999 were found to have cross-sectional area in the same range as found in diploid fish in a previous study comparing diploid and triploid salmon (8800–11 It has been stated in the literature that, in general, cultured fish tend to have softer and less preferable texture than free-living fish ( In a previous study ( The force required to shear the smoked fillet samples was significantly higher than for the unprocessed fillet samples for the three origin-groups when comparing unprocessed and smoked fillets from the same fish individual (see The force required to shear the salted and smoked ocean-ranched salmon fillets was found to be not significantly different between the processing treatments; brine and dry salting and smoked at different temperature (20 and 30°C) as well as electrostatic smoking (see The force required to shear salted and smoked fillets from the two farmed salmon groups (slaughtered in October 1998 and April 1999) was significantly different between the processing treatments. The shear force required for the dry salted fillets, smoked both at 20°C and by electrostatic smoking from the farmed group slaughtered in October 1998 was lower than for fillets processed by the other processing methods (see Significantly lower yield was obtained for smoked samples treated with dry salting than the brine salted fillets. Higher yield was also obtained for samples smoked at 30°C as compared to 20°C. The smoked samples that were brine salted and smoked at 30°C gave the highest yield (see Lower yield through the salting and smoking process was obtained for the ocean-ranched group than the farmed groups. There was not a significant difference in yield between the farmed groups although there was a difference in the cross-sectional area and fat content in the starting material. The salt content in the smoked product was highest in the ocean-ranched samples in the range of 3.3–3.9% (see The cross-sectional area of the muscle fibers decreased during the salting and smoking process in the three fish origin-groups (see Samples were collected from the same fillets after salting, prior to smoking and after smoking to understand further the effects of the individual process parameters. The same fillets were followed through the process from unprocessed fillet to smoked fillet. The cross-sectional area of fibers in dry salted fish fillets was significantly smaller due to shrinking compared to the unprocessed fillet. The cross-sectional area of muscle fibers from salted fillets was found to be smaller after dry salting than after brine salting. After smoking, the cross-sectional area of fibers from the brine salted samples was still bigger than from the dry salted samples (see Numerous papers have been published on the effects of salts on water retention and/or structural properties of either minced or intact muscle from fish or mammalian meat ( Swelling or shrinkage of the myofibres occurs via an increase/decrease in the fibre transverse axis either by an electrostatically or entropically driven mechanism. Both the ionic strength and the specific ion affects the extent of swelling and hence the liquid holding ability of minced fish muscle ( The final salt content in the smoked samples was found to vary from 2.7 to 3.4% (see The different processing methods used in this study showed similar effects on the muscle fibers diameters as compared to the unprocessed muscle. However, a trend was detected where the dry salting method lead to more fiber shrinkage than the brine salting method. The muscle fiber initial cross-sectional area and yield after smoking was not found to be related. However, these results could not be extrapolated to the wild salmon (ocean-ranched) group. The force required to shear the smoked fillets was not found to be related to the different processing methods or the starting material. The European Commission (4th Framework, FAIR 95-1101) provided financial support. The authors wish to thank Mireille Cardinal (IFREMER, Nantes, France) for smoking the samples and Magny Thomassen and Turid Morkere (Akvaforsk, As, Norway) for measuring the fat content.