Recent studies indicate that lead and cadmium may exert both direct and indirect actions on bone turnover, indirectly via kidney dysfunction, and directly on osteoblast and osteoclast function. Increased blood lead concentrations, most likely as a result of an increased bone turnover, have been detected in pregnant, lactating, and menopausal women. Lead exposure has also been negatively associated with children’s growth in stature. Both lead and cadmium are nephrotoxic and can disturb vitamin D metabolism. Cadmium has been shown to induce kidney damage and osteoporosis/osteomalacia at long-term high-level exposure. A negative association between cadmium dose and bone mass has recently been detected in both occupationally and environmentally exposed people at relatively low cadmium exposure.Throughout life there is a continuous process of bone turnover (remodeling). Bone turnover is carried out in bone metabolic units involving a sequence of bone resorption and formation. During the period of skeletal growth, bone formation exceeds resorption and skeletal mass increases ( Bone formation is carried out by the active osteoblast, which synthesize collagen. The collagen forms an organic matrix (osteoid) within which calcium is then deposited as amorphous masses of calcium phosphate (mineralization of bone). Calcium is the chief mineral contributing to the structural integrity of the skeleton. The bone protein osteocalcin is synthesized by the osteoblast and is thought to play a major role in the mineralization process of bone ( Bone resorption (degradation and removal of osseous tissue) is carried out by the osteoclast; a large multinucleated cell formed by fusion of several precursor cells. The osteoclast attaches to the surface of the bone and tunnels its way into the mineralized bone. Approximately 90% of the organic matrix of bone tissue are type I collagen, a helical protein that is cross-linked at the Bone turnover is influenced by a large array of hormones, e.g. the active form of vitamin D (1,25-(OH) PTH increases plasma Ca levels by stimulation of bone resorption, renal tubular Ca reabsorption, and 1,25-(OH) There are several factors affecting bone growth and normal bone turnover. Peak bone mass is to a great extent genetically determined ( Osteoporosis is characterized by reduction in the quantity of bone or atrophy of skeletal tissue ( Lead (Pb) is accumulated in bone (half-life of ≈27 years), which contains >90% of the body burden ( The contribution of skeletal Pb to blood Pb has been determined by In an ongoing study, we have determined Pb and Cd in blood and urine in relation to bone turnover in pregnant and lactating women in Stockholm. Blood and urine were collected in gestational week 11, and 36, 3 days post partum (pp), 12 weeks pp, and 1 year pp (  We have studied BPb in women 20–50 years of age, and 50–85+ years ( Lead is a potential risk factor for osteoporosis because of the central role the skeleton plays in Pb toxicokinetics. Bone Pb storage and release follows the general physiology of bone Ca metabolism ( The developing skeleton seems more sensitive to Pb than the adult skeleton. Epidemiological studies have shown an inverse relationship between BPb and growth (in stature) in children ( The mechanisms behind Cd induced bone effects are not clear but several different possibilities have been suggested ( The Itai-itai disease, which has been shown to be a very severe type of Cd poisoning, was first diagnosed in Toyama Prefecture, in Japan ( The patients of Itai-itai disease have kidney damage characteristic of high Cd exposure and in addition serious damage to the bones, often in the form of combined osteoporosis and osteomalacia ( In a recent Swedish study, the relationship between Cd exposure, early renal effects, and osteoporosis were examined in environmentally and previously occupationally Cd exposed men and women in an area where a battery factory has given rise to environmental Cd pollution ( In a recent study published in Lancet ( Experimental data indicate that Cd can affect bone mineralization directly without clear signs of renal effects (