In this work, the electrochemical production of hydroxyl radicals on boron-doped diamond (BDD) electrodes with different sp3/sp2 ratios was studied, together with the relationship between the level of production of hydroxyl radicals and the degradation and mineralization of aniline, taken as a model organic compound. A higher sp3/sp2 ratio on the BDD surface produces a greater number of hydroxyl radicals, as previously stated; however, for the first time the difference in the production of hydroxyl radicals for different levels of sp2-impurities on BDD surface was established and its importance in determining the nature of the BDD surface (semi-active or inactive) is demonstrated. The results are of great relevance in interpreting the real effect of conductive diamond electrochemical oxidation on the treatment of organic wastes described in the literature.Anodic oxidation (AO) is one of the most widely used [ However, recent studies have shown that the degree of electrochemical mineralization of organic compounds depends on the sp Araújo and co-workers [ Thus, the aim of this work is to provide information about the generation of hydroxyl radicals on diamond surfaces with different levels of sp Aniline hydrochloride (C Polarization curves were measured at room temperature, applying a scan rate of 5 mV s Electrolysis of DMPO solution (10 mM) in perchloric acid (0.1 M) was carried out using a one-compartment cell at room temperature. Boron-doped diamond (BDD) with different sp 0.1 L of aniline solution was introduced into an undivided electrochemical cell with constant stirring at room temperature. BDD (on Si) thin film electrodes from NeoCoat® with a thickness of 2 mm, resistivity of 100 mΩ cm and boron concentration of 500 ppm were used as anodes. An AISI 304 stainless steel plate was used as the cathode. Both electrodes had a geometric area of 2.8 cm Galvanostatic electrolyses were performed with an MCP model M10-QD305 power supply, which also displayed the cell voltage. pH was measured with a Hanna Instruments Model HI8424 pH-meter. During electrolysis, samples were withdrawn from the solution in the cell at regular time intervals and then refrigerated until they were analysed. The degree of mineralization was monitored through the decay of the chemical oxygen demand (COD) and total organic carbon (TOC). The chemical oxygen demand (COD) was determined by sample digestion using reactive HANNA for 2 h at 150 °C in a HANNA Instruments HI 839800. After complete digestion, the samples were cooled and analysed in a photometer HANNA Instruments HI 83099. The total organic carbon (TOC) was determined by catalytic combustion at 850 °C using a non-dispersive infrared detector (NDIR) in a Vario TOC Select Elementar analyser. Using these data, the mineralization current efficiency (MCE) for each treated solution was then calculated from Eq. Aliquots were taken at different times during the electrolysis to evaluate the decay of aniline concentration in a reverse phase high-pressure liquid chromatographer using a UPLC Shimadzu LC-20AD with diode array detector SPD-M20A fitted with a Purospher RP-18, 5 um, 150 mm × 4.6 mm (id) column at 25 °C ± 1 °C. Acetonitrile:water (50:50) was used as the mobile phase with a flow rate of 0.5 mL min During the oxidation of water, hydroxyl radicals are formed on the BDD surface (see Eq. However, Comninellis stated that, at active anodes, hydroxyl radicals can be stabilized at the anode surface, forming higher metal oxides, and in the case of carbon electrodes, the hydroxyl radicals are quickly transformed to oxygen. As a diamond electrode is considered an inactive anode, the strong interaction between surface and hydroxyl radicals is not considered, and the production of hydroxyl radicals should be similar on all BDD anodes. From the effects explained above, sp The change in the concentration of aniline was determined by HPLC-RP, in which this compound exhibited a well-defined peak at a retention time of 7.2 min. This analysis ( The same trend was observed for aniline mineralization, where the dependence on the sp The carbon sp The authors thank the financial support of