Mature fine tailings (MFT), a mineral matrix of residual hydrocarbons, water, and fine clays, are generated by the extraction of bitumen from oil sands. Finding ways to get MFT to dewater more quickly is critical to improving the reclamation of tailing ponds. Although many methods have been developed to treat MFT, most of them have been rejected for lack of technical or economic feasibility. The aim of this study was to investigate the performance of alkoxysilanes on dewatering and densifying MFT. The performance of five alkoxysilane types was evaluated by capillary suction time (CST), settling percentage, and solids content. Among them, bis(3-trimethoxysilylpropyl)amine (bis-amine) performed best, especially when combined with centrifugation. Bis-amine was then used in an experimental design to study the influence of alkoxysilane dosage and initial solids content on MFT dewatering and densification. The experimental design showed that certain operation conditions produced sediments with low CST (below 20s), relatively high solids content (over 42wt%), very low turbidity (about 6.0 NTU) and minimal concentration of solids in the supernatant (0.2wt%), which facilitates the reuse of the recovered water from MFT flocculation in the oil sands extraction process. In addition to these promising findings, it is important to point out that no calcium was added, and that bis-amine has a lower molecular weight, and therefore is less shear-sensitive than the commercial high molecular weight polymers used to treat MFTs in commercial applications.Canada has huge oil sands deposits in northern Alberta, which are estimated to be the third largest in the world. Oil sands represent 97% of Canada’s total oil reserves ( The waste byproduct from oil sands extraction processes, consisting of sand, clays, fine silt, and water (tailings) is sent to tailing ponds for sedimentation. Over time, a top water layer is formed in the tailing ponds, which is recycled back to the extraction plant. The bottom layer eventually forms mature fine tailings (MFT), which has a solids content up to 30% (w/w) with the remainder being water. Further dewatering of MFT may take as long as 100 Reducing the volume and increasing the density and strength of MFT are probably the most important environmental challenges faced by the oil sands industry ( This study uses alkoxysilanes as flocculants for MFT dewatering and densification. Compared to commercially available flocculants, such as polyacrylamide (PAM), poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDADMAC) and polyethylene oxide (PEO), alkoxysilanes are chemicals with low molecular weight, which make them less shear-sensitive. In addition, besides the low cost of alkoxysilanes, several types of these chemicals are commercial available, which make them an interesting alternative for the flocculants currently used by industries. Alkoxysilanes can form oligomers or polymers after sequential hydrolysis and condensation reactions in aqueous alcoholic solution; they also bond to other materials, including those with Si-O-Si bonds, such as those present in certain clay minerals, via silicate bonding. It is, therefore, plausible that alkoxysilanes could polymerize and bond with suspended clay particles, in a manner similar to conventional polymer flocculants, although via a different mechanism. Once bonded together by alkoxysilane bridges, the clay particles might undergo flocculation, if they could be brought close together by the tendency of the alkoxysilane polymer to minimize its surface area. The objectives of this study were to: (1) flocculate MFT with five different alkoxysilanes in order to compare their behavior, and screen those with better performance. These tests were conducted in an undiluted MFT sample, which is an already dense suspension of clay particles. This is a hard test for any flocculant, but a relevant one for the oil sands industry; and (2) carry out an experimental design aiming to optimize and understand the role of solids content of MFT and silane dosage on the dewatering and densification of MFT using the best alkoxysilane selected in the screening part of this investigation. Mature fine tailings used in this research were kindly provided by Imperial Oil. A Dean-Stark apparatus was used to quantify its bitumen, solids, and water contents by refluxing toluene in a Soxhlet extractor. Condensed toluene and co-distilled water were continuously separated in a trap designed to recycle the toluene through the extraction thimble, dissolving the bitumen present in the sample, while the water was retained in the trap for quantification. Pore water from centrifugation of the MFT was used to determine its chemical composition by flame atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) (Varian 220FS). The particles size distribution of the solids was evaluated by laser diffraction using a Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments). The bulk MFT sample was stirred to homogenize it, and then 200 After the mixing step, the samples were allowed to settle under normal gravity (settling) or under centrifugation. Settling experiments were carried out by pouring MFT/flocculant samples into 100 Several tests were performed to determine the efficacy of the flocculants used in this work, including settling percentage, capillary suction time (CST), sediment solids content, and supernatant turbidity. Settling percentage was calculated as the ratio ( Five distinct alkoxysilanes (purchased from Gelest) were tested in this work for their ability to dewater MFT. PDADMAC, a water-soluble cationic and linear polymer, which is effective in coagulating inorganic and organic particles such as silt, clay, algae, bacteria, and viruses ( Flocculants with longer polymer chains (higher molecular weights - MW) can adsorb onto the surface of several particles at the same time, whereas polymers with lower MW attach to fewer particles ( The hydrolysis was carried out dissolving 1 Once the alkoxysilanes were hydrolyzed, flocculation experiments were performed according to the methodology described in Section A Central Composite Rotatable Design (CCRD) was used to study the influence of two variables – MFT solids content (wt%) and alkoxysilane dosage (ppm solids basis) – on the CST, settling percentage, sediment solids content, and supernatant turbidity of one alkoxysilane selected during the screening experiments. Each variable was studied at five coded levels (−1.41, −1, 0, +1, +1.41), and the model included twelve runs with four replicates at the center value, as shown in  Five distinct alkoxysilanes were used to flocculate MFT at concentrations of 1500, 3000, 4500 and 6000 Some alkoxysilanes were hydrolyzed before being used in the flocculation experiments to increase their degree of oligomerization, and hopefully improve their flocculation ability. Alkoxysilane oligomers can only be used as flocculants if they remain soluble in water, otherwise they cannot be properly dispersed in the MFT. The MFT sample was flocculated with hydrolized  Surface charges, quantified by the zeta potential, are important for a better understanding of particle stability ( Centrifugation improves MFT dewatering through the physical mechanisms of particle segregation, assemblage formation, and flow channeling ( Regarding the sediment solids content, an increment of approximately 3% was observed when pure MFT was subjected to centrifugation in comparison to normal gravity settling ( Compared to flocculation with PDADMAC and A statistical experimental design was used to investigate the effect of varying the dosage of alkoxysilane and MFT solids content on flocculation and dewatering. This experimental design allows for efficient analysis of variables without the need for a full-factorial experimental design ( Parameters with The values for the independent variables are the code values, where From the results obtained in the ANOVA ( As expected, CST increases with solids content, but decreases with  The solids concentration factor ( Although Experiments 6 and 7 ( Based on the results for the particle size characterization of MFT ( From an analysis of the response surfaces (  The supernatant obtained from centrifugation of the flocculated MFT was analyzed for turbidity and solids content. According to the results presented in Although in this work the optimization of MFT solids concentration and the dose of Furthermore, it is important to highlight that, as well as bis-amine, there are other commercially available aminosilanes with the potential to be tested as flocculants in the treatment of oil sands tailings. Silanes, besides being cheaper than many flocculants currently used, have significantly lower molecular weight, which brings two practical advantages: (1) it is easier to disperse low molecular weight polymers in tailings because of their viscosities are lower ( Among the alkoxysilanes tested only those containing an amine group showed a clear, dose-dependent improvement of dewatering properties of undiluted MFT. Both initial solids content of MFT and bis-amine dosage have significant effect on CST and percentage of settling, while only initial solids content of MFT presented an effect on SCF and only bis-amine dosage presented and effect on supernatant turbidity. Bis-amine was very effective in decreasing turbidity of recovered water from MFT flocculation process, even without calcium to help sedimentation, which favors even more its reutilization. This work was a preliminary study on the flocculation of MFT to point out the potential of aminosilanes, chemicals easily purchased, cheaper compared to flocculants currently used and with low molecular weight, which reduces their viscosities and shear-sensitivities. The authors gratefully acknowledge See See