Freshwater and marine seafood products purchased in Montreal, Canada, were screened for diverse veterinary drug residues including sulfonamides and potentiators, macrolides, lincosamides, nitrofurans, nitroimidazoles, amphenicols, quinolones and fluoroquinolones, one triphenylmethane dye and its leuco-metabolite, and tetracyclines. QuEChERS extraction ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) was validated in three model matrices (fatty fish, lean fish, and shrimp edible meat). Method detection limits were in the range of 0.002–3 μg/kg, and the accuracy of matrix-matched extracted calibrants was generally within acceptance criteria. The aquaculture or wild-caught samples of pangasius (basa), cod, salmon, sole, tilapia, trout, white shrimp and giant tiger prawn originated from Canada, China, India, Southeast Asia (Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam), and other regions worldwide. Overall, 38 % of the tested fish and shrimp samples had detectable residues of at least one veterinary drug or metabolite, and 25 % were not compliant to Canadian guidelines. Leucomalachite green was detected across various sample types (detection frequency: 13 %; maximum: 0.9 μg/kg). Other detected compounds (2–11 % of samples) included tetracycline (maximum: 36 μg/kg), 4-epi-oxytetracycline (18 μg/kg), oxytetracycline (13 μg/kg), metronidazole (13 μg/kg), sulfamethazine (4.8 μg/kg), sulfamethoxazole (4.2 μg/kg), trimethoprim (0.59 μg/kg), florfenicol (0.27 μg/kg), flumequine (0.21 μg/kg), enrofloxacin (1.6 μg/kg), and ofloxacin (0.52 μg/kg).Aquaculture provides about 100 million metric tons of seafood per year, more than half of the world’s seafood production ( Intensive practices pose several challenges for the sustainability of the sector including human and environmental health impacts ( Maximum residue limits (MRLs) have been established for the protection of consumers in Canada ( Depending on the substance status and required action level, quantitative analytical methods with sensitive detection limits are imperative for an accurate evaluation of MRL compliance. Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is the archetypal detection technique for veterinary drug analysis in foodstuff, combining high selectivity and sensitivity for reliable identification ( Analytical methods targeting compounds of different properties in matrixes of high fat content also require certain adjustments ( Traditional sample extraction and clean up methods are increasingly replaced by the QuEChERS approach (quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe) and expanded versions ( In the present study, a QuEChERS–LC-MS/MS method was designed to screen veterinary drugs in seafood sold in Montreal, Canada. The research objectives were threefold: (i) develop a multiresidue method to determine 10 antimicrobial classes in seafood; (ii) validate the analytical method on three representative matrix types: salmon/trout fillets (fatty fish), basa/tilapia fillets (lean fish), and shrimp edible meat (crustaceans); and (iii) evaluate drug residue levels on a range of seafood products purchased in 2018 in markets of Montreal, Canada. Veterinary antimicrobial residues were extracted using a modified QuEChERS method ( Certified standards were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.) at chemical purities of 95 % or higher, for sulfonamides [sulfamerazine (SMZ), sulfadiazine (SDZ), sulfathiazole (STZ), sulfadimethoxine (SDM), sulfamethazine (SMT), sulfamethoxazole (SMX)] and associated potentiators [ormetoprim (OMT) and trimethoprim (TRM)], macrolides [erythromicin (ERY)], lincosamides [lincomycin (LIN)], quinolones and fluoroquinolones [ciprofloxacin (CIP), enrofloxacin (ENF), flumequine (FMQ), and ofloxacin (OFL)], nitrofurans [furazolidone (FRZ), nitrofurantoin (NFT), and nitrofurazone (NFZ)], nitroimidazoles [metronidazole (MTR)], amphenicols [chloramphenicol (CAP) and florfenicol (FFN)], one triphenyl methane dye and its leuco-metabolite [malachite green (MG) and leucomalachite green (LMG), respectively], and tetracyclines [chlortetracycline (CTC), doxycycline (DXC), oxytetracycline (OTC), 4-epi-oxytetracycline (4-OTC), and tetracycline (TTC)]. Isotope-labelled internal standards had chemical purities >95 % and isotopic purities >99 %. Chloramphenicol-d5 (CAP-d5), leucomalachite green-d5 (LMG-d5), and tetracycline-d6 (TCC-d6) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.), while trimethoprim- Solvents of HPLC grade, including methanol (MeOH), acetonitrile (ACN) and water, were supplied by Fisher Scientific (Whitby, ON, Canada). Formic acid (FA; purity ≥95 %) and sodium chloride (NaCl) were obtained from Fisher Scientific (Whitby, ON, Canada). Magnesium sulfate (MgSO The tested capsulated syringe filters (0.2 μm porosity) included cellulose acetate, nitrocellulose, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and polypropylene (PP) from the Sterlitech Corporation (Kent, WA, U.S.A.), glass fiber filters (GFF) from Cole Parmer Canada (Montreal, QC, Canada), and regenerated cellulose from Fisher Scientific (Whitby, ON, Canada). Overall, 56 seafood samples were purchased in August 2018 from stores in the Montreal area (QC, Canada), including 32 fish and 24 shrimp products. Samples were collected by qualified university personnel and placed in individual plastic bags or Ziploc bags labelled with a unique laboratory identifier. Upon reception at the laboratory facilities, the fish samples were thawed (when applicable), and the muscle fillet was cut with a stainless-steel knife and ground using a NutriBullet NB101-S Pro 900 series. Shrimps were peeled and the edible meat was ground likewise. Homogenized samples were transferred to 50-mL polypropylene falcon tubes and stored at −20 °C in the dark until further preparation. A summary of sample codes and characteristics is provided in the Supporting Information (SI Table S1). The collected samples included red-meat fish such as salmon (salmonidae, n = 6) and trout (salmonidae, n = 4), white-meat fish such as sole (soleidae, n = 2), cod (gadidae, n = 2), tilapia (cichlidae, n = 8), pangasius (pangasiidae, n = 10), and crustaceans such as tiger shrimp ( The method was adapted from multiresidue QuEChERS methods from A sample intake of 2 g wet weight of ground fish or shrimp matrix was introduced in a 50-mL polypropylene tube and spiked with a surrogate internal standard mixture to reach a concentration of 10 μg/kg. The QuEChERS extraction then proceeded with the addition of 10 mL of HPLC-water with 0.1 % FA and then homogenization of the samples for 5 min with a Virtis grinder (Gardiner Research Equipment, New York, distributed by Fisher Scientific). Following the addition of 10 mL of ACN with 0.1 % FA, the samples were again homogenized with the Virtis grinder (5 min). Magnesium sulfate was added (4 g MgSO Instrumental analysis was performed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS). The injection volume was 100 μL for improved detection limits; a highly aqueous final extract composition (90:10 H Analyte detection was performed with a TSQ Quantiva triple quadrupole mass spectrometer from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). The instrument was operated in selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode. The first (Q1) and third (Q3) quadrupoles were operated at 0.7 Da FWHM. The collision gas pressure (CID gas) was set at 1.5 mTorr. The dwell time was set at 20 ms. The analyzer was coupled to a heated electrospray ionization (heated-ESI) source operated in polarity-switching mode. The source parameters were as follows: sheath gas was set at 55 A.U. (arbitrary units), auxiliary gas at 15 A.U., sweep gas at 0 A.U., spray voltage at +4300 V or −3500 V, ion transfer tube temperature at 350 °C, and vaporizer temperature at 250 °C. Compound-dependent mass spectrometry parameters are provided in SI (Table S3). Samples were quantified using extracted matrix-matched calibration curves of three distinct types: red-meat fish, white-meat fish, and shrimp. For instance, for salmon and trout samples (red-meat fish), the calibration curve was designed as follows. We pooled subaliquots of salmon and trout samples and homogenized the composite fish matrix. Native analytes were then added to 2 g aliquots at 9 calibration levels (0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 20, 50, 100, and 150 μg/kg), while the surrogate internal standards were spiked at 10 μg/kg. Individual salmon and trout samples were quantified based on the composite red-meat fish matrix-matched calibration curve. We proceeded likewise for the matrix-matched calibration curve in white-meat fish (pooled pangasius and tilapia matrix) and in shrimp (pooled tiger shrimp and white shrimp matrix). Calibration curve levels were thus extracted in parallel to the samples following the same QuEChERS procedure and UHPLC-MS/MS analysis (Sections For each sample, the concentration in the unspiked aliquot was derived from the response ratio (native analyte to internal standard area ratio) in field samples and the corresponding matrix-matched curve. Since the calibration curve levels were submitted to the overall extraction and analysis process, potential recovery losses were compensated by the quantification procedure ( Injection blanks were run at the beginning of each UHPLC-MS/MS batch sequence, and after quality control spikes to control for the absence of carryover. No contamination was noted in method blank samples (n = 3 per analytical batch). Compound identification in field samples relied on matching retention times with authentic standards, detectable signals for quantification (QT) and confirmation (CT) MS/MS transitions, and matching QT/CT relative responses ( Method limits of detection (LODs) were determined as per the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio method. The S/N was measured in low-end calibration curve levels constructed in red-meat fish, white-meat fish, and shrimp matrixes, and the LOD was derived from S/N = 3 (SI Absolute recovery was assessed as per the procedure described in previous studies for fish and invertebrates ( In (Eq. Calibration curves (Section Matrix-matched quality control samples were designed in the same way as the calibration curve but with a distinct spike level (10 μg/kg). Whole-method accuracy was determined by spiking jointly target analytes and isotope-labelled internal standards to red-meat fish, white-meat fish or shrimp (n = 3 per matrix type) at the start of the preparation procedure and quantifying them as per their corresponding matrix-matched calibration curve. Precision was derived from the relative standard deviation (RSD %) calculated on these replicates. Whole-method precision was also evaluated on non-spiked samples, by performing triplicate sample preparations for ∼20 % of the samples from the market survey. The RSD % of these replicates is provided in SI (Table S5). An initial calibration verification standard (ICV) was run to verify the accuracy at the beginning of each analytical sequence. Continued calibration verification (CCV) standards (overall n = 24) were also run regularly along the LC-MS/MS sequence ( Human health risks associated with the occurrence of veterinary antimicrobial residues in seafood were estimated using a deterministic approach with “conservative” values (e.g. highest concentration and high consumption values). Such scenarios using “conservative” values overstate typical exposures ( The method LOD should be lower than 1 μg/kg for some compounds to discern MRL compliance or violation. This was not always attainable when a small extract fraction was injected to LC-MS/MS. If using a high organic solvent percentage in extract, too high a sample injection volume could imply peak broadening and other distortions, or even losing a portion of the signal in the RPLC chromatographic dead time due to viscous fingering phenomena ( To ensure that clean extracts were injected and thus extend the chromatographic column lifetime, a filtration step prior LC-MS/MS analysis was investigated (SI Table S7). Antimicrobials of the nitrofuran class showed the highest mean recoveries regardless of filter type (81 %) and the hydrophobic triarylmethanes the lowest (15 %). Of the 7 tested filtration membranes, only 2 yielded acceptable recoveries for a majority of compounds. Polypropylene had recoveries within 70–120 % for nearly all tested compounds except doxycycline (54 %) and triarylmethanes (<10 % and <1 % for the chromatic and leuco forms, respectively). Regenerated cellulose yielded the most consistent filtration recoveries (92–110 %) of the targeted veterinary antimicrobials, without exceptions (SI Table S7). Regenerated cellulose was also previously used for the filtration of biota extracts prior LC-MS analysis of polar to moderately polar pesticides and antimicrobials ( Solvent extraction and ultrasonic-assisted extraction were investigated, using diverse organic solvents—MeOH, ACN, and combinations of the latter—amended with formic acid modifier. A defatting step was carried out with hexane ( Alternatively, a QuEChERS extraction procedure was investigated using experimental designs (SI Table S8). The addition of acidified water at the start of the procedure (prior the addition of ACN) was imperative to avoid clumping of the fish and shrimp matrix during the homogenization step. Without the water addition step, highly turbid extracts not amenable to LC-MS/MS analysis were obtained even after QuEChERS purification. A significant amount of aqueous co-solvent with ACN may be key in reducing the amount of coextracted interferents. In addition, ACN can later be separated from water by salting out ( The influence of other QuEChERS extraction parameters was investigated (SI Table S8). Varying the mixing time (Virdis grinder) consecutive to solvent addition between 3–7 min had a limited influence on analyte signal and precision. Regardless of mixing time, 21/27 compounds had normalized responses within 85–100 % (SI Fig. S2), and a 5 min mixing time was finally retained. Different amounts of MgSO Method validation was conducted adapted from literature procedures for emerging contaminants and general U.S. FDA guidelines ( LODs ranged between 0.002–2.9 μg/kg in red-meat fish, 0.002–3.0 μg/kg in white-meat fish, and 0.002–1.5 μg/kg in shrimp (SI Table S4). The LOD performance is in the same order of magnitude or better than recent studies targeting veterinary antibiotics in seafood ( Absolute recovery was assessed at a concentration level of 50 μg/kg, adapted from the methodology described in Regardless of matrix type, absolute recoveries of tetracyclines and related metabolites were low (<19 %). The recovery of oxytetracycline, for instance, was in the range of 12.8–14.8 % in the three representative seafood matrix types (SI Table S9). This may be due to the ability of tetracyclines to form complexes with divalent metal ions ( It should be noted that these are absolute recoveries, referring to the amount recovered independently from corrective measures (extracted calibrants, surrogate internal standards). Even if low absolute recoveries were observed for some compounds, accuracy was still acceptable since quantitation was derived from matrix-matched extracted calibrants—an approach also used by Matrix effect compensation in samples was applied using matrix-matched calibration curves for each of the three main sample types (classified within fatty fish, lean fish, or crustaceans). This approach has been previously reported for emerging contaminants, for instance in foodstuff ( Once the initial accuracy assessment had been performed, continued verification of accuracy was conducted by inserting matrix spikes along the LC-MS/MS batch sequence. The accuracy of extracted CCVs is summarized in SI, with 8 replicates analyzed for each matrix type (SI Table S6). In fatty fish CCVs (salmon/trout), nine compounds were within 90–110 % mean accuracy, eight within 80–90 %, five within 70–80 %, and one (metronidazole) within 60–70 %. In lean fish CCVs, 23/27 compounds had a mean accuracy within the set acceptance range of 70-130%, while four compounds were flagged with biased-low (60–70 %) accuracies (erythromycin, furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, and nitrofurazone). All compounds were deemed within acceptable accuracy range in shrimp CCVs (SI Whole-method precision was also assessed on a subset of non-spiked samples from the market survey (SI Overall, 21 out of 56 (38 %) seafood samples tested positive to at least 1 veterinary drug residue. More than 1/3 Compound-specific occurrence data for the sample dataset (n = 56) are summarized in Florfenicol, metronidazole, ofloxacin, sulfadiazine, sulfamethazine, and tetracycline were seldom detected in samples from the present survey ( Detectable levels of quinolones/fluoroquinolones were reported in 40 % of pangasius shark catfishes from the present survey, consistent with use trends of these compounds (e.g., enrofloxacin) in pangasius farms in Vietnam ( Similar to this study, enrofloxacin and oxytetracycline were reported at detection frequencies of 11.4 % and 10.5 % in a comprehensive survey of 958 fishery products in South Korea ( Compound-specific concentration ranges of the present dataset (n = 56) are summarized in The fishery product with the highest rate of violations was tilapia (6 out of 8 assayed samples, or 75 %). In tilapia samples, guidelines were exceeded mostly for sulfamethoxazole. Tetracycline (not allowed for use in aquaculture in Canada) was detected above the reporting limit (CFIA’s “DTC” criterion [detected above the reporting limit], CFIA aquaculture therapeutant residue monitoring list) in giant tiger prawn (36 μg/kg) and tilapia (0.86 μg/kg). The banned compound metronidazole surpassed the DTC criterion (reporting LOD = 0.07 μg/kg) in white shrimp samples from Indonesia (1.4 μg/kg) and Thailand (13 μg/kg). Concentrations of leucomalachite green in samples with positive detections ranged between 0.05–0.90 μg/kg ( Trimethoprim/sulfadiazine and ormetoprim/sulfadimethoxine (potentiated sulfonamides), florfenicol, and oxytetracycline are reported to be used in farms of saltwater reared Atlantic Canada salmons ( Previously, Health Canada and CFIA’s Total Diet Study ( It was beyond the scope of the present study to evaluate how seafood processing (e.g., cooking) may affect exposure to veterinary antimicrobial residues. The stability, decrease or increase of residues in edible meat would greatly depend on their physicochemical properties ( Hazard Quotients (HQs) were calculated for compounds detected in 2018 in markets of Montreal using “conservative” values (Table S12). Based on the available ADIs, HQs for individual compounds (SDZ, SMT, SMX, TRM, FMQ, ENF, OFL, FFN, TTC, and OTC) were below 10 % for all the scenarios, therefore indicating no risk of adverse effects for these compounds. For compounds confirmed to be genotoxic or for which genotoxicity cannot be ruled out (e.g. leucomalachite green and metronidazole), the ADI approach is generally not acceptable and a margin of exposure (MoE) approach should be used ( The present study aimed at evaluating a multi-class multiresidue procedure to screen veterinary drug residues in seafood products sold in Montreal, Canada. Some of the targeted compounds are banned or not approved for use in Canada with stringent action levels to protect consumers, and a suitable degree of sensitivity was thus required for the intended purpose. A QuEChERS–LC-MS/MS method targeting 27 veterinary antimicrobials was validated in three representative matrix types (red-meat fish, white-meat fish, and shrimp). Whole-method accuracy and precision were generally within acceptance guidelines, and the LOQ performance was suited to assess MRL compliance. The validated method was applied to a set of 56 samples among diverse seafood products (pangasius, cod, salmon, sole, tilapia, trout, white shrimp and giant tiger prawn) collected from grocery stores in Canada. Leucomalachite green, sulfamethoxazole, and enrofloxacin were the most frequently detected residues. None of the salmon, sole, and trout samples farmed in Canada exceeded Health Canada’s guidelines. However, 14 of 46 samples (30%) imported from Eastern Asia, Southeast Asia, and other areas were not compliant according to current guidelines for veterinary antimicrobial residues. Based on current risk assessment tools and data, exposure to seafood contaminated with veterinary drug residues is unlikely to represent a health concern in Canada. Additional toxicological data on metronidazole are nonetheless required to assess the risks related to the occurrence of this substance in seafood.  The authors report no declarations of interest. We thank the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is supplementary data to this article: