Using data from Web of Science, this research investigates how physical science researchers funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research complied with its open access policy, and compares the citation counts of articles published through gold and green models.
                  It was found that, for articles published between 2008 and 2015, 9% were available through gold open access routes and 13% were available through green routes; most were not openly accessible. Citation rates were comparable for green open access and non-open access articles, but citation rates for gold open access articles were lower. After controlling for publication year, citation rates of gold, green, and non-open access articles were comparable. Among gold open access articles, citation rates were highest for open access journals with article processing charges, but after controlling for publication year, articles published in hybrid journals, followed by those in open access journals with article processing charges, achieved the highest citation rates. Articles published in free open access journals had the lowest citation rates. The results suggest that green open access is the most economical approach to comply with open access policies, and that it provides researchers with at least as much research impact as gold open access.Over the past decade, funding agencies around the world have adopted open access policies. At the time of writing this article, 71 funding agencies There are, however, two ways to achieve open access: gold open access and green open access. “Gold open access” is achieved through publishing in one of three groups of journals. One group charges its authors no article processing fees, generally because the costs of publishing are borne by a sponsoring society or association. Thus, authors can publish in these journals for free. We call them “free open access journals” in this study. A second group of journals collects article processing charges (APC) from authors to publish their articles. We call this group “open access journals with APC.” The third group is composed of traditional subscription-based journals that offer authors the opportunity to make their individual article openly accessible upon payment of article processing charges. We call this group “hybrid journals.” All gold open access articles are freely available to readers immediately upon publication. Under the “green open access” model, authors publish their articles in traditional subscription-only journals. Then, after a publisher-specified embargo period has elapsed, they “self-archive” their works by depositing them in institutional or subject-specific repositories. Green open access is permitted by most publishers; at the time of writing this article, SHERPA RoMEO, which provides information on publisher copyright and archiving policies, states that 74% of the publishers listed on their site allow self-archiving of “post prints” (articles that have completed the peer review process) ( The possible “citation advantage” of open access publishing, that is, the possibility that articles made freely available to readers are cited more often than those behind a paywall, has been studied for more than a decade ( Of the many studies on citation advantage of open access, one stream has focused on that of green open access, and again the results have been mixed. For example, two early studies showed that making a subscription-only article available in a repository increased the citation rate by 36–200%, and that the amount of increase varied by discipline, with physics articles being the greatest beneficiaries of green open access ( However, some have argued that much of the citation advantage experienced by green open access articles might be the result of other factors. Another stream of research on the citation advantage of open access articles has concentrated on gold open access. Using data from the Directory of Open Access Journals, Journal Citation Reports, and Scopus, Over the last few years, more and more traditional subscription-based journals have started to offer authors the option to make their article openly available upon payment of APC. A few studies have therefore focused specifically on the citation advantage of hybrid journals. Studying the open access and non-open access articles in journals published by Springer and Elsevier, Sotudeh and colleagues found that open access articles had a citation advantage ranging from 21% to 49%, depending on the year of publication ( While many studies have looked at whether open access publishing (either gold or green) leads to greater numbers of citations, relatively few have directly compared the citation counts of gold and green open access. Studying the types of open access papers at the European and world level from 1996 to 2013, Archambault and colleagues found that green open access articles had the greatest citation advantage, being cited 53% more than the average of all papers in the study ( In the current academic climate, obtaining research funding has become increasingly competitive, and so it is important for researchers to both use their funds to their best advantage and maximize the possibility of achieving high scientific impact for their work. The average article processing charges range from $1000 for open access journals with APC to $3000 for hybrid journals ( As discussed in the Specifically, the following research questions are investigated: How did researchers comply with CIHR Open Access requirements? Green open access or gold open access? Were there differences in the number of citations received by green open access and gold open access articles? Among the gold open access articles, what percentage of articles was published in free open access journals, open access journals with APC, and hybrid journals? Were there citation differences among the three groups? We searched Web of Science to identify articles funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research using the “Funding Agency” search field. During the initial search, it was found that authors used several different variations of CIHR, therefore, we used the following search string to try to capture as many eligible articles as possible: FO=(“Canadian Institutes of Health Research”) OR FO=(“Canadian Institute of Health Research”) OR FO=(“Canadian Institutes for Health Research”) OR FO=(“Canadian Institute for Health Research”) OR FO=(cihr). Because CIHR has required fund recipients to make their peer-reviewed journal articles openly accessible since 2008, we limited the results to the publication types of “journal article” and “review” and used year limits of 2008–2015. Other publication types such as proceedings paper, editorial material, book chapter, letter, reprint, software review or book review were excluded, as they are not covered by the policy. Since we were interested in finding out how physical scientists complied with the open access policy, we limited the results to Web of Science's Research Areas of physical science, which includes 17 research areas. The bibliographic data from Web of Science was downloaded in January 2016 for further analysis. Web of Science classifies articles as non-open access or open access. Because the number of non-open access articles was large, a random sample was selected. We then searched Google Scholar to determine if the full text of each article in the sample was available in either an institutional repository or a subject repository, thus whether the article was available through a green open access route. We used the “All versions” function within Google Scholar to find the various versions of these articles. During the research process, we found that the articles classified as “open access” by Web of Science included only those published in free open access journals or in open access journals with APC, but not those published in hybrid journals. Open access articles published in hybrid journals were actually included in the non-open access category. Also, some free open access and open access journals with APC were misclassified by Web of Science as “non-open access.” Thus, as we came across open access articles in our non-open access sample, we moved them to the gold open access category for analysis. See For each gold open access article, we searched the journal's website to determine whether it was a free open access journal, an open access journal with APC, or a hybrid journal. The APC of each open access journal with APC and each hybrid journal were recorded based on the information found on their websites. Some journals charged a base APC for a certain number of pages, with additional fees charged for extra pages. In that case, we recorded only the base fee. Some journals also offered discounts to certain groups of authors, e.g., members of certain scientific associations, or authors from developing countries. In those cases, we recorded only the regular charges for these journals. If APC were expressed in a currency other than U.S. dollars, we converted them to U.S. dollars using the exchange rate on the day of research. We then compared the citation counts of these different types of articles to determine whether there were differences in the scientific impact, as measured by citation counts, of the different open access models. 2754 records funded by CIHR in the research areas of physical sciences were retrieved from Web of Science. We then limited the results to the publication years of 2008–2015, and received 2736 results. Before 2008, only two records reported the funding agency as being CIHR, one from 2005 and one from 2007. In 2008, the number of records that reported that the funding agency was CIHR increased to 101, indicating that it was in this year that researchers began to comply with CIHR's open access policy, part of which is to acknowledge CIHR as the funder. As we stated earlier, 2008 was also the year that the CIHR open access policy came into effect. The numbers of physical science articles funded by CIHR in each year can be found in  Of the 2736 articles, 2573 were classified as “non-open access” by Web of Science and 163 as “open access” ( A random sample of 487 articles was selected from the 2573 non-open access articles (confidence level: 95%; confidence interval: 4%). Of the 487 sample articles, we found that 16 were actually gold open access articles, which included 12 articles published in hybrid journals, 2 in free open access journals, and 2 in open access journals with APC. These 16 articles were moved to the Gold Open Access Category. Therefore, 471 were studied to determine if they were available through a green open access source (institutional or subject repository) ( Of the 471 articles, 67 articles could be accessed through either an institutional or subject repository. Three of the 67 were available in both a subject and an institutional repository. The remaining 404 articles were not openly accessible through a green route. Of the 163 articles categorized as “open access” by Web of Science, 8 were published in free open access journals, 155 were published in open access journals with APC, but none were published in hybrid journals. Because the open access category of Web of Science did not include those published in hybrid journals, it is difficult to determine exact number of open access articles published in hybrid journals. Based on the proportion of open access articles classified as “non-open access” by Web of Science, we were able to estimate the percentage of green open access, gold open access, and non-open access categories, as shown in We also estimated the percentage of each of the gold open access types. As can be seen from We compared the average number of citations per document for gold open access articles, green open access articles, and non-open access articles. Surprisingly, gold open access articles had the lowest average number of citations per document (8.71), whereas green open access achieved an average of 12.37 citations per article, a level 1.42 times that of the gold articles. Non-open access articles were also cited more often than gold articles; they had an average number of citations of 11.90. Research has shown that there is often a time lag between publication date and citation peak ( The average APC for hybrid journals and open access journals with APC was $1589 USD (SD The 155 articles published in open access journals with APC appeared in 27 journals, only one of which was not listed in Journal Citation Reports. Journals listed in Journal Citation Reports are often considered core research journals in their fields, so there is some indication that these are high-quality journals. Seven journals published more than three of the articles examined in our study. The title, impact factor, and APC of these journals are listed in  We also compared the average number of citations per article for the three gold open access types: free open access journals, open access journals with APC, and hybrid journals. Open access journals with APC had the highest average number of citations per article (8.9), whereas the average number of citations per article for hybrid journals and free open access journals were much lower: 5.6 and 5.5, respectively. When we compared the citations of those articles published between 2012 and 2014, the results were quite different. Hybrid journals had the highest average citations of 10.83, double of that of open access journals with APC (5.31). The average number of citations for articles published in free open access journals dropped to 2.8 for 2012–2014. However, numbers of both hybrid and free open access articles were very small for this period, so this sample may not be representative. Details are listed in This study explores how physical science researchers receiving funding from CIHR complied with the open access policy. The results show that in the eight years following implementation of CIHR's open access policy, the compliance rate was low; only 22% of the articles funded by CIHR were openly accessible. Our results align with previous literature, which indicated that about 20%–24% of peer-reviewed journal articles were openly available ( It has been argued that if there is no open access enforcement in place, the compliance rate is likely to be low ( Funding agencies are experimenting with other approaches to increase the open access compliance rate. One such method is to consider only openly accessible articles when assessing a grant applicant's research. For example, four higher-education funding bodies in the U.K. recently announced that only final peer-reviewed manuscripts deposited in an institutional or subject repository will be eligible for the Research Excellence Framework, a system for assessing the quality of research in U.K. higher education institutions ( As In recent years, the infrastructure of institutional and subject repositories has improved, and advances in Internet search engines (e.g. Google Scholar, arguably the most used academic search engine) have made it easier to retrieve different versions of the full text of an publication ( Of the three gold open access types, free open access journals were the least used type (8%), while hybrid journals were used more often (25%) and open access journals with APC were the most popular choice (67%). The average impact factor of free open access journals is the lowest, and the average citation counts per document, when publication date is considered, is also the lowest for this group. This finding is consistent with previous literature. Comparing the impact of different models of open access journals in sciences, We found that both the average APC and impact factor of hybrid journals were significantly higher than those of open access journals with APC, which echoes previous findings that there is a positive correlation between APC and journal impact factors ( It should be noted that, when publication date is controlled, the citation advantage of hybrid journals over other types of open access models, as exhibited in this study, may be subject to self-selection/quality bias. Because the APC of hybrid journals are much higher than open access journals with APC and, of course, than green open access sources, authors may select only their highest quality research for publication in hybrid open access journals. Therefore, the higher citation rates of papers published in hybrid journals might be a reflection of the quality of those papers, instead of the effect of hybrid open access. As pointed out by This study has several limitations. First, we used Web of Science as the data source, thus the articles included are limited to those indexed in Web of Science, which is known to be selective in choosing journals for indexing. Therefore, our results might not be applicable to those not indexed in the Web of Science. However, the journals indexed in Web of Science are generally considered to be the core journals in scientific literature, thus we believe our results are able to provide a snapshot of the current status of open access for articles funded by CIHR. Second, we used Google Scholar as the tool to determine whether the full text of a publication was freely accessible on the web through green open access in either an institutional or a subject repository. It is possible that the full text of some articles was deposited in institutional repositories or subject repositories, but that these openly accessible versions were not identified by Google Scholar, and thus that the actual percentage of green open access articles could be higher than the percentage reported in this study. To test whether this was the case, we later selected a random sample of 20 articles categorized as “non-open access” in our study, and searched the Internet using a variety of search strategies to try to find the full text of these articles. However, none of these was found in an institutional or subject repository. Therefore, the results are believed to be accurate. Third, it is possible that some of the articles in our study resulted from research funded by CIHR grants received before the implementation of the open access policy (i.e., before 2008), and thus the grantees were under no obligation to comply with this policy, and thus the compliance rate is higher than our calculations show. Finally, we searched for the green open access versions of the articles in our sample in early 2016. The articles in our study were published from 2008 to 2015. To comply with the policy, researchers have 12 In this study, we found that most articles did not comply with CIHR's open access policy. It is our hope that the low open access compliance rate identified in this study might serve as an impetus for CIHR and, potentially, other funding agencies, to take action to increase, or at least monitor, compliance. The green, rather than the gold, open access route was a more common choice for those researchers who complied with the policy. We found that articles available through the green route were more likely to be cited than gold open access articles, but that after controlling for publication date, there was no significant difference in citation rates between green and gold. Of gold open access journals, open access journals with APC were chosen for the majority of articles, while hybrid journals were the second choice, and free open access journals were much less popular. After controlling for publication date, hybrid journals had a higher citation rate than did open access journals with APC; free open access journals had a much lower citation rate than the other two categories. In this time of scarce research funds, maximizing the impact of one's work and using one's research funds wisely makes sense. Our study shows that green open access is the most economical method for researchers to comply with funder open access policies, and that it provides researchers with at least as much research impact as does gold open access. The results identified in this study also have implications for librarians. When providing educational sessions on open access, librarians should ensure that they provide information on selecting and using institutional and/or subject repositories, and identifying and negotiating publisher copyright and self-archiving policies.