This is a review of recent literature on pristine and specifically functionalized mesoporous silica-based materials or ‘designer silicates’ used as adsorbents for aqueous pollutants removal and water treatment. Ordered mesoporous silicates, their synthesis, surfactants removal, and preparation of the designer silicates were briefly introduced before discussing their applications in the removal of inorganic and organic pollutants. Designer silicates, such as the nitrogen/thiol-containing, the magnetics, and the composites, are highlighted with their various applications for the removal of toxic metal cations, anionic species, dyes, pesticides, industrial organics, pharmaceuticals and other emerging pollutants. These applications were briefly discussed indicating salient features and using illustrating figures where possible.Pollution of water sources by organic and inorganic chemical toxins is a priority concern worldwide. The magnitude of this concern is enormous, and remediation of contaminated water sources is seemingly intractable because of the diverse nature of pollution sources [ Several techniques have been employed for pollutants removal from water, such as filtration, chemical precipitation, ion exchange, reverse osmosis, electrochemical treatment, membrane technology, evaporation recovery, photocatalysis, solvent extraction, and adsorption. However, most of these are limited by techno-economic and environmental considerations [ Ordered mesoporous silica is eliciting a growing interest in water treatment chemistry due to its various remarkable properties. These properties include high specific surface area, large pore–size, chemical inertness, an abundant repertory of surface functional groups that can be tailored for excellent selectivity towards specific pollutant, good thermal stability and low cost of manufacture [ The objectives here are to focus on the advances in ordered mesoporous silica-based adsorbents used for aqueous inorganic and organic pollutants removal. Brief highlights of the types, synthesis routes and modifications/functionalization of the ordered mesoporous silica-based adsorbents are given. This is followed by an overview of several studies involved with the application of ordered mesoporous silica-based adsorbents in the specific adsorption of inorganic and organic pollutants from aqueous solutions. In summary, the review highlights the recent reports (mainly from 2009 to 2017) on the use of ordered mesoporous silica-based adsorbents for the removal of inorganic and organic pollutants from aqueous solutions, and presents a brief description of these adsorbents, advantages, and limitations; and reports on regeneration methods where available. To give insight into the adsorbents effectiveness, reported adsorption capacities are noted. This class of mesoporous materials consists of extensive inorganic or inorganic–organic hybrid arrays with the exceptional long-range order, highly tunable textural and surface properties and controlled pore size and geometry [ Mesoporous silicates can be synthesized under varying range of pH conditions (from strongly acidic to highly basic – Usually, a single surfactant (such as the Pluronic-type surfactant; poly(ethylene oxide)- To access the pores within the ‘as-synthesized’ mesoporous silica composites, it is necessary to remove the surfactants used in the self-assembly. Mesoporous silica synthesized via the surfactant-templated sol–gel reaction is carefully packed and shrink significantly and irreversibly when directly dried from solution thus losing its characteristics [ Though remarkable properties of ordered mesoporous silicates are highlighted for water treatment purposes, these properties are sometimes not accessible. A major challenge with mesoporous silicate upon template removal is its hydrophilicity due to the high surface silanol density ( Typically, an organic functionality can be introduced post-synthesis by grafting or chemical attachment onto the silanol groups in the mesoporous silica or by co-condensation during the template-directed synthesis of the mesoporous material. The chemical attachment of organic functionalities onto the silanol groups changes the silica wall polarity and introduces the desired functionality which enhances the surface adsorption properties ( Direct grafting (Primary modification) through reaction of suitable organosilane, in an appropriate solvent, with the silica surface under reflux [ Reacting a previously grafted functionality with another functional species (Secondary modification) [ Transformation of the grafted functionalities by additional treatments. Co-condensation during the template-directed synthesis of the mesoporous material involves the simultaneous condensation of the desired organic functionality (such as 3–aminopropyltriethoxysilane) alongside the primary silica source (usually the alkoxides such as tetramethyl (or tetraethyl) orthosilicate) in the presence of a surfactant. The desired organic functionality is covalently linked through a non-hydrolysable Si The aim of the routine characterization is to determine the physical (morphology, structure, and texture) and chemical (functional groups, nature of interactions between atoms and possibly their orientation) properties of the final synthesized meso-structured silicate materials. This implies that meso-structured silicates' characterization is classified into two groups: the physical and chemical characterizations. The physical characterizations include determination of; (a) the specific surface areas, pore volume and diameter, and porosimetry using gas physisorption method, (b) the organization of the silicate morphology up to the three-dimensional order and nanoscale using electron (both scanning and transmission) microscopic techniques, and (c) the types of meso-structures or any structural damage arising from the functionalization process using the diffraction (X-ray and electron) techniques [ The chemical characterizations include determination of; (a) the effectiveness of the desired functionalization, and possible nature and form of the chemical constituents using spectroscopic techniques such as the Infra-red, Raman and ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy, (b) the amounts of organic groups incorporated as well as their stability using thermogravimetry, (c) the quantities of some basic elements using elemental chemical analysis, and (d) the effectiveness of covalent bonding of the organosilanes to the silica framework and the extent of siloxane condensations using the nuclear magnetic resonance [ In order to meet the evergrowing stricter water regulatory standards placed by governments and other regulatory bodies, numerous advances in material science are emerging for enhancing water purification process. Functional designer silicates with high efficiency and excellent selectivity towards specific aqueous pollutants are particularly interesting due to the recorded successes of these materials for aqueous inorganic species adsorption. Nitrogen/thiol and magnetic silica-based designer materials have been at the forefront of these advances. Though pristine silicates have various remarkable properties which may be beneficial in the water treatment process, they have been outclassed by their designer derivatives. For instance, ordered mesoporous MCM-41 and MCM-48 silica were synthesized, amine functionalized with N Zhang et al. [ Bois et al. [ Kang et al. [ Amino-functionalized mesoporous and nano-mesoporous MCM-41 silica have also been synthesized using 3-aminopropyltrimethoxisilane and used for removal of Ni(II), Cd(II) and Pb(II) from aqueous solution [ Aminopropyl (NH Comparable to melamine-based dendrimer amines [ Sayari et al. [ Coupling of other active functional groups to already functionalized silica materials has also been explored by coupling salicylaldehyde to aminopropyl SBA-15 in the synthesis of N-Propylsalicylaldimino-functionalized SBA-15 mesoporous silica ( The foregoing has shown that amino functionalizing of silica may be essential for removal of aqueous pollutant cations. In that case, it may also be possible to load a high amount of amino or nitrogen groups on siliceous materials such as SBA-15 for higher cations removal. In line with this logic, Zhao et al. [ In order to ease the separation process of the silica adsorbents from the aqueous solution after the pollutants adsorption, some workers have magnetized the silicates. One major advantage of such designer silicates is that they can be separated from aqueous solution after the adsorption process by an external magnetic force ( Recently, cubic spinel crystallites of Zn−silica modified cobalt ferrite magnetic nano-structured composite (CoFe Some researchers have argued that it is vital to make the adsorbents' preparation process eco-friendly by a substantial reduction of secondary pollutants. In line with this, Alotaibi et al. [ An attempt has been made at combing porous silica and graphene nanosheets decorated with Wang et al. [ Inorganic functionalities have also been incorporated or imprinted on silicate surfaces to improve the metals' adsorption process. For instance, in order improve adsorption efficiency of Pb(II) from acidic wastewater (pH 2.0), Pb(II) imprinted mesoporous silica functionalized with iminodiacetic acid was fabricated [ Other organic molecules, such as the biologically active dopamine, may be useful in the adsorption process. Uranium ions have been adsorbed in aqueous solution using post-synthesis dopamine grafted mesoporous silica [ Coupling of inorganic phosphate to silicates is eliciting interest in aqueous pollutants removal [ Studies of adsorption of organic pollutants on pristine and mesoporous silicates seem to be a less traveled part compared to adsorption of inorganic pollutants like the toxic metals. Here, we shall discuss some of the recent studies dealing with adsorption of organic pollutants on silicates. One major drawback in using pristine silicates for organics adsorption is that the surface silanol groups are hydrophilic and easily forms hydrogen bonds with water thus limiting the adsorption process. However, Huang et al. [ In order to improve the efficiency of the silica-based materials, several nitrogen-containing designer silicates have been synthesized and studied. Aminopropyl- and tripolyphosphate-functionalized SBA-15 have been studied for pesticide (pentachlorophenol– PCP) removal from aqueous solutions [ Bi-functionalized SBA-15 based designer adsorbents have been synthesized to target specific molecular features of pollutants [ In line with the concept that cooperative effect [ Another nitrogen-containing silicate is the polyacrylic acid-grafted mono-disperse silica nanoparticles [ Various studies have reported that it is possible to magnetize designer silicate adsorbents to be used for organics removal from aqueous solution. However, unlike the adsorption of aqueous cations, less attention has been given to designer magnetic-silicates for removal of aqueous organic pollutants. Amino-functionalized magnetic mesoporous MCM-41 silica (magMCM-41-NH Magnetic core-shell silicates have also been recently used for removal of Congo red dye from aqueous solution [ In addition to the nitrogen-containing and magnetic functionalities of designer silicates, others have been studied recently. For instance, a comparison has been made of the effect of multiple roles of similar organic functional groups in designer silicate adsorbents specifically using mercapto- and sulphonic acid functionalization of SBA-15 for adsorption of the antibiotics ciprofloxacin [ A comparative adsorption study of Boldine (2,9-dihydroxy-1,10-dimethoxyaporphine) was carried out using pristine and propyl-sulfonic acid-functionalized SBA-15, SBA-16, and mesocellular foam (MCF) [ Apart from incorporation of organic functionalities on the silica surface, inclusion of transition metal (such as Co(II), Ni(II) and Cu(II)) functionality onto the surface of MCM-41 [ Recently inorganically modified spherical mesoporous MCM-41 silica using CuO exhibited better adsorption capacity for the cationic dyes– crystal violet and methylene blue (52.9 and 87.8 mg/g, respectively) compared to the pristine spherical mesoporous MCM-41 (46.2 and 65.7 mg/g, respectively) [ Similar to the inclusion of transition metal functionality onto the silicate surface, coal fly ash (containing primarily Si, Al, and Fe at concentrations of 239.5, 108.0 and 60.3 mg/g, respectively) was used to modify 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane functionalized mesoporous MCM-41 [ In the same vein, Wang and co-workers have shown that metal ion-modified mesoporous silicates obtained from naturally occurring palygorskite or Illite clay may be used for efficient removal of both organic pollutants and metals cations [ The combination of adsorbents has also been studied as a method of increasing pollutants adsorption capacity. In this regard, mesoporous silica has been coated on micrometer-sized and nanometer sized zeolite A and these were compared with the pristine zeolite A for adsorption of butyraldehyde [ Lately, silica aerogels [ Another recently attempted synthesis of designer silicate with the simultaneous ability for fast removal of organic, inorganic, and microbial contaminants from aqueous solution [ Though various mesoporous silica materials have recently been investigated for pollutants removal from aqueous solution, SBA-15 and MCM-41 have received the greatest attention. Comparison of some recent designer silicates and pollutants adsorbed from aqueous solutions are shown in Apart from the use of these silicates for direct adsorption of aqueous pollutants from water, designer mesoporous silica and its functionalized derivatives have been applied in areas such as photocatalysis. Titanium substituted SBA-15 has been prepared by several methods and used as support for TiO Dou et al. [ In order to meet the evergrowing stricter water regulatory standards placed by governments and other regulatory bodies, numerous advances in material science are emerging for enhancing the water purification process. One such advance includes the functionalized ordered mesoporous silica or designer silicates. In the last eight years, designer silicates have gained wide interest as adsorbents for aqueous pollutants due to the plethora of designer opportunities available. The nitrogen/thiol-containing silicates and the magnetized derivatives or magnetics (surface or core-shell) have been extensively explored for the removal of toxic cationic and anionic species, dyes, pesticides, industrial organics, pharmaceuticals and other emerging pollutants. Recently, higher definition designer silicates, comprising of functionalized mesoporous silicates and other adsorbents synergistically combined, are proving far more successful materials than the lone functionalized silicates. In conclusion, the present review emphasizes the following: Though pristine silicates have various remarkable properties which may be beneficial in the water treatment process, they have been outclassed by their designer derivatives. It is possible to synthesize designer silicates having single or multi-functionalizations, by co-condensation or post-synthesis grafting, using various molecules ranging from organic, inorganic to biological molecules. Inclusions of transition metals functionality onto the silicate surface via an already attached organic-moiety resulting in enhanced adsorption have also been achieved. Coupling of other active functional groups to already functionalized silica materials is an emerging trend that is proving successful for enhanced adsorption efficiency. Recent studies have shown that some ‘supposed waste materials’, such as fly ash and rice husk, could be used as major raw material sources for designer silicates instead of the commercially-available organosilanes. This could drastically reduce the cost of designer silicates production. It is also possible to synthesize eco-friendly designer silicates which exclude the extreme conditions of the popular classical method of preparation such as extreme pH, high temperature and toxic chemicals. Co-condensation or post-synthesis grafting of functional groups does not significantly affect adsorption efficiency, but the type and density of the functionality. For instance, multi-nitrogen-functionalized silicates exhibit higher pollutant loading capacity than the sparse analogues– mono-nitrogen-functionalized silicates. The magnetics, apart from easing the adsorbent separation process by using an external magnetic force, enhances adsorption capacity. Higher definition designer silicates have been synthesized by coupling ordered mesoporous silicates with other adsorbents. These kind of materials have resulted in Extra-ordinary adsorption capacity, Luminescent adsorbent that can be used to visually monitor the adsorption process instead of using the usual instrumental methods, and Designer adsorbents with the simultaneous ability for fast removal of organic, inorganic, and microbial contaminants from aqueous solution. Designer silicates have shown high adsorption and excellent selectivity towards specific pollutant, as well as the capacity for simultaneous removal of aqueous pollutants. It is worthy to note that these materials exhibited excellent reusability. The success of aqueous pollutants removal by designer silicates could be attributed to hydrogen bonding, electrostatic attractions, hydrophobic interactions, or π–π stacking interactions between the silicates and pollutant. In some cases, it has been attributed to the cooperative effects among these, or even sequential adsorption of one pollutant may lead to the enhanced synergistic adsorption of a second pollutant. With the large literature available and still being published on designer silicates, perhaps some of the biggest challenges to overcome now are: actual field trials, synthesis of greener designer silicates, and their large-scale production. Available literature are mostly idealized laboratory studies and cannot be used to predict the usefulness of designer silicates in actual field situations due to the presence of interfering agents. The applicability of these materials might be another challenge since most laboratory studies are batch processes while the column or fixed bed is usually preferred in the industries. The byproducts of the sol-gel synthesis methods are not environmentally friendly; greener synthesis methods for designer silicates is of high necessity so as not to cause a bigger environmental challenge will endeavoring to solve another. Despite the promising potential of designer silicates, difficulty in large-scale production is still a stumbling block for their industrial applications because the currents synthesis methods are complicated, difficult to control, not eco-friendly, and results in small yields. It is envisaged that with the rapid development of new and facile synthesis methods, the listed challenges will result in exciting research outcomes, and designer silicates are bound to play a vital role in water treatment technologies. We acknowledge the supports of