The process of drilling, in general, always produces sound. Though sound is used as a diagnostic tool in mechanical industry, its application in predicting rock property is not much explored. In this study, an attempt has been made to estimate rock properties such as uniaxial compressive strength, Schmidt rebound number and Young's modulus using sound level produced during rotary drilling. For this purpose, a computer numerical controlled vertical milling centre was used for drilling holes with drill bit diameters ranging from 6 to 20mm with a shank length of 40mm. Fourteen different rock types were tested. The study was carried out to develop the empirical relations using multiple regression analysis between sound level produced during drilling and rock properties considering the effects of drill bit diameter, drill bit speed and drill bit penetration rate. The F-test was used to check the validity of the developed models. The measured rock property values and the values calculated from the developed regression model are fairly close, indicating that the developed models could be efficiently used with acceptable accuracy in prediction of rock properties.Engineering characterisation of rocks has been studied intensively by many investigators. Acoustic emission studies related to rocks were initiated by The acoustic identification of rocks during drilling process was studied by Generally, rock excavation projects require uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and static modulus of elasticity (E) of the rock material. High-quality core specimens of proper geometry are needed for direct determination of these parameters. However, it is not always possible to obtain suitable specimens from highly fractured and/or weathered rocks for this purpose. Therefore, models predicting UCS and E based on rock index tests and rock properties could be an alternative method. The Schmidt rebound hammer (SRH), originally developed to measure the surface hardness of concrete ( Based on the above discussion, it is evident that, very limited work is reported in the literature regarding the application of sound levels for estimation of rock properties. An effort has been made in this study to establish statistical relationship between rock properties and sound level produced during rotary drilling using multiple regression analysis technique for the predictions of UCS, E and SRN of rocks from sound level produced during rotary drilling. The ISRM ( It is thus hoped that this study will serve mining, civil and geotechnical engineers in making practical decisions at the stage of the preliminary site investigation works, for determining UCS and E of rocks. For laboratory investigations, different rock specimens were collected from different parts of India representing a variety of rock strength. During sample collection, each rock block was inspected for macroscopic defects so that test specimens are free from fractures and joints. In the laboratory, rock drilling operations were performed on BMV 45 T20, CNC vertical machining centre ( Table size – 450 Recommended optimum air pressure – 6 Power supply – 415 Carbide drill bits of shank length 40 The instrument used for sound measurement was a Spark 706 from Larson Davis, Inc., USA. The instrument was equipped with a detachable 10.6 Compressive strength is one of the most important mechanical properties of rock material, used in mine planning design. AIM-317E-Mu micro controller compression testing machine manufactured by Aimil India Private Limited was used for measurement of universal compressive strength. It has an intelligent pace rate controller, motorized pumping unit and loading unit with maximum loading capacity of 2000 Schmidt rebound hammer is often used for determination of SRN and UCS during the early part of field investigation. It is a measure of the hardness of the rock material by counting the rebound degree. Tests were performed with DIGI-SCHMIDT 2000. The graphic display unit of the instrument displays the rebound value. UCS, Young's modulus and point load tests were performed according to ISRM suggested methods ( Test samples for rotary drilling, having a dimension of 20 For each combination of drill bit diameter, drill bit speed and penetration rate, a total of 64 sets of test conditions were arrived at (drill bit diameter of 6, 10, 16 and 20 For 15 It may be argued that sound produced from the CNC machine itself may affect the sound level measurement during rock drilling. It is important to mention that if the sound level difference between two sources is more than 10 Multiple regression analysis is widely used for modelling and analyzing the experimental results. Physical properties of rocks can be predicted by multiple regression modelling, the statistical methodology used to relate variables ( The results of rock properties (UCS, SRN and Young's modulus), Point load test, Schmidt hammer test, weathering grade, grain size and range (maximum and minimum) of A–weighted equivalent sound level recorded during drilling of different rocks are given in These results were analysed using Multiple Regression and Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) technique. For modelling and analysis SPSS software version 17.0 ( The mathematical modelling of sound level produced during drilling is influenced by many factors. ANOVA was carried out to find which input parameter significantly affects the desired response. To facilitate the experiments and measurement, four important factors were considered in the present study. They are drill bit diameter in mm (A), drill bit speed in RPM (B), penetration rate in mm/min (C) and equivalent sound level produced during drilling in dB (D). The responses considered were UCS, Schmidt rebound number and Young's modulus. In order to compare all reasonable regression models, a backward elimination procedure was used as the screening procedure ( For UCS, the best model found was The ANOVA for UCS is given in It can be observed from Finally, as observed from the model summary ( Experimental analysis also shows that, as the UCS increased the sound level produced during drilling also increased for rock samples collected. UCS values obtained using regression model, Point load test and Schmidt hammer test were then plotted against the experimentally measured UCS values for all tested rocks using 1:1 slope line ( The procedure described in As seen from  The same procedure as described in As seen from  Sound level produced during laboratory scale rock drilling was applied to predict rock properties. The study developed empirical relations using multiple regression analysis method between sound level produced during drilling and different rock properties (UCS, SRN and Young's modulus) considering the effects of drill bit diameter, drill bit speed and penetration rate. The F-test related to the utility of the overall regression model was implemented to check the validity of the models. The multiple regression models explain 99.57%, 99.71% and 97.22% of the total variation in the observed UCS, SRN and Young's modulus tests respectively. The measured rock property values and those calculated from the regression model are fairly close which indicates that the developed models could be effectively used, with acceptable accuracy, at the preliminary stage of design to predict the rock properties in mining industries. One of the major advantages of this investigation is that more than one rock property can be predicted by a single experiment. However this method may not be suitable for very hard rocks (UCS > The empirical relationships developed are not aimed at replacing the ISRM suggested testing methods, but rather as a quick and easy method to estimate the rock properties like UCS, SRN and Young's modulus. It is suggested that the experimental investigation should be repeated on a number of additional rock types in order to determine/confirm these statistical relations. Further study is required to see how varying the rock type affects correlations.