Low grade powdery zinc oxide ores (5.2% Zn, <2 mm) are mixed with cement 5 wt.%, pelletized and solidified. The diameters of the pellets obtained are between 5 mm to 8 mm. When the pellet solidification periods are 3 days, 10 days and 45 days respectively, the alkaline leaching rates of zinc in the pellets are up to 92.2%, 87.3% and 72.9% respectively. Decreasing the solidification time can reduce reaction time, increase dissolution of zinc in pellets and lower the effect of initial zinc concentration on leaching rate. The experiment results show that the minimum solidification time is three days, and the kinetic study indicates that alkaline leaching of the low grade zinc oxide pellets is controlled by the diffusion of the leach liquor through the gangue layer in the whole leach process, and the apparent rate constants are 3.51×10−2 day−1, 8.09×10−3 day−1, 4.74×10−3 day−1 respectively.The processing of zinc oxide ores is becoming more attractive due to the depletion of zinc sulfide ores as well as the restriction on sulfur emissions during their processing. There is very abundant zinc oxide ores in Yunnan province (China). The zinc oxide ores usually contains a low grade zinc, high grade calcium magnesium carbonate and silica. Leaching of zinc can be performed either by hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical routes. The low grade zinc of the ores results in high consumption of energy in pyrometallurgical processing due to the necessity of heating high contents of gangue materials. The high content of silica usually enters solution as silica gel with zinc when acid leaching method is used. The formation of silica gel makes filtration difficult. To overcome the filtration difficulty, a new flocculating agent (Magnafloc 156) was used by The zinc oxide ores used in the present study was from Lanping town in Yunnan Province of China. The raw ores ground was analyzed by chemical method and examined by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The chemical composition is given in According to the result of previous paper, nine experiments are designed. In all experiments, the liquor and solid ratio is 4:1.Other different experiment parameters such as solidification time, concentration of (NH The experiments are carried out in a column reactor that is fabricated from 5 mm thick glass. The column showed in  A plot of the percentage of leached zinc against time is presented in  When the solidification period is 45 days, the effect of initial zinc concentration in leaching liquor on the percentage of leached zinc is shown in When the solidification period is 10 days, the effect of initial zinc concentration in leaching liquor on the percentage of leached zinc is shown in Pellets are reacted with ammonium sulphate solution according to the following reaction equations ( The reaction of pellets can proceed in a topochemical manner, whereby the thickness of an outer shell of insoluble gangue layer is progressively increased while the inner core of unreacted particle is decreased. It is clear that the rate of reaction decreases with time in  Based on the experimental data in where When the diffusion through the gangue layer is rate controlling, the kinetics may be correlated graphically using the Valensi equation: where  Zinc is successfully recovered by pelletizing and alkali leaching in a column reactor. The percentage of leached zinc increases with in the concentration of ammonia and ammonium sulfate, so does the solubility values of zinc in leached saturation which are 14.48 g/dm Decreasing the solidification time can reduce reaction time, increase dissolution of zinc in pellets and lower the effect of initial zinc concentration on leaching rate. The experiment results show that the minimum solidification time is three days, or else the pellets have not enough intensity, break up too much and the leaching liquor is difficult to go through the material layer. When the solidification period is 45 days, zinc recovery in pellets increases significantly with the decrease of initial zinc concentration in leaching liquor. When the solidification period is 10 days, the initial zinc concentration has an inconspicuous effect on the zinc recovery in pellets. Decreasing the solidification time can lower the effect of initial zinc concentration on leaching rate, which is very useful in practice when the water phase is recycled to leach other pellets after extracting zinc from solution. The kinetic study indicates that alkaline leaching of the low grade zinc oxide pellets is controlled by the diffusion of the leach liquor through the gangue layer in the whole leach process, and the leaching rate equations of This research is supported by Green Metallurgy Research Institute in Kunming University of Science and Technology, China. The author gratefully acknowledges Prof. Fei, Prof. Ma and Prof. Shenli for help.