The issue of recycling organic wastes in closed life support systems (CLSS) includes both fundamental aspects of environmental safety of the recycled products and their effective involvement in material cycles and technical aspects related to the structure of the system and the crew's demands. This study estimates the effectiveness of wet combustion of different amounts of organic wastes in hydrogen peroxide under application of an alternating current electric field. The study also addresses the possibility of controlling the process automatically. The results show that processing of greater amounts of wastes reduces specific power consumption and shortens the duration of the process, without significantly affecting the level of oxidation of the products. An automatic control system for a semi-commercial installation has been constructed and tested experimentally. The solution of mineralized human wastes prepared in the automatically controlled process in this installation was successfully used to grow radish plants, with the main production parameters being similar to those of the control.Development of the programs for an extended presence of humans on Mars or the Moon faces numerous complex technical problems. One of them is designing and constructing closed human life support systems (CLSS), including those capable of operating on surfaces of celestial bodies for long periods of time. The issue that needs special attention is processing of organic wastes, which is important for closing the loops of material cycles in the system. Waste processing is not just a challenge for space exploration. The increase in the world population adds gravity to the environmental concerns. Different recycling technologies, wastewater treatment processes, and other measures have been developed to reduce human-induced environmental pollution. Certain waste recycling solutions proposed for reducing environmental pollution may be used in space systems, while processes developed for CLSS may be useful for terrestrial applications. At the present time, one of the most common methods of organic waste treatment is aerobic and anaerobic biodegradation ( Researchers of the Institute of Biophysics of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (IBP SB RAS) have developed and patented a method of wet combustion of organic wastes in the hydrogen peroxide aqueous medium, by using an alternating electric field ( In the IBP SB RAS, processes of wet combustion of wastes have been studied for several years, in a 1.25-L laboratory installation. The studies have addressed different physical and chemical parameters of oxidation of various organic wastes, including power consumption, types of voltages applied, duration of the mineralization process, waste oxidation level, and the composition of the products. However, until now, insufficient attention has been paid to the relationship between the scale-up level and productivity of the wet combustion method developed for processing organic wastes. Oxidation reactions of organic compounds in H An experimental installation of 6-L effective volume was constructed to study the influence of the scale-up on the process parameters. This volume is large enough to mineralize the daily wastes of two people: the number of members of the Bios-3 crew ( Electricity was supplied from the 220 V/50 Hz network, and the necessary voltage was achieved by using a system of electrical power transformers. An ammeter and a voltmeter were connected to each installation for monitoring energy parameters of the process. Pressure and temperature sensors were used to monitor the oxidative process in the semi-commercial reactor. Two types of organic wastes were used: 1) human wastes (with a ratio of 1.5 L urine to 150 g feces per day) and 2) plant waste (ground dry wheat straw). Wheat straw was used as model plant waste because straw comprises the major portion of the plant waste ( Each type of the waste was mineralized separately. The wastes were mixed with hydrogen peroxide, and the mixture was poured into the reactor; then alternating voltage was applied to the electrode rods to induce the process. Mineralization rate was regulated by varying the voltage. The amounts of H As mineralization produces considerable foaming and gas emissions, the process rate needs to be regulated to avoid reactor breach. This is achieved by varying the voltage supplied to the electrode rods. Three stages can be distinguished: 1) an initiating voltage, which speeds up the reaction rate; 2) an operating voltage (which is somewhat lower than the initiating voltage), sustaining the process; and 3) a final voltage (which is somewhat higher than the operating voltage), accelerating the decomposition of H In this study, we analyzed the following parameters: the duration of the process and its power consumption, the efficiency of hydrogen peroxide utilization, and the level of oxidation and composition of the products. The total power consumed by the foam breaker and platinum catalyst ( The levels of oxidation of the solutions were estimated based on the values of chemical oxygen demand (COD), and the lipid and organic nitrogen contents. COD was determined by the titrimetric method ( Automatic control of the process of organic waste mineralization in the semi-commercial reactor was performed by controlling the pressure. Preliminary experiments showed that this parameter was the best indicator of the phases of waste mineralization in the reactor: oxidation initiation, propagation, and termination. The wet combustion process is mainly intended for mineralization of human wastes. Fiber processing by this method involves considerable time and energy consumption and requires substantial amounts of H Although some of the elements of human wastes may vary considerably, the major elements such as K, Na, Cl, S and P vary too little to cause significant deviations from the normal dynamics of mineralization process. Therefore, it appears possible to design an automated control system based on kinetics of a certain parameter. Radish plants were grown in watertight stainless-steel 850-m Plants were grown under continuous light conditions. The intensity of photosynthetically active radiation was 150 W/m Radish plants were grown hydroponically, on an inert substrate – expanded clay aggregate. Irrigation was done automatically, every 4 h. Eleven liters of the nutrient solution was used, which enabled thorough moistening of the root substrate. The solution produced in the automatically controlled reactor process was used as a mineral fertilizer in the experiment on growing radish plants. Knop's solution was used in the control. The volume of the mineralized solution used in the test was sufficient to supply the necessary amount of nitrogen to the plants: 400 ml per plant chamber. Calcium and potassium nitrates were added to the mineralized solution during plant growth in order to maintain nitrogen concentration of the solution at the level corresponding to the control. During processing of human wastes, almost all nitrogen volatilized from the solution as ammonia ( CO  As can be seen from Only the semi-commercial reactor was equipped with an automatic control system, as this type of the reactor is more suitable for use in a CLSS [see 2.1]. As noted above (3.1), the wet combustion method was more effective for processing human wastes, and, thus, the automatic control system was designed with a view to using it for this purpose. In the case of combustion of human wastes, during the entire mineralization process the voltage may be changed only once (from 100 V to 50 V), as in the large volume, mineralization proceeds effectively, and there is no need to use the final high voltage to decompose the H Changes in the parameters of the mineralization process are shown in The most accurate indicator of process development is the gauge pressure ( Therefore, we controlled the operation of the reactor based on the readings of the pressure sensor. The pressure of 200 mm H Stable operation of the reactor could be possible not only at a pressure of 80 mm H The design of the automatic control system for oxidation process in the reactor was based on the one pushbutton principle. The control of the process is based on the strength of the signal from the pressure sensor, which is transformed into switch signals of the corresponding relays intended for conducting the process ( The automatic system consists of ( a power package; a control unit; and actuating devices. The power package consists of starters, autotransformers TR1 and TR2, and a power source for the relay. This unit is intended for power supply to the reactor electrode rods and switching of the catalyst and foam breaker. The power package supplies power to the control unit. The control unit comprises a power source, a panel of the converter of the signal from the pressure sensor (PS), a digital display, and control elements. This unit is intended for measuring and converting the signal from the pressure sensor and generating control signals to switch transformers TR1 and TR2 on and off. The digital display shows the pressure as mm H Actuating devices are the foam breaker and the catalyst for complete oxidation of hydrogen and volatile compounds released during waste mineralization. Operation of the automatic control system consists of the following steps ( When the start button is pushed, power is supplied to the system: transformer TR1 and the control unit. Mineralization is initiated, and the current pressure is continuously compared with the initial, preset value (80 mm H Once the pressure of 80 mm H Once the pressure of −20 mm H The reaction products may be poured out at any time after the completion of the process. It is important that time is not a process parameter, and an operator need not be present to finish the process. The course of the automatically controlled reaction is plotted in Then, the pressure rises in a snowball fashion, reaches a certain maximum, and drops dramatically to a negative value. The decrease to the negative pressure is caused by the complete release of the gas from the solution and cooling of the gaseous medium in the reactor by the reflux condenser. The mineralized solution prepared in the automatically controlled process was chemically similar to the solution produced in the manually controlled reaction ( The elemental composition of the plants grown on the mineralized solution was somewhat different from that of the control plants ( Concentrations of the main photosynthetic pigments were within normal limits and did not differ significantly between experiments ( The mineral and biochemical compositions are given on a dry mass basis. Photosynthetic productivities were similar in both experiments, and the masses of the plants did not differ significantly between experiments ( The intervals presented in Analysis of the results shows that the use of larger volume reactors for wet combustion considerably increases energy and time efficiency of the process, and this may be very important for planetary bases with large crews. As the population density of these bases grows, waste processing will become more efficient and take less time. The natural question that arises is: How can a sufficient amount of H The issue of hydrogen peroxide synthesis in the CLSS was principally resolved by The automatic control system will save the time of the crew members, who will not need to continuously control the operation of the installation. As shown in this study, mineral solutions produced in the automatically controlled process of organic waste oxidation may be used as a source of mineral nutrition for plants cultivated in the system. Thus, the method of organic waste oxidation described in this paper may be regarded as a technologically suitable component of the infrastructure of the closed-loop CLSS. This study was carried out in the IBP SB RAS and supported by the grant of the