 Prof. Luc Delaey was born on National Day of Belgium July 21, 1939 in Gullegem, Belgium. He graduated as Master of Metallurgical Engineering at the Catholic University in Leuven in 1963 after which he went to the University of Stuttgart to become dr. rerum naturalis in 1966 under the guidance of Prof. Warlimont. Returning back to Belgium, he obtained a research fellowship from the Belgian National Science Foundation after which he obtained a permanent position at the department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering of the Catholic University Leuven in 1968. He became full professor in 1974. Prof. Delaey holds different visiting professor positions such as Carnegie-Mellon (1970), INSA-Lyon (1981) and Barcelona (1994–1995). Prof. Delaey focussed his research initially on the physical metallurgy of diffusionless phase transformations, thermodynamics of phase equilibria, electron microscopy. Especially his work on martensite in Cu-based alloys was highly appreciated. He did pioneering work on the crystallography, the defects in the structure and the stabilisation of martensite in Cu–Zn–Al and Cu–Al–Ni alloys. In 1982, he was chairman of the ICOMAT-conference in Leuven as a recognition of his outstanding contributions. Prof. Delaey became professor emeritus after his retirement in 2004. The research activities are concerned with “Phase Transformations”, especially phase transformations in solid materials, mainly in metallic materials but also in ceramics and composites. The emphasis of the research is on the crystallographic, microstructural and thermodynamic aspects of phase transformations and the use of phase transformations as a “tool” to tailor microstructures and thus the properties, physical as well as mechanical. The research activities can be classified under the following six main topics: The study of diffusionless phase transformations, especially martensitic transformations. The study of precipitation reactions in non-ferrous alloys. The thermodynamic study of phase equilibria and the determination of phase diagrams. The study and development of metal–matrix composites. The development of new materials by thermal spray forming. The physical properties of materials. Most of the research activities on martensitic phase transformations were concerned with the copper-based alloys. A systematic study of the crystallographic and microstructural characteristics of a number of copper-based martensitic alloys resulted in a more general study on “Martensitic Transformations in copper-, silver- and gold-based alloys” (154 pp.) which was published co-authoring with H. Warlimont in Progress in Materials Science in 1974. This work is still recognized as the key-reference work in this field. The study was then extended to the properties related to the martensitic transformations in copper-based alloys. The results of this extensive study was published in a threefold overview paper “Thermoelasticity, Pseudoelasticity and the Shape Memory Effects Associated with Martensitic Transformations” in Journal of Materials Science also in 1974. This paper was the first dealing with these related properties and is still a reference paper concerning those properties. Later work allowed to generalise the study as published in “Diffusionless Transformations” (68 pp.) Materials Science and Technology (1991). The thermodynamics of the thermoelastic and pseudoelastic martensitic transformations were, because of some controversy, re-analysed in “Thermally and stress-induced martensitic transformations in the reference frame of equilibrium thermodynamics” (120 pp.) and published in Progress in Materials Science (1993). He has considerably contributed to the understanding of the martensitic transformations in copper-based alloys and of the shape memory effects associated with these phase transformations. He has been many times invited as keynote lecture at international conferences. As an electron microscopist, much of his interest went also to the formation of precipitations, especially in aluminium-based alloys. The influence of precipitation on the deformation behaviour during cold as well as hot working received his special attention. The careful analysis and interpretation of the results was very much appreciated by the Belgian industrial research partners in awarding his research team in 1987 with the three annual aluminium prize. Phase transformations are intimately related with phase equilibrium, a great part of the recent research activities is concentrating on measuring and calculating the phase equilibrium in multi-component alloy systems. These activities of the research team are awarded with a five year governmental research grant within the frame work of the so-called “concertated research actions of the government”. In this work, special attention was also paid to the ferrous alloy systems, which has led to the publication in Progress of Materials Science of a paper (163 pp.) on the phase transformation of γ He has taken the academic responsibility of the study and development of metal–matrix composites by powder metallurgy and non-conventional casting techniques. The aim of this study is to introduce within the metallic matrix, mostly an aluminium-matrix, finely dispersed intermetallics. Mechanical alloying is one of the preferentially used and further developed techniques. A new mechanical process has been patented. The activities in this field is reflected by the chairmanship of two international conferences on hot isostatic pressing in 1988 and 1993 and by his election as president of the International Committee on Hot Isostatic Pressing. In the framework of a national programme in promoting the collaboration between industry and fundamental research at universities, a research programme was set up to develop new materials, in casu intermetallics, by the plasma spray forming technique. Because this technique offers a kind of freedom in choosing the constituents, the study of the synthesis of intermetallics was started within the research team. The fundamental aspects of the metallurgical processes as well as the development of plasma spraying conditions to fabricate thin walled free-standing components receive equal attention. After the recent first successes of this part of the research, the activities concerning the plasma spraying of intermetallics were consolidated for an important period of time but have ended with the departure of Prof. Delaey. The physical properties of materials are studied from different point of views: the crystallography of the material and the influence of the symmetry on the properties, the thermodynamic interrelationships between some of those properties, the influence of the microstructure and how the tailor the microstructure in order to obtain the requested properties. Prof Delaey guided 32 Ph.D. students, published about 200 papers in regular journals and books, and about 120 papers in conference proceedings. A short list of some important papers is given here. H. Tas, L. Delaey, A. Deruyttere, “The self-accomodating character of the β′1 copper–aluminium martensite”, Met. Trans. 4 (1973), 2833–2840. H. Warlimont, L. Delaey, “Monograph: The martensitic transformation in noble metal base alloys”, Prog. Mater. Sci., 18 (1974), 1–154. L. Delaey, R.V. Krishnan, H. Tas, H. Warlimont, “Reviews: 1.28. Thermoelasticity, pseudoelasticity and the memory effects associated with martensitic transformations. I. Structural and microstructural changes associated with the transformations”, J. Mater. Sci. 9 (1974), 1521–1535. R.V. Krishnan, L. Delaey, H. Warlimont, H. Tas, “Reviews: Thermoelasticity, pseudoelasticity and the memory effects associated with martensite transformations. II. The macroscopic mechanical behaviour”, J. Mater. Sci. 9 (1974), 1536–1544. H. Warlimont, L. Delaey, R.V. Krishnan, H. Tas, “Reviews: Thermoelasticity, pseudoelasticity and the memory effects associated with martensite transformations. III. Thermodynamics and kinetics”, J. Mater. Sci. 9 (1974), 1545–1555. L. Delaey, “Diffusionless transformations”, Mater. Sci. Technol. 5, in: P. Haasen (Ed.), Phase Transformations in Materials, VCH Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Weinheim (1991), pp. 339–404. P. Wollants, J. Roos, L. Delaey, “Thermally- and stress-induced thermoelastic martensitic transformations in the reference frame of equilibrium thermodynamics”, Prog. Mater. Sci. 37 (3) (1993), 227–288. Van der Ven, L. Delaey, “Monograph: models for precipitate growth during the γ L. Delaey, Chapter 9: “Phase transformations in materials”, in: G. Kostroz (Ed.), “Diffusionless Transformations” (revised edition), Wiley-VCH (Weinheim), 2001, pp. 584–654. Prof. Delaey was also very active to promote science. He took up a lot of duties of which he really took care of. Apart from his scientific activities, he was very active as associate editor or member of the editorial board of high ranked magazines such as Scripta Materialia, Acta Materialia, Materials Letters, Intermetallics, Advanced Performed Materials. As a consequence Prof. Delaey's work was recognized by different professional honours and prizes: he was fellow of ASM, fellow of FIM, full member of the “Royal Academy of Sciences” and received a medal of the Royal Leopoldsorde. A summary of those “other activities” and “professional honours and prizes” is given below.  Associate editor of “Acta Metallurgica et Materialia”. Member of the editorial board of “Materials Letters”. Member of the editorial board of “Intermetallics”. Member of the editorial board of “Advanced Performed Materials”. Member of the “Structures and Materials Panel of AGARD” (1985–1995). Member of the International Martensite Committee. Chairman of the International Committee on Hot Isostatic Pressing (IHC). Member of the Board of Directors of AMT, Herk-de-Stad, Belgium. Member of the Board of Directors of Metalogic, Heverlee (Belgium). Associate editor of “Scripta Metallurgica et Materialia”. Vice-administrator for the year 2000 and administrator for the year 2001 of the “Klasse Natuurwetenschappen” of the “Koninklijke Academie van België voor Wetenschappen en Kunsten” (Royal Academy of Sciences). Member of the Research Council, K.U.Leuven (1978–1985). President of the International Committee on Martensite (1979–1982). President of the Belgian Society of Electron Microscopy (1980–1982). Chairman of the International Conference on Martensitic Transformations, ICOMAT-82 (1982). Member of the Direction Comité of the “Direction du Centre d’Etude de Chimie Métallurgique” of the French National Centre of Scientific Research (CNRS) (1983–1985). Member of the Direction Comité of the “Groupe d’Etudes Métallurgiques Physique et de Physique des Matériaux” of the French National Centre of Scientific Research (CNRS) (1983–1985). President of the Metal Society of the Flemish Royal Society of Engineering (1985–1990). Chairman of the International Conferences on Hot Isostatic Pressing (1988 and 1993). Head of the division of Physical Metallurgy (1985–1995). Head of the department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering of the K.U.Leuven (1989–1992).  Fellow of the ASM. Fellow of the FIM. Laureate of the National Interuniversity Foundation (1963–1965). Laureate and Medal of the International contest of the Scientific movies, Section: research, Brussels (1973). Laureate and Medal of the International contest of the Scientific movies, Section: education, Brussels (1973). Laureate of the Belgian Aluminium Association, three annual prize (1988). Laureate of the Belgian Aluminium Association, three annual prize (1993). Full member of the “Koninklijke Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schone Kunsten” (Royal Academy of Sciences) (1993). Medal of the Royal Leopoldsorde. Prof. Delaey was a very open-minded person with special interest to martensite but also to other physical problems of physical metallurgy. After a rather long period of illness, he died on September 29, 2009.