The purpose of this study was to determine how magnesium in seawater influences the corrosion behaviour of freely corroding steel. This was done by studying if Mg(OH)2 is formed and if calcite and aragonite differ in their protective properties. No Mg(OH)2 was detected after immersion of steel in a Mg2+-containing artificial seawater. Magnesium seems to influence the corrosion behaviour of freely corroding steel by causing calcium carbonate to precipitate as aragonite. Aragonite is more effective in covering the surface than calcite and is therefore more functional in preventing oxygen from reaching the steel surface, thereby lowering the corrosion rate.Seawater is a complex chemical system and its corrosivity is affected by various factors. These include the concentration and access of dissolved oxygen, salinity, concentration of major and minor ions, biological activity and pollutants Calcium carbonate (in both crystalline forms of aragonite and calcite) has a lower solubility product than for Mg(OH) Magnesium does, however, influence the crystalline form of the calcium carbonate deposits The purpose of this study was therefore to determine if and how Mg The compositions of the two artificial seawater solutions used in this study are shown in Low carbon steel (SAE 1006 [UNS G10060]) was used for the experiments. The chemical composition of this steel is given in Immersion tests were performed in continuously aerated solutions using three samples per solution. The volume of the solution was 2500  XRD also confirmed that the calcium carbonate precipitates that formed on the steel immersed in solution 2 (Mg Another important observation is that the calcite crystals have large gaps between the individual precipitates where oxy-hydroxides (rust) were formed ( No magnesium-containing precipitates were observed using scanning electron microscopy and none could be detected either by means of XRD on any of the samples. This confirms earlier observations made by Elbeik and co-workers The corrosion rates of the samples were determined by using average weight loss measurements after immersion for 21 days in the different solutions. These results are shown in It can also be seen from Aragonite was the only form of calcium carbonate deposited on the steel immersed in artificial seawater containing Mg Assistance from T. Rademeyer, B. Peyper, W. Olivier and P. Masuku is gratefully acknowledged.