Ayran is a yoghurt drink traditionally manufactured by mixing yoghurt with water and salt. The effects of different levels of water and salt on the rheological properties and serum separation during storage of traditionally manufactured ayran were investigated. Ayran samples were prepared by the addition of water at levels of 30 or 50g100g−1 and salt at levels of 0, 0.5 or 1g100g−1 and stored at 4°C. All samples exhibited non-Newtonian behaviour with shear-thinning and slight thixotropy was observed in some of the 30g100g−1 water-containing samples. The rheological properties of ayran samples were determined by using the power law model. The consistency coefficient decreased and the flow behaviour index increased dramatically with increasing levels of water and salt. Increasing the levels of added water and salt resulted in more serum separation. Proper adjustment of the amount of water and salt during the manufacture of ayran was necessary to obtain optimum consistency and to prevent serum separation during storage.Ayran is a yoghurt drink commonly consumed in Turkey, especially in summer season. Ayran is traditionally prepared by mixing yoghurt with water and salt which are added at levels of 30–50 Rheological properties of fermented milk beverages have been studied to determine the flow behaviour and their effects on the textural properties. A high consistency index and high pseudoplasticity correlated positively with the sensory acceptability of lactic beverages ( Optimum consistency for a good mouthfeel and no serum separation during storage are desired quality criteria in ayran. The texture of ayran, as perceived by the consumer, is affected by its rheological properties. However, the textural and rheological properties of ayran have been studied to a limited extent only in the literature. Ayran samples sold in retail markets in Turkey were found to be non-Newtonian pseudoplastic fluid, with thixotropy in some samples modelled with the power law model ( Ayran samples were prepared in the laboratory by the traditional method of mixing yoghurt, obtained from a local retail store, with water and salt. Salt solutions of different concentration were prepared by blending food-grade NaCl and tap water. The salt solutions were pasteurized by boiling for about 5 The rheological properties of the ayran samples after 1 day storage were measured using a rheometer (Haake Rotovisco RT20, Haake, Germany) in controlled shear rate mode. The sensor used was the Z40 DIN coaxial cylinder system with a cylindrical rotor of 20 Time-dependent flow behaviour of the ayran samples was determined in the preliminary trials by the measurement of change in viscosity with time at constant shear rate. Ayran samples containing 30 A controlled ramped shear rate test was also carried out to determine the rheological characteristics of the samples. The shear rate was increased linearly from 5 to 20 Samples were placed into 50 Rheological properties of ayran were determined by applying non-linear regression using SPSS 10.0 statistical software ( The effects of two levels of added water and three levels of added salt on the rheological properties were analysed in a 2×3 factorial design using the data from the two replicate trials. The data on serum separation from the two replicate trials were similarly analysed using a 2×3 factorial design. The composition of the ayran samples prepared in separate trials were similar for levels of dry matter and fat and for pH ( The apparent viscosity decreased and the shear stress increased as the shear rate was increased in the ayran samples demonstrating non-Newtonian behaviour with shear-thinning ( As the amount of water was increased, the consistency coefficient and the flow behaviour index changed ( The consistency coefficient decreased and the flow behaviour index increased as the concentration of added salt was increased in the ayran samples. The magnitudes of the flow behaviour index and the consistency coefficient were similar in the ayran samples that contained added water at a level of 30 Serum separation during storage for 15 days increased as the levels of added water and salt level increased ( Ayran is a diluted yoghurt drink that has the physical properties of yoghurt. During yoghurt manufacture, high pasteurization temperature (93°C) is applied to milk to denature whey proteins and thereby to improve the water holding capacity of the resultant yoghurt ( The rheological properties of ayran were found to be dependent on the water and salt level added in its preparation. Increasing the level of added water reduced the consistency index and increased the serum separation in ayran during storage. Added salt had similar effects on the rheological properties and serum separation, as added water. Addition of high levels of water (50 The authors would like to thank Filiz Lokumcu for her technical assistance in the rheological measurements.