Silica nanotubes (SiNTs) were synthesized by acid-leaching the natural halloysite nanotubes (HNTs). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images showed that SiNTs retained the morphology of HNTs. The specific surface area (183.6m2/g) and pore volume (0.74cm3/g) of SiNTs were three times higher than those of HNTs, which indicated more active groups on the surface of SiNTs than HNTs. The 29Si nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were used to trace the variations of chemical structures. NMR spectroscopy demonstrated the disappearance of Q2 structure (Si(OSi)2(OH)2) and Q4 framework structure (Si(SiO)4), and the partial chemical shift of Q3 structure (Si(SiO)3(OH)) from HNTs to SiNTs. Photoluminescence (PL) analysis showed the higher blue PL intensity of SiNTs than that of HNTs, which indicated that the as-synthesized SiNTs could have potential application in the fields of light localization and optical devices.Nanotube structures of silica materials showed unique physicochemical properties due to their nanosized wall thickness between the outer and inner surface. However, the potential applications of silica nanotubes (SiNTs) were still in the early stages of their development, scientists and engineers had already started to consider the possible applications for this kind of new material. It had been considered for use in drug-delivery systems Treatment of halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) or other clay minerals by organic or inorganic acids led to the leaching of the diaspore-like sheets from the structure Halloysite clay was obtained from Hunan, China. All reagents were analytical grade and used without further purification. All solvents were analytical grade and used without further purification. Halloysite clay was pretreated via emulsion dispersion, filtering, washing with distilled water, and drying for 8 The crystalline phases were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis with a RIGAKU D/max-2550VB+ 18 The white halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) showed short cylindrical hollow tubes with an average length of 0.7–1.5  The major chemical groups in SiNTs and HNTs were identified by the FTIR spectra ( The theoretical chemical composition of halloysite was similar to kaolinite except for its higher water content  The optical properties of HNTs and SiNTs at room temperature were also investigated under excitation at 286  This paper offered a more environmentally benign approach to the general production of silica nanotubes (SiNTs) from natural halloysite nanotubes (HNTs). The insights into the physicochemical aspects from HNTs to SiNTs indicated that leaching removed the gibbsite octahedral layer of halloysite, and more active groups were formed on the surface of SiNTs than HNTs. Chemical structure analysis demonstrated the disappearance of Q This work was supported by the