Scale effects on the strength of coal are studied using a discrete element model. The key point of the model is its capability to discriminate between the “strictly sample size” effect and the “Discrete Fracture Network (DFN) density” effect on the mechanical response. Simulations of true triaxial compression tests are carried out to identify their respective roles. The possible bias due to the discretization size distribution of the discrete element model is investigated in detail by considering low-resolution configurations. The model is shown to be capable of quantitatively reproducing the dependency of the maximum strength on the size of the sample. This relationship mainly relies on the DFN density. For all given sizes, as long as the DFN density remains constant with a uniform distribution or if discontinuities are absent in the considered medium, the maximum strength of the material remains constant.Discontinuities are observed at all scales in coal and they greatly affect its properties. For an instance, when the density of discontinuities increases, a decrease of the strength is observed. The unconfined compressive strength (UCS) of coal is also known to be dependent on the scale at which it is tested ( Coal, like rock, is a cohesive frictional geomaterial structure of which usually contains complex networks of discontinuities (cleats). Cleat networks can present very different spatial distributions, which depend on the coalification process, ranging from highly organized to extensively disordered configurations. Generally, an organized cleat set can be decomposed into face and orthogonal butt cleats (see In common bituminous coal, bright coal (vitrain rich) and dull coal (durain rich) are generally the main constituents. In bright coal, cleat spacing occurs at the millimeter scale, whereas it is generally much greater in dull coal (decimeter scale). Based upon the observation that cleating is often confined to the brighter bands in coal, the use of the terms “bright” and “dull” infers a measure of volumetric cleat density. The “brightness profiles”, therefore, enable an assessment to be made of coal seams structure ( In the present study, a numerical model based on the discrete element method (DEM) ( First, the study focuses on intact media, in order to assess the possible effect of discretization, i.e. the resolution of the model, on the predicted results. Then, the effect of an increasing density of discontinuities is characterized. Previous relationships between the strength and the size-scale have been proposed. For example, In this paper, a quantitative investigation on the scale effects on strength is proposed on the basis of numerical modeling. The size of a synthetic coal specimen is increased and the evolution of its strength is studied for given pre-defined cleat patterns. The scale dependency of the strength is then discussed. The algorithm used in the present discrete (or distinct) element method (DEM) ( For small deformations, coal exhibits a linear elastic response characteristic of geomaterials. To reproduce this behavior, linear elastic interaction forces between the discrete elements are sufficient. In the present model, the interaction force Once the DE's packing has been generated to form the numerical sample, pairs of initially interacting discrete elements are identified within an interaction range Contrary to classical DEM which only considers strictly contacting DE (i.e. The normal interaction force is calculated through the local constitutive law (see In compression, In tension, the normal interaction force is also linear using the same stiffness for small deformations. The maximum acceptable tensile force After the tensile force reaches its maximum value, the stiffness may be modified by a softening factor When Δ The shear force To model the nonlinear behavior of geomaterials, a modified Mohr–Coulomb model is used ( The maximum shear force The maximum shear force is calculated for a bonded interaction according to Only purely frictional new contacts can appear during the simulation, with a maximum shear force defined as Since spherical discrete elements are used in this model, the interaction law must include a moment in order to control the rolling occurring between DE during shear displacements. The moment transferred between two interacting DE can be written as Doing so, the sliding process increases and the resulting macroscopic internal friction angle Because the proposed DEM is a fully dynamic formulation, a local non-viscous type damping is used in the model in order to dissipate kinetic energy (see ( In order to model discontinuities in the DEM, a specific contact formulation, inspired by the work of Cundall and co-authors on the development of the Synthetic Rock Mass model ( The interactions forces concerned by this modified contact logic use the same formulation as defined in When sliding occurs between two DE on both sides of a discontinuity, Within the proposed DEM, intact coal material is represented by a set of spherical DE. In this study, numerical samples are generated using a polydisperse distribution size for the DE in order to avoid any artifacts related to regular packings. A wide range of coal properties can be found in the literature depending on site or testing specificities (see for example ( Due to the intrinsic presence of cleats at all scales in coal, it is difficult to assess directly its intact mechanical properties from triaxial tests, even if coal specimens are very small. Measurements made on small dull coal specimens by Mechanical characteristics of cleats are not straightforward to determine because, in vitrain layers for example, both mineralized and unmineralized cleats can be found in the same seam. A local strength value close to the average tensile strength for coal is thus chosen here (see A series of numerical tests have been performed simulating true triaxial testing apparatus. The loading is applied on the numerical specimen through six rigid frictionless boundary walls with servo-controlled positions depending on the chosen loading path (see Like the number of elements, the density or the strain rate applied on the specimen need to be selected correctly ( Since the scope of this article is to study the scale effect on strength, it is crucial to first identify the possible contribution of the discretization of DE sets on the response of an intact numerical specimen. For this purpose, four different cubical samples with identical volumes Behaviors of the four samples subjected to triaxial compressions under a 200 Yet, local interaction laws have been carefully implemented to be size independent and the respective fabric of each sample should be equivalent, since they have been generated using the same procedure. One could therefore expect a discretization independency. The porosities and, more particularly, the initial values of the coordination number (average number of interacting links per element) of each sample, are specific to each packing and thus show a dependence of the internal fabric on the resolution, which contributes to the global response discrepancy. This dependence can be formulated using the ratio between the number of DE, which composes the inner part of the sample To get rid of these resolution effects on Young's modulus and on strength when the discretization is low, the local values of the stiffness and tensile strength could be modified. However, because adjusting the micromechanical parameters is a delicate process, another alternative was chosen here, consisting in modifying the initial interacting distance for which cohesive links between particles are created (see Contrary to the case where initial coordination numbers were not kept constant ( As the purpose of the present study is to deal with the effect of discontinuities on the overall mechanical properties of cohesive frictional materials, several series of triaxial compression tests have been performed on numerical samples containing a pre-existing set of discontinuities (i.e. a discrete fracture network (DFN)). The first of these tests concerns the effect of the DFN density on the mechanical properties of a sample with a given size and discretization. In a numerical sample of length Four different samples have been built up with an increasing fracture density, which can be characterized by the number of cleats per sample length The comparison between experimental data and numerical results is presented in terms of the HBC parameter values in Numerical results show a decrease of the strength with an increase in the DFN density, which is in good agreement with experimental data. This result also agrees with the geological strength index (GSI) approach, which is commonly used in rock and mining engineering (  One can note that Young's modulus and the dilatation angle are equally affected by the presence of discontinuities. Both of them tend to decrease with an increase in the material cleating, which also confirms experimental observations ( Obviously, deformations as well as propagation of cracks (i.e. occurrence of local bond breakage) are strongly driven by the presence of pre-existing discontinuities, which act as planes of weakness inside the material. Due to their lower cohesive properties, the interacting links crossing the discontinuities tend to fail before the ones located in the intact zones of the material. It should also be noted that, as for the intact material, micro-cracking mainly occurs in the direction parallel to the main applied stress (the In order to assess once again, the influence of discretization on DEM predictions, the same series of triaxial compression simulations have been performed on samples with different As expected, a discretization effect can be observed. The amplitude of the strength decrease is not constant, with a higher strength decrease for the lower Thus, attention must be paid when a network of discontinuities is introduced into a DEM model and comparisons need to be made between results, using different discretization sizes. A test configuration has been set up to assess whether or not the DEM model can reproduce the scale effect on strength, by comparing its predictions to Medhurst and Brown results ( Using a given fixed distribution size for the DE ( Results in terms of stress–strain responses and volumetric deformations of the intact material (i.e. no DFN inside) are presented in A slight decrease of the strength, which converges to a limit value, can be observed when the sample size increases (see also A discrete fracture network (DFN) is now defined and introduced into the numerical samples (see The stress–strain and volumetric curves obtained for the tests performed under 200 In the presence of discontinuities, the decrease in the maximum strength is now well pronounced and it is consistent with the experimental observations provided by Medhurst and Brown (see A remarkable aspect concerns the contribution of the DFN or fracture density with the sample size if regularly spaced discontinuities are used. When representing this density (computed here as the ratio between the total surface Thus, when the size of the sample increases, as long as the density of the DFN increases, a decrease of the maximum strength is observed. One could extrapolate that given any sample size, as soon as the density of the DFN remains constant, the maximum strength of this sample will no longer change. These results suggest that the scale effect on strength mainly relies on the evolution of the DFN density rather than directly on the size of the sample. The size of the sample for which the DFN density becomes constant can be seen as a representative volume element (RVE). Beyond this size, no scale effect on strength is noticed. However, this conclusion is only valid when the DFN has a uniform spatial distribution. In the case of a non-uniform spatial distribution of fractures, no RVE is reached and the scale effect will not only depend on the fracture density, but also on their spatial correlation. Comparable numerical results have been recently obtained by Using a 2D approach based on a power law description of a fracture set, This conclusion is also in agreement with scaling laws developed for concrete materials. For example, the type 1 size shape effect law formulated by Bazant ( Several criteria based on Mohr–Coulomb theory have been developed to assess the scale effect in fractured geomaterials ( The effect of discontinuities on strength was numerically investigated using a discrete element method. The model integrates structural effects induced by discontinuities, which are known to produce strong behavior changes in rock-like materials, scale dependency above all. Triaxial test simulations were performed on intact samples and samples with pre-existing discontinuities. The results were systematically compared to experimental ones in order to estimate the reliability of the method. Emphasis was put on possible numerical bias. Resolution effects (i.e. discretization size effects) have been shown for low resolutions, which impose special care when discrimination studies and quantitative results are expected. Controlling the coordination number is one of the possible solutions to get rid of this artifact. The study focused on the relationship between the strength and uniform sets of pre-existing discontinuities regularly spaced in a numerical sample. Comparisons with experimental data have shown that the model can reproduce a strength dependency on the density of the DFN. The effect of structural features on the fabric of the material can be simulated. It has been shown that, starting from an intact material, increasing the DFN density tends to diminish the strength properties in a way quantitatively comparable to the experimental observations. When increasing the size of the numerical sample, it has been observed that the strength remains constant when discontinuities are absent or when the DFN density ( This work has been financially supported by the