The influence of temperature and carbonation duration time on the phase, morphology, particle size and purity of aluminum hydroxide produced by carbonation of aluminate solution obtained from sintered nepheline syenite leaching have been studied. Carbonation experiments were carried out at different conditions such as temperature range of 60–90 °C and cooling to room temperature during 8 h, constant temperature of 80 °C during 8 h, time range of 2–10 h and 80 °C. The products were analyzed by XRD, LDS, FESEM and XRF methods. Results show that bayerite was the major phase of aluminum hydroxide for all products; however, amount of gibbsite was formed with bayerite at constant temperature of 80 °C. The particle size distribution of the products was bimodal. The mean particle size of the all bayerite precipitates increased from 8.3 µm at 60 °C to 12.9 µm at 90 °C. The particle size of product decreased slightly from 12.6 to 11.9 µm during constant temperature process. Increasing the carbonation duration time tended to increase the size of the particles and the larger particle size was seen for 4 and 8 h. Morphologies of products were consisted of coarse ovoid–shaped and small spherical particles at all temperatures and times. The product at constant temperature included pseudo–hexagonal prism and ovoid–shaped morphology. By increasing the temperature and time of carbonation from 60 to 80 °C and 2–10 h, the amount of Al2O3 in the products increased whereas decreased at 90 °C because of the presence of other elements in the product. The amount of Al2O3 in product at constant temperature decreased whereas a higher amount of silica was existed in the product. According to results, at 80 °C and during 8 h, a single phase product with good particle size and purity can be produced.Gibbsite, bayerite, nordstrandite and doyleite are four polymorphs of aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH) Carbonation is a complex process involving absorption of CO Generally, carbonation is performed at temperatures of 70–80 °C and duration time of 5–8 h In most of the previous researches, studies on carbonation of aluminate solutions have been limited to the lime–soda sintering process and all the aluminum hydroxides precipitated are identified as gibbsite type To investigate the influence of carbonation temperature and duration time on the morphology, particle size, polymorphic and purity on aluminum hydroxide, carbonation experiments were done at different conditions. Aluminate solutions obtained by alkaline leaching the sintered nepheline syenite provided from Azarshahr alumina pilot in Eastern Azerbaijan province, Iran. The initial aluminate solution included 16 g L Experiments of initial carbonation temperature influence were carried out at the temperature range of 60–80 °C and the carbonated solutions were cooled to room temperature during 8 h to precipitate the aluminum hydroxide. A carbonation experiment also lasted for 8 h in a water bath with a constant temperature of 80 °C. To study the effect of duration time of carbonation, experiments were done at initial temperature of 80 °C and time range of 2–10 h. All experiments were carried out at pH 11 with pouring 1.5 L aluminate solution into a 2 L glass reactor. The solution was heated in a thermostatically controlled water bath (±0.1 °C). After the solution reached the desired temperature, the carbon dioxide gas was injected into the solution with a certain flow rate of 0.08 m The effect of carbonation temperature on the aluminum hydroxide production was studied at pH 11 and temperatures between 60 and 90 °C. XRD pattern of the products is shown in A carbonation experiment was also performed at 80 °C to investigate the influence of constant temperature during the carbonation process. The XRD pattern of product, shown in The carbonation experiments were carried out at 80 °C and pH 11 under different periods of 2–10 h to investigate the effect of the carbonation time on the products. For the experiments of carbonation process under 2–10 h, the bayerite appears in the final products based on the XRD analysis ( The particle size distribution (PSD) and morphologies of aluminum hydroxide precipitates under different temperature of 60–90 °C are shown in The morphology of bayerite precipitates formed at 70 and 80 °C ( The variation of mean particle sizes (d The PSD curves of the product at constant temperature of 80 °C is shown in The size distribution curves and FESEM images of aluminum hydroxide at different times of 2–10 h are shown in The influence of carbonation time on the d The XRF analysis of Aluminum hydroxide precipitated under temperatures of 60–90 °C is represented in The XRF analysis of Aluminum hydroxide produced at constant temperature of 80 °C is indicated in Chemical composition of Aluminum hydroxide products formed under carbonation times of 2–10 h is shown in According to XRF analyzes in The effect of temperature and duration time of carbonation process for producing aluminum hydroxide from aluminate solution obtained from sintered nepheline syenite leaching was investigated. Carbonation experiments were carried out at pH 11 and temperature range of 60–90 °C and cooling to room temperature during 8 h, constant temperature of 80 °C during 8 h, time range of 2–10 h and 80 °C. XRD analyzes of all products indicated that bayerite is the major phase of aluminum hydroxides; however, the aluminum hydroxide produced at constant temperature of 80 °C contains amount of gibbsite and sodium silicate. The aluminum hydroxides precipitated from all experiments have the bimodal PSD. The mean particle size of all bayerite precipitates increases with the increasing the temperature, e.g., from 8.3 µm at 60 °C to 12.9 µm at 90 °C and increases slowly at 80 to 90 °C, e.g., from 12.6 to 12.9 µm because of slow growth rate of bayerite crystals. For the low temperatures, a mixture of small spherical and ovoid–shaped particles are observed, whereas at high temperatures bunches of ovoid–shaped particles are found. Temperature constant during carbonation affects the phase of the product and a mixture of particles with shapes of ovoid and pseudo–hexagonal prism is produced. The particle size of product becoming smaller from 12.6 to 11.9 µm during constant temperature process due to the presence of gibbsite in a mixture with bayerite. Increasing the carbonation time tends to increase the particle size, but the smaller particle size is formed for the longest experiment of 10 h. However, the larger particle size is obtained at carbonation times of 4 and 8 h. Morphology of the products formed at different times of carbonation reveal small and ovoid particles made up of spherical particles agglomeration. By increasing the temperature and time of carbonation process from 60 to 80 °C and 2–10 h, respectively, the amount of Al The authors acknowledge the