This paper describes experimental work and the mathematical modeling of solvent extraction of cadmium(II) from neutral and acidic aqueous chloride media with a Cyanex 923 extractant in Exxol D-100. Solvent extraction experiments were carried out to analyze the influence of variations in the composition of the aqueous and organic phases on the efficiency of cadmium(II) extraction. In neutral and acidic chloride conditions, the extraction of cadmium(II) by the organophosphorous extractant Cyanex 923 (L) is based on the solvation mechanism of neutral H
                        n
                     CdCl(2+n) species and the formation of H
                        n
                     CdCl(2+n)L
                        q
                      complexes in the organic phase, where n
                     =0, 1, 2 and q
                     =1, 2. The mathematical model of cadmium(II) extraction was derived from the mass balances and chemical equilibria involved in the separation system. The model was computed with the Matlab software. The equilibrium parameters for metal extraction, i.e. the stability constants of the aqueous Cd–Cl complexes, the formation constants of the acidic Cd–Cl species and the metal equilibrium extraction constants, were proposed. The optimized constants were appropriate, as there was good agreement when the model was fitted to the experimental data for each of the experiments.Contaminants such as heavy metals are widely present in the liquid effluents originating from industry. Among them, cadmium is considered to be one of the most dangerous, and due to its toxicity, its use in industrial sectors has declined worldwide. Nevertheless, major users of cadmium in industry are still generating wastewater from applications such as metal plating, cadmium–nickel batteries, phosphate fertilizers, mining, pigments, stabilizers and alloys. Liquid effluents containing cadmium can be treated using conventional physical and chemical techniques such as precipitation, ion exchange, reverse osmosis, adsorption and liquid–liquid extraction. Although effective, they have several drawbacks when they are applied to wastewater composed of diluted metal solutions, and this limits their industrial application. New technologies are being developed for the elimination of heavy metals that are intended to be easy to implement and have low costs of operation. Supported liquid membranes (SLMs) have attracted significant attention over the past few years in the fields of environmental studies and hydrometallurgy. This reflects a growing interest in potential applications in membrane processes for the recovery and separation of metals. The diffusion-limited transport of metal ions across SLMs is a powerful new tool that provides a very competitive alternative to conventional treatments since it combines extraction, scrubbing and regeneration in a single step. Using a liquid as a membrane phase can enhance solute flux because liquids have higher diffusion coefficients than solids. The addition of a complexing agent to a liquid membrane improves the flux of metal ions, since the carrier reacts selectively and reversibly with the solute and helps to transport it across the membrane The modeling of supported liquid membranes for metal separation processes involves the development of a theoretical model of metal transport through the liquid membrane system under study. It is an essential step in designing an efficient recovery treatment and scaling up any SLM configuration The present manuscript describes work on solvent extraction of cadmium(II) from neutral and acidic chloride media using the neutral organophosphorous extractant Cyanex 923 in the aliphatic diluent Exxol D-100. The removal of cadmium(II) from aqueous chloride solutions using Cyanex 923 as an extractant was described as promising, mainly due to the high extraction efficiency Cyanex 923 is a neutral solvating extracting agent. It is a mixture of four phosphine oxides with the general formula R Liquid–liquid extraction experiments were carried out in separatory funnels in which equal volumes (10 The solvent extraction studies were performed at concentrations of cadmium(II) in the aqueous feed phases of 0.3–10 The mathematical model of the studied separation system was derived based on the mass balances and chemical equilibria involved in the investigated media. Assuming equilibrium conditions, the reactions between reagents in the aqueous and organic phases were formulated, as well as the global mass balances of cadmium, chloride, proton ions and extractant. In an aqueous neutral chloride medium, cadmium(II) forms several chloride complexes according to the overall formula CdCl These stepwise stability formation constants, expressed in terms of activities In an aqueous acidic chloride medium, except for the CdCl The equivalent stability formation constants are as follows: The reactions The ionic strengths ( The extraction mechanism of cadmium(II) from a neutral or acidic chloride medium is related to the solvation of the neutral CdCl The extraction reactions that take place in the organic phase of the separation system studied can be described by the following reactions: The corresponding equilibrium extraction constants are as follows: The reactions To complete the model, equations for global mass balances for cadmium, chlorides, protons and extractant were introduced. According to the mass balance law, and taking into account the equal volumes of the aqueous and organic phases, the total concentration of each reagent in the extraction system can be presented by the sum of the species concentrations that exist in each of the phases in equilibrium. The mass balance of cadmium(II) ions is given by: The mass balance of chloride ions is given by: The mass balance of protons is given by: The mass balance of the extractant is given by: The values of the chemical and extraction equilibria constants defined in Eqs. The experimental data (127 experimental points) were inserted at the beginning of the program in the form of a matrix, whose columns represented the initial conditions of the aqueous and organic solutions and the experimental values for the percentage of extraction obtained. The equilibria in the aqueous and organic phases and the global mass balances were grouped in the balance block. The initial guesses for all the species concentrations, expressed using The crucial parameter, on which the optimization depends, was identified as the metal content in the organic phase. Assuming that four kinds of metal species can be coextracted from aqueous medium, the concentration of the metal present in the organic phase was written as: Subsequently, the percentage of extraction calculated by the model for each of the experimental points studied was linked to The objective function Finally, the Liquid–liquid extraction is not a common method for determining the stability constants of metal complexes in aqueous solutions. However, a few reviews are available on the determination of the stability constants of Cd–Cl species in aqueous media from data using the solvent extraction method. Rice and Smith Alguacil and co-workers The related constants in the literatures are provided in An attempt was made to adjust the reported sets of equilibrium stability constants of Cd–Cl species and the extraction constants to the experimental data in the proposed model of cadmium(II) solvent extraction. Unfortunately, these constants did not reproduce the experimental results. The main reason is that the model considered all the possible species that could be extracted by the Cyanex 923 extractant. Moreover, the conditions reported for experiments in the literature were very different from the ones in this study. The extraction constants reported by Alguacil et al. were determined at 5 These factors forced us to look for the constants without taking into account the values in the literature. This meant that, except for the extraction constant for the HCl, which was maintained constant, all of the unknown equilibrium parameters underwent the optimization process. Comparative graphs between the experimental and simulated results for each of the studied SX tests were plotted in order to verify the correctness of the optimized constants. The effect of the initial metal content, the concentration of chloride and proton ions in the aqueous phase and the concentration of extractant in the organic phase are illustrated in The extraction isotherms at 0.5 The effect of chloride ions on the extraction performance in a neutral medium was investigated at two different concentrations of extractant: 5% and 10% (v/v), and at an initial cadmium content of 1 The carrier plays a decisive role in making the extraction process efficient and economically viable. The influence of the extractant on the extraction performance in neutral solutions was studied at 1 The effect of proton concentration on Cd(II) extraction at 1 The influence of chloride ions in an acidic medium was studied at initial concentrations of metal and protons of 1 The effect of the Cyanex 923 concentration in acidic solutions was studied at 1 Extraction isotherms in acidic medium were carried out at 0.1–3 In the present study it was assumed that there were four neutral species that could be extracted from an aqueous medium using the solvation mechanism. Unlike the studies reported by Alonso et al. Once the constants had been determined, the model predicted that CdCl In the acidic chloride medium at proton concentrations of 0.4 The mean absolute error (MAE) for the optimization was calculated using the following equation: Its value was 3.01%. This means that the optimized constants provide a satisfactory description of the proposed cadmium(II) solvent extraction model. This work reports on the extraction of cadmium(II) from neutral and acidic chloride media using Cyanex 923 in Exxol D-100. Experiments were designed to obtain equilibrium data and to analyze the equilibrium behaviour of the separation system. According to the experimental data, Cd(II) extraction was satisfactory in both of the systems studied, although the acidic chloride medium gave better results. The mathematical model developed enabled the equilibrium constants to be determined and was based on both the mass balances and the chemical equilibria involved in the separation process. The stepwise stability formation constants of the aqueous Cd–Cl complexes and the formation constants of the acidic Cd–Cl species formed in the aqueous phase in equilibrium were This work was funded by the