The dehydration kinetics of boehmite prepared from the hydrothermal transformation of gibbsite has been comprehensively studied to clarify the mechanism of the dehydration process using a thermogravimetric technique under both isothermal and non-isothermal conditions. Selected residues were examined by XRD, SEM, TEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED). Results indicate that the dehydration process is a topotactic reaction which brings about γ-Al2O3 with porous microstructure and poor crystallinity. The kinetic data were analysed using the model-free (isoconversional) methods. The results indicate that the activation energy of the dehydration process depends on the reaction extent, signifying the dehydration process is chemical controlled with a diffusion complication as the reaction extent increases. Prediction of the dehydration extent was accomplished using the kinetic parameter of the non-isothermal process and the isoconversional method. The predicted rate is in a reasonably good agreement with the measured values. Finally the mechanism of the dehydration process is discussed based on the auxiliary results from the physical examination of the reacted residues and the kinetic behaviour.In the Bayer process, bauxite is digested in caustic liquor for extracting alumina at temperatures dictated by the mineralogical forms of alumina present in bauxite. Boehmite is one of three main aluminium-bearing minerals (gibbsite, boehmite and diaspore) commonly found in bauxite ores. After digestion, both insoluble minerals and reaction products are removed as residue from the liquor. Gibbsite (Al(OH) The final stage of the Bayer process is the calcination (to ∼980 Outside the alumina industry, boehmite as a precursor is used through thermal treatment for preparation of many materials, which include catalysts, adsorbents, ceramics, refractories, electronic devices and bio-medical materials Despite the widespread interest in boehmite, studies of the kinetics of its thermal behaviour are limited and the results are difficult to compare due to different test conditions. Tsuchida et al. Alphonse and Courty Nordahl and Messing The dehydration of boehmite has long been regarded as a topotactic reaction In our previous study of the dehydration kinetics of gibbsite It is evident that there are discrepancies between the published results. The discrepancies could be caused by a number of factors such as the preparation and attributes of boehmite, the thermal dehydration conditions and the mathematical methods for processing the kinetic data In this paper, we investigate the kinetics of boehmite dehydration in the temperature range similar to that used for the dehydration of gibbsite Model-fitting and model-free (isoconversional) methods are two types of methods widely used in analysis of kinetic data from thermal reactions of solids. Although the model-fitting method has been the most popular method used in studying solid-state kinetics, it can produce some problems For this and other reasons, the ICTAC Kinetics Committee has conducted an extensive comparison study of the two methods on processing both isothermal and non-isothermal data The dehydration of boehmite is a solid decomposition reaction, Under constant temperature condition, Eq. For a non-isothermal process with a constant heating rate A common objective of a kinetic study is to understand the mechanism of the reaction process and to be able to predict the rate of the reaction by an equation. Practically, many large scale reactions take place at constant temperature or at steady continuous conditions. It is therefore reasonable that prediction of reaction rate is made assuming an isothermal process. This can be achieved by using Eqs. Boehmite was prepared by hydrothermal transformation of gibbsite (C31, Alcoa) in deionised water in a Parr autoclave at 200 A sub-sample of the boehmite was analysed by XRF (PANalytical PW2404 4 The specific surface area of the boehmite was measured by nitrogen adsorption via the B.E.T. method (TriStar Surface area and porosity analyser, Micromeritics) and is given in The density of the boehmite was measured by Helium pycnometry (ASTM D4892-89) and is given in The morphology of the boehmite was examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JEOL, JSM-5800LV) ( The dehydration kinetics of the boehmite was measured by a thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) method. The experiments were conducted using a NETZSCH simultaneous thermal analysis apparatus (Model STA 409 PC). Samples of boehmite were placed in corundum pans (sample size ranging from 30 to 50 Some of the dehydration tests were also followed by DSC (Model STA409 PC, NETZSCH) to determine phase transformation by measuring the endothermic and exothermic behaviour under the same conditions as used for each corresponding TGA test. Selected samples of boehmite residues dehydrated at 823  The selected samples were examined using SEM. Typical micrographs are shown in The selected residues were also examined using TEM. DSC traces for all non-isothermal runs (five heating rates) show no evidence of amorphous or glass transition (not shown). However, the trace for the highest heating rate (20 TGA traces (not shown) indicate that the dehydration process commenced appreciably only when temperature was higher than ∼700 These data were replotted using Eq. The dehydration extents at various heating rates are shown in The activation energy initially increases with the reaction extent, reaches a maximum at ∼ The range of the activation energy is in good agreement with that determined by Wilson and Mcconnell Prediction of the dehydration rate under isothermal conditions was evaluated using the model-free Eq. The XRD traces of the dehydrated residues show the evolution of γ-Al The high activation energies calculated using the model-free methods from either the isothermal or the non-isothermal data clearly indicate that the dehydration is a chemically controlled process. The activation energy changes with the reaction extent and the dehydration process is complicated by diffusion as the reaction extent increases. The diffusion of water is not likely to be the rate-limiting factor because the TG-DSC results show that the dehydration is faster than the formation of the spinel γ-Al The rate-limiting role of Al cation diffusion in structural transformation can be further supported by the impact of the number of Al cations at tetrahedral sites on free energy change (Δ  The dehydration of boehmite is a topotactic process. The high activation energy and the dependence of activation energy on the reaction extent under both the isothermal and non-isothermal conditions indicate that the dehydration process is a chemically controlled process with a diffusion complication as the reaction extent increases. The dehydration process can be predicted using the model-free method and the predicted dehydration rates are in good agreement with the measured values. The mechanism of boehmite transformation to γ-Al The authors gratefully acknowledge that this project received funding from the