The high nitrogen content of chitosan is the main reason for its ability to sorb metal ions through several mechanisms including ion-exchange or chelation, depending on the metal and the pH of the solution. Glutaraldehyde is used to crosslink chitosan through imine linkage between amine groups of chitosan and aldehyde groups of the crosslinking agent. This modified biosorbent was studied for palladium recovery in acidic medium (around pH 2). The influence of several parameters such as pH and competitor anions were studied with respect to sorption equilibrium. Sorption isotherms were obtained and modeled using the Langmuir and the Freundlich model. This study also examines the effect of palladium concentration, particle size, sorbent dosage, and the extent of crosslinking on sorption kinetics. Kinetic curves are modeled using single diffusion model equations to evaluate the predominance of either external or intraparticle mass transfer resistance. The influence of the acid used to control the pH of the solution was examined in conjunction with the influence of competitor anions. Sulfuric acid proves to be unfavorable to palladium sorption, in comparison with hydrochloric acid. However, the addition of chloride anions in a palladium solution, whose pH is controlled with sulfuric acid, enhances metal anion sorption: results are interpreted with reference to chloropalladate speciation.Palladium is one of the most expensive metals. However, due to its special properties in catalytic processes, it is widely used in industry. The low concentration of palladium in the terrestrial crust, the low availability of this metal, and the location of palladium sources in few countries, some of which are politically unstable, explain that many processes have been investigated and developed to recover it in complex solutions, or aimed at palladium recovery from spent catalysts Chitosan is an aminopolysaccharide extracted by a deacetylation procedure from chitin, the most abundant biopolymer in nature after cellulose Chitosan is also characterized by its easy dissolution in many dilute mineral acids, with the remarkable exception of sulfuric acid. It is thus necessary to stabilize it chemically for the recovery of metal ions in acidic solutions. Several processes have been developed to reinforce chitosan stability in acidic solutions through crosslinking treatments. The crosslinking can be accomplished with different chemicals such as epichlorhydrin or glutaraldehyde. Glutaraldehyde has been used by several groups for cadmium recovery on chitosan beads This sorbent has been widely experimented with for noble metal groups, in its original form, or after chemical modification Chitosan was supplied by ABER-Technologie (France) as a flaked material, with a deacetylation percentage ca. 87%, defined by FTIR spectrometry The glutaraldehyde crosslinking bath contained concentrations varying between 0.145 and 1.45 M. The ratio of glutaraldehyde to chitosan (crosslinking ratio CR: mol GA/mol NH Palladium solutions were prepared from PdCl For sorption isotherms, known volumes of palladium solutions (100 ml) at fixed concentration (10, 20 or 40 mg For the study of sorption kinetics, a standard procedure was applied The determination of palladium species was established as a function of experimental parameters (pH, chloride concentration, palladium concentration) using Equilibrium is described by usual isotherms equations such as described by Freundlich, Langmuir, Brunauer Emmett and Teller or Sips Mass transfer involves several steps including (i) bulk diffusion, (ii) film diffusion, (iii) intraparticle diffusion, and (iv) sorption and/or ion-exchange process. Heat transfer may be added in theory; however, due to the heat transfer properties of water, kinetic limitations due to heat transfer can be neglected. Providing sufficient agitation to avoid particle and solute gradients in the batch reactor also makes it possible to ignore bulk diffusion. Moreover, it is usually accepted that sorption processes can be considered as instantaneous processes, and the kinetic control is mainly attributed to film and intraparticle diffusion. Simplified models have been developed such as the homogeneous diffusion model (HDM), and the shrinking core model (SCM), with special definitions for film diffusion, intraparticle diffusion, and chemical reaction control To obtain the external mass transfer coefficient, a simplified procedure previously described by Findon et al. was used Crank proposed a model whereby diffusion is controlled only by intraparticle mass transfer for well-stirred solutions of limited volume ( The influence of the pH on palladium sorption was studied with respect to the acid used for the pH control. Metal ion sorption on chitosan is assumed to occur through several single or mixed mechanisms including (i) coordination on amino groups in a pendant fashion or in combination with vicinal hydroxyl groups, (ii) electrostatic attraction (in acidic media), (iii) ion exchange with protonated amino groups through proton exchange or anion exchange, the counter ion being exchanged with the metal anion The speciation of palladium depends on both pH and chloride concentrations. Palladium is usually present in solution in its most stable form, i.e. Pd(II). It forms square planar complexes especially with ligands such as N or S, due to its characteristics of soft acid. However, in acidic media, in the presence of chloride it easily forms chloro-complexes. Chitosan usually binds metal ions by chelation mechanisms at near neutral pH At low pH, the excess of chloride or sulfate anions involves competition between palladium species and the counter anions for the sorption on protonated sites. Increasing the pH results in a decrease of this competition and the predominance of species more favorable for sorption around pH 2–2.5. Above pH 2.5, the balance between counter ions and palladium species is less favorable, moreover palladium may be present in solution under the form of less anionic species, depending on the concentration of chloride anions, or as hydrolyzed species. It is noticeable that the formation of hydrolyzed species is not favorable for palladium sorption as it is for uranium and molybdate sorption Sorption capacity is significantly higher in the optimum pH range for hydrochloric acid solutions than for sulfuric acid solutions. Baba et al. study copper sorption on a new chitosan derivative in several media including ammonium nitrate in function of the pH  The distribution coefficient, defined as the ratio of the palladium concentration in the sorbent to its concentration in the solution at equilibrium, varies as a function of chloride concentration (not shown). The slope of the curves is significantly different between hydrochloric and sulfuric acid pH controlled solutions. The distribution coefficient may be correlated to the co-logarithm of chloride concentration (p It appears clearly that the increase in chloride concentration significantly decreases sorption efficiency, thus the favorable effect of chloride is only a relative effect in comparison with sulfate anions, mainly related to the association of chloride with palladium to form anionic species. Moreover, the strong influence of chloride competitor anions confirms the proposed ion-exchange mechanism. The sorption isotherms of hexachloroplatinate anions on chitosan-based sorbents has been proven to be strongly influenced by the acid used to control the pH of the solutions    Increasing chloride concentration involves the predominance of PdCl The size of sorbent particles has been shown to be a key parameter in the control of sorption performances of several metal ions on chitosan. However, the influence of this experimental parameter depends on several criteria: (a) the chemistry of the metal ion: its ability to form hydrolyzed and/or polynuclear species, it ionic size; (b) the characteristics of the sorbent: its crystallinity, the rigidity of the polymeric chains, the degree of crosslinking. Uranium sorption is controlled by particle size, while the modification of the biopolymer by grafting new functional groups resulting in a dissolving/reprecipitation procedure induces a decrease in the crystallinity of the biosorbent and causes the sorption capacity to be independent of the particle size  Increasing the crosslinking ratio increases the stability of the biopolymer in acidic media; however, it also decreases the number (or fraction) of free and available amino groups on the chitosan backbone and the accessibility to internal sites of the sorbent    The influence of palladium concentration on sorption kinetics was studied changing the type of acid used for controlling the pH at 2 ( For HCl solutions, decreasing palladium concentration allows equilibrium to be reached faster with a final concentration tending to 0 ( Several hypotheses can explain the change in intraparticle diffusivities and sorption kinetic rates with metal concentration: (i) a change in metal speciation (not really marked in the case of this study), (ii) a pore blockage mechanism as suggested by Rorrer et al. Glutaraldehyde crosslinked chitosan is effective at removing palladium from dilute solutions. Though sorption performances depend on the composition of the solution, and especially the acid used to control the pH, maximum uptake occurs around pH 2. The influence of the pH and chloride concentration on sorption performances is discussed in relation to palladium speciation: the predominance of chloro-anionic species is found to be favorable. The Freundlich equation fits sorption isotherms well with both hydrochloric and sulfuric acid solutions, though hydrochloric solutions allow a better affinity to be obtained for palladium sorption on chitosan, as represented by the initial slope of the sorption isotherm. Sorption capacity in HCl-media reaches 180 mg Sorption kinetics are controlled by particle size, crosslinking ratio, and palladium concentration. At low sorbent dosage, 2 or 3 days are required to reach sorption equilibrium, while in favorable conditions, such as high sorbent dosage (150 mg The authors would like to thank the CICYT (Ministry of Science and Education of Spain) for financial contribution (Proyecto No. QUI 99-0749).