Introduction
                  Patients may be at an increased risk of atypical proximal femoral fractures with prolonged bisphosphonate use.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  This was a retrospective review of patients who sustained a subtrochanteric fracture of the femur in our department between April 2009 and March 2014. The radiographs were reviewed for features of atypical femoral fractures as described by the American Society of Bone Mineral Research.
               
                  Results
                  185 patients were coded according to the National Hip Fracture Database as having sustained a subtrochanteric fracture of the femur. Of these, 26 patients had radiographic findings consistent with an atypical subtrochanteric fracture. 5 patients were excluded as their histology confirmed malignancy. 12 patients were taking bisphosphonates on admission. All 12 patients were females taking alendronic acid on admission, who sustained the fracture as the result of minimal or no trauma and underwent long gamma nail fixation. The mean age was 71.6 years (range 62–79 years). The mean length of time on bisphosphonates prior to admission was 8.33 years (range 3–25 years). 9/12 patients had pre-existing symptoms for between 5days and 2 years prior to admission. 1 patient sustained a broken gamma nail 14 weeks post-operatively requiring revision. The mean time to discharge from theatre was 16days (range 5–57days). The mean time to radiological union in the patients in whom there was evidence was 24 weeks.
               
                  Conclusions
                  In this small group of patients, management of this fracture pattern can be complex with the potential for delayed or non-union and prodromal symptoms are common.The use of bisphosphonates has long been established to reduce the risk of hip and vertebral fractures in patients with osteoporosis, as well as in the management of metabolic bone disease such as osteogenesis imperfecta and Paget’s disease Structurally, bisphosphonates have a high affinity for bone mineral and are stable analogues of pyrophosphate. Their mechanism of action is to decrease bone loss by increasing apoptosis of osteoclasts The aim of this study was to assess the post-operative outcomes of patients who sustained a bisphosphonate-related atypical proximal femoral fracture between April 2009 and March 2014 in a large district general hospital. A retrospective review of patient case notes, charts and radiographs who sustained a subtrochanteric fracture of the femur between April 2009 and March 2014 and presented to our department was performed. The list of patients was generated from the National Hip Fracture Database coded as ‘subtrochanteric fracture’. The radiographs of patients were reviewed for features of atypical femoral fractures as described by the American Society of Bone Mineral Research (ASBMR) The ASBMR radiological criteria state that the fracture must be located along the femoral diaphysis from just distal to the lesser trochanter to just proximal to the supracondylar flare. This is usually in the proximal 1/3 of the femoral shaft. 4 of the following 5 features must also be present: Fracture associated with minimal or no trauma, such as a fall from standing height or less The fracture line originates at the lateral cortex and is substantially transverse in orientation. It, however, may become oblique as it progresses medially across the femur. Complete fractures extend through both cortices and may be associated with a medial spike, incomplete fractures involve the lateral cortex The fracture is non-comminuted or minimally comminuted Localised periosteal or endosteal thickening is present at the fracture site. The case notes of patients who met the above criteria were subsequently reviewed to ascertain patient demographics upon admission, the laterality of the fracture, the mechanism of injury, mobility status, the presence of pre-existing symptoms, operation, histology results from reamings sent, length of bisphosphonate treatment prior to admission, metabolic disorders, post-operative complications, mobility on admission and discharge, and subsequent revision surgery. Exclusion criteria included patients with proximal femoral fractures due to pathological causes such as cancer, new trauma, patients with radiological features not matching the criteria set by ASBMR. Between April 2009 and March 2014, 185 patients were coded according to the NHFD as having sustained a subtrochanteric fracture of the femur. Of these, 26 patients had radiographic findings consistent with an atypical subtrochanteric fracture. Of these 26 patients, 5 patients were excluded as their histology from reamings in theatre confirmed malignancy. Of the 21 patients remaining, 12 patients were documented to be taking bisphosphonates on admission. All 12 (n In 3 (n All 12 (n Nine (n Two (n All 12 (n One (n Seven (n One (n The mean time to discharge from theatre was 16  In our department, between April 2009 and March 2014, 185 patients were coded according to the NHFD as having sustained a subtrochanteric fracture of the femur. Of these, 26 patients (14.1%) had radiographic findings consistent with an atypical subtrochanteric fracture. The ASBMR radiological criteria describe the pattern of these atypical fractures as originating at the lateral cortex and being substantially transverse in orientation. There may be a medial spike associated with complete fractures and these fractures usually have nil or minimal comminution Twelve out of twenty six patients who sustained an atypical subtrochanteric femoral fracture in our study were taking bisphosphonates on admission. All of these patients were taking alendronic acid. According to efficacy trials, in women who are below the age of 80 years old and have documented osteoporosis, bisphosphonates prevent clinical fractures In our study, the mean length of time on bisphosphonates was 8.33 years (range 3–25 years). It is still unclear as to the optimum duration for bisphosphonate therapy. ‘Drug holidays’ have been advocated in the literature after a 3–5 Early clinical indicators of bisphosphonate associated fractures of the proximal femur may include prodromal symptoms of ipsilateral thigh or groin pain, and radiologically a thickened lateral proximal femoral cortex with cortical beaking The surgical management of atypical subtrochanteric fractures of the femur remains a challenge due to the deforming forces of the muscular attachments on the proximal and distal fragments, the transverse fracture pattern and the bone quality One (n We recognise the limitation of a study of this kind, being that we have a small sample of patients. However, given that, according to the current literature, these fractures are rare, this study adds to the growing evidence on the subject. This study supports the current literature that bisphosphonate related atypical fractures are rare. However, in this small group of patients, management of this fracture pattern can be complex with the potential for delayed or non-union. Prodromal symptoms are common and important to be aware of in patients taking bisphosphonates. Patients with a metabolic disorder and also taking steroids may also be at increased risk of this fracture type. The technical difficulties faced during surgical management of these fractures have been identified, and it is recommended that the surgery should be performed by senior experienced surgeons to help prevent failure of fixation. In the primary care setting, patients should be assessed for their fracture risk, and be considered for a ‘drug holiday’ from bisphosphonates or switch to a selective oestrogen receptor modulator after 5 years to avoid such entity of fractures.