Polyaniline (PANI) in the nano form was prepared by a simple sol–gel method. The prepared PANI was carbonized under a direct nitrogen gas carbonization method to produce carbonized polyaniline (C-PANI). The difference in morphology and structure of the two prepared materials were studied and characterized for structure and morphological analysis by FT-IR spectrometry, X-ray diffractometry, scanning, and transmission electron microscopy. The Nano-PANI and C-PANI had a pore diameter of 84.96 and 90.86 nm which surface areas of 18.8 and 14.42 m2/g respectively. The prepared Nano-PANI was in emeraldine salt state; C-PANI was completely carbonized. The prepared materials were applied as electrode coating materials on the copper sheet which acted as a substrate and it produced a uniform smooth coating. This is promising and can further be studied for electrochemical applications. Further work is ongoing to ascertain its’ electrochemical capacitance properties. The method of preparation of the Nano-PANI and Nano C-PANI is eco-friendly and simple for the production of mass material for industrial purposes.Recent studies have shown that there is a tremendous development in carbon-based advanced material in its field of application. After the discovery by Buckminsterfullerene C 60 and carbon nanotube by Kroto et al and Iijima respectively Polyaniline is one of the widely researched intrinsic conducting polymers due to its diverse range of properties There are two types of capacitance, Double-layer, and Pseudocapacitance. Nano-PANI has demonstrated high capacitance values because of its unique multiple redox states since pseudocapacitance is associated with reversible redox or faradaic charge transfer. Carbonization of the nano-PANI with nitrogen gas is to enhance the capacitance by additional Faradaic redox which makes it useful and outstanding behavior in supercapacitor electrodes In this research, polyaniline was synthesised by a simple sol–gel method Aniline 99.8% pure, Potassium Persulphate (KPS), Polyvinylidene fluoride, hydrochloric acid (HCl) 37%, and methanol were purchased from Acros Organics, N-Methy1-2-pyrrolidone was bought from Carlo Erba Reagents and used as received. All chemicals were of pure analytical grade and solutions were prepared with distilled water. Copper sheet with an area dimension of 1x3 cm was used as the substrate for this study. Methanol was used to degrease the surface of the sheet, the sheets were rinsed with deionized water then allowed to dry in an electrical furnace at 60 °C. The sol–gel method was used to synthesize polyaniline from aniline monomer as explained by For C-PANI, a preferable amount of the prepared Nano-PANI was weighed in a crucible and placed in an Acros International 1000 Gas Furnace for 10 mins at 1000 °C in an atmosphere of nitrogen. The sample was kept in the furnace until the furnace cooled to 100 °C. To prepare the coated electrode, the prepared Nano-PANI and C-PANI (80 wt%), polyvinylidene fluoride (5 wt%), and N-methyl-pyrrolidone as a solvent were mixed forming a paste. The paste was mixed with the aid of a Cole-Parmer ultrasonic device for 45 min for uniformity and then coated onto the copper sheet (1 × 3 cm) mechanically. The coated sheets were dried at 50 °C for 2 h. The morphology of the prepared samples’ surface was explored using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), JEOL (JSM 6010 LV, Japan) and a JOEL (JEC-3000 FC Auto Fine Coater); a coating device to aid proper reading, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), JEOL (JEM-2100 plus, Japan). The functional groups of the Nano-PANI and C-PANI were determined via FT-IR analysis by a Shimadzu IR Prestige-21 (Bruker spectrometer model) spectrometer. The crystallographic structures of the materials were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) by X-Ray diffractometer (Shimadzu LabX XRD-6100), Japan using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The Adsorptive N The SEM and TEM images of Nano-PANI and C-PANI are shown in Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy was used to investigate the chemical bonding compositions and functional groups of Nano- PANI and C-PANI samples. Results from The XRD spectra of the Nano-PANI and C-PANI produced via sol–gel techniques and carbonization of prepared respectively show the two characteristics.  The substrates were coated by a mechanical technique with the paste formed for the electrode composition. The uniformly coated copper sheet for Nano-PANI and C-PANI are shown in Polyaniline was successfully synthesized by the simple sol–gel technique; the prepared Nano-PANI as a precursor was carbonized. The method of preparation of the Nano-PANI is eco-friendly and simple for the production of mass material for industrial purposes. The characterization results of the prepared Nano-PANI and C-PANI confirmed that the morphology, chemical composition, crystallinity, and surface area were altered significantly as a consequence of the carbonization process. Characterization showed that the Nano-PANI and C-PANI had a pore diameter of 84.96 and 90.86 nm which surface areas of 18.8 and 14.42 m  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors will like to show appreciation to Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and Egypt-Japan University of Science and Technology for the grant and facilities to have this research; also, the Egypt Ministry of Education for their support. Special thanks to Mr. Mohamed Ghanim, Eng. Essam Hares, Eng. Hesham Elqady, Ing Joshua Chireboah Ansah, Ing Selma Orleans-Boham and my advisor Professor Richard K. Amankwah for his endless advice for the success of this research.