Models used to predict digestibility and fill of the dietary insoluble fibre (NDF) treat the ruminoreticular particulate mass as a single pool. The underlying assumption is that escape of particles follows first-order kinetics. In this paper, we proposed and evaluated a model of two ruminoreticular sequential NDF pools. The first pool is formed by buoyant particles (raft pool) and the second one by fluid dispersed particles (escapable pool) ventrally to the raft. The transference of particles between these two pools results from several processes that reduce particles buoyancy, assuming the gamma distribution. The exit of escapable pool particles from the ruminoreticulum is exponentially distributed. These concepts were evaluated by comparing ruminoreticular NDF masses as 43 and 27 means from cattle and sheep, respectively, to the same predicted variable using single- and two-pools models. Predictions of the single-pool model were based on lignin turnover and the turnover associated to the descending phase of the elimination of Yb-labelled forage particles in the faeces of sheep. Predictions of the two-pool model were obtained by estimating fractional passage rates associated to the ascending and descending phases of the same Yb excretion profiles in sheep faeces. All turnovers were scaled to the power 0.25 of body mass for interspecies comparisons. Predictions based on lignin turnover (single pool) and the two-pool model presented similar trends, accuracies and precisions. The single-pool approach based solely on the descending phase of the marker yielded biased estimates of the ruminoreticular NDF mass.Compartmental modelling has been used to translate complexity of natural phenomena into conceptualized quantitative relationships that can be used to simulate reality. Transfer mechanisms among selected state variables and interchanging flows of matter within the system can be modelled. These concepts have been applied successfully in ruminant nutrition, and pioneering studies using compartmental modelling in this field have provided a theoretical basis of the quantitative transactions the digesta suffers in the ruminant gastrointestinal tract (GIT) ( Forage-fed ruminants present, at least, two distinguishable solid phases together with a liquid phase in the ruminoreticulum (RR). The first remarkable solid phase is a floating mat (raft) formed by particles whose buoyancy promotes their selective retention at the dorsal rumen. The second solid phase is a pool of particles usually smaller in size than the raft particles, but dispersed within the fluid phase ventrally to the floating mat (  The insoluble fibre mass in the RR has been treated as a single pool of particles in the current feeding systems for ruminants (e.g. Complementary definitions of symbols in Eqs. The proposed model was built on the same basic concept behind Eqs. There are initial steps that gradually prepare the originally unavailable but potentially digestible substrate within a newly ingested particle to be digested. As detailed in a companion paper, the lifetime of this gradual availability of the substrate follows The retention or resistance to escape of a given entering particle in the raft pool is measured by its lifetime, which is assumed to be In the assumed irreversible transference mechanism ( The input to the system is the insoluble fibre intake rate ( The family of gamma densities is convenient to obtain solutions by the mathematical artifice of solving sets of differential equations based on exponential distributions of lifetimes (    At the equilibrium, input and output rates become average input and output rates: The model described in Eq. The database used by Body parts and physiological quantitative variables can be scaled to body mass using a general scaling function (Eq. Hereafter, the error term ( Likelihood estimates of turnover can be obtained based on indigestible entities because the clearance of indigestible matter from the RR is not confounded with the loss of mass via digestion ( The 95% confidence interval for the estimate 0.715 was [0.337, 1.094] and for the estimate 0.160 was [0.067, 0.253]. Therefore, the standard turnover was different from zero and the exponent was not different from the reference value of 0.25 ( The absence of marker excretion profiles in the S1 database required an alternative procedure to estimate the transit of particles along the GIT. Therefore, we used a second database named S2 (A. Cannas, unpublished data) originated from experiments designed to estimate fractional passage rates in sheep by varying the daily intake of physically effective fibre. This latter measure was based on NDF concentration and proportion of food particles that are retained in a 1.18 The ratio The order of time dependency ( Once fractional passage rates that are associated with the raft and the escapable pools for each ewe (S2 database) were estimated, turnovers of the raft ( These equations were used as inputs to models M2 and M3. There were no information available to compute fractional passage rates for concentrates; therefore, for all models we assumed that fractional passage rates associated to concentrates were twice the estimates for roughages. The degradation kinetics was estimated from The three models used to predict the total fibre mass in the RR (M1, M2 and M3 scaled and not scaled to The absence of markers to trace the transit of particles in the GIT of animals in the S1 database was the major limitation. The likelihood of estimates might have been improved if additional information was available. Therefore, model predictions were strongly dependent on the power of the association between retention time and The correlation between estimates of parameters of Eq. There is an agreement among some authors that GIT contents scale better to We believe that this rationale might be applicable to ADL because it is intrinsic to the insoluble fibrous matter (NDF). Despite the controversy regarding the reference value for the exponent, we fitted Eq. The retention of solids in the RR is associated to the plane of nutrition and to the physical form of the diet; thus, pelleting and grinding reduces retention ( The anatomical RR segment contains liquid and several solid fractions, including microbes and a myriad of particle sizes of food origin with different turnover times. In this context, H.L. Lucas (cited by In practice, if there is no reason to doubt that Despite the divergences of power appropriateness in scaling intake rates, scaling variables to The comparison of model adequacy measures revealed that both scaled and non-scaled M1 and M3 models were equally adequate in predicting the amount of NDF in the RR ( The measured fibre mass was underpredicted by 5% for M1 and by 31% for M2, whereas M3 overpredicted The non-conformity of the ADL pool to the premise concerning the Lucas test can be interpreted as the existence of at least two heterogeneous pools in the ruminoreticular digesta ( Pelleted diets do not necessarily reduce the retention time in small ruminants because the fine fibres from processed feeds may be effective for sheep and goats. The fine fibre of pelleted diets competes with the insoluble fibre that is provided by the dietary forage ( We chose the insoluble fibre mass as the variable to be evaluated because no further calculations based on inherent assumptions like those behind turnover are necessary. The model was evaluated on its capability to reproduce the variable The ratio The two-pool model proposed and evaluated on the basis of Eq. The selective retention of potentially digestible matter ( The raft formation appears to be limited by animal size ( Intake can be predicted as the ratio between gut capacity and gut retention time ( The use of markers to trace the dynamics of particles in the ruminant gastrointestinal tract has been useful in predicting important variables that affect productive functions of the animals. Although intake and ruminoreticular contents of an indigestible internal marker (e.g. ADL) yield estimates of the insoluble fibre mass by evacuation or at slaughter with similar accuracy and precision as those obtained with an external particulate marker (e.g. Yb), the latter method brings the convenience of non-invasive measurements. However, the traditional interpretation that only the descending phase of a marker excretion profile in faeces is associated to the retention of fibre in the RR is less likely. For forage-fed ruminants the raft pool should be considered and the generalized model of particulate flow kinetics (Eq. This work was accomplished during the sabbatical year spent by the first author at Texas A&M University, granted by the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq)—Brazil (Process no. 210094/2006-0).