This study aimed to examine the influence of the traditional leadership qualities towards to develop community cohesion in the Iban community in Malaysia. A quantitative approach was used to conduct this study, where data were collected through a self-administered survey questionnaire from 210 chiefs in the Iban longhouse at the Pakan District in Sarawak, Malaysia. A pre-tested questionaire was administrered to the respondents using a simple random sampling in the District of Pakan, Sarawak. The leadership quality was measured based on the leadership traits, leadership style, leadership behaviour, situational leadership, and trsnformational leadership; while the community cohesion was measured by a sense of belonging, social alienation, social support, rootedness, social solidarity, and social ties. The results of the correlation and regression analysis showed that the traditional leadership qualities had a significant correlation with the development of social cohesion. The findings proved that the traditional leadership is essential to increase community cohesion in the Iban community. The findings would be important guideline to the development thinkers, practitioners, community leaders, and development institutions.Community development is a process through which people and communities learn how they can help themselves ( The commitment of leaders towards community involvement is a key indicator in developing community cohesion. While the success of leadership in society depends on the quality of followers who are willing to contribute to the success of the leadership of the largest power ( Iban community is the largest community in Sarawak, Malaysia. Most of them live in longhouses. This study has a number of rationales and importances. We believe that while the study focuses on Iban community in Malaysia, the implications are international in scope. The Minstry of Women, Family and Community Development, Malaysia is responsible to determiner policies and direction to achive women, family and community development. We mentioed earlier that leadership and social cohesion are important elements for community development. The Iban community is part of the Sarawakian community of Bumiputera, which comprises the vast majority in the state of Sarawak. According to the last census, the total population in Sarawak was 579,900, and the Iban comprises the largest percentage (almost 30%) of this population ( The literature gives a certain level of confusion about the definition of leadership, leadership style and qualities of leadership. These concepts may have a number of definitions but still these are very complicated and these are studied through various fields that require different definitions. For example, many theories and explanations have been developed in leadership because of their importance as a practice and research topic ( The role of leadership completely depends on the leadership style. The scholars in the field of leadership research use many and varied conceptualizations of leadership style. Most of the definitions are based on a distinction between an internally and intrinsically directed, people-oriented, and stimulating leadership style versus an externally and extrinsically directed, task-oriented and correcting leadership style ( The leadership goals are to improve the quality of work, to transform, and to set goals to achieve success. Leadership quality is often a measure of the success of community development. This study is more focused on a community leaderwho is responsive to community needs. This is most effective when s/he shares its goals, values and vision in the local community. Today, ‘community cohesion'is more influential concept in community development. According to Improving the function and quality of local leadership is one of the ways to shape cohesion in the community ( Iban Dayak is one of the groups who mostly live in Sarawak, including a small represent in West Kalimantan and Sulawesi. The Iban population is about 30% of all citizens and ethnic Dayak Sarawak's largest compared with other ethnic Dayak ( Generally, the leadership in the Iban community can be divided into traditional and modern leadership. The traditional leadership is called TuaiRumah, while modern leadership consists of institutions Temenggong, Pemancha and headman. This study focused on the quality of the traditional leadership in the Iban longhouse in the formation of community cohesion among the people of the longhouse. This kind of leadership is very dominant and has a strong influence in the rural community. Normally, they are made up of parents or religious leaders and highly respected by the community. The relationship between traditional leaders and communities found to be very closely because they are seen more often interact and sit in a set of communities. Traditional leadership role in uniting the Iban community is critical to the success of any project. TuaiRumah is the authority to appoint leadership in the longhouse only, Penghulu on the regional, and Pemancha on the county level. Tua Rumah leadership institutions have existed before the British colonial era and still remains to this day. The leader is better known as Tuai works practically an institution in the longhouse. Tuai in Malay means ‘old or head’ and ‘house’ refers to the items under the authority of the tuai. Quality traditional leadership is crucial in shaping cohesion and simultaneously promoting community development processes among rural communities. According to This study aimed to examine the influence of the traditional leadership qualities towards to develop community cohesion in the Iban community in Malaysia. The basic hypothesis of this study is leadership quality in terms of leadership characteristics, behavior, styles, situation and transformational will influence the formation of social cohesion of Iban communities in longhouses. The main objective of this study was to examine the influence of the traditional leadership qualities towards to develop community cohesion in the Iban community in Malaysia.  To know the demographic and socioeconomic profile of the Iban community; To explore the leadership quality of the Iban community according to the leadership traits, leadership style, leadership behaviour, situational leadership, and trsnformational leadership; To measure the community cohesion according to the sense of belonging, social alienation, social support, rootedness, social solidarity, and social ties. This study used a quantitative approach, where a survey design was carried out to conduct this study. This design generally provided the characteristics and quality of leadership and social cohesion of the Iban community. Here, leadership quality aspects are categorized as independent variables, while social cohesion variables are categorized as dependent variables tested based on the impact of these leadership qualities. The study employed the correlation statistical tool which determined the relationship between these variables. This study was conducted in Pakan District of the Sarawak Sarikei Division. The Sarikei Division consists of four main districts namely Sarikei District, Meradong District, Julau District and Pakan District. Based on the last Preliminary Count Report in 2010, the total number of population in Sarikei was 54, 992. The composition of the Iban population in the city of Sarikei is 18, 559, Meradong 27, 676, Julau 15, 419, and Pakan consist of 15, 480 people. The Pakan district was chosen as the location of the study because of its population density factor consisting of Iban. Based on the source of census population in 2010, a total of 14, 423 people in the Pakan District are Ibanians. The people of this district are still practicing the traditional Iban community life pattern. Based on these homogenous factors and characteristics, the Pakan District is best suited for this study. This study applied a multi-stage sampling procedure. First, selected the Pakan District for the study. Secondly, considered six main longhouse areas such as Engkamop, Wak, Pedanum, UluJulau, Lemunjan, and Entabai.), and then three areas such as Wak Area, Lemujan/Entabai Street Area and Entabai were randomly selected. Thirdly, selected thelonghouses from the three longhouse areas where 10% of the longhouses from the three areas were randomly selected. Total nine longhouses were selected. Fourthly, selected a total 210 household heads “tuaibilik” as respondents from nine longhouses for the study. The study followed the following inclusion criteria to select the respondents. All other were excluded from the study. head of longhouse household “tuaibilik” either male or female, (ii) living in the selected longhouse, and (iii) recognize tuairumah as a leader for the longhouse Overall, the respondents involved in this study were between 20 years and the maximum age of 80 years with an average age of 46 years ( Data were collected through a face-to-face interview method. There were a number of justifications to use this method for data collection. First, the respondents’ education level was low and this face-to- face interview method was more effective to them. Secondly, this data collection method has a number of merits such as accurate screening, capture verbal and non-verbal meanings, keep focus, and capture emotions and behaviours ( The researchers used the research ethics provided by the University of Malaya Research Ethics Committee (UMREC). The researchers submitted an application in a prescribed form with the research proposal and other relevant documents to the UMREC. The committee undertakes ethics review of all research involving human participants and approved this research. The data obtained from the distribution of questionnaire were analyzed using SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version 22.0). To ensure the reality and validity of the study, the pilot test and the Cronbach Alpha test were used. Based on pilot study, Alpha Cronbach values for each element as follows; community cohesion = 0.867, leadership characteristics = 0.823, leadership style = 0.896, leadership behaviour = 0.789, situation leadership = 0.932, and transformational leadership = 0.947. In order to facilitate the data analysis, procedures frequencies, product-moment correlation and multiple regression were employed. Perason product-moment correlation were employed to determine the relationship between leadership quality element (independent variable) and community cohesion among the Iban community (dependent variable). Five leadership quality (indenpendent variables) were included in the following correlation analysis. The former comprised: leadership traits, leadership style, leadership behaviour, situational leadership and transformational leadership. While the dependent variable is community cohesion among Iban community. Data showed that the correlation coefficients (r) for the five leadership quality variables were highly significant. These observations indicated that positive relationships existed between five variables and community cohesion among Iban community. An analysis of leadership quality influence to community cohesion level was also done by using Multiple Linear Regression Analysis using ‘enter’ method. The findings of the study show that (R) for this study is 0.64. The value of R (0.64) explains that there is a high correlation between independent variables with dependent variables. While Adjusted R The objective of this study was to determine the influence leadership quality toward the community cohesion in the Iban longhouse. Based on a quantitative analysis, the study found that all elements of the leadership qualities such as leaders’ characteristics, behavior, styles, situation and transformational have relationship and contributing factor to the formation community cohesion in the longhouse of the Iban community in Malaysia. The article contributed a dynamic and multi-dimensional understanding of how the leadership quality influential were shaping within the community cohesion in the Iban community in Malaysia. The findings showed that transformational leadership variables and characteristics of leaders were two major contributors to the formation of community cohesion in the Iban community. Transformation leadership emphasized the aspect of moral values, ethics and leaders' insights in influencing and transforming individuals, organizations and communities ( Idealized influences owned by TuaiRumah can be seen through their personality that shows a high commitment to things related to community life, easy to approach the population, can make judgments in decision making, mutual values, gain people's confidence and selflessness. This is in line with the assertion that the Iban people served the collective interest of the group. In addition, the superior influence of TuaiRumah also shows that they have their own charisma in leading the longhouse residents. This is in line with the assertion made by Individualized consideration is a factor that describes the role of the leader as a mentor to his followers. It is the attitude that a leader must possess by giving an example of high ethical behavior, being pride, and adding one's trust and respect. This leader also has the characteristic charisma of a leader who seeks to develop a great symbolic power to influence his followers ( The second element of leadership qualities influencing the community cohesion in the Iban community in the longhouse is the character of the leader itself. These leadership features are also seen as an important factor in the TuaiRumah's social resources and influence over the Iban community in the longhouse. Even according to Based on a quantitative research approach, this study explored the leadership quality based on leadership traits, leadership style, leadership behaviour, situational leadership, and trsnformational leadeship; while the community cohesion was measured by a sense of belonging, social alienation, social support, rootedness, social solidarity, and social ties. This study acknowledged the limitations of the study that data were collected fully depend on quantitative approach that would facilitate the triangulation. A further study can be suggested that could captured many qualitative aspects about the leadership and community cohesion in the Iban community. Results showed that the quality of traditional leadership has a very significant relationship with the formation of community cohesion. This explains the increasingly high quality of the Leadership of the House, the higher the community cohesion that exists in the community. The importance of the traditional leadership of TuaiRumah is seen bringing a new dimension in the field of community development. This study has emphasized the quality of traditional TuaiRumah leadership to shape community cohesion in the Iban community. The importance of leadership in the Iban community is not something new in the world of scientific research and has acquired a wide range of critical views from local researchers or outside researcher. Early institutional leadership in Iban society can be seen clearly in the longhouse social organization ‘TuaiRumah’. The Iban community also has various other ‘Tuai’ titles such as ‘TuaiKayau’, ‘TuaiSabong’, and ‘TuaiBurong’. According to the findings of this study, to improve the quality of traditional leadership should be given special attention to future research. The importance of improving the quality of leadership in the Iban community also has a positive impact on the development of rural communities. The findings of this study has a greater policy implication. Malaysia is a multi-racial country. At the policy level, the government acknowledges that national unity would not be possible without a greater equity and balance among Malaysia's social and ethnic groups ( The result from this study also helped to reveal that the success of the community cohesion programme was not depended solely on how much money, skills and efforts that were allocated, but most important was to exist a strong and clear connections and linkages between effectives leaders and other existing factors in the community. In general, community-level leaders are either officially or unofficial selected by the authorities. The findings exposed that all of the elements of leadership qualities, which are the characteristics of leaders, leadership behaviors, leadership styles, situation leadership and transformational leadership contributed to community cohesion in the Iban community. Therefore, the party responsible for appointing community leaders should ensure that those who are appointed have the characteristics of a quality leader, good behavior, and acceptable style of society and practice transformational leadership. M. Rezaul Islam: Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. Haris Abd Wahab: Conceived and designed the experiments; Wrote the paper. Laying Anggun: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments. This work was supported by The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper. Supplementary content related to this article has been published online at The following is the supplementary data related to this article: