Pulverization is an essential pre-combustion technique employed for solid fuels, such as coal, to reduce particle sizes. Smaller particles ensure rapid and complete combustion, leading to low carbon emissions. Traditionally, the resulting particle size distributions from pulverizers have been determined by empirical or semi-empirical approaches that rely on extensive data gathered over several decades during operations or experiments, with limited predictive capabilities for new coals and processes. This work presents a Discrete Element Method (DEM)-based computational approach to model coal particle breakage with experimentally characterized coal physical properties. The effect of select operating parameters on the breakage behavior of coal particles is also examined.normal interaction force between particles normal interaction stiffness individual particle stiffness particle-scale modulus of elasticity equilibrium distance between particles shear interaction tangent stiffness particle-scale Poisson’s ratio rotational stiffness normal cohesion parameter internal friction angle shear cohesion parameter interaction ratio critical time step size particle-scale density The comminution process has wide applications in several industries, including mining, power, cement, paint and pharmaceuticals. The design and operating conditions for comminution devices traditionally have been determined by empirical or semi-empirical approaches derived from the vast data gathered over the years during operations or experiments. Most of these process models are based on the Population Balance Method (PBM) One of the major applications of comminution in the power industry involves the pulverization of coal to attain rapid and complete combustion. In a coal-fired power plant, raw coal is pulverized and partially dried in a mill prior to combustion. The pulverized coal is then carried to the combustion chamber by fluidizing the coal particles using pre-heated air. The size distribution and shape of the coal particles have a significant impact on the efficiency of the mill and combustion process (also noted in The design of these mills traditionally has been based on the process models The Discrete Element Method (DEM) Broadly speaking, two approaches are typically employed in modeling the dynamic breakage of granular samples using DEM. The first approach is based on the Bonded Particle Model (BPM) In this study, the first approach based on the BPM is used to simulate coal particle breakage because of its algorithmic simplicity and the availability of experimental test data for calibrating bond strength. The particle breakage is modeled by constructing the macro-particles (or Note that the actual coal grinding process in mills also results in much finer particles or a powder-like substance, because of abrasion and chipping. The presence of such powdery material can have significant impact on the breakage behavior. The powder acts as a lubricant, leading to reduced intergranular force transmissions. Cleary The following section provides details on the constitutive laws and the DEM model used in this work. Section In this study, the soft-sphere approach of DEM In this study, the intact coal material is represented by a set of spherical agglomerates. Each agglomerate is composed of rigid spherical Two types of contact laws are employed in the present model. For the interactions of particles from within an agglomerate, a cohesive-frictional contact law is used. The intergranular lock between the coal particles is approximated by a notional cohesive bond. The interaction forces are defined using elastic stiffnesses corresponding to normal force, shear force, and the moment between the discrete elements. The normal interaction force between the two particles This linear relationship for the interaction force with symmetry in tension and compression is considered for simplicity. Other more sophisticated models for contact forces, some of which are outlined in The fracturing of the coal particle agglomerates is captured by the rupture of bonds. These bonds fail when either the tensile normal force (Eq. Interactions between particles from two different agglomerates and between a particle and the domain walls are modeled using a frictional constitutive law given simply by Eqs. In the classical DEM approach, only the strictly contacting particles are considered for interactions. Using a parameter called This feature provides the capability to have an initial denser network of cohesive bonds between the particles of a granular sample. Notably, the interaction ratio is set back to its default value of 1.0 after the first simulation time step, so new contacts only occur between strictly touching particles. Also, the equilibrium distance The constitutive laws described herein do not include velocity-based damping. Therefore, an artificial numerical damping is used to dissipate the kinetic energy of particles in the simulations. To approximate the quasi-static conditions, a high value of 0.8 is used for the damping coefficient. This ensures that the energy released by breakage of a bond does not have significant influence on the sample’s mechanical behavior and breakage of subsequent bonds. To ensure stability of the explicit integration scheme used for the DEM simulations, the time step size must be smaller than the critical time step A value of In addition to the physical properties of coal, the described model also requires several critical material parameters governing particle separation. Due to the lack of suitable laboratory characterization tests and experimental data, determination of all the parameters through calibration is not possible. One of the most important properties to determine breakage behavior of any granular sample is the cohesive bond strength: The Brazilian test Next, a numerical Brazilian sample is constructed to calibrate the cohesive strength. A disc-shaped numerical sample, 5-mm diameter and 2.5-mm thickness, is generated by a random dense packing consisting of 5402 spherical particles of radius 100 The cohesive strength of bonds is the critical mechanical property for the breakage simulations and is obtained through calibration in this study. Other model parameters are chosen to be typical material properties and from literature. Properties including modulus and Poisson’s ratio are selected from the material properties for coal reported in  Simulations with different values of cohesive strength parameter were conducted. The grinding section of a coal pulverizer generally consists of compressing rollers (or tires) and a rotating table on which the raw coal is fed. Each passage of the rotating table against the rollers breaks the coal particles into progressively smaller sizes. The ease of pulverization, or It would have been desirable to model the HGI test and numerically predict the particle size distribution evolution (as in The model used in this study consists of a small cuboidal coal sample, placed between two plates which provide mechanical loading on to the sample. This initial mechanically stable DEM sample configuration is prepared using the procedure described as follows:  First, a sample of spherical The volume of each spherical ball is then replaced with an agglomerate of densely packed spherical particles of radius 100 This sample is isotropically compressed using rigid walls to a resulting hydrostatic stress state of This dynamically compressed sample is still not mechanically stable under gravity. Hence, the sample is now placed on a plate at the bottom and with periodic boundary conditions in  The progressive breakup of the interparticle bonds leads to the breakage of an agglomerate, resulting in individual particles and granular fragments of different sizes and shapes. A granular fragment here is defined as a group of particles connected by at least one continuous cohesive bond chain. The individual 100-μm-sized particles are assumed to be non-breakable. Therefore, the crushing of these particles that leads to even smaller-sized particles, which should happen in an actual scenario, is not accounted for. There is no unique way to define the size of granular fragments. For example, it can be defined by the size of the equivalent solid sphere, the size of the sphere circumscribing the fragment, or simply by the number of particles in each fragment. In this paper, the fragment size is characterized by the radius of gyration, There are several factors that affect coal’s grindability, including some of the major operating parameters for a given mill hardware configuration, such as the roller wheel compression against the table and the rotational speed of the table (grinding ring). The pulverization process mainly involves two broad categories of mechanical loading on the coal sample: 1. Compression force on the coal sample and 2. Transverse shear induced by the rotation. Other factors are raw coal type and their physical properties, which can be accounted for in the DEM model parameters. The effect of some operating parameters on the coal sample’s breakage behavior is examined via numerical experiments. The model parameters used in these numerical simulations are the same as those in In a pulverizer, the roller wheel compression against the table is an important mill operating parameter, governing the breakage behavior of the coal sample. The desired small coal particle sizes are difficult to achieve with insufficient compression. Conversely, excess compression can lead to accelerated wear and tear on the equipment. Therefore, informed control of the compression is necessary for optimal operation of the pulverizer. In the context of the current model, shown in Although the numerical model used in this study is simplistic and quantitative validation with test data from a real system comparable to the one shown in For comparison purposes, In the simulation results presented thus far, a constant friction angle with an arbitrary, but reasonable, value of 30° has been used for interparticle interactions or interactions between the plates and particles. Although the internal friction angle for interparticle interactions is an inherent property of the coal material sample, the frictional interaction between the coal sample and plates can be altered by introducing some surface profile on the grinding balls or table. In this section, the effect of varying the friction angle for interactions between the plate and coal particles is studied. As mentioned previously in Section  The rotational velocity of the table in a coal pulverizer is another important operating parameter for mill operations. For the model considered in this work, the top plate velocity represents the rotational velocity in an actual mill. The effect of variation in the magnitude of velocity on the coal sample’s breakage behavior is considered in this section. Three different velocity values are considered: Coal particle size distribution plays an important role in the efficiency of combustion in coal-fired power plants. Traditionally, the breakage distribution from the pulverization process is obtained through some empirical or semi-empirical approaches. These approaches do not provide accurate predictions for varied coal types because the breakage behavior inherently depends on the coal’s physical properties. The main contribution of this work is to provide an integrated experimental and DEM based computational framework to model the coal particle breakage. The model requires several input parameters, with cohesive strength between the particles deemed the most important of all that affect the breakage behavior of coal. A procedure to calibrate the cohesive strength parameter using the Brazilian Test is presented. The model’s details and capabilities are demonstrated with the help of a surrogate system subjected to periodic boundary conditions. The effect of some of the operating parameters on the breakage behavior is then studied. Although the numerical problem demonstrated in this work is simplistic compared to a real pulverizer, it still provides the complete framework required to build a full-scale predictive model for the pulverizer. As computational capabilities advance, this model can be extended to simulate the actual particle size distributions in a pulverizer. Meanwhile, the model predictions provided in this work can provide some quantitative insights on the coal grindability. Also, this modeling approach, upon validation, can help to accelerate the design of pulverizers and selecting operating conditions for new types of coal. Because of computational limitations, the smallest discrete element resolution of size 100-μm is used in the current study. Much smaller particle sizes are desirable for more accurate predictions. In addition, using a wide size distribution of coal particles to form the sample agglomerates will lead to a denser, more realistic numerical representation of the coal sample. The approach used in this work is based on Bonded Particle Method, which is computationally intensive due to the large number of particles in the simulation. An alternative and computationally efficient replacement strategy requires the crushing strength of different-sized particles. The determination of such size-dependent strength for much smaller-sized particles (few microns to mm) via experimental procedures is a subject of future research. The Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is operated by the Battelle Memorial Institute for the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. of DE-AC05-76RL01830. This work was funded by the This manuscript was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.