Functional meat characteristics were studied in three turkey lines, (1) RBC2: representing 1960s commercial turkeys, (2) F-line: a line selected for body weight (BW) and (3) C-line: a fast growing commercial line with enhanced breast muscle yield. The RBC2s Warner-Bratzler shear force values for the Pectoralis major (PM) were lower than the F- and C-lines’ values (P
                     <0.05). The WHC of the breast muscle from the C-line was lower compared with the RBC2 line (P
                     <0.05), with the F-line being intermediate between, though not different from either the RBC2 or C-lines. A trend was observed, as the thermally induced meat gels from the RBC2 line PM had the highest storage modulus (G′), the F-line was intermediate and the C-line had the lowest storage modulus (P
                     =0.09). These results suggest that selection for increased growth and breast muscle yield may be associated with decreased meat functionality in modern commercial turkeys.The modern commercial turkey is largely the end result of genetic selection for BW and increased relative size of the Pectoralis major (PM) breast muscle ( One anomaly in turkeys that has been described in the past is the condition of pale, soft and exudative meat (PSE). It has been estimated that the incidence of PSE approaches 20% ( The myofibrillar or salt soluble proteins (SSPs) of muscle are comprized primarily of myosin and actomyosin and these are the functional proteins of a processed meat product. Myosin is the protein most responsible for the thermally induced gelation and water-holding properties of processed meat, whereas other SSPs influence the properties of myosin ( Comminution of muscle in salt solutions with ionic strengths above 0.25 The objective of the current study was to test the hypothesis that different turkey genotypes, exhibiting significant differences in BW and breast yield, will exhibit concomitant differences in breast muscle functional characteristics. To test this hypothesis, breast muscles from three distinct turkey genotypes were sampled for the purpose of comparing their WHC and the viscoelastic properties of thermally induced meat gels. All procedures were authorized by the ILACUC at The Ohio State University. Forty toms from three genetically distinct turkey lines were hatched and reared at the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center (OARDC, Wooster, OH) and were used to characterize the functional properties of breast muscle. The three lines were as follows: (1) RBC2: a random bred control line representing a composite of commercial turkey lines from late the 1960s ( The toms were raised during the summer of 2001, which was the hottest on record in Ohio. Toms were randomly selected and harvested by exsanguination at 16, 18, or 22 week of age. The BW of individual toms was recorded immediately after harvest. The PM breast muscles from both sides of the keel were immediately dissected from each bird, weighed and placed in an ice water bath for 20 The frozen PM muscles were thawed and allowed to equilibrate to an internal temperature of 4 Water holding capacity was determined using a modification of the method reported by A second set of SSPs was prepared, as described in WHC section, for sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoretic (SDS–PAGE) analysis. The SSPs were mixed with an equal volume of reducing buffer (60 The SSP solutions in brine were prepared as described in the WHC section, except 25 Myosin was prepared from minced PM breast muscles and purified by repeated washes in low salt buffer solution (20 Myosin heavy chain purity was evaluated by SDS–PAGE analysis as previously described in the electrophoretic analysis section. Myosin concentrations were determined by comparing the densitometric intensity of known concentrations of myosin to dilutions of the sample myosin in SDS–PAGE. The relative myosin heavy chain concentration in each supernatant was determined by SDS–PAGE. The gels were prepared as described above and scanned and digitized employing a GS 700 Imaging Densitometer. The relative concentrations of neonatal (nMyHC), slow myosin heavy chain 2 (sMyHC2) and adult fast skeletal (aMyHC) myosin heavy chain isoforms in the PM were determined by ELISA employing a bank of monoclonal antibodies (mAb). The specificities of these mAbs for avian sarcomeric MHC isoforms have been previously described ( The sensitivity of each of the mAbs was determined via a titration vs. previously purified chicken MyHC. Briefly, the purified chicken, adult, fast MyHC standard was diluted from 1 Data were analyzed using the PROC MIXED procedure of SAS v. 8 ( The RBC2 line toms weighed significantly less than both the F-line and C-line toms at all ages ( There were no significant age There were no significant line differences in cooking loss associated with the PM ( No differences in aMyHC were found among the three lines ( The WHC was determined by using breast muscle samples from all three harvest ages. No significant age or age The electrophoretic image in The RBC2 line had an 80 The results of these experiments support the hypothesis that selection for increased BW and breast yield in turkeys has changed the functional characteristics of breast muscle as it relates to several indices ultimately related to product quality. Selected aspects of breast muscle development have been reported previously for the RBC2, F-line, and other commercial genotypes ( Elevated post-harvest carcass temperature has been one factor linked to the reduced functionality in turkey breast meat ( The lack of significant differences among lines in MHC isoform concentrations or in the myosin migration pattern in protein aliquots taken from brine supernatant is consistent with other studies ( The WHC of the breast meat from the RBC2 line was significantly higher than the C-line breast meat ( The trends observed in the viscoelastic analysis followed the same genetic patterns described for the other experiments. The results, though inconclusive, are promising from two perspectives: (1) the myosin heavy chain concentrations were similar in each sample, yet very different ultimate The distribution of the viscoelastic values of the three lines may help explain the increased incidence of malformed turkey breast processed products observed within commercial practice. Typically, most processed turkey products employ breast muscles from multiple birds combined together. If only one or two breast muscles have a reduced capability to form strong thermally induced meat gels, the product may still be acceptable. However, if multiple breast muscles have a reduced functionality, the processed product may not form correctly. In this study, individual breast muscle samples from RBC2 line birds tended to form thermally induced meat gels with greater storage modulus values. The WHC and viscoelastic data support the hypothesis that increased selection intensity for muscle growth has resulted in a concurrent loss in meat functionality. The RBC2 line serves as an unselected control and had the best meat functionality across several measurements. The C-line is the result of the greatest selection pressure, both for increased growth and for increased breast yield, and consequently breast meat from this line showed the least functionality. The F-line, which has faced intermediate selection pressure of increased body weight but not increased breast yield, gave rise to meat functionality that was intermediate to the other two lines as well. The progressive changes in muscle traits and functionality trends observed in the current study (RBC2 This material is based upon work supported under a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. Salaries and research support provided by state and federal funds appropriated to the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center, The Ohio State University.