The effect of mechanical activation on the reduction behavior of a hematite concentrate has been examined using a combination of simultaneous thermal analysis (STA), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM) analysis, and laser diffraction. The samples were activated in vibratory and planetary mills.
                  Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric (TG) analysis revealed that reduction of mechanically activated and initial hematite proceeds stepwise (Fe2O3
                     →Fe3O4
                     →Fe). The hydrogen reduction of mechanically activated samples initiates at low temperatures compared with the initial sample. The beginning temperature (onset) of the reduction decreases from 421 °C in the initial sample to 330 °C in the mechanically activated sample, depending on the grinding intensity. Further, the reduction of hematite to magnetite in the activated samples is more pronounced due to mechanical activation. At low temperatures, the activated samples give a higher degree of conversion than the initial samples regardless of which milling device is used. Hematite reduces completely to iron metal.
                  A comparison of mill-type effect based on stress energy (specific grinding work) suggests that the mill-type effect is confined by a stress energy of 4300 kJ/kg. After releasing 4300 kJ/kg energy, mechanical activation by the planetary mill brings about a larger decrease in onset temperature and a slightly higher degree of conversion at lower temperatures than does activation by the vibratory mill for a given stress energy. A direct relationship between the reaction characters at lower temperatures and structure sensitivity character (S/X) and stored energy can be identified after releasing 4300 kJ/kg energy. However, partial sintering of material at higher temperatures during the reduction of the mechanically activated hematite became active, and the effects of disordering of the hematite structure vanished and subsequently the reduction reaction was retarded.The increase of industrial interest in the direct reduction of hematite ores using gaseous reductants arises from the several technical advantages that this method offers over the conventional blast furnace process ( The reduction of iron oxide is a very complex process because it is a heterogeneous reaction in which several simultaneous reactions usually occur. Extensive studies were conducted by The reduction rate of iron ore depends on numerous factors that vary from process to process. These factors include temperature, pressure, gas flow, mineralogical composition (including crystal size, porosity, and distribution within the ore) of the ore, and the interaction between the iron ore and the reducing atmosphere. In the reduction of iron ore with hydrogen, it was generally established that wüstite is unstable at temperatures lower than 570 °C under equilibrium condition, but it could be an intermediate product at temperatures below 570 °C under irreversible condition ( On the other hand, mechanical activation of solid substances is one component of modern scientific disciplines of mechanochemistry. At present, mechanical activation exhibits a wide range of potential applications. It has been reported that mechanical activation substantially accelerates the leaching kinetics of several sulfide and oxide minerals, even at ambient pressure. The enhanced effect is attributed to the increase of specific surface area and structural disorder ( The goal of this paper is to describe the thermal behavior of mechanically activated hematite by applying high energy milling in the planetary and vibratory mills. The dependence of reduction behaviors of hematite on structural changes is also discussed. The high-purity hematite concentrate used in this study was kindly supplied by the LKAB (Luossavaara Kiirunavaara Aktiebolag) company in Sweden. The chemical composition of the initial sample is given in Hematite concentrate was mechanically activated using a planetary mill (RETSCH) and a vibratory mill (HUMBOLDT; PALL 20 U). A mixture of ball steel media with dimensions between 6 mm and 22.2 mm and with apparent density of 4875 kg/m The particle size distribution of the samples was measured by laser diffraction (CILAS 1064) in the liquid mode. The mean particle diameter was obtained from the particle size distribution. Simultaneous thermal analyses (STA) were conducted using a NETZSCH STA 409C instrument at a heating rate of 10 °C min The XRD patterns were obtained using a Siemens D5000 powder diffractometer with Bragg–Brentano geometry equipped with a curved graphite monochromator in the diffracted beam arm and using Cu Kα radiation ( The morphological characterization of the samples was performed using a Philips XL 30 scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a LaB The mean diameter of the ground samples, as shown in This view is supported by the results of the SEM analysis ( Thermoanalytical methods provide a great deal of information about the structural changes of hematite that occur during mechanical treatment. The reduction behaviors of the initial and mechanically activated samples were studied between room temperature and 850 °C at non-isothermal condition with hydrogen gas. No remarkable change was observed below 200 °C.  A weak endoeffect at about 775 °C is due to the transition from the ferromagnetic state into the paramagnetic state and/or due to the transition of α-Fe to β-Fe. The Curie temperature of iron is around 1053 K ( In order to obtain additional information about the weight loss of the sample obtained by milling, a TG analysis and a DTG analysis were performed. In these techniques, changes in the mass of a sample are studied while the sample is subjected to a controlled temperature program (  Similar plots were constructed for the samples ground in the planetary mill. The results are shown in The above mentioned results are confirmed by the DTG curves shown in the insets of To understand why the reduction reaction retards at higher temperatures, especially in the mechanically activated samples, SEM investigation was employed on the reduction products. The SEM micrographs are presented in The differences between the effects of the two mills are studied with regard to their specific grinding work (stress energy). Direct comparison of mills will be possible if the efficiency and ability of the mills in transferring energy to the particles being ground are known. However, the measurement of the efficiency of energy transfer in mills is a complicated task, and, as far as we know, the evaluation of grinding intensity and mill efficiency has not been adequately established. In this study, the mills are compared using the specific grinding work (stress energy), SE, characters of the mills, which are proposed by The two reduction parameters were considered in the comparison of the mills' effects. The beginning temperature (onset) of the reaction was derived from the curve of weight variation (TG) of the differential thermal analysis by the extrapolated peak onset method ( Experimental data (decrease in sample weight) were then converted into degree of conversion at various temperatures and used in the comparison of the mills' effects. The obtained results are displayed in The degree of conversion at three temperatures is displayed in To clarify, the structural changes and stored energy (enthalpy) in the hematite as a result of mechanical activation have to be investigated. According to To summarize, it was observed that structural changes caused by mechanical treatments accelerate the reduction at lower temperatures and remarkably decrease the starting temperature of the reduction. The reduction at higher temperatures shows decreased effects of structural changes because of partial sintering of powders during reduction. The reduction of mechanically activated hematite would give better results at lower temperatures with low heating rate in non-isothermal conditions. More investigations are recommended to elucidate the relationship between structure characters and kinetics parameters of the hematite reduction and to determine the effective structures in the reduction process. The milling process has been shown to have a pronounced influence on the reduction (with the aid of hydrogen) of hematite: The mechanical activation of hematite by planetary mill and/or vibratory mill had a positive influence on the reduction of hematite with hydrogen gas at lower temperatures. At higher temperatures, the formation of a dense layer retarded the reduction. Mechanical activation of hematite concentrate led to the initiation of reduction at lower temperatures. The starting temperature of the reduction was decreased to about 90 °C. The activated samples had a higher degree of conversion at lower temperature ranges. The reduction of hematite to magnetite was pronounced in the activated samples compared to the initial sample, and the corresponding exoeffect was developed and sharpened after 1 and 3 h of milling with higher media surface in the planetary and vibratory mills, respectively. Planetary milling generated great structural changes compared to vibratory milling for a given stress energy over the grinding intensity. However, the mill-type effect on the reaction was confined by a stress energy of 4300 kJ/kg. After releasing 4300 kJ/kg energy, planetary milling decreased the onset temperature more than vibratory milling. More investigations are needed to explore the availability and influence of individual structure characters on the reaction. The authors would like to thank Professor Claes I Helgesson for his valuable comments and discussions on this paper. We would like to express our gratitude to Dr. Nourreddine Menad for his assistance in the measurements of thermal analysis data.