In this work, the crystallization of gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O) in the temperature range of 20–60 °C is investigated along with the simultaneous regeneration of HCl by the reaction of concentrated CaCl2 solution (3–3.5 M) with H2SO4 at a concentration range of 2.6–8.0 M. Fast addition of H2SO4 proved counter productive as it yielded a gel-like fine crystal suspension. Slower addition via titration or in multiple steps over 2 to 4 h followed by 2 h of equilibration proved successful in producing well developed columnar gypsum crystals of ~50+ µm long and 5+ µm thick.
                  It was determined that for the purpose of producing high strength HCl (4 M), with minimum soluble CaSO4 (5 g/L at 40 °C), 8.0 M H2SO4 has to be used at a molar ratio (SO4/Ca)=0.8. Upon the elevation of temperature or by using seed and recycling, crystal growth was promoted yielding crystals as large as 100+ µm in length and 20+ µm in thickness. Crystallization tests in the presence of several metal chlorides showed that metal impurity uptake is not a problem except for lead, which was present at 95 ppm (or mg/kg). Filtration rates higher than 4000 kg of solids deposited m−2 h−1 were obtained.Hydrochloric acid has the potential to find a wide range of applications in chloride hydrometallurgy because of its strong leaching power and favorable metal chloride chemistry ( The regeneration of HCl is a critical issue in all these processes, and this is usually done by a process called pyrohydrolysis, which involves the thermal decomposition of metal chlorides. This process is however, highly intensive in terms of energy and capital. Moreover, the thermodynamic data indicate that this technology cannot be used in the case of CaCl Calcium chloride (CaCl The reaction of the spent CaCl In industrial practice, this crystallization process will be followed by solid–liquid separation in order to obtain the final product. The energy consumption in such operation is a decisive factor that depends on the properties of the crystals produced ( It is the objective of this paper to systematically study the different reaction conditions such as: temperature, CaCl The gypsum crystallization experiments were performed at constant temperature range of 20–60 °C using 1 L Pyrex, baffled reactor equipped with an agitator and a temperature controller. Sulfuric acid solution was always the limiting reactant and added under different conditions: variable addition rate; variable concentration at the range of 2.66 to 8.0 M; different total molar ratio of [SO The addition time of the acid was varied between the case that all the acid was added at once and up to 4 h of acid addition either by titration or in small doses (stages). Following the addition of the acid, the mixture obtained was continued to be agitated at constant temperature for the purpose of crystal ripening. This equilibration period was varied from 0 up to 6 h. Another set of experiments was conducted to study the effect of seed/recycling using A.C.S calcium sulfate dihydrate (DH) received from Sigma-Aldrich as a seeding material. The seed loading was varied as follows: 15, 25, 30 and 60 g/L seed. This seed load was calculated based on the initial calcium chloride solution volume, which yields 144.56 g of gypsum (DH) when 6.65 M H For the metal uptake tests, various metal chlorides of 0.1 M concentration were used either individually or as a mixture. In this case, the seed loading used was 15 g/L. Upon the completion of each test, the crystals were filtered, washed and dried. Some of the produced crystals were subjected to recycling while others were kept for characterization. As washing medium hot water equal to two volumes of the filtrate was used except in the metal uptake tests, where the crystals were washed until their coloration disappeared. After water washing the crystals were further washed by acetone to displace any retained moisture and then dried at 60 °C for 24 h. Under these conditions, no dehydration of the gypsum crystals occurs ( The method of addition and the concentration of the precipitating agent (in this case H Where Three methods of acid addition were investigated: (a) all the acid added at once, (b) acid added by titration and (c) acid added in stages (doses). In all cases, the XRD analysis of the crystals obtained confirmed the presence of only gypsum (DH phase). The effects of acid addition method and time on the settling rate and % solids density of the resultant settled slurry are shown in It is clear that when all the acid was added at once, very fine needle crystals clustered together with a “glass-wool” appearance, were produced, thus explaining their gel-like behavior. On the other hand, the crystals obtained with gradual addition of the acid, i.e. by titration for 2 h as seen in Since there was no much difference in gypsum crystal morphology between 2 and 4 h titration time, it was decided to conduct most of the subsequent titration tests with 2 h acid addition period. Further more, the equilibration time was varied between 2 and 4 h and then was standardized at 2 h. The benefit of equilibration is evident from the SEM micrographs shown in One of the objectives of this work is the regeneration of HCl out of CaCl It can be seen that as the acid concentration increased, the settling rate decreased. On the other hand the % solids density increased (from 22% with 2.66 M H However, the settling rate cannot be taken as direct indication of the increase in gypsum particle size alone, because it is also a function of the solids content. For this reason SEM image analysis and particle size analysis were performed to check the crystals morphology and their mean particle size. The SEM results are shown in As can be seen from the SEM pictures, the crystals were well formed in both cases with evidence of better crystal growth in the case of 2.66 M H Despite modest improvements obtained when supersaturation was controlled via the regulation of acid concentration, the settling rates measured were rather slow (only a few centimeters per hour). On the other hand, the % solids density was relatively high, around 30%. This means that thickening of the slurry can be replaced by direct filtration in this context. Hence, filtration rate measurements were made, using a press filter under a vacuum pressure of 20 psi. The measurements were done at room temperature and the filtration rate values obtained are tabulated in HCl regeneration is discussed in another section of this paper, but it should be mentioned here that an attempt was made to use higher than 3.5 M CaCl Having demonstrated that the titration method results in easily filterable gypsum crystals, it was decided to investigate next the step-wise addition method ( With the dual purpose of: (i) verifying that the step-wise addition method gives equivalent results to titration and (ii) determining the optimum number of steps (or stages) required to approximate the titration procedure, a new set of tests was conducted. In each experiment, 2 h of equilibration were applied after the limiting reactant was consumed. The experimental results in terms of settling rate and % solids are shown in It is evident from The effect of temperature was investigated in the range of 20–60 °C. No higher temperatures were tried as it is known that elevated temperatures favor the conversion of calcium sulfate dihydrate to hemihydrate or anhydrite in HCl–CaCl The volume-based mean particle size increased dramatically from 10.9 µm at 20 °C to 22.9 µm at 40 °C and to 47.3 µm at 60 °C. At the same time, the quality of the crystals was markedly improved with temperature elevation. Hence, from a crystallization point of view 60 °C is the preferred temperature although at this temperature the residual calcium sulfate content in solution as discussed in another section is somewhat elevated. Several tests were performed to evaluate the effect of seed loading and recycling on the quality of the produced gypsum. Tests were first done at 40 °C using 2.66 M H According to The growth of crystals through seeding and recycling was confirmed through a second series of tests at 60 °C. In this series of tests, 15 g/L seed was used. As the particle size distributions in Spent CaCl In these experiments, 0.1 M of NaCl, MgCl The results of metal uptake and filtration rates are shown in As mentioned earlier, one of the objectives of this work was to achieve the regeneration of HCl from CaCl It is clearly seen that the HCl strength in the regenerated solution increased with the increase in the concentration of sulfuric acid used as expected. However, the theoretical HCl concentrations predicted from the chemical equation were somewhat higher than those obtained from titration. It is suspected that at 2.66 M H The same final regenerated solutions were analyzed to determine the residual = soluble) calcium sulfate (CaSO It was found that the crystallization chemistry of the CaCl The optimum crystallization results in terms of the production of high quality crystals were achieved through supersaturation control combined with seeding and recycling. In this work, supersaturation was controlled by the method of sulfuric acid addition (either by titration or in multiple stages). With no seeding, needle-like crystals of 50+ µm length and 5+ µm thick were produced. Use of seed yielded crystals of 100+ µm length and 20+ µm in thickness. The resultant crystal slurry had poor settling rates but yielded high filtration rates in the value of ≥ The concentration of residual (soluble) CaSO Finally, the effect of metal chlorides on gypsum crystallization was also investigated using various metal chlorides including: NaCl, MgCl The following sponsors are gratefully acknowledged for their support: Hatch, Noranda (now Xstrata Copper), Process Research Ortech and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).