The recovery of ultrafine weakly magnetic minerals using HGMS is proved a tough issue in industrial practice. Optimization of HGMS parameters determines the recovery result. The capture limits of weakly magnetic particles of diameter range 1–30μm in high gradient magnetic field are studied using a numerical computation method. The matrix size and slurry velocity as well as the magnetic induction show great influence on the capture radius. The capture radius decreases rapidly with the decrease of particle size, the increase of matrices diameter and slurry velocity. For generalized condition, the capture radius is largely dependent on the ratio of slurry velocity V
                     0 to the so called magnetic velocity Vm
                     . The capture efficiency decreases with the increase of the matrices arrangement value of d/a (the ratio of half the spacing between matrices to the matrix radius). The relationship between capture efficiency and V
                     0/Vm
                      as well as d/a is obtained. This relationship can provide a guidance of choosing matrices of the perfect size and arrangements or configuring the HGMS system to work with high capture efficiency. It is also demonstrated how to regulate the HGMS system from a working point of low capture efficiency to a working point of high capture efficiency.Massive ultrafine weakly magnetic particles are produced during the processing of iron ore and these fine minerals generally cannot be recovered and are lost into the tailings because the magnetic force acting on minerals decreases sharply with the decrease of minerals size. As the accessible mineral resources become less and less, more and more attention is paid to the recovery of these fine magnetic minerals. High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is a promising method to deal with weakly magnetic minerals ( For the recovery of the fine weakly magnetic minerals, the characteristics of the matrices such as the cross-section radius Capture radius is a limit where the particle just can be captured by the matrix. Watson calculated capture radius of the magnetic particles in a magnetic filtration for sewage treatment by solving the trajectory equations and put forward a method for the calculation of capture radius ( For fine particles in a fluid in an applied magnetic field, there are several kinds of competitive forces: inertial force, gravitational force, fluid drag force and diffusion force ( There are three possible configurations in the HGMS: transverse, longitudinal and axial. For the transverse configuration, the magnetic field, the matrices’ axis and the direction of the flow are mutually perpendicular; For the longitudinal configuration, the magnetic field is parallel to the direction of flow and both are perpendicular to the matrices’ axis; For the axial configuration, the flow direction is parallel to the matrices’ axis and both are perpendicular to the magnetic field. As reported ( The capture radius can be calculated with a numerical computation method. The motion of particles is determined by Eqs. In this study, a set of fluid flow Results in  For the flow around the cylinder matrices, the fluid around the left sides of the matrices drives the particles to move away from the large magnetic force area while the fluid around the right sides of the matrices drives the particles to move towards the large magnetic force area. So some particles will get across the matrices and are captured at the right sides of the matrices. Additionally, it can be seen from Eqs.  Based on the data in Besides the particle and matrix size, the slurry velocity also has great influence on the capture efficiency. This is mainly because the increase of slurry velocity will cause the increase of the drag force acting on particles. The influence of slurry velocity When matrices of 0.1 Eliminating the  On the basis of the relationship between The capture efficiency distribution can be a guidance to configure the HGMS system or regulate the recovery efficiency. For example, for a given mineral size, we can calculate the Imagining that the HGMS system is working within area B, as point 1 shown in Based on the calculations and analyses, the matrix size and slurry velocity as well as the magnetic induction have great influence on the capture of magnetic particles. The capture radius decreases rapidly with the decrease of particle size and the increase of slurry velocity and matrices size. Matrices of small size have larger capture radius and present higher capture efficiency under the same packing fraction as matrices of large size. The decrease of matrix size can compensate the influence of the increase of slurry velocity on the capture efficiency. For generalized condition, the capture radius is mainly dependent on