In this work, the thermal decomposition and digestion of dolomite during the calcination of medium and low grade phosphate ore were investigated. Moreover, the migration distribution of co-associated iodine in gas, liquid and solid phases was also examined. The effects of calcination temperature and time, digestion temperature and time, and liquid-solid ratio on the P2O5 grade, MgO removal rate and iodine migration distribution of phosphate ore were systematically studied. The results showed that the main phase Ca5(PO4)3F remained almost no change during calcination-digestion process of phosphate ore. The impurity dolomite was decomposed into magnesium and calcium oxides, and carbon dioxide was precipitated. With the thermal decomposition of dolomite, most of the accompanying iodine adsorbed in phosphate ore was oxidized to iodine and sublimated to the gas phase. A small amount of iodine continued to exist as an isomorph in the fluoroapatite lattice. Increasing the temperature and prolonging the time accelerated the decomposition rate of dolomite in phosphate ore. However, excessively, high calcination temperature and prolonged calcination time affected the decomposition reaction and led to the reduction of effective CaO and MgO content. This was not conducive to the removal of calcium and magnesium, or to the improvement of phosphate grade. Appropriate digestion temperature, time and water volume facilitated the digestion reaction and increased the MgO removal rate. During calcination and digestion progress, 80%~90% of the associated iodine migrated to the gas phase in the form of elemental I2. Under the optimized calcination conditions, the removal rate of MgO reached (85.0 ± 0.1)%, the grade of phosphate concentrate increased up to (32.5 ± 0.1)%, and the content of MgO was (1.02 ± 0.1)%.Phosphate ore is an important mineral resource. The global phosphate ore resources are mainly distributed in Morocco and Western Sahara, China and Syria, with an average P In general, phosphate ore anti-flotation technology can reduce the magnesium content in phosphate ore to between 0.8 and 1.5% ( The ability of the calcination-digestion process to effectively remove calcium and magnesium impurities from phosphate ore and recover the associated iodine depends on several factors. The main influencing factors include the thermal decomposition of impurities dolomite and calcite, hot water digestion of decomposition products CaO and MgO, and migration of iodine associated with phosphate ore distribution behavior. In this paper, the effects of calcination-digestion parameters on the P The crushed sieved phosphate ore powder was placed in a tube furnace (SLG1200–60, precision ±1 °C) and heated to the set temperature at the heating rate of 10 °C/min. Then, the furnace was heated at a constant temperature for a certain period of time. Afterwards, the ore powder was naturally cooled in furnace to the room temperature to obtain the calcined phosphate ore. The exhaust gas was absorbed by 10% Na The liquid-solid ratio (water/calcined phosphate ore, mass ratio), water temperature and digestion reaction time were set according to the designed experimental conditions. Then, the calcined phosphate ore was added to water at a certain temperature under stirring. The stirring was continued until the digestion reaction time was set. Next, 20% NH The migration distribution rate of associated iodine in gas, liquid and solid phases during the calcining-digesting process of phosphate ore was calculated by the following formula: Where The average migration amount Where m The removal rate of MgO during the calcining-digesting process of phosphate ore was calculated by the following formula: Where The P The fluorine content in the raw phosphate ore was measured by Specific ion electrode method (GB/T 1872–1995 phosphate rock and concentrate- determination of fluorine content-specific ion electrode method). Other chemical composition in raw phosphate ore was measured by X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (Zetium, Panalytical, Netherlands), the instrument accuracy was 0.028%. Test conditions: maximum voltage 60KV, maximum current 160 mA, ceramic end window tube, rhodium target, 75 μm coated window, maximum scanning speed (θ/2θ) 600°/min, angular repeatability (θ/2θ) ≤ 0.0001°, the number of samples is not <27. The MgO content in the phosphate concentrate ore was measured by flame atomic absorption spectrometric method (GB/T 1871.5–1995 phosphate rock and concentrate-determination of magnesium oxide content-flame atomic absorption spectrometric method), the instrument used was flame atomic absorption spectrometer (AA-6300C, Shimadzu Corporation, Japan). The test conditions were: acetylene-air flame, magnesium hollow cathode lamp, and wavelength of 285.2 nm. The calcining process of raw phosphate ore was studied using thermal analyzer (STA 449C, Germany) over the temperature range of 0–1200 °C, at the heating rate of 10 °C/min. Phase analysis of the raw phosphate ore, calcined phosphate ore and phosphate concentrate ore was performed using X-ray diffractometer (D8 advance, Bruker, Germany). The test conditions were as follows: Cu target, Kα rays, current 150 mA, voltage 40 kV, 5°~90° continuous scanning, and scanning rate 10°/min. All chemical composition results were measured by parallel samples. The results were taken as arithmetic mean, and the absolute difference of the parallel sample analysis was not greater than the tolerances allowed by the standards and instruments. The difference between the maximum value of the experimental data and the arithmetic mean was the chemical analysis detection error, the instrument analysis detection error was the accuracy of the actual experimental equipment, the accuracy of the XRF in this experiment was 0.028%. The raw phosphate ore used in this study was obtained, from Weng'an, China, and was a medium-grade carbonate type phosphate ore. Results of X-ray fluorescence spectrum analysis are shown in The experimental results of the effect of different calcination temperatures and calcination time on the P It can be seen from It can be seen from the TG-DSC curve in It can be seen from The experimental results of the effects of digestion temperature, digestion time and liquid-solid ratio on the P It can be seen from The experimental results of the three-phase distribution of iodine after calcination of phosphate ore at different temperatures and after digestion are shown in The experimental results in The experimental results of the three-phase distribution of iodine after the phosphate ore was calcined at different times and after digestion are shown in It can be seen from The atomic matrix method ( It can be seen from The results of XRD analysis of the phosphate ore calcined at different calcination temperatures and calcination times are shown in It can be seen from It can be seen from In carbonate-type phosphate ore, dolomite is the main gangue mineral present. Dolomite decomposes into magnesium and calcium oxides during the roasting process and precipitates carbon dioxide. Phosphate minerals do not change during the calcination process. Therefore, after calcination, MgO and CaO are converted into a loose structure and fine particle size hydroxides with the help of water during digestion. The digestion reaction is carried out by addition of NH During the ore dressing process of phosphate ore and the thermal decomposition of dolomite, most of the accompanying iodine adsorbed in the phosphate ore is oxidized into iodine element, which then sublimates and migrates to the gas phase. A small amount of iodine may continue to exist as an isomorph in the fluoroapatite crystal lattice. Therefore, the thermal decomposition of dolomite is the key to the entire beneficiation process. The decomposition reaction is as follows  It was found that the main phase in the ore, calcium fluorophosphate Ca It was found that increasing the calcination temperature and prolonging the calcination holding time accelerated the decomposition rate of dolomite in the phosphate ore. However, very high calcination temperature and prolonged calcination time affected the thermal decomposition reaction and led to the decrease in effective CaO and MgO content. These conditions were not conducive to the removal of calcium and magnesium in the subsequent process. Nevertheless, the optimum digestion temperature, time and water volume were beneficial to the digestion reaction and improved the MgO removal rate as well as the phosphate grade. During the calcining process of phosphate ore, the distribution of accompanying iodine migration changed. Most of the accompanying iodine adsorbed in phosphate ore was oxidized to iodine I It was found that the optimum calcination-digestion conditions were: calcination temperature 950 °C, calcination time 45 min, digestion temperature 60 °C, digestion time 30 min, and liquid-solid ratio 2:1. Under these optimized conditions, the removal rate of MgO in phosphorus concentrate was (85.0 ± 0.1)%, and the MgO content was (1.02 ± 0.01)%. Moreover, the P This work was supported by the