The shrinking core model (SCM) is widely used to model fluid–solid reactions such as the leaching of metals from minerals. In most cases, however, the particle size distribution (PSD) of the solid material was disregarded. In this paper the erroneous shift in the control regime when neglecting PSD was quantified and the dependence of the shift on the coefficients of variation (CV) and the type of PSD was analysed. By coupling the SCM with a Gamma PSD, it was found that neglecting the PSD would shift the control regime from chemical reaction to inert/ash layer diffusion, when the CV was between 0.7 and 1.2. For a system controlled by liquid film diffusion, neglect of the PSD, would shift the control regime to chemical reaction when CV is between 0.3 and 0.7 or to inert/ash layer diffusion when CV is greater (0.9–1.5). It was therefore postulated that some researchers had unknowingly made invalid conclusions about the control regime due to the neglect of PSD. However, an inert/ash layer diffusion-controlled process was insensitive to the neglect of PSD. When CV<0.3, neglect of the PSD would not cause any erroneous shifts, irrespective of the control regime. Experimental data confirmed the observation. For a given CV, the deviation in the fraction reacted from the mono-PSD increases with CV and decreases with time. The maximum deviation, which occurs at the beginning, is about 10% with a gamma PSD of CV=0.3. The percent deviation is dependent of the type of PSDs. Gamma PSD gives the lowest deviation while Gaudin–Schuhmann results in the largest deviation (maxi. ∼19%, with CV=0.3) in the first half of dissolution process. Log-normal distribution gives a larger deviation than gamma but quickly approaches the latter with time. The deviation for Rosin–Rammler is between log-normal and Gaudin–Schuhmann. For systems with CV less than 0.3, the SCM can be fairly used without considering PSD. When CV is greater than 0.3, particularly in the early stage of a dissolution process with a PSD other than gamma, PSD should be included to avoid substantial errors.Fluid–solid reactions are encountered in a variety of chemical process industries. Applications are found in the fields of extractive metallurgy, control of gaseous pollutants, combustion of solid fuels, and catalyst manufacture ( The major models that have been developed for non-catalytic fluid–solid reactions are the shrinking core, shrinking particle, homogeneous and grain models. The shrinking core model (SCM) is applicable to an initially non-porous particle, which reacts with a reagent leaving a reacted layer around the unreacted core. The shrinking particle model is similar to the SCM except that no product layer is left around the unreacted core. The homogeneous model is applicable to a solid with a homogeneous distribution of pores, while the grain model is applicable to a solid consisting of individual dense grains compacted together. Among these models, the SCM has been widely used in the area of hydrometallurgy to model leaching systems. However, in some cases, inconsistent conclusions were made after the application of the SCM. The SCM was first developed by The form of the rate equation is determined by the control regime, or the rate-limiting step which can be one of the following three: When the diffusion through liquid film controls, When the diffusion through inert/ash layer controls, When surface chemical reaction controls Some researchers ( However,  Here, we incorporate PSD into the SCM for each of the three kinetic control regimes and evaluate errors and shifts in the kinetic control regime. For mono-sized particles of diameter For a surface chemical reaction-controlled process, For an ash/inert layer diffusion-controlled process, no algebraic expression can be obtained for For a liquid film diffusion-controlled process For a group of particles of various sizes divided into discrete size ranges, For a continuous distribution of particles,  A number of PSD functions can be used to describe multi-particulate systems, including Gaudin–Schuhmann, Rosin–Rammler, log-normal, gamma ( The gamma function is given by Substituting Therefore, the overall conversion or fraction reacted is given as Since the cumulative gamma function approaches 1, as   Simulations were carried out for each control regime case to determine the effect of change of CV on the conversion of the solid.  In order to quantify the extent of deviation of fraction reacted at any CV, from the case where CV=0 (mono-sized distribution), the percentage deviation of fraction reacted at a specific CV, from the case at CV=0 were plotted as shown in Fig The percentage error was calculated using the formula, Generally, for CVs up to 0.3, the percentage error was less than 10%. For CV=0.5, the error was below 10% after about 60% extraction was achieved. The trend in error was similar when the other particle size distributions shown in The effect of the control regime on the error was also investigated. The trends observed in the error at different CV is not surprising since the closer the value of CV is to 0, the closer the distribution is to the mono-sized state, irrespective of the type of particle size distribution, kinetic control regime, size of the particles or rate constants involved. However, since incorporation of particle size distribution into the shrinking core model is cumbersome, it would be desirable to determine conditions under which incorporation of the PSD is not critical. Since at CVs less than 0.3, the error values are generally less than 10%, close to experimental error, the PSD may not be needed when CV is less than 0.3. However, when CV is greater than 0.3 the PSD should be incorporated into the SCM. It is common for authors to plot  Some researchers obtained high activation energy (suggesting chemical reaction control) while their system followed the inert/ash layer diffusion-controlled equation ( Similarly, by plotting “1−(1− Plotting “1−(1− Data from leaching of slag using aqueous sulphur dioxide (in excess) to extract cobalt is used for verification. Full details about the experiment can be found in Data obtained from particle size analysis were in the form of discrete particle size distribution and had to be converted to the continuous particle size distribution. If The value of Cobalt extraction data were found to fit the chemical reaction control case the best. The activation energy calculated from the values of To illustrate the erroneous conclusion that may result by neglecting the PSD of the dry sieved slag (which had a CV of 0.84), experimental data were plotted by assuming a mono-sized PSD using the reaction and inert/ash layer diffusion-controlled equations ( A number of researchers reported high activation energy for leaching systems that appeared to follow the inert/ash layer diffusion-control equation. 48.9 and When the coefficient of variation (CV) is large, neglecting particle size distribution (PSD) in the shrinking core model (SCM) can result in erroneous conclusions about the control regime. For a chemical reaction-control process, neglect of the PSD erroneously shifted the control regime from chemical reaction to inert/ash layer diffusion, when the CV is between 0.7 and 1.2. For an inert/ash layer diffusion-control process, neglect of the PSD did not cause any shift in the control regime. For CV greater than 0.3, the data did not fit any of the control equations of the SCM for mono-sized particles. For a system controlled by liquid film diffusion, neglect of the PSD, erroneously shifted the control regime from liquid film diffusion to chemical reaction (for CV between 0.3 and 0.7), or inert/ash layer diffusion (for CV between 0.9 and 1.5). The shift in the control regime occurs for all the commonly used PSDs. For a given CV, the deviation in the fraction reacted from mono-sized distribution increases with CV and decreases with the fraction reacted (or time). The maximum deviation, which occurs at the beginning, is about 10% with a gamma PSD of CV=0.3. Assuming CV=0 results in an overestimation of the fraction reacted in most of the time from the beginning. The percent deviation is dependent of the type of PSDs. Gamma PSD gives the lowest deviation while Gaudin–Schuhmann results in the largest deviation (maxi. ∼19%, with CV=0.3) in the first half of dissolution process. Log-normal distribution gives a larger deviation than Gamma but quickly approaches the latter. The deviation for Rosin–Rammler is between log-normal and Gaudin–Schuhmann. For systems with CV less than 0.3, the SCM can be fairly used to predict/model experimental data while using the average particle size. In cases where a PSD cannot be determined, the ground solid should be effectively wet sieved to remove the finer fractions. Wet sieve can lower the CV of the particles and make the SCM for mono-sized distributions applicable. 