This paper reports the dry sliding wear behaviour of AA7075 aluminium/SiCp composites fabricated by powder metallurgy technique. Five factors, five levels, central composite, rotable design matrix is used to optimize the required number of experiments. The wear test has been conducted in a pin-on-roller wear testing machine, under constant sliding distance of 1km. An attempt has been made to develop a mathematical model by response surface method (RSM). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) technique is applied to check the validity of the developed model. Student's t-test is utilised to find out the significance of factors. The effects of volume percentage of reinforcement, particle size of reinforcement, applied load, sliding speed and hardness of counter part materials on dry sliding wear behaviour of AA7075 aluminium/SiCp have been analysed in detail.Aluminium alloys are widely used in many automobile, aerospace and mineral processing components because of their excellent combination of low density and high thermal conductivity Earlier investigations Kwok and Lim From the above literature review, it understood that the effect of different factors and their interactions on dry sliding wear behaviour of MMCs was studied extensively. However, most of the reported research works focused on the effect of either one factor or two factors on dry sliding wear behaviour of MMCs. There is no systematic study has been reported so far incorporating various factors that influence the dry sliding wear behaviour of MMCs. Hence, the present investigation has been carried out to develop a mathematical model to predict the dry sliding wear rate of AA7075 aluminium/SiC In order to achieve the desired aim, the investigation has been planned in the following sequence: Identify the predominant factors, which are having influence on wear behaviour of MMCs. Fabricate the AA7075 Al/SiC Find the upper and lower limits of identified factors. Develop an experimental design matrix. Conduct the experiments as per the design matrix. Develop a mathematical model. Calculate the coefficient of the factors. Check the adequacy of the developed model by ANOVA method. Test the significance of the coefficients by Student's Analyse the effect of reinforcement size, volume percentage, applied load, sliding speed and counterface hardness on dry sliding wear behaviour. Although the wear of composite materials appears to be simple, the actual process of removal of material is very complex. This is because of large number of factors influences wear The discontinuous MMCs used in this study were prepared by the powder metallurgy route, the matrix is closely confirming to the AA7075 aluminium alloy and the reinforcement is silicon carbide (SiC) particulates. The chemical composition of matrix material is presented in Trial experiments have been conducted on large number of specimens to find out the feasible limits of the aforementioned chosen factors in such a way that the wear should occur in steady state. From the experimental results, the following conditions are established: The range of the reinforcement size is so chosen based on the availability. If the reinforcement volume fraction was less than 5%, the wear rate was almost equal to the wear rate of unreinforced alloy. If the reinforcement volume fraction was above 25%, then the abrasion of steel counterface was observed. If the sliding speed was less than the 100 The minimum load that can be applied in the wear testing machine is 52 If the hardness of counterface material was less than 25 By considering all the aforesaid conditions, the feasible limits of the factors were chosen and they are presented in Owing to slightly wider ranges of the factors it is decided to use a five level, central composite, rotatable design matrix to optimize the experimental conditions. The wear test was conducted as per the conditions dictated by the design matrix ( All the specimens were ground on 600-grid emery paper to have uniform standard surface since the surface finish of the test specimens will also influence the friction and wear characteristics. The specimens were thoroughly cleaned with acetone in ultrasonic cleaner before and after the wear test and the weight loss was measured using an electronic balance having a resolution of 0.0001 Representing the wear rate of the composite materials by The model selected is a second-degree response surface expressed as follows: The values of the coefficients are calculated by regression with the help of the following equations Student's Wear rate: The adequacy of the developed model is then checked using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) technique The optical micrographs of as-sintered 7075 Al/SiC High wear resistance of composite materials is due to the presence of SiC particles that act as load-supporting elements. The effect of SiC particle size on wear rate for different values of speed and volume fraction is shown in The wear rate of the composites depends on the volume fraction and applied load simultaneously. The effect of load on wear rate, for different values of volume fraction and size of the reinforcement has been depicted in The influence of sliding speed on wear rate is depicted in The effect of counterface hardness, for different values of volume fraction and size has been depicted in  A mathematical model has been successfully developed to predict the wear rate of AA7075 aluminium/SiC The developed model can be effectively used to predict the wear rate of AA7075 aluminium/SiC The particle size is having inversely proportional relationship with wear rate. The reason is particle–matrix interfacial area is larger for small particle size (higher mesh) so the chance for the small particle size to pull out from the matrix alloy increase. The volume fraction of reinforcement is having directly proportional relationship with wear rate. Increase in the addition of SiC The sliding speed is having directly proportional relationship with wear rate. At high speed micro thermal softening of matrix material may take place that lowers the bonding effect of the SiC