Complex intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus (AO/ASIF type C) pose a significant challenge to the treating surgeon. This study aimed to review the functional outcome of these fractures managed with open reduction and internal fixation through a posterior triceps-sparing approach. Nine cases were treated over a 7-year period, with 7 patients available for review. Of note, the majority of cases were accompanied with significant associated injuries, including vascular and soft tissue trauma. A retrospective analysis of a consecutive series, managed by a single surgeon, was conducted at a mean follow-up period of 35.1 months (range, 6-78). The mean age was 41 years (range, 12-73). At the time of review, all fractures had united and the median arc was 90° (range, 70-115). All patients achieved good clinical scores as determined by the Mayo Clinic Performance Index. Quality of life assessment (SF-36) revealed no significant difference compared to the general population. The mean DASH score was 17.9, indicating mild residual impairment. There was no x-ray evidence of heterotopic ossification or post-traumatic osteoarthritis. The posterior triceps-sparing approach provides adequate exposure to the fracture site and allows early rehabilitation. Satisfactory functional outcome can be achieved for complex type C fractures of the distal humerus treated through this approach.Intercondylar fractures of the distal humerus represent a complex injury and often pose a challenge to the treating surgeon. Full recovery is difficult to achieve, and long-term functional outcome is often associated with stiffness or nonunion at the supracondylar level. Various approaches have been described to access the elbow joint; however, the best exposure of both columns of the distal humerus and the articular surface is via a posterior approach. In 1982, Bryan and Morrey described an alternative technique of approaching the posterior elbow in which the triceps mechanism is spared and reflected from medial to lateral without detachment. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to review a consecutive series of 9 patients with AO/ASIF type C distal humeral fractures managed operatively by a single surgeon -using a triceps-sparing approach to the elbow, as described by Bryan and Morrey. From January 1998 to December 2003, 9 consecutive patients presenting with AO/ASIF type C (intercondylar) distal humeral fractures were treated by a single surgeon at 2 teaching hospitals in Melbourne, Australia. The mean age was 41 years (range, 12-73). Five were male and 2 were female. The dominant extremity was involved in 4 (57%). The mechanism of injury included 2 motorcycle accidents, 4 falls, and 1 case of assault ( Two patients had significant associated injuries of the ipsilateral limb: 1 with a Monteggia fracture (patient 6) and 1 with acute limb ischemia due to transection of the brachial artery, which required vascular reconstruction (patient 3) ( All fractures were intercondylar and classified by the AO/ASIF classification: type C1 (Y intercondylar), type C2 (intercondylar with extra-articular comminution), and type C3 (intercondylar with intra-articular comminution). Five patients had type C2 fractures and 2 had type C3 fractures. Patients were positioned in the lateral decubitus position with the affected arm resting over a support, allowing at least 90° of elbow flexion. A straight midline incision, centered over the olecranon, was used. The ulnar nerve was isolated and later transposed anteriorly into the subcutaneous tissues. The medial aspect of the triceps was elevated from the humerus and reflected laterally with its tendon off the olecranon, in continuity with the periosteum over the ulna. A tourniquet was not used in any case. After anatomica reduction of the trochlea was performed, the distal humerus was reconnected to the columns with an orthogonal dual plating technique. After fixation of the fracture was achieved, the triceps was returned to its anatomic position and the tendon reattached to the olecranon and proximal ulna by transosseous sutures. The ulnar nerve was allowed to remain in a transposed position. The forearm fascia-periosteum complex was sutured to the margin of flexor carpi ulnaris, and the wound was closed. Compression bandages were applied and kept intact for 3 or 4 days, after which the wound was inspected. Patients were allowed to commence immediate range of motion exercises with the assistance of the physiotherapy team. Routine x-rays were taken at regular intervals to assess bony union. All the patients were reviewed by a single author, who was not involved in the surgery or the postoperative management of any patient. Assessment included questions concerning pain, range of motion, stability, and functional outcome. The Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI) was used as an objective measure of overall outcome. Anteroposterior and lateral plain x-rays were performed at the time of latest follow-up and assessed for bony union, articular step-off or gapping, valgus-varus angulation, post-traumatic arthrosis, and heterotopic ossification. Data were entered into SPSS 11.0 and descriptive summaries of the data were performed. The SF-36 scores for each patient were compared with published age and sex-match population control values using Wilcoxin Signed Rank test. A Seven patients were available for follow-up. The mean follow up time was 35.1 months (range, 6-78) ( The overall median arc of elbow flexion was 90° (range, 70-115°), with a median fixed flexion deformity of 10° (range, 0-55°). Median flexion was 110° (range, 90-135°), median supination 70° (range, 45-90°), and median pronation 80° (range, 10-90°) ( The mean score for the MEPI was 83 out of 100, with all 7 patients achieving a good grade. The mean DASH score was 17.9 points (range, 7.5-32.5), indicating mild residual impairment. For SF-36 scores, when each variable was compared statistically for age and sex-match population control means, there was no significant difference between our study group and the general population in any of the variables ( At the time of latest follow-up, all fractures had united. One patient, in addition to the intercondylar fracture, had a displaced fracture of the lateral epicondyle. On review, this had not united; however, it did not appear to be of any clinical significance to the patient and, therefore, was not actively treated. Anatomic alignment in the anteroposterior and lateral planes was seen in all x-rays. There were no cases of post-traumatic arthrosis or heterotopic ossification. Of 4 patients with ulnar nerve palsy preoperatively, only 1 had regained full ulnar nerve function at the time of latest follow-up. The remaining 3 had mild residual parasthesia in the ulnar nerve distribution. No patient considered this to be a significant functional deficit. The patient with the 3B open fracture required bone grafting for delayed union of the supracondylar fracture at 7 months postinjury (patient 1). Complete union had been achieved at the time of follow-up. Elective removal of metal was performed in 1 case at the patient's request (patient 5). The patient with an associated Monteggia fracture had an extensive oblique fracture of the ulna shaft (patient 6). At the time of the index operation, a suitable length plate was not available. The ulna was replated with a dynamic compression plate at 72 hours. This patient also underwent anterior capsulotomy at 24 months postinitial injury for persistent stiffness and fixed flexion deformity. At time of latest follow-up, the patient continued to have persistent fixed flexion of 55°. Intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus are difficult to treat and functional outcome can be variable. Because of the low incidence of these fractures, only a few series, with a considerable number of cases, have been reported. It is generally agreed that open reduction and internal fixation is standard treatment, with the aims, as described by O'Driscoll, being: 1) soft tissue healing without infection; 2) restoration of diaphyseal bone stock; 3) union between the distal fragments and the shaft; and 4) a stable, mobile articulation. As in all forms of surgery, exposure and access to structures is critical. Various techniques have been described for approaching the posterior distal humerus. However, controversy still exists regarding which approach is optimal in minimizing complications and enhancing function. The triceps-sparing approach was originally described by Bryan and Morrey for its use in total elbow arthroplasty. The interpretation of overall functional outcome of distal humeral fractures from the literature is difficult, as the studies are often small and treated by multiple surgeons through multiple approaches with variable rehabilitation regimes and inconsistent functional outcome measure scales. Our study, on the other hand, is strengthened by the fact that the patients were treated through the same approach by the same surgeon, and the postoperative rehabilitation was standardized. In our series, the mean range-of-motion is comparable to those of similar fracture patterns reported in other studies, where patients were managed postoperatively with early active mobilization. In our series, the mean DASH score of 17.9% indicates a mild perceived impairment, reflecting that the patients felt that they were left with a low level of upper extremity disability. In other studies with similar follow-up, the DASH scores range from 12% to 20%. The median arc of elbow flexion of 90° is comparable to other published papers. Although a greater degree of flexion would be desirable, it must be taken into consideration that the majority of patients in our series also had significant associated injuries. One patient had an associated Monteggia fracture, which, in combination with the distal humeral fracture, resulted in a floating elbow (patient 6). Another patient was treated 8 weeks after presenting with significant pain and stiffness after a failed reduction and fixation of his fracture performed overseas (patient 7). Furthermore, there was 1 patient that was included in our study who had mild cerebral palsy and intellectual impairment, and as a result, satisfactory rehabilitation was a challenge (patient 4). The reported incidence of heterotopic ossification after posterior approaches to the elbow ranges from 0% to 49%. One potential limitation of the triceps sparing approach may be encountered when trying to access the lateral epicondyle. This was evident in patient 4, who sustained an AO/ASIF type C2 fracture, as well as a comminuted and displaced fracture of the lateral epicondyle. In this patient, because of the high degree of comminution, the fragments were sutured back in place. However, we found that reduction of this structure can be a challenge through this approach because of the pull of the common extensor muscles and the lateral reflection of the triceps. One possible way to overcome this is to make a separate lateral approach to the lateral epicondyle. The limitations of this present study are related to the inherent weaknesses of retrospective studies of uncommon conditions with many variables. However, we present a consecutive series of patients with similar fracture patterns, treated by a single surgeon through the same approach. From this study, we can conclude that complex distal humeral fractures can be managed via a posterior triceps-sparing approach, with good functional outcome and low rates of complications. In our experience, this approach provides excellent exposure to the distal humerus, without disruption of the extensor mechanism and avoiding the possible risk of triceps weakness. We would like to acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Jonathan Rush for his helpful and critical review of this paper. Dr. Eugene T.H. Ek is supported by scholarships awarded by the Faculty of Medicine, University of Melbourne, the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons and the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia.