Here, a large-scale char atomistic structure (41,438 carbon atoms) and simple simulation approaches explored char gasification behavior for H2O and CO2 — comparing their mixture with one gas being passive (non-reactive) and the dual reactive mixture. Reactivity was captured through simplistic atomistic simulations via an automated sequence of gas diffusion, close-contact determination for gas (es) to reactive edge sites, then “reaction” via atom deletion. The higher reactivity of H2O was captured by a reaction probability function. For the reactive mixture (where both gases are reactive), the char consumption rate was 14% higher than with H2O alone, but lower (∼80%) than the sum of the individual gases (where only one gas is reactive), demonstrating competitive behavior. The H2O out competed the CO2 molecules and contributed ∼83% to the char consumption — with the reaction rate being similar to that of H2O independently. The pore size development for individual gases also differed with H2O favoring development in the smaller pore sizes in comparison to CO2. With fewer gas molecules (using 10% to capture a lower pressure), the competitive behavior was muted and became much closer to additive behavior. These simple simulations are consistent with the emerging rationalization of contributing factors to char gasification.Gasification of coal, petcoke, or biomass fuel is used for power generation (integrated gasification combined cycle power plant), steam generation, and for chemicals/fuel production. The conversion of coal in a gasifier is generally divided into three main processes: drying, devolatilization, and char gasification. It is the char gasification that is the rate limiting step and this has been examined for >50 years [ The simple Langmuir-Hinshelwood (L-H) mechanism describes the kinetic reaction rate of char gasification in pure gases (H Roberts and Harris reviewed the literature and observed that H This “active sites saturation” theory is in agreement with most of the experimental data, and Li et al. demonstrated the char reactivity behavior for the gas mixture was dependent on the reactants partial pressures [ In addition to the The evolution of char surface morphology and pore structure with different gasification reactant gases has also been evaluated [ It is evident that char gasification behavior occurring with both H Atomistic simulations are an approach to explore the reaction behaviors. Both Density Functional Theory (DFT) [ In our earlier work, a large-scale char structure (41,438 carbon atoms) was obtained by a rapid construction strategy [ The char structure was constructed in earlier work to conform with the experimental data of Sharma et al. [ Material Studio software (7.0) was used to perform the char gasification simulation using a simplified approach coupling molecular dynamics steps followed by an evaluation of the interaction (near neighbor determination) between reactive edge sites and reacting gas molecules. We utilized and amended existing in-house generated Perl script to perform these steps and capture the appropriate data via the study table component. For simplicity, hydrogen atoms were removed from the char structure during simulation, and cross-links, heteroatoms, and ash were not included. Several cases were explored to isolate the contribution of H The gasification simulation is an iterative process of gas diffusion and carbon atoms deletion, with the following steps: The geometry optimization of the char structure and the molecular dynamics modelling of gas diffusion were performed using the Forcite module. The time step for gas diffusion was 1 fs in the NVT ensemble with Andersen thermostat temperature ramp control, and the Dreiding force field [ The reaction of each layer/single PAH molecule obeyed the edge recession model. In each simulation step, the edge carbon atoms (pink in A close contact calculation was adopted to find the reactive carbon atoms in close proximity to a reactive gas molecule. In the case of an individual reactive gas, the oxygen atom in the reactant gas is reactive to char active sites while the other gas is passive. When a reactive carbon atom is within the reactive distance (3.2 Å) of a diffusing reactive oxygen atom, a close contact is identified. In the simulation for the gas mixture, it is reasonable to assume that all the active carbon atoms are potentially accessible by H To reduce the computational expense the reactive carbon is simply deleted, this thus omits the diffusion of the products out of the pore system. As the diffusion step is computationally expensive we further reduce computational expense by retaining the molecule given the assumption it could easily be replaced by other molecules (albeit after additional diffusional time). Here, to capture the relative reactivity between char-H The changes in: char structure (location of reacting carbon atoms), position of the gas molecules, frequency of potentially reactive atoms (edge and ring fragments), overall rate with individual gas contributions are collected in the study table component, with the simulation process then repeating until termination. Typically, ∼75 sequential diffusion/reaction steps took ∼40 h with 10 cores running on two 1.90 GHz processors (personal workstation) utilizing a char structure with 41,438 carbon atoms for H While approaches such as ReaxFF have the benefit of mechanistic data, the approach here (while more simplistic) has several advantages: reduced computational approach, much larger structures, an ability to fix the char structure in place so the porosity, stacking, and alignment are retained, and in particular for a larger structure, the pore structure can be directly controlled. The gas diffusion inside the char structure and the (pore) structure development can be captured which influences the reaction. The char gasification reactivity was evaluated by normalized reaction rate ( The penetrations of the two gases into the char structure were visually quantified by blocking the top and bottom of the char structure with a non-reactive barrier of Si atoms. The reactive mixture gases were initially distributed at the four remaining side faces (1500 H The char gasification was evaluated using reactive H    To quantify the gasification behavior of char for the reactive mixture, we traced each potential “reaction” to the instigating gas (H The review of Roberts and Harris [ The penetrations of H  Experimental data has demonstrated a difference in the chars pore size distribution during gasification when comparing H  When H The penetration evaluation ( The gasification behavior of a large-scale char structure in H The authors acknowledge financial support from the