Froth recovery was calculated in a 130m3 mechanical cell of a rougher flotation circuit. This was done by bubble load determinations along with mass balance surveys. Valuable grade in the bubble load decreased in the −38μm due to fine particles entrained to the chamber of the device. The effect of fine particle entrainment on froth recovery was evaluated. A comparison between results from the raw bubble load data (assuming all particles were transported by true flotation) with those from corrected bubble load information (subtracting fine particle entrainment) was carried out. Entrainment occurred due to hydraulic transport in the bubble rear, which corresponds to the worst case scenario for froth recovery estimation. Results showed that the relative error was less than 0.3%, which allowed validation of the bubble load measurement as an effective methodology for froth recovery estimation at industrial scale.Flotation has been used for more than a century to separate valuable mineral from gangue and it remains a major process for mineral concentration. In flotation, hydrophobic particles have the highest probabilities of attachment to bubbles to be transported to the concentrate streams. Thus, differences in hydrophobicity between the different minerals are necessary for a selective separation. Bubble loading allows for the mineral collected by true flotation to be sampled. Bubble load knowledge can be used to develop strategies for increasing floatability of valuable minerals as well as the depression of gangue. Therefore, bubble load determination is important to understand the collection processes, which allows flotation parameters to be optimized. In addition, bubble load can be used to determine the contribution to the overall recovery of both collection and froth zones independently. Thus, the bubble load measurement is useful to evaluate froth recovery, which is affected by particle detachment, especially in scavenging operations ( Some researchers have reported work on the analytical modelling of bubble loading. For example, Devices for direct bubble load determinations have been reported in literature. As far as could be ascertained, most of these devices are only appropriate for laboratory scale flotation or applicable under specific industrial operation conditions. For instance, The apparatus developed by In this technical note, bubble load measurements in the first cell of a rougher circuit were carried out per size classes. In parallel, mass balances were carried out to determine froth recovery. Cyclosizer analyses of the bubble load samples in the fine classes showed a Cu grade decrease for particles under 38 The plant work consisted of sampling for mass balances around a rougher flotation bank from El Teniente concentrator, Codelco-Chile. The rougher circuit consists of four parallel banks of seven 130 The metallurgical data was classified into two size fractions (−45 Bubble load samples were classified into nine class fractions and assayed for Cu, Mo and Fe. Insolubles (silicates) were also analyzed. Each size class was reported as the following mean sizes: 208  In order to estimate the froth recovery, the mass transport of floatable mineral across the pulp–froth interface must be known. This material entering the froth is calculated by measuring the bubble load, the superficial gas rate and the cell cross-sectional area at the interface level. The superficial gas rate,  Three measurements of bubble load (BL) were conducted in parallel with mass balance surveys around the first rougher cell (BL1 and BL2 during Survey 1 and BL3 during Survey 2). Bubble load samples separated by size class were examined for metal content. The size by size characterization along with the feed mineralogy allowed analysis of the mechanisms involved in the presence of floatable (pyrite) and non-floatable (insoluble) fine gangue in the bubble load device. The mineral distribution observed in the raw feed showed that Cu was fed to the flotation circuit mainly as chalcopyrite CuFeS  The transport of fine hydrophilic particles from the pulp to the froth phase can be caused due to the following mechanisms: entrainment, hetero-aggregation and true flotation (association or inadvertent activation) ( The increase of insoluble in the finer sizes of bubble load measurements was not attributed to true flotation by association (at fine particle sizes, gangue mineral have a high probability of being fully liberated, as demonstrated by For insoluble particles greater than 45 In order to determine the mass transported to the bubble load device by entrainment, the following assumptions were made: Insoluble material under 45 The mineralogy of bubble load entrainment was similar to the tailings mineralogy under 45   The effect of the entrained particles on the froth recovery ( Bubble load measurements were conducted in a Cu rougher circuit consisting of mechanical cells of 130 The authors are grateful to Carlos Torres and El Teniente Division Codelco-Chile for providing access to their plant and the valuable assistance in the thesis development of Cristian Carrasco. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1130568 and Federico Santa Maria Technical University, Project 271351.