The mechanics of granular mixtures are pivotal in many industrial applications. Unravelling the relation between yielding and comminution, the action of mechanically induced grain size reduction, in confined mixture systems is a common and open challenge. This paper attacks this problem by adopting the breakage mechanics theory, which was originally proposed for single mineral materials. We present an extension to the theory that allows predicting: (1) the yielding pressure in granular mixtures, (2) the yield pressure increase/hardening with increasing breakage, and (3) the evolution of the grain size distributions of the separate species—all of these novel capabilities are tested and validated with experiments. Of particular appeal is the finding that the average yielding pressure is a simple generalized mean with an exponent −3/2 of the yielding pressures of the homogeneous components.Granular systems composed of particles with dissimilar properties are found in a wide variety of fields. In mining operations, for example, granules composed of different mineral species are liberated from the parent geomaterial during fragmentation ( Breakage mechanics is only briefly reviewed here: the end-product is presented in the form of a set of master equations. The focus in this paper is the derivation of an extended theory that is meant to capture the behaviour of granular mixtures at high stresses. The derivation of the master equations of the homogeneous theory of breakage mechanics can give necessary mathematical and physical information (e.g., statistical micromechanics, energy balance, and particle scale mechanisms) and can be found elsewhere ( Let The breakage mechanics equations for The corresponding explicit form of the breakage dissipation is given as Acknowledging the limits of the Hertzian contact model in correctly predicting the stiffening effect from rising coordination numbers with pressure, to a first-order energy considerations suggest that the bulk modulus is inversely proportional to the porosity (e.g., The first goal of this paper is to generalize the breakage mechanics formulation for mixtures, generally containing Alternatively, the equation above could have been specified directly in terms of mass fractions rather solid-volume fractions. The two options converge only when the specific gravity of the species is the same. However, the use of volume rather than mass is more relevant when describing brittle granular systems because it is the volume that directly carries the information of the grain size. Particle size (not mass) controls the spatial distribution and number of force chains that are to be transferred through the particular species and how much energy these particles store. Similarly, the definition of the gsd by mass or volume in using Eq. Before we proceed, it is useful to define yet another type of average—different to the gsd average definition of Eq. Let The average gsd of the entire mixture is given by weighing the individual distributions of the mixture using the phase fractions: Free energy is an additive quantity, so that the overall specific mixture energy is simply the average of the specific energy of the separate phases, but taking the gradation into account: In Eq. Combining Eq. Before any crushing occurs, Now let us move to the dissipation, subjecting attention to rate independent processes. We designate the mixture dissipation as The mixture dissipation is the average of the dissipative power of the distinct phases (defined as a phase's breakage energy times the incremental change of that phase's breakage): Combining Eqs. Note that before any crushing, all Finally, note that if the initial and ultimate gsd of all of the phases in the mixture are assumed similarly, the list of criticality proximity parameters satisfies The key results, however, do not depend on following either Eq. In writing Eq. The remaining ingredient in the theory requires postulating the precise dependence of the mixture dissipation on the phase dissipations. Let us start by postulating the following general structure: At this stage In accord with Eq. Therefore, applying Eq. Rearranging and summing over the phases Therefore, the mixture breaking-yield criterion is given by The reason for distinguishing between the strain-dependent and independent forms of the yield functions in Eqs. Now we turn back to ask what the value of the coefficient Note that although the yield criterion depends on the arithmetic mean of the  Before any crushing For a Hertzian model, we use Note that in the above the critical void ratio refers directly to the entire mixture in hand, rather to the species Combining Eqs. Therefore, the average critical yielding pressure is simply the generalized mean with an exponent −3/2 (the Hertzian modulus minus two) of the separate critical phase yielding pressures of the homogeneous components. For example, for two-phase mixtures, the last equation becomes: Note, the apparently simple Eqs. The mixture formulation presented above was tested with experiments of dry sand crushing in constrained compression. Each specimen was constructed by mixing two sand species of dissimilar mineralogy but equal and uniform gradation. Similar grain shapes were used to hinder particle shape effects and to minimize the role of each species’ relative density on the relative density of the prepared mixtures. In addition, we deliberately selected sands that could be separated with respect to mineralogy after testing; indeed, mineralogical separation yields complementary information about the granular breakage evolution of the different phases in the crushing assemblage. Set 1 consisted of mixed specimens composed of standard Ottawa sand with minimum and maximum void ratios The Results for Sets 1 and 2 are presented in In the previous section we focused on establishing a relation for the critical comminution pressure for granular mixtures. This section focuses on establishing relations for the evolution laws of the phases’ breakage variable; in this way we are able to predict not only how the overall mixture gsd evolves, but also how the separate gradations evolve. The reason for distinguishing between the strain-dependent and independent forms of the yield functions in Eqs. The factor ‘2’ is the outcome of rigorously distinguishing, and differentiating Eq. For example, in bi-mixtures we have This equation tells us that in predominantly strong specimens, the weak material would initially break at a slower rate than in predominantly weak specimens. In 50–50% specimens Initially when This means that weak granules will start breaking quicker because Eq. Eq. Solving Eq. Generalization gives the solution for Separation post-testing with respect to mineral composition yielded grain size distributions for the weak and strong fractions in each specimen tested. The experimental distributions were compared to the predictions prescribed by Eqs. The use of the theoretical Eqs. Granular mixtures are ubiquitous in nature and man-made systems. The mixture strength is dependent on the properties of the constituent species. The theory of breakage mechanics, which was originally proposed for homogeneous granular materials ( The authors would like to acknowledge the Australian Research Council through the ARC Discovery Grant scheme DP0774006 and the US National Science Foundation through Grant CMMI 700914.