An extensive study on separation and recovery of uranium (VI) from dilute aqueous solutions using a liquid emulsion membrane (LEM) technique is presented. The study has highlighted the importance of emulsion stability for maximizing uranium recovery. The emulsion constitutes tri-n-octylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as a carrier, paraffin as organic diluent, an emulsifying agent, and stripping phase. The residence time required for adequate pertraction of uranium has been evaluated. The important variables affecting the LEM permeation process such as the concentrations of surfactant, extractant, internal strip phase, and effect of speed of agitation, aqueous feed phase pH, and the presence of iron were systematically investigated. Using suitable values, an attempt was made to recover uranium from a synthetic process plant stream. It was found that strip phase sodium carbonate concentration of 0.5 M gives maximum recovery of uranium. The feed phase pH has been found to be critical for uranium recovery by this technique.Effective separation, concentration, and purification of uranium (VI) from its secondary sources and wastewater are one of the challenging tasks faced by nuclear industries. It is always desirable to recover all the uranium from such dilute solutions not only for its strategic value as fuel for nuclear reactors but also to meet stringent discharge standards. The various process techniques available for recovery of uranium from aqueous solutions include biological treatment The liquid emulsion membrane (LEM) technology, which was invented by The LEM technology refers to simultaneous extraction and stripping, where metallic solutes present in lean solution form a complex with the extractant. The complex formed then diffuses through a membrane phase to a stripping phase interface from where it is stripped into the bulk of encapsulated stripping phase. The volume of stripping zone liquid is very small compared to aqueous feed phase, thereby resulting in concentration of uranium. The concentrated uranium from the strip phase can be recovered by breaking the emulsion. A typical transport process occurring in an emulsion globule during LEM extraction of uranium is shown in Despite much work done on the LEM extraction of uranium Therefore, there is considerable scope for a better understanding of the various parameters affecting the LEM process and, hence, a systematic study of the application of the LEM technique to concentrate uranium from aqueous solutions was undertaken. Loba Chemie and Mohini Organics (P), Mumbai, supplied the extractant tri- Emulsions were prepared by emulsifying an aqueous solution of strip phase with an organic phase. The organic or membrane phase consisted of surfactant Span 80 and TOPO in diluent paraffin. The internal strip phase (sodium carbonate) was added dropwise to the stirred organic phase. A predetermined volume ratio of 1:1 was maintained for organic phase to the internal strip phase. The contents were stirred at 5000 times min The stable emulsion obtained was dispersed in the feed phase of uranium solution. The extraction runs were performed in a glass vessel of 80-mm diameter using a six flat-bladed turbine impeller of 40-mm diameter rotating at 300 min The concentrations of uranium in the aqueous feed and strip phases were spectrophotometrically determined using the alkaline peroxide method Extraction of uranium (VI) by a LEM process is governed by several parameters and poses a challenging problem in the field of hydrometallurgy. The equations given below exhibit extraction and stripping reactions of uranium occurring in LEM technique, where TOPO represents an extractant tri- The parameters influencing the recovery of uranium were pertraction time, surfactant, extractant and strip phase concentrations, speed of agitation during extraction, pH of the external feed phase, and presence of iron. The ranges of parameters used for the present study of the LEM extraction of uranium are shown in Experiments to study breakage of the emulsion were carried out using lithium added as a tracer during emulsion preparation [because of its non-extractability with TOPO The following terms are used: extraction (Ex), stripping (Sr), swelling (Sw), and breakage (Bk), defined as follows: Since the LEM technique is system and material specific, each metal ion has its own pertraction or residence time under the given conditions of parameters used. The pertraction time of the emulsion is therefore a decisive factor in obtaining maximum extraction and recovery of metal. However, the longer the pertraction time, the more will be the transfer of water to the internal phase, which causes the membrane to swell that subsequently initiates breakage of the emulsion phase  In the development of a metal separation process using LEM, it is important to ascertain the effect of surfactant concentration on the behavior of extraction. An increase in surfactant concentration increases the viscosity and the stability of the adsorption layer, which in turn enhance resistance of the emulsion to mass transfer and invite more water transfer The object of an LEM process lies in fruitful recovery or enrichment of a metal inside the strip phase. The strip phase concentration of sodium carbonate was varied from 0.1 to 2 M. The selection of proper extractant or carrier and its concentration always exerts a significant influence on the LEM system. Since the recovery of uranium ions inside the strip phase is more important in the LEM process rather than the mere extraction, so a carrier concentration of 0.05 M is recommended. Further, from an economic point of view, also a lower concentration of carrier is always preferred. The speed of agitation decides the amount of transfer of uranium through liquid membrane. The stability of emulsion is always affected adversely by the shear exerted during agitation The following simulation studies were carried out in order to work on an actual plant stream generated from nuclear material processing. In order to simulate the aqueous streams generated from uranium processing plant, uranium feed solutions of desired pH were prepared by using nitric acid. The feed phase pH was varied from 0.5 to 3. It was found that by increasing pH of the feed phase from 0.5 to 1, percentage extraction as well as stripping of uranium is increased, as shown in  The recovery of uranium can be improved either by preventing co-extraction of iron using a suitable masking agent or by preparing stable emulsions, which can hold more concentrated strip phase. The removal of uranium from its dilute aqueous solution using a liquid emulsion membrane was studied with respect to various parameters. TOPO, Span 80, and sodium carbonate were used as a carrier, surfactant, and stripping agent, respectively. In this LEM system, a pertraction time of 15 min gives highest extraction of uranium. It was observed that swelling of emulsion increased with the concentration of surfactant, extractant, internal phase, and speed of agitation. In the absence of iron impurity, maximum recovery of uranium was obtained when the internal phase concentration of sodium carbonate was kept at 0.5 M, extractant concentration at 0.05 M, speed of agitation at 300 min breakage (%) metal ion concentration at time initial metal ion concentration (g/L) extraction (%) stripping (%) swelling (%) uranium ion concentration in external feed phase (g/L) uranium ion concentration in internal phase (g/L) initial uranium ion concentration (g/L) uranium ion concentration at time volume of internal phase (L) volume of external feed phase (L) external phase internal phase initial time The authors are grateful to Prof. V.V. Mahajani of UDCT, Mumbai, for his valuable suggestions during the course of work. Thanks are due to Mr. M.K. Dixit and Mr. S.G.S. Murthy for their help in atomic absorption spectroscopic analysis.