The choice of a fixation device for small bone fragments is difficult, particularly if they are intra-articular or peri-articular. We describe our experience with Orthofix pins as a method of small bone fragment stabilisation in tackling varied acute and reconstructive procedures. We used Orthofix pins (Orthofix Fragment Fixation System, Verona, Italy) as the fixation device in 19 patients. The injuries included: four scaphoid non-unions; two non-unions of ulnar styloid with instability; one comminuted distal humeral fracture; two radial head fractures; one intra-articular fracture involving the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint; one trans-scaphoid perilunate fracture dislocation; two metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint fusions for chronic subluxation of the thumb; one MCP joint fusion in a patient with macrodactyly and MCP joint instability; one PIP joint fusion for rheumatoid arthritis; two PIP joint fusions in severe contracture; one carpometacarpal joint fusion for osteoarthritis; one crush injury of the hand which required several reconstructive procedures prior to metacarpal osteotomy using Orthofix pins. The ages ranged from 9 to 80 years (average, 38 years). There were 11 male and eight female patients. The average period of follow up was 8.6 months (range, 3–18 months). Fixation was supplemented with bone grafting in non-union cases. All patients were assessed at regular intervals both clinically and radiologically. A case of radial head reconstruction is illustrated in All but one fracture went on to radiographic union. Eighteen of the 19 patients under review had good to excellent subjective results. In the patient with a crush injury of the hand the metacarpal osteotomy had not united on X-ray at 3 months, however, the pins remain intact. In the patient with macrodactyly and MCP joint instability, the MCP joint had fused and she was undergoing further soft tissue debulking. In one case (radial head fracture) one of the Orthofix pins was impinging on rotation and was buried deeper. There was one case of superficial wound infection which settled on oral antibiotics. We have not had to remove any pins to date. The use of Kirschner (K) wires in small bone fragment fixation dates back to the early part of this century and is one of the most common procedures in orthopaedics. Their advantages are simplicity of use and low cost. Threaded K wires, designed to produce better anchorage in bone were a later modification. Small bone fragment screws using the lag screw principle became popular in the mid-70s to provide rigid fixation of small fragments. However, all techniques have disadvantages. K wires may have poor bone purchase and fragments can slide over wires The lag screw principle using small fragment screws is more complex which requires pre-drilling with two drill sizes as well as pre-tapping of bone. All this could not only lead to fragment comminution but very small fragments are too small for these procedures to be carried out In contrast, Orthofix pins have a cutting edge and threaded section designed for anchorage in cancellous bone. The implants are fitted into a standard drill and drilled directly into the fragments to be secured. The proximal portion of each implant consists of a smooth shaft the diameter of which is greater than that of the threaded section and the chamfer which functions to push one fragment towards the other ( In conclusion, we have found the Orthofix pin to be a useful internal fixation device which can be applied in a number of situations, which is simple to use and can be introduced in a single action. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.