The basic aim of process engineering has always been to design better products and more efficient processes. In the past, this could be accomplished quite successfully with systematic experiments, by varying process equipment and process parameters step by step. Todays market requires high product quality and lower production costs, but all this must be reached in shorter development times. The traditional procedures have reached their limits. For further improvements, the process engineer's work must be based on more precise knowledge and broader understanding. In fluid process engineering this has more or less become reality. The reason might be that fluid systems can be described with a few properties, and the physical laws governing their behaviour are basically simple (in principle). The complexity is caused by the number of components, feedbacks, the fast kinetics and the differences in local conditions. For products in the disperse state, like powders, granulates, tablets, suspensions, pastes, polymer dispersions and emulsions, the situation is quite different. The products have a large variety of properties, and these product properties not only depend on the basic chemical composition, but also on the physical state of the product. This fact is formally described by the so-called property functions, which were introduced by The knowledge of these relationships will allow considerable improvements in solid process engineering, but one must be aware that this implies considerable efforts in particle system characterisation. The sensor model—as discussed later—describes the relationship between the measured signal and the particle property under investigation. As shown in The traditional approach was focused on the level which is directly accessible in the sense of processing equipment, processing parameters and product properties. This allowed the assessment of the effect of experimental variations. However, the relationships were visible only as multifactorial correlations, and in most cases the laws and properties governing these relationships were not accessible. As a product changed, simple rules did not work any more. It has become evident that a quantitative understanding can only be achieved on the underlying level of basic physical properties and processes. Their determination is the challenge for particle system characterisation technology and for modelling technologies, which are needed to fit experimental data into the total picture of a process. While most people seem to agree to this statement, everyday practice of particle technology engineers very often is still based on traditional concepts like empirical tests and statistical methods. One of the reasons could be that information required by this concept is not available because no suitable characterisation method can be found or in the first trials the available methods give odd results. Particle system characterisation indeed plays a key role ! The required steps involve more than a simple particle size determination. When a product is designed or manufactured, for those physical properties that have been identified as being relevant for the quality of the final product (e.g. activity, colour strength, viscosity), specification values and tolerance ranges must be defined. When the process chain is designed, each step requires individual specifications. The ability of a process step to modify a physical property must be described by the process function, and this includes the intended modifications (e.g. comminution) as well as unavoidable degradations (e.g. agglomeration in drying). Finally, not all product states are suitable for all process steps (e.g. very fine particle size is difficult for washing and solid–liquid separation). All this must be quantitatively considered to find the most efficient process design. The determination of these property and process functions in general requires considerable experimental effort. This involves a meaningful characterisation of the disperse state, which, especially for fine particles, is governed by adhesion forces. The preparation of a sample determines the result of the measurement, so it must be chosen in accordance with the purpose of the measurement. A preparation as soft as possible might be required in order to preserve the state of a sensitive product sample, or a very intense dispersion might be necessary to characterise the product's performance in a later application. The characterisation of particle systems is a complex task, since already a single real particle can hardly be described exactly. A complete description of a collective of dissimilar particles is even less realistic. In addition to that, the product state can vary in space and time. For process and quality control, qualitative understanding or modelling and simulation, respectively, different levels of availability, precision and depth of information are required, and different technical solutions may be involved. For some examples the criteria for choice and adaptation of particle system characterisation methods and preparation techniques will be discussed. As already mentioned, particle system characterisation is only one part of the task to determine the basic physical properties and their effect on product properties. The other part is to determine the results of process steps and the influence of process parameters. Most characterisation methods have limitations and are not really selective, their response depends not only on the primary physical property, but also on other parameters. This is called sensor model or sensor function. For example, for optical counters the measured intensity of scattered light depends on particle size (according to the Mie theory), but this function has three distinct ranges with completely different behaviour. For ultrasonic extinction methods, there are several physical effects which contribute to the total extinction. In general, it takes some experience and understanding to interpret sensor data in the right manner ( The concept of a threefold model has already been discussed in former papers ( The paper's focus is on the dispersity characteristics, so in first instance size and shape of particles will be considered. The spatial distribution, i.e. the relative positions and orientations of primary particles is a very important dispersity characteristic, as for magnetic pigments in tapes or for effect pigments in coatings. Many particles are agglomerates which we call flocks when they are very loosely bound, and aggregates when they are very dense and tightly bound. Finally, particles can have inner structures like pores and heterogeneous phases (see In the macroscopic world, particle behaviour is dominated by gravity and drag forces, but in the nanosized world the attractive forces between particles tend to be dominant, so in many cases we will find a system of nanosized particles in an agglomerated state. These agglomerates, which are at least bound by van der Waals forces, in general, cannot be easily dispersed by simple means like stirring. This is even more true if there are some solid bridges between particles, as happens very likely in a drying step, for example dry pigments often need to be dispersed in a stirred ball mill, with an energy input which is almost equivalent to the amount required for grinding. Many product properties depend on reactions or on dissolution at the particle surface (see For products difficult to dissolve like carotene, it was found that the bioavailability increases with the finess ( The optical properties of a particle depend strongly on size, especially in the nanoscale domain. This is particularly important for optical particle sizing. The optical properties of agglomerates resemble those of similarly sized particles, so for a coating the agglomerate size is relevant. The agglomeration state is very variable, so a pigmented coating might be well dispersed during manufacturing, but pigments may form agglomerates during storage or in application due to inefficient stabilisation. On the other hand, loose agglomerates present after dispersion need not be present in the dried coating. In addition to the agglomeration state, the strength of the agglomerates is important. Therefore, in many cases, it is necessary to determine the breakage of the agglomerates as a function of the dispersion intensity during the process and the application, and to define a suitable preparation of the product before measurement. It is quite common to perform such strength measurements in wet systems, increasing the intensity from moderate stirring, to ultrasonic bath, to sonotrode, and even to the levels of a stirred ball mill. For dry preparation such a defined treatment is rarely employed, but it is just as possible, as It should be noted that in this case the simple representation of average There are several methods suitable for product characterisation in the nanoworld. Only few of them are suitable for flowing undiluted suspensions or emulsions like ultrasonic extinction spectroscopy (for size) or electrophoretic mobility spectroscopy (acoustosizer, for size and zeta potential). Photon correlation spectroscopy (for size) and microelectrophoresis (for zeta potential), are employed for diluted suspensions, rarely counters (for size). Some sizing methods consist of a separation (field flow fractionation, sedimentation) combined with a detection (extinction, counters). In gases, the scanning mobility analysers play an important role besides particle counters and cascade impactors ( This task is difficult with the dispersion methods available for the nanoparticle range. The shear rates which are easily obtained with stirrers offer only very moderate dispersion energies. On the other hand, mills and ultrasonic equipment are not easy to handle and quantify (for example the broad residence time distribution leads to a sample which has seen a mix very different dispersion energies). The intended use of the information gathered must be considered as well, with respect to accuracy and reliability, and the characterisation procedure must be validated. This general procedure for the analysis of particle systems requires knowledge in process engineering, particle technology and physics. The effort required to achieve such a complete characterisation of a product may seem considerable, but the level of understanding that becomes possible by this is necessary if we want to reach our goals in product and process design. And one should keep in mind that the same effort is not necessarily required for process control, once the process has been understood very often a sufficient control is possible with very simple, inexpensive sensors. The product and process model are important tools to understand process and product behaviour. The characterisation of the disperse system plays a keyrole in determining the models and model parameters. The three model categories are very closely related : A product model which describes the dependence of product quality on the disperse state and the disperse product behaviour. A process model which describes how the process conditions lead to a specific disperse state. A sensor model which describes the physical measuring signal as a quantitative effect resulting from the disperse state.