Objective
                  Distal radial fractures are common. Modern trends favour operative treatment in many instances, providing stable fixation and early functional recovery. Recent biomechanical evidence suggests that volar locking plates (VLPs) enable adequate stability for dorsally displaced fractures, both in dorsally intact (DI) and in dorsally comminuted (DC) fractures. The aim of the study was to compare the clinical outcome of these two fracture groups treated with a VLP.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective case–control analysis of 91 distal radial fractures treated surgically using VLP by a single surgeon between the years 2006 and 2008 was carried out. Fractures were classified according to the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthes/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification. Based on initial pre-reduction X-rays and computed tomography (CT) scans, fractures were classified into two groups of DI and DC fractures. The patients were re-evaluated at 2 and 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months and 1 year.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-one fractures (45%) were dorsally comminuted. Patients in the DC group were significantly older (mean 59 vs. 46 years, p
                     <0.01) and included more female patients, as well as significantly more C3 type fractures than the DI group (p
                     <0.04). The mean Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score at 1 year postoperatively was 6.3±2.3 for the DC group, as compared with 6.6±2.02 for the DI group (p
                     =0.64). Average time to return to work was longer in the DC group (81.2 vs. 63.6 days, p
                     =0.05). Range of motion, volar tilt, and radial inclination were within clinically acceptable values and did not differ significantly among the two groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  VLP fixation of DC distal radial fractures results in the maintenance of reduction and comparable functional and radiographical outcome with respect to DI fractures.Distal radial fractures are of the more common fractures seen in fracture practice Operative treatment for unstable distal radius fractures had gained popularity recently. Recently introduced volar locking plates had shown promising clinical results in unstable distal radial fractures. The aim of this study was to compare the results of DC and dorsally intact (DI) distal radius fracture fixed with a single, volar locking plate, without bone graft. Overall, 91 distal radial fractures in 89 patients were treated using open reduction and volar locking plate fixation between the years 2006 and 2008, by a single surgeon (senior author) in a level I academic trauma centre. Forty-two patients were male and 49 were female. The average patient age 52.7 years (range 18–74), and 58% of the patients were older than 50. Fractures were divided into two groups based on dorsal bone comminution as seen on plain films and computed tomography (CT) ( All patients underwent initial diagnostic work-up that included antero-posterior (AP) and lateral plain wrist films and a CT scan of the injured wrist with axial, coronal and sagittal reformats. Fractures were classified using the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthes/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification. All patients were operated via a standard volar FCR approach, Data were recorded in the patients’ charts and included age, sex, mechanism of injury, length of stay, length of sick leave (time to return to work, as reported by the patients) and postoperative complications. Patients were evaluated in the outpatient clinic for range of motion and postoperative radiographs at 2, 6 weeks, 3, 6 months and 1 year after the operation. DASH (Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand) score and was done at 1 year postoperatively. Radiographic evaluation included AP and lateral X-rays performed according to the above timetable as well as the measurement of radial length, volar tilt and radial inclination. Radiographs were assessed by an independent evaluator blinded to the patients (SK). Radiographic evaluation was measured using a picture archiving and communication system (PACS) measurements tools (Centricity, GE Healthcare Systems, Inc). Statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for measuring outcome among the two study groups. Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) v 15 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used as a software package. A Patients’ demographics among the two study groups are depicted in The mean DASH score at 1 year postoperatively was 6.3 Cooney et al. In our study, we demonstrated that the same clinical results could be achieved for both DC and DI distal radial fracture using a volar locking plate, using a single volar approach and without bone grafting. These results were achieved in a series of mostly intra-articular, comminuted and unstable fractures. Although sick leave (time to return to work after surgery) was significantly longer in the DC group, this might have been biased by the other characteristics of these patients, such as age, gender and fracture types. The functional outcome of our patients from both study groups, as manifested by the DASH score, was similar to that achieved by other investigators. Recently published literature describes the advantages of using locking plates in treating unstable distal radial fractures, The fact that reduction was preserved in both study groups implies that good stability was achieved in the DC group despite the compromised dorsal cortex. Recent biomechanical evidence suggests that the use of volar locking plates in osteoporotic bone can withstand physiological cyclical load at the time required for fracture healing. Historically, bone grafting was a routine step in treating distal radial fractures with dorsal bone loss. As debatable as the indications for operative treatment of distal radial fractures may be, The main advantage of our series is the use of a single implant and a uniform surgical approach and technique for most types of fractures. Nevertheless, despite the uniformity of the approach and implant used, the reduction of the articular surface is mandatory and should be done using a variety of both direct and indirect reduction techniques. There are a few limitations to our study. First, the study was retrospective in nature, and definite outcome measurements were collected mostly at a single postoperative time point. Hence, outcome at earlier time points might have been overlooked by the study. Second, the study was a single-surgeon/single-implant case series, favourably biasing the results, as proficiency with the implant improves. Another limitation lies within the definition of dorsal comminution. Due to inadequate literature definition, we arbitrarily defined it as severe dorsal displacement inspected on pre-reduction lateral films and multiple bone fragments or bone loss seen on CT reconstruction formats. Despite its intuitive soundness, it is still not objectively validated. In conclusion, as increasing evidence supports the use of volar locking plates in the treatment of displaced distal radius fracture, their use provides reliable results in DC fractures, similar to DI fractures, without the need of dorsally placed implants, additional approaches or bone graft. None declared. None.