Hydrogen evolution reaction following Volmer–Heyrovsky–Tafel mechanism and not under diffusion control can be characterized using Tafel polarization and AC admittance data at various frequencies and at various overpotentials. Such reaction has four independent kinetic parameters. One empirical constant related to charge required for complete surface coverage is also involved. A new approach to determine kinetic parameters utilizing these data and neglecting Heyrovsky and Tafel backward reaction rates has been proposed. This involves determining all the four kinetic constants using experimental data at a single overpotential. The empirical constant, i.e., charge required for complete surface coverage is determined by validating obtained kinetic constants at other overpotentials. The Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm to solve coupled nonlinear equations has been utilized for such purpose. The approach has been validated using the literature data.The kinetic rate constants and mechanism of electrochemical reactions involving adsorbed intermediate can be characterized using steady state Tafel polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Generally, electrical equivalent circuits are fitted to EIS impedance data using a complex nonlinear least square algorithm. The circuit parameters thus obtained are used for determining the transfer function. The transfer function is then used to determine kinetic constants for the reaction using constitutive equations. Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) involves three reaction steps, Volmer (electrosorption), Heyrovsky (electrodesorption) and Tafel (recombination)  At The charge required for complete surface coverage, The method to determine individual rate constants is not well established in case of hydrogen evolution reaction without diffusion control. Atleast four approaches have been tried, as mentioned below: Simultaneous fitting of Simultaneous fitting of Factorial fitting and minimizing residuals of Manual fitting by adjusting rate constants Four independent conditions are required to obtain four kinetic constants. However, in all four approaches, experimental data were simulated using less than four conditions. It indicates that other kinetic parameters might have been adjusted manually through trial and error approach. Also the procedure to choose The estimation of kinetic parameters for the case of HER will be addressed in this communication through a novel approach. The approach will be validated using the literature data Heyrovsky and Tafel backward reaction rate can be neglected and Using Eqs. In the above equations, Let the positive root of Eq. Eqs. Constants Charge required for full surface coverage, Nonlinear equations may possess multiple solutions and need to be eliminated based on physical grounds. The approach to solve the problem is to first solve four equations (Eqs. The Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm to solve these equations was used. The algorithm source code Any nonlinear algorithm, if it converges, converges to local minimum of error near to initial guess value. It is therefore necessary to try many combinations of initial guess values. One should test the correctness of algorithm as For validation of this novel approach by numerical simulation using nonlinear Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm for HER, Tafel polarization and EIS data of (1