Extraction of geothermal energy, oil and gas, and coalbed methane (CBM) are all constrained by the rock’s permeability. To stimulate the production, hydraulic fracturing has become a routine procedure, which is influenced by many factors especially the pre-existing natural fractures. The natural fractures have various characteristics, such as aperture, persistence, and density, which have different effects on the hydraulic performance. Hence, it is necessary to study the dependence of hydraulic fracturing on natural fracture parameters to improve its effectiveness. In this research, the distribution of natural fracture is generated using the discrete fracture network (DFN) to study these relationships. To verify the accuracy, the numerical model is calibrated at a particular case with observed data and then continued to different fragmentation characteristics. Results show that the hydraulically fractured area has an inverse relationship with the natural fracture aperture. However, the increase of pre-existing fracture persistence first causes the fractured zone to increase but increasing persistence of natural fractures further causes the area to decrease. Parametric study shows that pre-existing natural fractures play a critical role in hydraulic fracturing effectiveness, which ultimately affects the production.As one of the significant energy sources, coal plays a critical role in industry and brings enormous economic benefits to society Generally, in a dual-porosity model, the coal and rock mass are modeled as being composed of natural fractures and matrix. However, the pre-existing fractures are the main fluid pathways and play a critical role in the efficiency of hydraulic fracturing and the matrix permeability is deemed to be negligible in most cases In this paper, the DFN model was reconstructed to study the hydraulic fracturing efficiency on energy extraction performance using a distinct element method. Moreover, the numerical model was calibratedwith observed data from Cooper basin, South Australia. The model was used to evaluate how changes in the natural fracture’s properties affect hydraulic fracturing efficiency. This research will enhance the hydraulic fracturing community’s awareness of how much hydraulic fracturing’s effectiveness is influenced by original fractures. In general, the permeability of coal and rock mass mainly depends on the natural fractures, because, compared with the fracture permeability, the permeability of matrix can be ignored. Therefore, the distribution and characteristics of natural fractures are the focus of this study. According to the identical attributes, such as origin, orientation, and mechanical properties, the natural fractures are divided into different discontinuity sets. In fact, the fractures are parallel to each other in the same group, making it easy to assign the direction of natural fractures. More importantly, the similar mechanical properties in each discontinuity set make it possible to describe the change of fractures characteristics during the hydraulic fracturing and to determine the dependence of hydraulic fracturing effectiveness on natural cracks parameters. In the meantime, the working intensity, complexity of fracture networks, and simulation time could be reduced by neglecting the minuscule differences of fractures characteristics. In the end and based on the field data, the natural fractures in the study area are assigned to two discontinuity sets. The orientation of natural fractures is one of the important parameters needed to model the natural fractured rock mass. Meanwhile, as the main channels for water flow, the fracture orientation also defines the direction of fluid flow, because the water preferentially flows through the existing natural cracks before creating new fractures. The dip, dip direction, and rotation angle are three angles that define fracture orientation Another crucial parameter is the fracture location. In general, the central points of fracture obey uniform, gauss, or empirical bootstrapped distribution. However, in this paper the fractures are uniformly distributed in the discontinuity set based on the field data and the experience. Consequently, the fracture density is the key point to characterize the fracture distribution. The linear density, areal density and volumetric density are the commonly used methods in DFN modelling to describe the fracture development degree One of the complex and important parameters in DFN modelling is fracture size, which determines how far the fluid flows and affects the hydraulic fracturing efficiency. In DFNs modelling, the fracture size depends on its shape, which can be either disc, or polygon The values for all the variables used to model this study’s fractures are listed in One of a critical parameter not included in the above model is the channel geometry. Channel geometry obviously does not affect the distribution of natural fractures, but it is a very important factir that influences the fluid flow and hydraulic fracturing effectiveness. The channel geometry consists of the height and width. The height, also called the aperture, mainly depends on the shape of the fracture’s cross section. For a circular cross section, the aperture is half of the hydraulic diameter, whereas for a rectangular section, the aperture is a function of the fracture’s size The fracture width is another important parameter that determined the channel geometry. In general, there are three different ways to Generally, the equations governing fluid flow through the fractured coal and rock mass are the Navier-Stokes equations, which can be described as follows In a double-medium model, the rock mass consists of natural fractures and matrix. The cracks are the main channels of fluid flow, which are discretely distributed in the model, illustrated in For the change of aperture during hydraulic fracturing, Perkins and Kern proposed a computation, which was described as follows This approach has limited application, because it assumes that the width of channel geometry is constant. Therefore, the cubic law is applied to the flow channels, and hydraulic fracturing effectiveness can be obtained by calculating the change in the discrete fractures parameters. The hydraulic aperture can be calculated as below Meanwhile, the normal stress could be calculated based on the hydraulic pressure, which is assessed as follows To study water flow through fractured coal and rock mass, the fluid characteristics obtained from a hydraulic fracturing experiment in Cooper basin were used in the DFNs models, which are listed in  To verify the accuracy of simulation results, it is worth noting that the parameters used in DFN modelling are consistent with the parameters used during the hydraulic fracturing experiment in Cooper basin. According to the field experimental results, the leak-off ratio was 0.474, but in the simulation, the ratio was 0.535. After comparing the results obtained by the two experiments, it is apparent that there is no significant difference, validating the reliability of simulation. The simulation results, however, indicate that the hydraulic fracturing does not achieve the desired functionality, and thus it is necessary to study the influence of natural fractures characteristics on hydraulic fracturing to improve the stimulation. Based on the above analysis, it is apparent that natural fractures have numerious attributes relevant to hydraulic fracturing, such as aperture, persistence, orientation, and density. More importantly, these characteristics have different contributions to hydraulic fracturing. Therefore, to analyze how much the dependences of hydraulic fracturing effectiveness on the different natural fracture characteristics, a series of sensitive studies were carried out. By changing the characteristics of natural fractures, the realistic data about the hydraulic fracturing efficiency are obtained, which are characterized by the hydraulic fracture area, and these data can be used to reveal the change law of hydraulic fracturing effect versus natural fracture parameters.   Due to the low permeability of coal and rock mass at depth, clean energy cannot be extracted efficiently from underground mines. In order to stimulate production, hydraulic fracturing is widely used. However, the effectiveness of hydraulic fracturing is not as good as is originally expected. The main reason lies in that the natural fractures are existed in the fractured rock mass, and the fluid flows preferentially through the existing channels rather than creating new ones. Meanwhile, natural fractures carrying various characteristics, such as aperture, density, persistence, and orientation, which have different effects on hydraulic fracturing. Therefore, it is necessary to study the influence of natural fracture parameters on hydraulic fracturing efficiency. In this paper, the three-dimensional distribution of natural fractures was rebuilt using DFN model and was used to study how changes in natural fractures characteristics affect hydraulic fracturing versus fracture characteristics. The simulation results show that hydraulically fracturing area has an inverse relationship with the fracture aperture. That is,it is decreased and gradually keep a constant level as the aperture increases. The variation of hydraulic fracturing area versus natural fracture size indicates that it increases firstly and then decreases with the rise of pre-existing persistence. It is hoped that the data and conclusion in this paper will advance the industry’s understanding of the role of natural fractures characteristics in hydraulic fracturing efficiency. The authors declare that the manuscript has no conflict of interest. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: