The dissolution of metal oxides in an acid-saturated ionic liquid, followed by selective stripping of the dissolved metal ions to an aqueous phase is proposed as a new ionometallurgical approach for the processing of metals in ionic liquids. The hydrophobic ionic liquid trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride (Cyphos IL 101) saturated with a concentrated aqueous hydrochloric acid solution was used to dissolve CaO, NiO, MnO, CoO, CuO, ZnO and Fe2O3. It was found that nickel(II) and calcium(II) could be separated from all other transition metals present in the ionic liquid phase by stripping at high chloride concentrations. By scrubbing the ionic liquid solutions phase with water, manganese(II) and cobalt(II) could be stripped together with a fraction of iron(III) and copper(II), leaving zinc(II) and the remainder of copper(II) and iron(III) in the ionic liquid phase. These metal ions could be removed from the ionic liquid using ammonia. Copper(II) and zinc(II) formed ammine complexes and were back-extracted, while iron(III) precipitated as iron(III) hydroxide. After removal of all the metals present in the ionic liquid phase, the ionic liquid was prepared for reuse. Unfortunately, the mutual separations nickel–calcium, cobalt–manganese, or zinc–copper could not be achieved. This system would be useful when nickel is the metal of interest, since separation of nickel from all other transition metals present in the solution is achieved by one stripping step.Ionic liquids (ILs) are a relatively new class of solvents which are entirely made of ions and possess a melting point below 100 Dai et al. and later Bell et al. reported the solubility of uranium(VI) oxide and vanadium(V) oxide, respectively, in imidazolium chlororoaluminate ionic liquids ( In this paper, we propose another approach to the dissolution of metal oxides in ionic liquids, namely by using an acid-saturated ionic liquid solution. More in particular, the dissolution of CaO, NiO, MnO, CoO, CuO, ZnO and Fe Trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride P The metal content of the ionic liquid phases and aqueous phases was determined using a benchtop total reflection X-ray fluorescence (TXRF) spectrometer (Picofox S2, Bruker). For analysis of the aqueous phase by TXRF, aqueous samples (1 10 To carry out the stripping experiments, a sample (4 The recovery of the ionic liquid was tested after stripping of copper, zinc and iron. To three individual batches of the P The results of all the stripping experiments are represented by the stripping percentage (% Here [ For the dissolution of metal oxides in an acid-saturated ionic liquid several preconditions need to be fulfilled. First of all, the ionic liquid has to be able to dissolve a sufficiently large amount of acid to convert the required amount of metal oxides. Secondly, the ionic liquid must form two phases in contact with water to carry out the stripping experiments with an aqueous phase. Thirdly, a low solubility of the ionic liquid in water is required to minimise losses of the organic cations to the aqueous phase in order to make the system viable from both an economic and environmental point of view ( The solubility experiments were carried out by adding the metal oxides NiO, CuO, Fe Knowledge of the metal speciation in the ionic liquid solution is of importance for optimisation of the ionometallurgical process. Although the divalent ions Ni(II), Co(II), Cu(II), Mn(II) and Zn(II) and the trivalent Fe(III) occur as tetrachlorometallate complexes in chloride ionic liquids ( Additionally, the dissolution of metal oxides in the acid saturated ionic liquid was compared with the dissolution in pure HCl solution (12 The stripping behaviour of the metal ions present in the trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride–hydrochloric acid solution was investigated as a function of the hydrochloric acid concentration in the aqueous phase. One can argue about the term “stripping” (or back-extraction) instead of extraction since the metal ions were originally present in the ionic liquid solution and are extracted only once because stripping is generally used for the redistribution of a component from an organic phase to an aqueous phase. We will, therefore, use the term “stripping” for describing this experiment. Only aqueous hydrochloric acid solutions were considered because the conjugate base of this acid is the same as the anion of the ionic liquid and mixtures of anions would be undesirable. It was found that nickel and calcium are quantitatively back-extracted to the aqueous phase over the entire HCl concentration range ( In order to reuse the ionic liquid, iron, copper and zinc have to be removed. For the removal of iron from trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride, stripping with EDTA was proposed ( In these alkaline conditions iron will precipitate as iron(III) hydroxide. In a continuous process, the three phases (i.e. the recovered ionic liquid phase, the aqueous solution with copper(II) and zinc(II) and the iron(III) hydroxide precipitate) can be separated in one step by using a solid bowl centrifuge ( Although it was reported that tetraalkylphosphonium halides can be combined with concentrated sodium hydroxide without any degradation ( In order to remove the metals from the ionic liquid, a multistep stripping procedure was applied on the ionic liquid-acid solution. The first stripping stage made use of a 6 An acid-saturated ionic liquid system has been used to overcome the problem of low metal solubility in ionic liquids and allow further processing of the metal ions from the ionic liquid phase. Trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride (Cyphos The stripping of the dissolved metals from the ionic liquid to the aqueous phase was demonstrated; nickel and calcium were separated from cobalt, manganese, and copper, zinc and iron. The mutual separation between cobalt, manganese, copper and iron is difficult. Recovery of the ionic liquid was possible by changing the stripping conditions and the ionic liquid could be reused after removal of iron, zinc and copper by washing with an ammonia solution. This process is of particular interest for the separation of nickel from other transition metal ions, because nickel can be removed in one step from cobalt, manganese, iron, copper and zinc. This research was supported by the