Cadmium selenide (CdSe) quantum dots were grown on indium tin oxide substrate using wet chemical technique for possible application as light emitting devices. The structural, morphological and luminescence properties of the as deposited thin films of CdSe Q-dot have been investigated, using X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy and optical and luminescence spectroscopy. The quantum dots have been shown to deposit in an organized array on ITO/glass substrate. The as grown Q-dots exhibited size dependent blue shift in the absorption edge. The effect of quantum confinement also manifested as a blue shift of photoluminescence emission. It is shown that the nanocrystalline CdSe exhibits intense photoluminescence as compared to the large grained polycrystalline CdSe films.Nanoparticles have been investigated intensively in recent years because of their size-dependent properties and the possibility of arranging them in micro- and nano-assemblies The various sizes of CdSe quantum dots that provide such interesting optical properties can be prepared in either colloidal solution or chemically deposited thin film form. For device application, it will be more advantageous to prepare quantum dot as thin film directly on a substrate. Therefore our research efforts, directed to explore the possibility of deposition of II–VI semiconductor quantum dots in thin film form A number of approaches have been used to synthesize thin film of semiconductor quantum dots such as chemical vapour deposition In this work, we have investigated possibility of growing CdSe quantum dot thin films using a chemical route. The results of our investigations of the structural, morphological as well as optical properties of the as grown films have been presented in this article. CdSe quantum dots were assembled on pre-cleaned (ITO/glass) substrates using wet chemical synthesis route from the ionic salt precursors of cadmium and selenium. In the synthesis of CdSe quantum dots, an aqueous medium containing cadmium chloride for Cd ion source and stock solution of sodium seleno sulphite for the Se ions were used. The stock solution of sodium seleno sulphite was prepared using appropriate ratio of elemental selenium and anhydrous sodium sulphite in distilled water. The ratio of cadmium to selenium (3.18:1) was kept constant in the synthesis of all samples. The pH of the electrolyte was maintained at 11 using ammonia solution. The surfactant used to control the size of quantum dots was mercaptoethanol. The mercaptoethanol to selenium ratio was varied from 0 to 2.42, to obtain CdSe quantum dots of desired sizes. Structural characterization was carried out using X-ray diffraction as well as transmission electron microscopy techniques. The X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded in thin film grazing angle mode of XRD6000 (Shimadzu, Japan) Powder diffractometer, using CuK For transmission electron microscopy (TEM), samples of nanoparticles were prepared by dispersing them into methanol followed by ultrasonification for an hour. The ultrasonificated suspension was further diluted. One drop of this suspension was loaded onto a carbon coated formvar grid and dried prior to the TEM examination. For TEM observations Techni 20G2 TEM operating at 200 The AFM studies were performed using Shimadzu SPM 9500J2. The samples were imaged in contact and dynamic mode using 50 Optical absorption spectra of the films were recorded at room temperature with the help of a dual beam spectrophotometer (UVPC 1601, Shimadzu) in the spectral range between 300 The photoluminescence spectra of Q-CdSe films were recorded using computer controlled rationing Luminescence spectrophotometer LS 55 (Perkin-Elmer instrument, UK), with The structural properties of the as deposited thin film samples of CdSe quantum dots were investigated using grazing angle mode of X-ray diffraction. The observed X-ray diffraction patterns of a poly-CdSe as well as three Q-CdSe samples (1, 2, 3) grown using increasingly higher concentration of mercaptoethanol has been shown in As seen from The spectra of as prepared polycrystalline CdSe film ( In small size regime, i.e. in sample QCdSe1, QCdSe2, QCdSe3 considerable asymmetry in the line shape may also arise due to the merging of two closely spaced reflections of cubic CdSe contributed by the (2 Size dependent structural transition has also been reported in CdSe Moreover, in all the Q-CdSe samples, the strongest XRD peak corresponded to reflection from (1 The average particle size estimated using Scherer's formula for all the samples were shown in The surfactant employed possesses a strong electron donor head group, its increasing concentration in the growth matrix, facilitated increasing adsorption on the growing CdSe nanocrystallite surface resulting into reduction in particle size. It was, therefore, concluded that the surfactant used in the studies can effectively control the size of CdSe quantum dots. Dark field images of Q-CdSe1, Q-CdSe2, Q-CdSe3 samples obtained by TEM have been shown in Typical high resolution three-dimensional surface morphological examination of CdSe quantum dot films QCdSe1, QCdSe2 and QCdSe3 have been shown in Addition of the surfactant during growth of the nanocrystallites results into formation of strong covalent bond between –SH head group of cappant with the surface Cd The optical absorption spectra of CdSe samples with four different particle sizes have been shown in In addition to the fundamental absorption onset, each of the CdSe samples exhibited a second absorption onset on the blue side of the fundamental absorption edge. The second absorption onset originates due to splitting of the valence band (Γ The 4p orbital of Se constitutes valance band in CdSe while conduction band is composed primarily of 5S electrons of cadmium. The optical transitions in CdSe quantum dots would thus involve the S level of the electron (conduction band) and three p-levels of the holes (valence band). Therefore, spin–orbit interaction leads to occurrence of two electronic transitions one corresponding to the HOMO-LUMO level and another occurs at energy higher than the fundamental absorption edge. Moreover in case of quantum dots, the continuous band transform into discrete energy states widely separated from each other which may also give rise to additional features in absorbance. Banin et al. The electronic transitions were further probed by photoluminescence spectroscopy and the results of typical PL emission spectra have been shown in To ascertain the peak positions in the spectra, we have deconvoluted the photoluminescence spectra using multi-peak fit Gaussian analysis programme and examined each of the peaks. The results of deconvolutions have also been shown in the corresponding The peak The peaks In all the three samples, the defect luminescence However emission peaks Moreover, Babentsov et al. Our observation, are in close agreement with the previously mentioned studies suggesting the origin of different emission peaks. Self-organized CdSe Q-dots have been successfully grown using wet chemical technique on ITO substrate. The as grown polycrystalline as well as Q-CdSe films were found to possess a preferential (1 The authors gratefully acknowledge UGC-DAE CSR, Indore for providing facilities for TEM experiments. The authors also acknowledge DST as well as CSIR, New Delhi for providing financial support.