A combination of severe plastic deformation by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) and bake hardening (BH) was used to produce high strength ultrafine-grained AA6061 aluminum alloy. 2, 4 and 8 passes of ECAP were performed, and the bake hardenability of samples was tested by 6% pre-straining followed by baking at 200°C for 20min. The microstructures obtained for various passes of ECAP were characterized by XRD, EBSD, and TEM techniques. The microstructures were refined from an average grain size of 20µm to 212nm after 8 passes of ECAP. Maximum bake hardenability of 110MPa, and final yield stress of 330MPa were obtained in the specimens processed by 8 passes of ECAP.The usage of bake hardened (BH) material is an effective way to reduce the weight of vehicles and obtain higher safety in transportation industry In general, BH takes advantage of strain aging when the solute atoms segregate to the dislocations and lock them. The procedure to determine the bake hardenability of materials is as follows: (a) the specimen is pre-strained between 2 to 8% at the room temperature, (b) aging is carried out at 170–200 Another effective way to improve the mechanical properties of metallic alloys is by producing ultrafine-grained (UFG) or nano-grained (NG) microstructures A combination of a grain refinement process and BH may result in significant increase in the strength of metallic alloys In this work, AA6061 aluminum alloy was used for experiments. Before the SPD processing, the initial bars were heated to 550 After different passes of ECAP, the grain size was characterized by XRD and EBSD techniques. Williamson–Hall equation was used to calculate the size of the produced grains To study the BH behavior of AA6061 aluminum alloy, tensile specimens were cut from the ECAP-processed and un-deformed samples according to ASTM E8. To simulate the BH process, the samples were pre-strained for 6%, followed by baking at 200 The microstructures of samples before the ECAP process had an average grain size of about 20 The grain size was also measured by XRD method. According to the XRD patterns, the peak of (2 The average grain size of as-received and ECAP-processed samples determined by XRD and EBSD are summarized in  In  As reported by Kozeschnik et al. As was mentioned before, there are two main factors that affect BH, and to evaluate their effects separately, it is needed to measure some important features experimentally, such as size, shape, volume fraction and distribution of hardening precipitates. Orowan strengthening is one of the well-known strengthening mechanisms resulting from precipitation hardening To calculate the effect of precipitation hardening in different passes of ECAP, we assumed that Based on Eq. A combination of SPD by ECAP process and BH treatment was used to study the effect UFG structures on bake hardenability of AA6061 aluminum alloy. The results indicated that the combination of high density of dislocations as well as high volume fraction of grain boundaries in UFG structures will result in more precipitation during the BH process, which is a major factor in increasing the bake hardenability and strength of the material. The authors would like to acknowledge the