Ore texture has been traditionally used by geologists during geological mapping and logging for mine planning. However, using textural information for mineral processing prediction has been rarely explored. In this paper, the correlation between the ore texture (as observed from the surface of drill cores) and the core samples response to lab scale mineral processing operations was studied for the Mont-Wright iron ore deposit (Quebec, Canada). The potential of drill core textures as a geometallurgical indicator was assessed.
                  Through the mineralogical characterization of the Mont-Wright textures, differences were observed in the iron oxides liberation and grain size distribution, and in the iron-by-size pattern associated to each drill core texture. These differences were reflected in the samples processing performance: different trends were observed in the comminution response and iron oxides separability by heavy liquid separation. According to these results, a classification of ore textures calibrated to mineral processing performances was established for the Mont-Wright deposit. This classification is intended to serve as geometallurgical indicator.Traditionally, the primary assessment of “how well” or “how poorly” the ore will respond to mineral processing has been based on mine geologists’ experience and visual assessments of drill cores. However, in the current context of the mining industry, with challenging lower ore grades and more texturally complex ores, traditional assessments need to be supported by a more accurate characterization of the ore resources. Geometallurgy has emerged in recent years to achieve this higher level of knowledge in a way to provide models for mineral processing prediction ( The ore meso- and macro- texture is used by geologists on a regular basis during geological mapping and logging. In the past, there have been few attempts to explore the information carried by the ore texture in relation to mineral processing ( In this paper, the use of the ore mesotexture (i.e. texture observable with the naked eye) as a geometallurgical indicator is evaluated for the Mont-Wright iron ore deposit (Québec, Canada). At this deposit, the geometallurgical model is under development and different approaches are being considered in order to define the most suitable geometallurgical indicators. At Mont-Wright, geologists and metallurgists have long suspected a link between texture (as observed in drill cores) and ore processing performance. In a previous work, The paper consists of seven sections. After the introduction given in the first section, the second section describes the six main drill core textures identified at Mont-Wright. Section three provides information on samples preparation for characterization and processing stages applied to the samples. Section four shows sample response to mineral processing, namely size reduction and separability of the valuable minerals, and links this response to ore texture. The fifth section contains the mineralogical characteristics of each texture obtained through Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA). Finally, in the last two sections, results are discussed and conclusions presented. Mont-Wright is an iron ore deposit occurring in the Labrador Trough, located in Northeastern Quebec, Canada. It is the largest open-pit mine in Quebec with an ore having iron content varying between 25% and 35%, and low contents of aluminium, manganese and phosphorus ( To identify the most frequent textural patterns at Mont-Wright, eighteen complete drill cores 50 mm in diameter (≈100 m deep for a total of 1500 m) from different representative areas of the deposit were visually examined. Six textural patterns were identified: massive (Ms), bright banded (BBd), dark banded (DBd), mottled (Mo), layered (Ly) and amphibolite (Amp). The texture nomenclature proposed in this work is intended to describe the visual appearance of minerals in drill core surfaces at the particular deposit under evaluation. Therefore, it is site-specific and does not necessarily correspond to the traditional definition of lithology or mineralogical classes established for BIF deposits.  Polished-thin sections were examined under optical microscopy. For each texture, two drill core portions from different samples were randomly selected to prepare polished-thin sections. The objective of this examination was purely qualitative and intended to identify differences in the micro-textures associated to each macro-texture. Special attention was drawn to the grains morphology, relative size and grain boundary relationship between iron oxides and quartz.  From this examination, some general remarks can be made. Hematite was the dominant iron ore mineral, except for the layered samples where magnetite was more abundant. Quartz grains were of finer size than the iron oxides grains for all samples, except the layered ones; in general, grain boundaries between iron oxide and quartz grains were not intricate, indicating an expected good liberation after grinding. To characterize each particular textural pattern and its unique metallurgical response, a set of twenty two samples was characterized. These samples were selected after visual examination of six complete holes (≈600 m). Each sample was composed of drill core portions chosen from a continuous 6 m long core, showing the same textural pattern. The selection was manual and strictly based on visual inspection of drill cores. Those portions in the 6 m long drill core with only quartz or with no textural pattern were rejected, as well as altered or not competent portions. This selection criterion was intended to provide samples for the characterization of the individual textures, without interference of other factors (such as alteration or porosity). With the objective of evaluating the metallurgical response of the six textural patterns considered, several tests were conducted on each sample to characterize the comminution response and iron oxides separability of each textural pattern. In addition, a detailed characterization of the micro-texture associated to each ore texture was performed by Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA). To complete the characterization, the samples were also chemically assayed. The characterization methodology schematic is shown in Comminution response was characterized by measuring the energy required to crush the samples following the procedure developed by After power measurement, the material was crushed to 100% passing 850 µm in successive stages in a roller crusher, recirculating only the +850 µm fraction to minimize the production of fines. The size distribution of the −850 µm material is shown in Two consecutive HLS tests were carried out using tetrabromethane (C For each size fraction, the head sample and the HLS sink and float products were assayed by X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry for Fe, Si, Al, Mg, Ca, Na, K, Ti, Mn and Zn. The loss on ignition (LOI) was measured by calcination of the sample at 1050 °C. The proportion of magnetic material was measured by Satmagan (SATuration MAGnetization ANalyser) analyses. Satmagan is an electromagnetic method used to estimate the magnetite content of a sample. The head sample density was determined using a Helium pycnometer (Micromeritics AccuPyc). The energy required to crush the samples was plotted in Sample response to Heavy Liquid Separation (HLS) was tested to evaluate trends in the separability and concentrate quality as a function of textural patterns. This test was selected because it enables processing small quantities of material compared to other gravity concentration methods, such as the Wilfley table. Given the almost binary composition of the samples consisting of quartz with a density of 2.65g/cm  Iron recovery in The results shown in the previous section demonstrate the distinctive ore response to comminution and concentration depending on the ore texture. Actually, the processing behavior of ores is dependent on the micro-textural characteristics and mutual associations of minerals within the ore (  During ignition, magnetite oxidation to hematite may occur, resulting in a gain of weight ( The correlation between crushing energy and drill core silica grade was analyzed. In general, a good correlation was found for all texture groups except for the amphibolite ( From the twenty-two initial samples, the fourteen samples marked ( The Amphibolite samples were analysed only for their modal mineralogy, i.e. mineral content. Given the low amount of iron oxides in these samples, neither their liberation nor their grain size distribution was characterized. For the discrimination between hematite and magnetite in the backscattered electron image, the methodology proposed by For all samples, except for the amphibolite, the quartz and the iron oxides weight proportion in the head sample is above 97% ( Along with quartz, the main gangue minerals identified were mica (biotite and muscovite), and amphibole (hornblende), but always in a proportion below 1% for all ore textures excluding the amphibolite. Titanium bearing minerals were detected mainly in the amphibolite samples and frequently in the form of titanomagnetite (i.e. exsolution veinlets of ilmenite and magnetite). Very low proportion of ilmenite and rutile were detected. The Fe and Si content obtained from the calculated assays provided by the MLA are compared in The liberation data of samples belonging to the same textural pattern group were averaged to obtain the typical liberation curve of each textural pattern for both iron oxides (  The head sample was assayed size-by-size to characterize the iron-by-size pattern, which shows the variations of iron (in weight proportion) along size fractions. As observed in Another important difference between textural patterns was found in the iron and silica weight distribution by sieve fraction computed from the size-by-size chemical assays. At Mont-Wright, several well-defined drill core textures can be observed. This work has evaluated the processing behavior and the mineralogical characteristics associated to each texture in order to explore the potential of this parameter as a geometallurgical indicator. The texture nomenclature proposed in this work is site-specific for the Mont-Wright deposit and it is intended to describe the visual appearance of iron ore minerals in the drill core surface, as observed with the naked eye. This approach is meant to provide a first indication about the expected behavior of a given ore sample based on a visual property that can be easily recognised during the early stages of the characterization work. Therefore, its inclusion into the geometallurgical model is straightforward from core logging. A similar approach has been addressed by other authors for different deposits ( In this work, the Mont-Wright drill core texture library was established through laboratory metallurgical testing and mineralogical characterization by MLA. The characterization work carried out showed that several parameters were correlated to the crushing energy. As shown in The variability observed for the crusher energy samples in the bright banded texture category is not yet understood. Additional measurements of the ore porosity or alteration degree in this ore texture are required to explain the wider crushing energy observed in The separability tests conducted by HLS showed three well-defined different behaviors in terms of iron grade-recovery depending on the texture type ( Another difference between textural groups is the iron-by-size for each pattern. As shown by A challenge for future work will be addressing how to effectively put this information into the block model in order to use this parameter for mine planning and blending optimization. Future research will investigate how to model processing performance according to the textural composition of the feed. In addition, a methodology for the automated recognition of the six drill core textures representative of the Mont-Wright iron ore deposit ( This study has shown that there is potential in the use of the drill core texture as a geometallurgical indicator for the Mont-Wright iron ore deposit. Through detailed mineralogical characterization and laboratory tests, this work has defined a site-specific drill core texture library for Mont-Wright. The characterization work carried out has provided the specific mineralogical characteristics of each drill core texture and has revealed particular processing performances for each textural group. By ore texture recognition during core logging, valuable information can be added to the block model, which in combination with silica and iron grades, would provide an early indication of the expected processing performance of a particular mine zone. The main advantage of using the drill core texture as geometallurgical indicator relies on the fact that just one single feature encloses information regarding several parameters, such as the grain size, the iron oxides liberation, the ore comminution response or the iron recovered to concentrate, among others. Furthermore, this information can be collected at the earliest stages of the characterization work. Another advantage of using a visual parameter as a geometallurgical indicator is that it brings the opportunity of using a common language for geologists, mining engineers and metallurgists. The authors wish to thank ArcelorMittal, COREM and Université Laval for their support and permission to publish this work. Also, the Mitacs Accelerate program is gratefully acknowledged for supporting an internship. The authors want to thank COREM’s staff who conducted most of the experimental work. Also, the contribution of the editor of the review, and two anonymous reviewers to the improvement of the original text is gratefully acknowledged.