The effect of microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting (as a conventional heating method) on ilmenite surface properties and its flotation behavior were compared. This comparison was performed by carrying out micro and laboratory scales flotation tests, XPS, XRD, FTIR, SEM and microprobe analyses, zeta potential and contact angle measurements. The micro scale flotation experiments indicated that the ilmenite flotation recovery improves from 73.5% to almost 94% and 91% after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting, respectively. This is in good concordance with the results of XPS analysis showing the increase of Fe3+ content from 48.5% to 66% after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and 64.8% after oxidation roasting. As evidenced by FTIR analysis, zeta potential and contact angle measurements, the improvement in ilmenite floatability and hydrophobicity after pretreatment is due to the entrance of more oleate ions into the Helmholtz layer and the increase of the formation of ferric iron oleate which is more insoluble than the ferrous one. The surface properties and floatability of quartz does not change significantly after pretreatment by both methods.
                  In ore flotation experiments, when the grinded ore was pretreated by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting, without significant changes in the TiO2 grade of flotation concentrate, the recovery of TiO2 improves from 65.4 to 76.2% and 73.7%, respectively. In the case of non-grinded ore, the recovery of TiO2 increases up to 79.8% and 70.2% after microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting, respectively. The decrease of iron content in the gangue minerals increases the improvement of TiO2 grade and recovery after pretreatment by both methods. Using microwave irradiation as a pretreatment process, the improvement in the recovery of TiO2 and separation efficiency is more than those of oxidation roasting. In addition, microwave irradiation reduces the consumption of activation and depressant agents.Ilmenite is the most important titanium mineral, which is used to produce titanium dioxide and titanium metal In this research, the efficiencies of microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting (as a conventional heating method) for improving ilmenite floatability and also its flotation behavior in the presence of different gangue minerals are investigated and compared with each other. The purified samples of ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene (Ol–Px), tremolite–clinochlore (Tr–Cch) and quartz were used in this study. The first three samples were prepared from the hand-picked samples taken from the Qara-aghaj deposit; a hard rock titanium deposit located 36 The ore samples including representative ore sample, low grade ore sample and high grade ore sample were used in the ore flotation experiments after removing the magnetite and titanomagnetite minerals by the low wet intensity magnetic separator. In this study, sodium oleate (C The XPERT MPD diffractometer equipped with Cu The BET analysis method with a high speed gas sorption analyzer (Quantachrome Corporation, NOVA 1000, VERSION 6.10) was used to determine the surface area of ilmenite and different gangue minerals. This analysis was carried out on the mineral samples with a size of −15 Microwave pre-treatment was conducted in a 2.45 The oxidation roasting pretreatment was conducted in a laboratory muffle furnace. When the furnace heated up to a predetermined temperature the sample placed in a ceramic pan was put into the furnace and roasted open to air. For carrying out the microflotation experiments, 30 A 300 cm After grinding, desliming and removal of magnetite, the ore flotation experiments were carried out in a 1l Denver cell with a solid percentage of 25–30% (wt%). In each test, 300 XPS analysis was carried out using a Specs EA 10 X-ray photoelectron spectroscope to determine the distribution density and binding energy of Fe The quantitative FT-IR analyses with 300:1, wt/wt, as the ratio of KBr to sample were carried out by NEXU670 FT-IR (Nicolet Corporation, USA). The mineral samples ground to smaller than 0.015 The measurement of the zeta potential was conducted by a Malvern instrument (Nano ZS, ZEN3600, UK). In each test, 50 The sessile drop method was used to measure the contact angle of de-ionized distilled water on a polished section of ilmenite before and after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting. The polished section cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with distilled water was then immersed in a collector solution for 8 The flotation recovery of ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene and tremolite–clinochlore as a function of pH before and after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and oxidation are shown in In order to determine the optimum values of effective parameters of pretreatment methods, several flotation experiments were carried out on the ilmenite samples after microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting under different conditions. In the case of microwave irradiation, the optimal values of irradiation power and irradiation time as the most important parameters were determined at 1000 In these series of experiments, the rougher flotation tests were carried out on the mixture of pure ilmenite (20 These experiments were carried out on the ore sample with a size of −150 In these experiments, the pretreatment process by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting was performed on the ore sample with a size of −25 In these experiments, two separate samples taken from blocks H and G of eleven blocks of Qara-aghaj deposit were examined. The ore sample taken from block H with 20.16% Fe (Fe total) contains higher amounts of tremolite–clinochlore and lower amounts of olivine–pyroxene. In contrast, the ore sample taken from block G containing 26.06% Fe (Fe total) has more olivine and pyroxene. The results of these flotation experiments presented in The XPS spectra provided for ilmenite before and after pretreatments were analyzed by peak fitting and separation The XRD patterns of ilmenite and pretreated ilmenite by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting are presented in The FT-IR spectra of non-treated and treated ilmenite and gangue minerals conditioned with sodium oleate at a pH of 6.3 are shown in In the quantitative FTIR spectra, the surface area under the peak appeared at 2923 The zeta potential of ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene, tremolite–clinochlore and quartz in the presence and absence of the collector were measured as a function of pH before and after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting ( Before pretreatment, when sodium oleate is added, the zeta potential of ilmenite and gangue minerals display a negative value over a wide pH range and their iep are shifted to a pH between 2.5 and 3. In weak acidic or alkaline solutions, the negativity of zeta potential for ilmenite, olivine–pyroxene and tremolite–clinochlore has good accordance with their iron content and flotation recovery. After pretreatment with both methods, with the entrance of more oleate ions in the Helmholtz layer of minerals their zeta potential decreases for all three phases. This decrease in zeta potential which results in the increase of mineral floatability is due to the conversion of Fe The contact angle was measured as a function of pH for ilmenite conditioned with sodium oleate before and after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting. The results presented in Also, the contact angle of a created water drop on the surface of non-treated and pretreated ilmenite conditioned with collector at a pH of 6.3 was measured as a function of time ( The morphology of pure ilmenite grains before and after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting was investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The results presented in Some polished sections prepared from non-grinded ore samples were studied by SEM before and after pretreatment by microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting. As seen from The reasons for differences between the effects of microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting (conventional heating) on ilmenite surface properties should be probed in the heat transferring mechanisms of two pretreatment methods. The heat transferring mechanisms in microwave and conventional heating systems, and their influences on ilmenite surface properties are schematically shown in The microwave enters into the material as a wave, and by getting absorbed; the material generates heat on their own by the penetration of the microwave. Therefore, microwave heating is internal heating, from the inside to the outside (surface) while in conventional heating, the material's temperature rises by spreading heat energy from the surface to inside (external heating) In comparison to oxidation roasting, when the ilmenite ore is pretreated by microwave irradiation, more ilmenite particles are liberated via grinding process. This is due to expansion of micro cracks in the boundary of ilmenite and gangue minerals and also within the ilmenites through the heat transferring from inside to the outside. In addition, the conversion of Fe Both pretreatment methods including microwave irradiation and oxidation roasting improve ilmenite floatability. This is due to the conversion of Fe The authors would like to thank