An efficient method for extracting bismuth (Bi3+) from a hydrochloric acid (HCl) system by cementation with copper (Cu0) powder was proposed in this work. The thermodynamic properties of cementation were investigated via cyclic voltammetry measurement and thermodynamic calculation. Then, the effects of reaction temperature, Cu0/Bi3+ molar ratio, stirring rate, HCl concentration, and competing ions on the cementation efficiency of bismuth were systematically investigated. Results showed that the cementation reaction between bismuth and copper powder was thermodynamically spontaneous. A Bi recovery of 99% could be achieved with copper powder under an optimized cementation condition (6 mol L−1 HCl, 60 °C, Cu0/Bi3+ molar ratio of 4, stirring rate of 500 rpm, and reaction time of 30 min). Kinetics study revealed that Cu0-Bi3+ cementation followed a first-order reaction law in the range of 20 °C–60 °C. The activation energy of bismuth cementation was 8.58 kJ mol−1. The generated cuprous ions can be recovered as copper sulfides by sulfuration after Bi3+ was extracted. This finding indicated that Cu0 powder cementation showed potential for Bi3+ extraction.Bismuth (Bi) has been extensively applied to manufacture electronics, ceramic powders, photoelectrocatalytic materials, high-temperature superconductors, flame retardants, catalysts, and other materials ( At the early stage, pyrometallurgy process is commonly applied to separate and recover bismuth from Bi-contained minerals or slags. However, this method suffers from a complicated process, high energy consumption, and low extraction efficiency ( For this reason, extracting bismuth in HCl with copper powder is proposed to reduce wastewater generation. The produced cuprous ions can be recovered as copper matte for copper production after deep sulfuration occurs. In our previous work, we proposed the removal of arsenic and antimony from a HCl solution via copper powder cementation, and we showed that over 99% of arsenic and antimony can be removed under optimized conditions ( This study aimed to extract Bi from the HCl system by copper powder. Electrochemical test and thermodynamic analysis were carried out to investigate the feasibility of copper cementation. The extraction efficiency of Bi under different conditions, such as solution temperature, Cu Bismuth oxide (Bi Cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were conducted on a CHI660 electrochemical workstation (CH Instrument, Shanghai, China) by using a glassy carbon electrode (GCE, exposed area of 12.56 mm The bismuth reactions on copper powder were investigated by batch experiments under magnetic stirring in nitrogen atmosphere. The desired dosages of copper powder (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Beijing Co., Ltd.) were added to 200 mL of Bi At high contents (>0.1 g L The extraction efficiency of bismuth by copper powder can be calculated by using the following equation and disregarding the minor change in the volume of the solution before and after the reaction: The phase composition of the product was analyzed through X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU D/Max 2550 PC) equipped with a Cu Ka source (λ = 1.54059 Å) at 40 kV and 40 mA. The morphological characteristics of the reaction products were determined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Zeiss Merlin, operated at 15 kV) equipped with an energy dispersion spectroscope (Oxford EDS Inca Energy Coater 300, operated at 15 kV). The electrochemical analysis of the Bi The Bi All of the activities were replaced by concentrations during the calculation. In Eq. The following equation can be obtained on the basis of charge conservation:  The reduction potentials of BiCl The equilibrium electrode potential of Substituting Eq. Similarly, the electrode potential of copper chloride complexes can be expressed as follows: In Eqs. Increasing the solution temperature significantly enhances the extraction efficiency as shown in The extraction efficiencies of bismuth and cuprous concentration increase as the Cu Theoretically, bismuth can be extracted when the Cu The stirring rate is another important parameter during extraction. As described by Shishkin, the influence of mixing intensity plays a significant role in the intensity of cementation; however, this parameter has not been studied in detail depending on the rotation speed of a mixer ( Thermodynamic analysis ( Aside from bismuth, arsenic and antimony in HCl system can be cemented by copper powder. The effect of coexisting arsenic and antimony ions on the cementation efficiencies of bismuth should be determined because arsenic, antimony, and bismuth are generally symbiotic with copper in minerals. In  The reaction rate constants and bismuth cementation activation energies at 20 °C–60 °C were further determined. In In The morphological characteristics of the cementation products were further determined through SEM. In Upon the optimized condition (6 mol L  In this study, bismuth was efficiently extracted from a HCl solution by copper powder instead of traditional hydrolysis. Thermodynamic analysis and CV analysis confirmed that the cementation reaction between Cu Batch cementation experiments showed that 99% of bismuth could be extracted with copper powder under an optimized cementation condition (6 mol L Kinetic analysis showed that the Cu The recovered bismuth was mainly elemental bismuth with blocky crystal particles. After Bi This work was financially supported by the