Sorption experiments for cadmium removal using two brown macroalgae Lessonia nigrescens and Durvillaea antarctica were carried out. Although both types of algae were capable of retaining cadmium, differences in their performance were observed. The optimum pH was 3.7±0.2, and to achieve the equilibrium, 5days of contact time were necessary for both biosorbents. The maximum experimental uptake obtained was similar for the two biosorbents: 95.3mgCdg−1 by D. antarctica and 109.5mgCdg−1 by L. nigrescens.
                  
                  The Langmuir model described the equilibrium sorption isotherms very well for both biosorbents and the Lagergren pseudo primer order model described the sorption kinetics for L. nigrescens satisfactorily and the Ho and Mckay pseudo second order model for D. antarctica. It was found that cadmium uptake by D. antarctica was faster than by L. nigrescens.Industrial activities, such as mineral processing and extractive metallurgical operations produce large quantities of wastewater containing high levels of heavy levels of heavy metals ( The objectives of this work are: (i) to evaluate two types of brown seaweeds – The biosorption process involves a solid phase and a liquid phase containing the dissolved species to be sorbed. From the biosorption experiments it is possible to evaluate quantitatively the retention capacity of a metallic contaminant by the biosorbent. The experimental conditions such as initial metal concentration, biosorbent mass-to-solution volume ratio ( The equilibrium isotherms are plots that relate the retention of the metal by the biosorbent and the equilibrium concentration of the metal remaining in the solution. The name “isotherm” is due to the initial conception of the sorption experiments, which must be done at constant temperature. However, the effect of temperature in biosorption is not as important as other influencing factors, such as solution pH The retention of the solute by a biosorbent can be estimated by a mass balance: There are two models typically used to adjust the adsorption isotherms. These are the Langmuir ( There are two commonly used kinetic models to adjust the kinetic experimental data: the Lagergren pseudo-first order model ( This model is based on the assumption that active surface sites exist on the solid material, to which the metals are adsorbed. The ions are fixed on a monolayer on the surface; there is no penetration of ions into the interior of the adsorbent. The model can be expressed in the following manner: This model is characterized by being an empirical equation, which is not limited to a finite adsorption capacity as the Langmuir model. Therefore, it is applicable for low and medium concentrations of solutes: One of the most applied models to describe the biosorption kinetics is the Lagergren model. This model is based on the assumption that for each metallic ion, one adsorption site of the biosorbent is assigned. The pseudo-first order rate expression of Lagergren is given by the following expression: When Eq. Another widely used model, the Ho and Mckay model, supposes the adsorption of divalent metal ions onto the adsorbent using two active sites. The pseudo-second order kinetic model is expressed as: Separating the variables in Eq. When rearranging Eq. The cadmium solutions were prepared by dissolving Cd(NO Each liquid sample was filtered through a N° 131 grade filter paper by a vacuum pump. The cadmium concentration in the filtrate was determined by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry inflame according to Chilean standard NCh 2313/10 Of. 96. pH was measured with a Orion 370 pH meter with a combined pH electrode.  The analyzed parameters were: (a) pH and equilibrium time, (b) type of biosorbent, (c) initial cadmium concentration ([Cd] The pH in the solution was kept constant by adding drops of either 0.5 After evaluating the pH effect and the equilibrium time, an optimum solution pH was chosen for all the experiments and the equilibrium time was chosen for the isotherms experiments. For the pH effect and the equilibrium time experiments either 500 or 1000 For the sorption isotherms, 250 These experiments were carried out to determine the optimum pH and the contact time to achieve the equilibrium. Sixteen experiments were carried out for each biosorbent with an initial cadmium concentration of 500 and 1000 After analyzing the previous findings, an initial pH of 3.7 In order to determine the optimum It can be noticed that both biosorbents are similar in behavior and cadmium uptake. It can be observed that optimum With the results found in Section It can be seen from In order to determine the biosorption kinetics, experiments were made with 100  When fitting the experimental data, the Ho and Mckay model showed better results when working with Sorption experiments for cadmium removal using the two brown macroalgae The biosorbent size used in this work was a significant factor influencing the results comparing with the size used by other type of algae in other investigations. Biosorption by The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the FONDECYT Project No 1120111. Ana González is acknowledged for help with the experimental work.