The adsorption of malachite green (MG) from aqueous solution by two different adsorbents (CZn5, PETNa8) were studied. Adsorbents were prepared from pine sawdust and polyethyleneterephatalate (PET) by chemical activation with ZnCl2 and NaOH, respectively. The adsorption was carried out in a batch system as a function of dye concentration, pH and contact time. Both adsorbents were found to be very effective in removing the dye at high concentration with adsorption percentage in the order of CZn5>PETNa8. The pH of dye solution in the range of 6–10, was found favorable for the removal of malachite green by using the two adsorbents at high concentrations. Equilibrium times were 120 and 90min for CZN5 and PETNa8, respectively. Kinetics of removal MG was studied using Lagergren equation and diffusion phenomena was analyzed using Weber and Morris intraparticle diffusion plots. It was also showed that the adsorption isotherm followed Langmuir model.Water pollution is a very persistent problem; the intensive disposal of different toxic substance without control constitutes a real danger. Waste waters from the textile, cosmetics, printing, dying, food coloring, and papermaking, etc., are polluted by dyes Industries use biological treatment, coagulation, floatation, oxidation, hyper filtration and adsorption for removing dye from the aqueous medium. Every process has its own limitations and advantages. Biological treatment is not found to be advantageous but it requires large land area and is constrained by sensitivity toward diurnal variation as well as toxicity of some chemicals, and less flexibility in design and operation. Adsorption onto granulated activated carbon (GAC) or powdered activated carbon (PAC) is widely practiced particularly for the removal of the persistent organics The objective of this work is to investigate the feasibility of using activated carbon prepared from pine sawdust and PET for removing malachite green (MG) from aqueous solution. The effects of contact time, initial dye concentration and pH of dye solution on the adsorption percentage are investigated. First adsorbent (CZn5), was prepared from pine sawdust by chemical activation with ZnCl The dye, Malachite Green, CI In the each experiment, 25 Contact time studies were carried out at different time (15–150 Nitrogen adsorption isotherms of CZn5 and PETNa8 are shown in The influence of the initial dye concentration of malachite green in the solutions on the rate of adsorption on CZn5 and PETNa8 was studied. The experiments were carried out at fixed adsorbent dose (0.1 A plot of adsorption capacity versus adsorption time (min) was shown in The effect of pH on malachite green by PETNa8 and CZn5 is shown in The experimental data were evaluated by using Langmuir and isotherm equation. But experimental data did not fit the Freundlich model. That's why these results are not given. The Langmuir equation has been successfully applied and given by: A linearised plot of One of the essential characteristics of the Langmuir isotherm could be expressed by dimensionless constant called equilibrium parameter, Several models have been proposed to express the adsorption mechanism of solute molecules onto an adsorbent: (a) pseudo-first-order kinetic model, (b) intraparticle diffusion model and (c) pseudo-second-order kinetic model. A pseudo-first-order kinetic model of Lagergren In this equation the average value of the rate constant, An intraparticle diffusion model of Weber and Moris A pseudo-second-order kinetic model of Ho and McKay First, the values of log( Second, the plots of Third, the values of the rate constants for MG onto PETNa8 (from The The kinetic parameters for adsorption MG onto CZn5 and PETNa8 are summarized in Adsorptions of MG on to activated carbon have been carried out by other investigators in the literature. Those investigations have been studied at low initial dye concentration. The results of present investigation showed that CZn5, PETNa8 prepared from pine sawdust and polyethyleneterephatalate (PET) have higher efficiency than other activated carbon used to remove MG in literature. Adsorption percentage decreases while initial dye concentration increase, but CZn5 has high adsorption efficiency than PETNa8 at high dye concentration. Maximum dye was removed within 120 and 90 The author wishes to thank the (DPT K120330) Planning Organization Center for support.