The Li-ion batteries are currently the technology of choice for the future generation of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles. New generation of these batteries based on less noble materials are currently in development. That is why the new approaches to their recycling are necessary and lithium recovery will become economically interesting. Indeed, this study deals with lithium separation from solution and is part of a larger project dealing with the recycling of the future generation of Li-ion batteries. In this study, the sorption/desorption technique was selected to evaluate lithium separation from lithium aqueous solutions. Four types of commercially available materials were used as sorbents: Amberlite IR 120 resin, molecular sieve 13X, aluminosilicate MCM 41 and activated carbons. Under the experimental conditions used in this study, the maximum lithium uptake ranging between 20 and 25mg Li g−1 has been reached for Amberlite IR 120 resin and molecular sieve 13X. All equilibrium and kinetics data have been described by a single-site ion exchange model.Even though the Li recovery from end-of-life Li-ion batteries is not considered currently as an economically interesting operation, the rise of electric vehicle technology could change this view point. The consequence could be a higher pressure on the Li cost and therefore on the battery makers and an increasing price for the users ( Pyrometallurgical processes are traditionally used when recycling of metals is done on a large scale, but the processes are expensive, energy-consuming and are not adaptable for lithium recycling ( Battery recycling is a real environmental, scientific and technologic challenge. At first, appropriate collecting and sorting chains are to be established. Next the battery discharging and dismantling should be developed; this is rather a technological challenge as the batteries arrive in different charging state to the dismantling facility. Further the plastics, solvents, ferromagnetic metals and the electrode active materials should be separated according to The majority of authors dealing with Li-ion battery recycling have optimized the leaching step with the scope of cobalt recovery from LiCoO The state of the art dealing with lithium separation from solution is not very vast; nevertheless some attention was already given to this question. The use of sorption ( With regard to the sorption technique, both organic and inorganic materials can be used for lithium separation from different media. Indeed, several types of activated carbons, both chemically or physically activated samples, were used for the uptake of Li from highly concentrated boron media ( As the leaching step seems to be controlled, the present paper was focused on the recovery and the concentration of lithium from a leaching solution. This preliminary study constitutes an integral part of a larger project dealing with hydrometallurgical recycling of used Li-ion batteries with a special focus on lithium recovery and reuse. The scope of the present article is to separate lithium from its aqueous solution. This solution is used as a model of a battery leachate, whereas the lithium recovery is operated by a classical mass transfer method. Therefore, the main objective of our work is to recover lithium from an aqueous solution in order to synthesis a high purity product able to be re-introduced in the materials manufacturing process for new batteries (closed-loop recycling). In this way, the selective recovery of lithium from electrode active material leachate is aimed. In the scope of this study, the sorption–desorption technique was selected as the most promising. The first objective was to achieve a separation of Li and a higher Li concentration. As the state of the art is not rich in the field of lithium sorption, it was necessary to evaluate at first Li uptake from synthetic solutions by different commercially available solid materials. Within this objective, a preliminary research focused on lithium retention from aqueous solutions was performed and the results are presented in this paper. Four commercially available solid samples were selected and tested as Li adsorbents, namely activated carbons, Amberlite IR 120 exchange resin, mesostructured aluminosilicate MCM 41 and molecular sieve 13X adsorbent. The present paper is focused on a detailed study of the equilibrium and the kinetics of lithium sorption and desorption. The uptake mechanism is also investigated and a model based on this mechanism is developed. Three lithium salts – LiCl, Li Amberlite IR 120 exchange resin, both sodium (reference Sigma Aldrich 224359) and hydrogen (reference Sigma Aldrich 06428) forms were used, hexagonal mesostructured aluminosilicate MCM 41 (reference Sigma Aldrich 643 653), molecular sieve 13X by Supelco (reference Sigma Aldrich 2-0304), activated carbons: steam activated Norit CAC 1240 Amberlite IR 120 resin is a gel type strongly acidic cation exchange resin. The resin is based on styrene divinylbenzene copolymer spheres functionalized with sulfonic acid. The mean size distribution ranges from 620 to 830 The hexagonal mesostructured aluminosilicale MCM 41 is characterized by a linear formula (SiO The molecular sieve 13X is a synthetically produced zeolite. Its particle size is comprised between 45–60 mesh and the pore size is 13 The steam activated carbon sample presented much larger particles ( Besides, sulfur acid, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide were used for pH adjustments. Lithium concentration in solutions was determined by ion chromatography technique. Metrohm 881 Compact IC Pro device equipped with conductivity detector was used. C4 250/4.0 column (by Metrohm) enabled the detection of lithium, sodium and four other cations (Ca Prior to the sorption experiments, it was verified that lithium salts are soluble and do not precipitate at selected pH and concentration range. All concentration values cited in this article are always expressed in mg or mol of Li L Sorption experiments were performed in duplicate with three lithium salts and all sorbents at ambient temperature. The influence of initial pH on lithium uptake efficiency was studied in the pH range from 3 up to 11. Solid amount was fixed at 20 The lithium sorption yield was calculated as follows: Next to the sorption experiments, lithium enriched sorbents were separated by filtration. Diluted hydrochloric acid solutions were prepared for each sorbent sample so as to obtain H Finally, the global lithium recovery yield was calculated as follows: Afterwards, the maximum uptake capacity of the tested materials was determined by varying the initial lithium concentration from 0.02 to 1 This set of experiments was performed at three initial lithium concentrations: 0.01 The lithium enriched sorbents were then separated by filtration and the desorption kinetics using diluted hydrochloric acid was studied afterwards. The acid concentration was fixed as to obtain H   This phenomenon was particularly pronounced with carbonate. Indeed, H The desorption experiments were thus also performed only with solid materials previously saturated with LiCl solution and the sorption and the desorption results as well as the recovery yields are summarized in The uptake mechanism was verified by mass balance taking into account both initial and final concentrations of Na At equilibrium, the sorption rate is equal to the desorption rate. Thereby, the equilibrium concentrations in solution (C Finally, Eq. Next, it is supposed that initially all sorption sites are occupied by the counter-ion (H Afterwards, the maximum uptake capacities of the Amberlite IR 120 resin and molecular sieve 13X were investigated. The experimental points were fitted with the developed ion exchange model and the proposed model fits satisfactorily the experimental points (as illustrated in Finally, the kinetics of lithium uptake and desorption were studied and the experimental data were fitted with the ion exchange model. In this model the concentrations in solution (C Sorption kinetic constant was estimated from experimental value of initial sorption rate r Finally, desorption kinetic constant (k The lithium concentration decrease is plotted in Kinetic parameters were estimated for each sorbent and each initial concentration tested and are summarized in The activity of ions was supposed to be equal to their concentration, which is only true for low concentrations. That is why the apparent kinetic constants decrease with increasing concentration. Diffusion phenomena in micropores which can become limiting at high concentrations, especially for molecular sieve. Indeed, the influence of mass transfer in the film and inside the particle was not taken into account and ion exchange at the liquid–solid interface was considered to be instantaneous. Possible parasite reactions which were not comprised in the model. Nevertheless, the estimated equilibrium constants are coherent with the previous values in For desorption of Li For molecular sieve, the kinetic model is more complex because of sorption and desorption rates of Li Concentrations in solution (C Net desorption rates (r Desorption kinetic constants of Li For molecular sieve, sorption and desorption kinetic constants of Li In order to calculate the last unknown kinetic constants (k Consequently, for Amberlite hydrogen form Eq. The kinetic parameters estimated for each sorbent and initial lithium concentration are summarized in In some cases, an important variation of kinetic constants was observed. Possible causes of this difference were already listed in the kinetic section. Nevertheless, the constants remain in the same order of magnitude. For the hydrogen form of Amberlite IR 120 the constants are comparable between the sorption and desorption experiments ( The purpose of this study was to develop a sorption/desorption method to recover the lithium contained in an aqueous solution such as a leachate of used Li-ion batteries obtained during their hydrometallurgical recycling. Since limited information is actually available on lithium sorption by commercially available solid materials, a preliminary study was required and its results were presented in this paper. The activated carbons and hexagonal mesostructured aluminosilicate MCM 41 revealed not to be efficient for Li uptake. Molecular sieve 13X and Amberlite IR 120 performed approximately the same uptake ranging between 20 and 25 The recovery of lithium from an aqueous solution is therefore possible by sorption/desorption method. Moreover, a concentration effect can be obtained (concentration factor ≈ The study currently continues with some selectivity experiments and a dynamic scale-up of the experiments is in progress. The separation of lithium from real Li-ion battery leachate presenting more metallic elements (Co, Ni, Mn, Na …) will also be studied. The economic feasibility of the process will be evaluated at the end of the project.