In this work, the possibility of separation of Zn2+ and Cd2+ metal ions from chloride (brine) solutions was examined. For this purpose, simple solvent extraction (SX) experiments by di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) in kerosene as a diluent was performed on synthetic and industrial chloride solution obtained from brine leaching of zinc filter cakes (by-product of zinc hydrometallurgical processing). The optimal conditions for separation were determined. The zinc extraction efficiency was 99% with negligible co-extraction of cadmium. Therefore, a high ΔpH0.5 value for Zn(II) and Cd(II) was achieved. FT-IR and slope analysis indicated that ZnClA∙3HA and CdClA∙3HA species were probably extracted.Extraction and recovery of zinc from secondary materials has become more impressive for researchers and producers due to the decreasing primary deposits of zinc and necessary utilizing and discarding waste materials produced by hydrometallurgical zinc processing, which are considered hazardous materials. On the other hand, environmental legislations have restricted the dumping of such waste materials [ Solvent extraction (SX) process is a popular method for selective separation of different metal ions. Separation of zinc and cadmium using SX, especially in sulfate solution by various organic solutions and extractants has been reported [ Alamdari In some studies, the extraction and separation of cadmium in the presence of other ionic species using amine, organophosphorous acids, carboxylic, and crown ethers from chloride solutions have been reported [ In the present work, the separation of zinc and cadmium from chloride synthetic solution and chloride solution obtained from brine leaching of zinc leaching filter cakes with the solvent extraction process by D2EHPA in kerosene as a diluent was investigated. Also, synthetic chloride solutions were used to determine the extraction method and mechanism. For this study, zinc leaching filter cake reside sample was obtained from Zanjan Zinc Khalessazan Industries Co., Zanjan, Iran. The chemical analysis of this material was carried out by Varian AA240 atomic absorption spectrophotometer. The results showed that zinc and cadmium contents in filter cake are 6.50 and 0.15 (wt%), respectively. XRD and XRF analysis of this residue are illustrated in This filter cake was leached in brine media (at solid: liquid volume ratio (S:L) = 1:4, Reagent D2EHPA (Merck Co.) was diluted in kerosene (0.3–0.75 mol·L Extraction percentage The effect of extractant concentration, equilibrium pH, contact time, temperature, and metal ions concentration was studied. A thermostatic water bath (Memmert Co.) and a Metrohm-type indicator, and electrode for pH value measurements were used. Metal ion contents of aqueous solutions were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) technique (Varian AA240), and their concentrations in the organic phases were calculated by mass balance. The extraction percentage ( For this purpose, the operating conditions used in the industrial solution were D2EHPA = 0.6 mol·L It is worth noting because pH Comparing The effect of extractant concentration on the separation of zinc and cadmium was studied using D2EHPA concentration varying from 0.3 to 0.75 mol·L The kinetics of Zn and Cd extraction was studied by equilibrating aqueous solution containing 20 g·dm It was also shown that prolong contact time had no adverse effect on extraction. Therefore, 5 min of contact time would guarantee a near-complete zinc extraction. Separation of Zn–Cd was investigated using D2EHPA 0.6 mol·L Also, the value of enthalpy change (∆ The effect of zinc and cadmium concentrations on separation isotherm was considered by synthetic solutions. For this goal, two solutions containing equal ratio of [Zn D2EHPA is a selective reagent for zinc extraction rather than cadmium. So, zinc was extracted before cadmium at lower pH values. When the zinc concentration in feed solution increased from 5 to 10 g·dm Also, To study the types of zinc and cadmium ions in chloride solution, Medusa® software was used. Also, slope analysis is a useful method to find the stoichiometry of metal–organic complexes in solvent extraction [ In these figures, it is observed that the increase of chloride concentration caused zinc chloride and cadmium chloride complexes to be formed. Based on It is observed that the zinc and cadmium species were stabled in the form of positive ions listed above at the pH range of 3. Therefore, a possible reaction can be expressed for each species. The complex of Zn The distribution coefficient of Zn As a result: According to Eq. Therefore, another possible extraction reaction with ZnCl Finally: Therefore,  The separation of zinc and cadmium from industrial chloride solution obtained from brine leaching of zinc leaching filter cakes and synthetic chloride solutions by SX using D2EHPA was studied. The principal conclusions may be summarized as follows: D2EHPA is capable of extracting and separating zinc from cadmium in chloride solutions. So, zinc can be extracted from the industrial solution at pH = 3 with approximately 99% yield and negligible contamination of cadmium. Optimal conditions of zinc and cadmium separation in industrial solution were obtained at 0.6 M D2EHPA concentration, 10 min of extraction time, pH Increasing the concentration of Zn (from 5 to 10 g·dm Medusa® software results, Eh-pH diagram of HSC 5.1® software, FT-IR and slope analysis were applied to identify the stoichiometry for extraction reaction of Zn The authors gratefully acknowledge the Zanjan Zinc Khalessazan Industries Company (