The paper is focused on the experimental study of cobalt and lithium recovery from active mass of spent lithium batteries with theoretical explanation of behavior of components in this process. Two leaching agents — H2SO4 and HCl were used in order to compare their effects on cobalt and lithium extraction. It follows from the results that using HCl as a leaching reagent is more appropriate than using H2SO4. Optimal conditions for cobalt and lithium recovery were: 2M HCl, 60–80°C, leaching time 90min. The work also explains the influence of temperature on cobalt and lithium extraction from active mass by activation energy in case of both leaching agents. It was found that the cobalt extraction in sulfuric acid occurs in two time periods. In the first time period, in 15 to 20min from the beginning of leaching, the process is controlled by the rate of a chemical reaction (Ea(Co)=43–48kJ·mol−1). In second time period, the process changes to diffusion controlled, as it is evidenced from the value of Ea(Co)=3–3.5kJ·mol−1. In the case of HCl, cobalt extraction in first time period is controlled by the rate of chemical reaction, Ea(Co)=40–44kJ·mol−1. In the second time period, process is converted to a mixed mechanism, Ea(Co)=20–26kJ·mol−1. Lithium extraction is controlled by the diffusion in both of time periods, or occurs in mixed mode. Ea(Li) is between 2 and 20kJ·mol−1 in both of leaching agent. The study of the fine structure confirmed the hypothesis that on the cobalt and lithium extraction affects the internal structure of the active mass, which consists primarily of LiCoO2 and the cobalt extraction is dependent on lithium extraction from the LiCoO2 structure.Currently, the lithium ion batteries (LiBs) represent a mobile source of electricity in many electrical devices. Their consumption is constantly increasing because of the expansion of information technologies as well as hybrid and electric vehicles (HEV and EV). It can be concluded that increasing consumption of lithium cells will result in long-term increasing amount of LiBs in waste. From that reason, their successful recycling is highly actual issue. LiBs belong to secondary electrochemical cells as a chemical reaction inside of LiBs is reversible. They consist of package, electrodes — anode and cathode, electrode active material, electrolyte and separator. Various binders and other additives can be added in order to improve their required properties. A special kind of LiBs is polymer LiBs, which differ from conventional LiBs by used separator and electrolyte ( A cathode active material of LiBs is mainly composed of metal oxides based on LiMO A cathode active material is a part of active mass which can be obtained by mechanical pre-treatment using crushing, grinding, sieving, etc. The active mass is a powder mixture of the cathode and anode active material (graphite, carbon) and electrolyte (organic solvent with dissolved lithium salts) usually with a particle size 0.8–0.1 The possibilities of the cobalt and lithium recovery from active mass can be divided into pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical treatment. Current research in laboratory scale focuses mainly on the sophisticated hydrometallurgical processing. It involves leaching of spent LiBs active mass and subsequent extraction of metals from leach liquor. Research on the leaching of the active mass of spent LiBs focuses on selecting a suitable leaching agent, temperature, L:S ratio and other parameters. The leaching is mostly carried out in an acidic leaching agent such as HCl, H However, despite the high extraction of metals, there are some problems that need to be solved. Active mass from spent LiBs represent a complex system of different materials. The active mass may include in addition to the initial components also new phases that can be produced during their life cycle — for example during discharging or overcharging. The all components have individual behavior during recycling and they can interact with each other. From this reason a mechanism of main metals (Co, Li) extraction is important to define, but a mechanism of their conversion to the leach liquor has not yet been published. Also determination of rate constants and rate-limiting steps for cobalt and lithium extraction has not yet been published so far. Moreover, in the current research there is a lack of publications focused on the progress of leaching active mass from spent LiBs by using HCl and H The main novelty aspects of this work are: The study of the thermodynamics of leaching of active mass from spent LiBs; The study of kinetics of cobalt and lithium extraction from active mass of spent LiBs during leaching in sulfuric and hydrochloric acid by activation energy based on the shape of kinetic curves; The study of fine structure of leaching residue for explanation of mechanism of cobalt and lithium extraction to leach liquor. A sample of spent portable LiBs from mobile phones and laptops weighing 20 Obtained active mass was subjected to analysis of the chemical and phase composition. The chemical analysis of active mass was carried out by the AAS method using Varian Spectrophotometer AA20 According the qualitative XRD analysis ( Thermodynamics studies systems in equilibrium state and predicts the probability of reactions in the system, depending on the external conditions. Thermodynamic calculations were carried out using the software HSC Chemistry 6.1 ( A thermodynamic study presented in this work was focused on the determination of the values of standard Gibbs free energy change ΔG The following equations describe the possible reactions of cobalt and lithium in a sulfuric acid solution, with values of ΔG The following equations describe the possible reactions of cobalt and lithium in a hydrochloric acid solution, with values of ΔG  For sulfuric acid as usable leaching agent results from the thermodynamic values in For hydrochloric acid, all calculated values of ΔG If only values of ΔG Given values describe the situation in the equilibrium state and relate only to individual phases. However, the real system consists of more than one phase, so it is necessary to verify how the system will behave under specified conditions. For this purpose, thermodynamic study through E-pH diagrams was carried out. E-pH diagrams indicate possible stable phases of an aqueous electrochemical system. Predominant ion boundaries are represented by lines. Calculated E-pH diagrams reflect real values of metal concentrations in solution. The resulting E-pH diagrams for the systems Co–S–H Thermodynamic study showed that cobalt and lithium extraction is theoretically possible in both of considered leaching agents. It was base for experiment condition design which was aimed to ensure cobalt and lithium extraction into solution and determine the optimum conditions. Leaching experiments were carried out in standard laboratory leaching apparatus. The concentration of leaching agents (0.1, 0.5, 1 and 2 The kinetic curves of cobalt extraction in the both of the leaching agents at marginal temperatures (20 and 80 Comparison of the effect of the used leaching agent and its concentration on the lithium extraction at marginal temperatures (20 and 80 In the case of cobalt, during the leaching in H In the case of lithium, during leaching in both of leaching agent almost 100% Li extraction was achieved, depending on used leaching agent and its concentration (2 It results from Two-stage leaching in H By two-stage leaching the hypothesis about consumption of available free acid during leaching was rejected, because in the second stage with fresh acid Co and Li extraction had been not significantly increased — for cobalt from 58% to 63% of extraction. From the external factors, influence of temperature on metal extractions was mainly recorded. For explanation of temperature influence the rate constants and rate-limiting steps for leaching were determined by activation energy. The shape of kinetic curves of cobalt and lithium extraction during leaching of the active mass from spent LiBs demonstrates the positive effect of increasing temperature on the extraction of metals. The influence of temperature on cobalt and lithium extraction can be expressed by Arrhenius equation. In order to determine the rate-limiting step of cobalt and lithium leaching, a calculation of the activation energy E In the case of using sulfuric acid as a leaching agent, the diffusion of lithium and cobalt ions on interphase surface occurs in the first section of leaching. This process is very fast, especially in the case of lithium because of very weak bonds of intercalated ions and a small atomic radius of lithium as well. The cobalt ions are considerably more stable than lithium ions, so that the reaction of cobalt ions is slower and therefore it is the rate-limiting step (E In the case of using hydrochloric acid as a leaching agent, in the first section similar situation occurs — diffusion of lithium and cobalt ions in the crystal structure as in the previous case. This process is very fast, so lithium ions on the interface boundary react with hydrochloric acid to form LiCl. The cobalt ions are more stable and the reaction of cobalt ions is slower and hence it is the rate-limiting step (E The existing results showed that the process of cobalt and lithium extraction from LiBs active mass occurs at least in two time periods. The process is very fast in the first minutes and for both leaching agents, rate limiting step is a chemical reaction. In the case of sulfuric acid, rate-limiting step of cobalt leaching is changed to diffusion with increasing time, in about 15–20 In order to confirm the controlling step of the leaching process of cobalt in first time period (0–15   Based on these facts, a new hypothesis was adopted that the two-time periods leaching of metals is the result of internal changes of active mass structure during leaching. In order to confirm or reject this hypothesis, study of the fine structure of leaching residues was realized, where the mechanism of cobalt and lithium extraction was studied by XRD. The study of the fine structure by XRD were carried out in order to confirm the hypothesis that the shape of kinetic curves is not affected by external factors (temperature, concentration and type of leaching agents), but their shape is an consequence of the internal influences and changes in active mass structure during leaching. It was assumed that extraction of one metal from the active mass structure depends on the extraction of the second metal and vice versa. The main phase in active mass with cobalt and lithium content is an oxide binary phase LiCoO From comparison of XRD pattern of input sample ( These phases are typical solid solution with variable content of components, indicating the possibility of changing values of spacing From Depending on the leaching time, diffraction This paper focuses on the theoretical and experimental study of cobalt and lithium recovery from active mass of LiBs. It was found that: Optimal conditions for almost 100% of Co and Li extraction from the active mass of spent LiBs were established as follows: 2 Co extraction occurs in two time periods. Time period I — Co extraction is controlled by chemical reaction in both of leaching agents (E Li extraction occurs in mixed mode in first time period, in second time period occurs in diffusion mode. By study of the fine structure by determining the Paper is the result of the Project implementation: University Science Park TECHNICOM for Innovation Applications Supported by