The use of polymer sorbents in wastewater treatment can generate large-scale secondary waste due to the oxidation of the polymer matrix, stemming from the ionogenic functional groups or impurities. In this work, amorphous Fe2O3 nanoparticles were embedded into a porous non-ionogenic polymer matrix (Porolas) using two different Fe(III) salts (iron nitrate and iron oxalate) for designing an easily separable and recyclable photocatalytic system. The Fe2O3-Porolas composites were prepared by a simple method: an impregnation of the Porolas by Fe(III) salts and calcination at 250 °C for 1 h. The sorption capacity and photocatalytic activity of the Fe2O3-Porolas composites were evaluated by the removal of methylene blue (MB) from model-contaminated water under UV light irradiation in the presence of oxalic acid. The characterization results, particularly from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and Mössbauer spectroscopy, confirmed the formation of highly dispersed amorphous Fe2O3 nanoparticles that are embedded in the Porolas matrix. An increase in the content of the embedded Fe2O3 nanoparticles decreased specific surface area (S
                     BET), MB sorption capacity, and apparent photodegradation rate constant (k
                     app) but increased the photodegradation efficiency of MB. The enhancement in MB removal can be attributed to the photocatalytic activities of the Porolas and Fe2O3 nanoparticles (heterogeneous photocatalysis), sorption effect, and leaching of Fe ions in aqueous solution (homogeneous photocatalysis). The scaffold network of the Porolas and highly dispersed Fe2O3 nanoparticles additionally contributed to the enhancement of photocatalytic activity of the Fe2O3-Porolas composite. Almost complete decolorization of MB (96–98%) and more than 97% TOC were achieved in this study, confirming simultaneous mineralization of both MB and OA in aqueous solution. The Fe2O3-Porolas composite can be easily prepared and inexpensive to design an easily separable and recyclable photocatalytic system for wastewater treatment.Non-ionogenic ion exchange resins (IERs) have been successfully applied in various processes, including hydrometallurgy, wastewater treatment, drug delivery, organic catalysis, etc. A large quantity of iron oxides generated from the Fenton process depends on the scale of treatment system and should be treated as a municipal solid waste after decontamination of wastewaters Since the specific surface area plays an important role in determining the photocatalytic activity of materials, researchers have attempted to increase the specific surface area of Fe The application of polymer sorbents in real wastewater treatment can generate large-scale secondary waste and technological issues The composite photocatalysts based on iron oxide generally have crystalline nanoparticles with different sizes, morphologies and properties In this study, two different Fe(III) salts were impregnated in the Porolas as precursors of iron oxide nanoparticles. The prepared Fe Ion exchange resin (Porolas, Smoly, Ukraine) in the form of beads of polystyrene hypercrosslinked with divinylbenzene was used as an inert support. The porous properties of the Porolas are given in The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a LabX XRD-6100 diffractometer (Shimadzu) with Cu Kα radiation. The microstructures of the samples (Pt coated) were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-5310, JEOL) at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the samples were taken with an EM-002B electron microscope (TOPCON). The specific surface area ( The sorption capacities for methylene blue (MB) of the prepared samples were determined by a batch method. For each batch experiment, the prepared sample (10 mg) was placed in a 100 ml of MB aqueous solution (0.025 mM) containing 0.43 mM oxalic acid (OA) and stirred for 24 h in the dark. After reaching an adsorption-desorption equilibrium, the suspension was irradiated by UV light (UV lamps of 20 W power, irradiation wavelength range of 300–415 nm, maximum intensity at 352 nm). The measured UV illumination power flux inside the reactor was 1.8 mW·cm The XRD patterns of the Porolas, 1%Fe The SEM images of the Porolas, 1%Fe The amorphous nature of the embedded Fe The N To monitor changes in the chemical structure of the Porolas in the presence of ultrafine iron oxide nanoparticles, the samples were investigated by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The optical properties of the Fe The surface chemical composition and chemical state of elements present in the 1%Fe  The 1%Fe The photocatalytic activities of both composites were estimated by MB sorption (%) in the dark, MB photodegradation (%) under UV light irradiation, and the apparent rate constant ( The sorption in the dark and photodegradation under UV light irradiation of MB over the samples in the OA-containing aqueous solution are shown in It is well known that the decolorization of MB under UV light irradiation is a very complex process and depends on the combined effects of heterogeneous photodecomposition on the surfaces of the Porolas and embedded iron oxide nanoparticles, homogenous photodegradation in aqueous solution, direct photolysis of MB under UV light irradiation, and adsorption-desorption equilibrium that takes place in aqueous solution The initial OA concentration was optimized in previous works It should be noted that the pH of the reaction solution was increased, and the concentrations of Fe ions and OA were decreased in the reaction solution during the photodegradation reaction under UV light irradiation. The final concentration of Fe ions in the reaction solution was found to be about 2 ppm at pH = 4.5, which is permissible by most international environmental acts/regulations in water treatment. Generating a large amount of The external and internal surfaces of the Porolas were covered with the Fe  The molecular modeling of the interaction of the OA and MB molecules with the surface of the Fe The sorption energies of the most stable configuration of the adsorbate (OA and MB) molecule in the presence of a number of water molecules ( Indeed, the presence of the Porolas increases the sorption of MB and OA molecules on (10–2) surface of Fe  In summary, amorphous Fe The Fe An increase in the content of the embedded Fe At pH = 3, the combination of heterogeneous and homogeneous photocatalyses was achieved owing to the dissolved Fe ions and the formation of highly photoactive Fe(III)–OA complexes at the initial stage of photocatalytic reaction under UV light irradiation. The generation of The Fe The authors are thankful to Prof. Masayoshi Fuji of Nagoya Institute of Technology, Japan, for rendering an access to research facilities in his laboratory. None. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: