This study evaluated the functional properties of chia mucilage powder (MCP) and gel (MCG) as a phosphate replacers in low-fat Bologna sausages. Four treatments were produced without phosphates (F1–2% MCP; F2–2% MCG; F3–4% MCP; F4–4% MCG) and two with 0.25% phosphate (F5–2% MCG and F6–4% MCG) besides control (20%-fat-0.5% phosphate). Samples containing mucilage were less firm and less chewy on day 0, except F3. Treatments containing 2% MCG were judged acceptable and provided better emulsion stability than those with MCP. Adding 4% MCP or MCG resulted in Bolognas with lower relaxation times and more restricted mobility and lowest sensorial acceptance characterized by the terms light brown and dark pink color (F4). The microscopy images exhibited less cohesive structure in treatments with 4% of MCG, suggesting the formation of a weaker bound protein network. Chia mucilage gel at 2%, due to its functional properties, has proven to be a feasible strategy to substitute 50% phosphate in low-fat Bologna sausages.Currently, there is a shift in the eating patterns in our society, with consumers being increasingly aware of the relationship between food and health. In this context, some meat products are often perceived as unhealthy due to their composition. Therefore, many of these negative connotations can be overcome by reducing the levels of harmful constituents, such as saturated fats, salt, nitrites, and phosphates ( Phosphates are synthetic additives widely used in meat products due to their functional properties, such as their water-holding capacity, ability to displace the isoelectric point of myofibrillar proteins, thereby increasing their solubility and extraction potential, and potent antioxidant activity ( It is estimated that approximately 50% of the daily intake of phosphorus (P) comes from food additives containing P, such as phosphates, which are widely used in the meat industry and rarely quantified on the labels ( Chia mucilage (MC) is a water-soluble anionic heteropolysaccharide that is exuded when chia seeds are soaked in water; it is composed of β-D-xylose, α- Considering both the technological properties of water-holding capacity and gel formation ability, and health benefits, the hypothesis that chia mucilage could substitute phosphates and fats in meat products has emerged as an alternative strategy for meat product reformulation with the objective to produce healthier products. In addition, replacing a synthetic additive with a natural ingredient contributes to the development of clean-label strategies. There is no universally accepted definition of the term clean label ( Therefore, the objective of this study was to assess the potential use of chia mucilage (in the form of a powder and gel) as a substitute for phosphates in low-fat Bologna sausages through the evaluation of its functional properties, such as water-holding capacity, gel and emulsion formation, texture, and physicochemical and sensory properties. Pork ( Chia mucilage (MC) extraction was performed according to the method proposed by The low-fat Bologna sausage treatments with the addition of MC were prepared according to Bologna sausages were prepared (in triplicate) according to Proximate composition including moisture, ash and protein content of Bologna sausages was determined according to the methodology described by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists ( Emulsion stability was determined in five replicates for each treatment using the methodology proposed by Color of all samples was measured using a CM-5 spectrophotometer (Konica Minolta, Tokyo, Japan), operating with D65 illuminant, 10° observer angle, SCE mode (regarding sample brightness), and CIELab color system for the evaluation of parameters L*, a*, and b*. The color variables were measured at three points on the central part of the cut surface of three slices of the samples at room temperature (25 °C). L*, a*, and b* values were determined as indicators of lightness, redness, and yellowness, respectively. Whiteness was calculated from the L*, a* and b* values: Whiteness = 100 – [(100 – L*) Texture profile analysis (TPA) was evaluated at room temperature in TA-xT2i texture analyzer (Texture Technologies Corp., Scarsdale, NY) with a load cell of 25 Kg. Thirty cylinders per treatment were used. Samples (20 mm thick and 20 mm diameter) were axially compressed into two consecutive cycles of 30% compression, with a 35 mm diameter probe, at a constant speed of 1 mm/s. Data were analyzed for hardness (N), springiness (dimensionless), cohesiveness (dimensionless), and chewiness (N). The samples were evaluated at 24 h after processing and every 15 days during 60 days of shelf-life. A Leica TCS SP5II (Leica Microsystems Heidelberg, Germany) equipped with a helium/neon laser was used for the fluorescence excitation (500–530 nm for FITC and 505–586 nm for Nile Red). Nile red (0.02% NMR relaxation measurements were performed using a MiniSpec mq 20 NMR spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin, Rheinstetten, Germany) operating at a frequency of 20 MHz. The methods followed those of The sensory studies were approved by the Ethics in Research Committee of the University of Campinas, SP, Brazil (CAAE – 6815 1217.8.0000.5404) and all participants signed a free and informed consent form, agreeing voluntarily to participate in the sensory tests. All tests were performed in the Sensory Analysis Laboratory (DTA/UNICAMP) using individual booths with lighting and proper temperatures, ensuring the comfort and privacy of participants. For the sensorial evaluations, the treatments FC, F2, F4, F5, and F6 were selected. The criteria taken into account for the choice of treatments were better stability of the meat emulsion and textural parameters of samples with MCG compared to those with MCP, as will be discussed in the development of this work. All the panellists ( TDS analysis was conducted according to A total of 117 consumers that regularly consumed Bologna sausages were recruited among students and staff of the University of Campinas (Campinas, Brazil). The color, aroma, flavor, texture, and overall acceptability were evaluated using a structured nine-point hedonic scale, with 1 being extremely disliked and 9 extremely liked ( Consumers were asked to complete a check all that apply (CATA) questionnaire with 16 attributes concerning the sensory characteristics of the Bologna sausages. The descriptors or attributes used in the CATA questionnaire were based on studies about sensory descriptors of healthier meat products ( The effects of the addition of chia mucilage and reduction of fat and phosphates on the physicochemical and technological properties of Bologna sausages was evaluated using a randomized complete block design. Three replicates were performed on three days. The results were analyzed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with linear models (GLM – TDS curves of Bologna sausages were plotted according to the methodology proposed by Proximate composition analysis of the samples subjected to the different treatments revealed some significant differences ( Similar ash contents were observed for the treatments FC, F5, and F6, with no significant differences (P > .05) among them. Possibly, the higher phosphate and fat content in FC and the phosphate content, together with the mucilage in F5 and F6, increased the ash content of these treatments when compared to others (F1-F4). The pH values of the Bologna sausages (Supplementary material 1) were similar, with only slight variations; the pH values (in day 0) ranged from 5.93 (FC) to 6.10 (F5). The pH of the samples with MCP (F1 and F3) was lower ( Phosphates improve water and fat binding, since they act synergistically with sodium chloride, increasing the ionic strength of the meat system; therefore, they also improve the solubility of myofibrillar proteins, leading to the formation of a more stable meat gel with better binding properties in meat products such as Bologna sausages ( The effects of phosphate reduction and the addition of MCP and MCG on emulsion stability in the samples are shown in However, the liquid and fat release in treatments containing a higher content of chia mucilage, 4% (F3–4% MCP and F4–4% MCG) was lower than treatments with 2% MC (F1 and F2), regardless of the form of chia mucilage used (powder or gel); even so, the liquid and fat release observed in these samples was still much higher than that observed in case of the control treatment (FC), which contained 0.5% phosphate. With regard to the incorporation form of the mucilage in the products, the comparison of F1 (2% MCP) and F2 (2% MCG), revealed a lower liquid release in case of F2, which suggests that the MCG provides a better stability than MCP. The treatments F5 and F6, both of which contained 50% lower phosphate levels, showed similar results, regardless of the final MCG content (2% or 4%, respectively). An increased emulsion stability was observed for these samples, with a considerable decrease in the liquid and fat release when compared to the phosphate-free treatments (F1, F2, F3, and F4). In contrast, the formulations F5 and F6 exhibited a significant ( In this study, instrumental color evaluation of the Bologna sausages ( At the initial storage period (day 0), the luminosity (L*) and whiteness were lower ( With regard to the storage period, during the evaluation period (60 days), the control Bologna sausage (FC) had higher lightness (L*) and whiteness and lower yellowness (b*), compared to samples containing chia mucilage. In general, the luminosity was stable in the case of the reformulated treatments, as the values at the beginning and the end of the evaluation period were similar, except in case of treatment F5, which showed increased L* and whiteness values at the 45- and 60-day time of storage. Similar values were also found for the parameters a* and b* in treatments F1–F4 at the beginning and at the end of the evaluated period, except in the case of F1, which showed increased a* values at the 60-day time. The reformulation strategies used in this study had significant effects ( Intriguing results were obtained for the elasticity and cohesiveness ( According to Probably, the addition of 4% chia mucilage was sufficient to affect the elasticity and, also cohesiveness of the Bologna sausages. The FC was the most cohesive at day 0 and differed (P < .05) from that of the other treatments. However, the treatments F5 and F6 were more cohesive (P < .05) than those without phosphates (F1, F2, F3, and F4), which again shows that these additives are crucial for the solubilization of myofibrillar proteins and stabilization of meat emulsions ( Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was used to assess changes in the protein structure and fat particles of the Bologna sausages, caused by the reduction of fat and phosphates and the addition of chia mucilage ( Comminution, in combination with the increase in ionic strength, and subsequent heating are processes used to manufacture emulsified meat products; they drastically change the structure of meat systems. In these products, such as Bologna sausages, high amounts of myofibrillar proteins are extracted, which, when heated, create a dense protein network, i.e., a gel, which holds an adequate amount of water ( Another important change in the evaluated meat systems occurred when the amount of chia mucilage added was doubled, i.e., in case of the treatments F3 (4% MCP), F4 (4% MCG), and F6 (4% MCG). The protein structures in F4 and F6 were spongier, less continuous and cohesive, and more heterogeneous, with small fat droplets being located in these matrices in the form of small clumps. Possibly, a higher chia mucilage concentration may have affected the formation of protein films around the fat droplets and the interactions of the protein–fat network in the samples. Other authors have reported that the addition of dietary fiber affects this structure in meat products ( Moreover, the chia mucilage, especially at higher concentrations, may have had an atypical behavior in the aqueous medium of the meat system, which has a high ionic strength. The NMR signal decay for all Bologna sausages samples could be fitted into two distinct exponential separate peaks (T Comparing the T When the phosphate reduction is evaluated, the mobility of the water molecules, represented by the T As an alternative ingredient to reduce animal fat and phosphates in this study, it is relevant to investigate its impact on the sensory properties of meat systems. The main objective of the TDS analysis is identifying the attribute perceived as “dominant” throughout food consumption.  Salty taste was the first dominant attribute in the FC (with a maximum dominance rate at 8.8 s), followed by gelatinous texture and spicy flavor. The salty taste attribute was only dominant in the control treatment (FC), despite all treatments having the same salt content. However, other formulations did not contain phosphates (F2 and F4) or had a 50% reduction (F5 and F6), which could explain this salty taste perception of the evaluators in case of the FC, since sodium tripolyphosphate has about 30% sodium. In emulsified meat products, the gelatinous texture refers to the gel that is formed in these products after the cooking step, which is enhanced by the presence of phosphates ( Among the reformulated treatments, F2 had a spicy flavor, gelatinous texture, and sandy texture (significantly dominant attribute at two time periods) as dominant attributes, while the attributes spicy flavor, chia flavor, and sandy texture were dominant in case of F4. For the treatment F2, the volunteers were able to perceive the gelatinous texture as a dominant attribute, even with a reduced fat content and the absence of phosphates, providing important information about the role of MCG in the texture of the products. Due to its structure, chia mucilage acts as a soluble fiber and is known to have a high water-holding capacity and promote gel formation and the stabilization of meat emulsions ( Other promising results on the role of phosphates in texture perception in meat products refer to treatments F5 and F6, which had a 50% reduction in the sodium tripolyphosphate content and the same MCG concentrations as F2 and F4 (2% and 4%, respectively). The volunteers did not assign the sandy texture attribute as dominant in case of samples F5 and F6, although these samples had the same MCG amounts as F2 and F4. The hypothesis for explaining this phenomenon is that phosphates, in association with MC, promoted the solubilization of myofibrillar proteins during the formation and stabilization of the meat gel; consequently, the gelatinous texture attribute was dominant, and the sandy texture attribute was not significantly perceived. In addition, in the evaluation of F6, firmness was the first dominant attribute, with a maximum dominance rate (0.32) at 6.7 s, followed by spicy flavor and gelatinous texture. The evaluation of meat products by the TDS methodology was adequate to compare several attributes over time and provided essential information on the characteristics perceived in products reformulated using an approach to remove and reduce the phosphate and fat contents by the addition of chia mucilage. According to The results of the consumer acceptance test and the evaluation of the CATA questionnaire are shown in F4 was characterized by the term strange residual taste, which can be related to the dominant chia flavor attribute found by the evaluators in the TDS evaluation of this sample. Furthermore, F6 was characterized by the negative term little succulent, which shows that the concentration of MCG (4%) affected the texture of the products, as can also be observed in the instrumental evaluation (TPA) ( With regard to the color attributes, all treatments differed (P < .05) from the control, and this evaluation was consistent with the lower values of the color parameters L* and a* and the higher values of b* ( evaluators of this attribute. These results have also been reported by Treatment F2 showed the most acceptable evaluation results; compared to FC, it was also satisfactory with regard to the attributes of overall acceptance, purchase intention, texture, flavor, and aroma. This result is very interesting and promising since the presence of MCG (2%) could compensate for the absence of this additive (sodium tripolyphosphate), which is considered highly important for the meat industry. The results show that the addition of 2% MCG in the total absence of phosphates and with 50% fat reduction was effective and provided satisfactory results in Bologna sausages, except for the color attribute, which is a technological challenge that still needs to be overcome. The hypothesis of this study regarding the two incorporation forms of chia mucilage and their possible effects on the properties of the products was confirmed. The gel form provided better stability and texture parameters (closer to the control) at concentrations of up to 2%. Microstructural changes in the Bologna sausages were noticeable at chia mucilage concentrations of 4%. This concentration led to changes in the protein structure and fat binding in the products, which indicates the formation of a more weakly bound protein network and the presence of less entangled fat droplets in this matrix. Understanding the causes of such behavioral differences and the interactions between meat proteins and chia mucilage is essential for the development of healthier meat products; this study has shown very favorable prospects for the reduction of fats and phosphates in meat products. For the first time, this study has provided information on the performance of chia mucilage as an alternative to phosphates in Bologna sausages with reduced fat contents, and has highlighted the main effects of chia mucilage on their technological, sensory, and microstructural properties. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors thank  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at