The hydrodesulfurization of dibenzothiophene and the hydrodenitrogenation of quinoline were investigated both individually and simultaneously as a mixture over an unsupported synthetic MoS2 catalyst. The reactions were carried out in a batch system under 3MPa H2 at 340°C. Investigations toward the effect of H2S on the hydrodenitrogenation reaction of quinoline revealed that H2S promoted the transformation of 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline (THQ1) to ortho-propylaniline (OPA), but had a considerable adverse impact on the transformation of OPA to propylbenzene and its derivatives (C9 products). The hydrodesulfurization of dibenzothiophene proceeded predominantly through a hydrogenation pathway to give cyclohexylbenzene. The hydrodesulfurization of dibenzothiophene was found to be completely inhibited during the initial stages of the reaction, when quinoline was added into the feedstock. The inhibition of the reaction persisted until the quinoline was transformed to a sufficiently low level. Thereafter, the hydrodesulfurization of dibenzothiophene recovered and the reaction proceeded with only moderate inhibition. In contrast, the hydrodenitrogenation of quinoline was significantly enhanced by the presence of dibenzothiophene in the reaction feedstock. The THQ1 and C9 products were the main species obtained from the hydrodenitrogenation reaction of quinoline. The presence of dibenzothiophene enhanced the activity and selectivity toward C9 productions. These results suggested that at least two types of active site were involved in the reaction. Dibenzothiophene could interact with distinct coordinative unsaturated sites, and this could stabilize and increase the acidity of the potential active sites assumed to be responsible for the hydrodenitrogenation reactions.Hydrodesulfurization (HDS) is an important reaction in a number of different refinery processes, and involves the catalytic removal of sulfur from petroleum feedstocks. There has recently been an increase in the number of innovative research projects focused on the development of novel HDS technologies because of widespread and stringent legislation adopted all over the world limiting the sulfur content in transportation fuel to a minimum, and even to zero in some developed countries For the hydrodenitrogenation (HDN) of aromatic nitrogen-containing species, the reaction initially proceeds through the saturation (hydrogenation) of the heteroring followed by the cleavage of the C–N bond. The resulting aliphatic or aromatic amine intermediates are ultimately converted to hydrocarbons and ammonia. Thus, aromatic nitrogen-containing compounds (especially the basic species) exhibit a strong affinity for the active sites associated with hydrogenation reactions. To achieve an ultra deep HDS reaction, it is critical to develop a more clear understanding of the factors influencing the reactivity of the refractory sulfur-containing compounds, including inhibition by the feedstock matrices and the identity of the catalytic species. Nano-MoS Ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate ((NH The nanosized MoS The chemical compositions of the sulfided molybdenum samples were determined gravimetrically using an ex situ microbalance from the weight differences of the sample before and after the sulfidation manipulation. The result indicated the occurrence of a fully complete sulfidation process to give the highly crystalline MoS Two model compounds, DBT and Q, were selected to represent the refractory S-containing and N-containing compounds in the HDS and HDN reactions, respectively. Three set of experiments were conducted, including (1) the HDS reaction of DBT in a decane solvent; (2) the HDN reaction of Q; and (3) the simultaneous HDS and HDN reactions of a mixture of DBT and Q. A mixture composed of DBT and Q of 667 and 67 Q was transformed rapidly during the early stages of the reaction. These transformations are believed to have occurred according to the reaction scheme depicted in The HDN reaction of Q over the nanosized MoS  Another set of reactions was investigated. In this case, the HDS reaction of DBT was carried out in presence of the Q species. Similar products to those detected when the reaction was conducted in the absence of Q were observed. Interestingly, however, the catalytic activity was different in this particular case, in that the yield of cyclohexylbenzene was much lower when the reaction was conducted in the presence of Q than that when it was conducted in the absence of Q in the feedstock, To investigate the effect of DBT on the HDN reaction of Q, a competitive experiment involving Q and DBT was conducted at 340 In a typical hydrotreatment process, the HDN and HDS reactions take place simultaneously in the reactor system. H The enhanced yield of THQ1 that was observed in the presence of H It has been found that a variety of different products resulted from the HDN reactions of Q. Reactions of this particular type proceed via a complex network of consecutive and parallel transformations. The weight balance of each route can be estimated from the information extracted from the product distribution plots, as well as plots of the selectivity of the reaction as a function of reaction time The HDS reaction of DBT over the current catalyst proceeded preferentially through the significant contribution from the HYD pathway to give the partially hydrogenated-dibenzothiophene and cyclohexylbenzene. The selectivity toward cyclohexylbenzene was ca. 0.4 during the initial stage of the reaction and shifted to ca. 1 toward the end of the reaction ( Similar results have also been reported for 4,6-DMDBT in the HDN reactions of nitrogen-containing compounds over NiMo/A As shown previously, Q affected the HDS behavior of DBT by selectively inhibiting the hydrogenation reaction pathway. In the same way, it is important to develop an insight into the effect of DBT on the HDN of Q. Therefore, the mutual influences of nitrogen-containing compounds and sulfur-containing compounds on each other can be analyzed. Other products (i.e., DHQ and THQ5) were detected, but only as traces, so that their contributions to the reaction network were considered to be negligible. Interestingly, no OPA was observed in this experiment. Under these conditions, it was envisaged that OPA would be a very reactive intermediate, and that its rate of formation and transformation would be fast (i.e., OPA would react as quickly as it was formed). The role of DBT in significantly promoting the C–N bond cleavage remains unclear. The polarizability factor of the substrate species may play a role among others in determining the activity of the catalyst. DBT is a good electron donor species because of the π electrons of the aromatic rings and S, and it may be adsorbed onto the active sites through its sulfur atom (σ adsorption) or through the electron clouds over the two benzene rings (π adsorption). The polarizability of DBT, which can be estimated from the calculation made based on the ACD/Lab software, was 23.9 The HDS reaction of DBT was conducted over unsupported synthesized nanosized MoS