Introduction
                  While there is conflicting evidence regarding the importance of anatomic reduction for tibial plateau fractures, there are currently no studies that analyse our ability to grade reduction based on fluoroscopic imaging. The purpose of this study was to determine the accuracy of fluoroscopy in judging tibial plateau articular reduction.
               
                  Methods
                  Ten embalmed human cadavers were selected. The lateral plateau was sagitally sectioned, and the joint was reduced under direct visualization. Lateral, anterior-posterior (AP), and joint line fluoroscopic views were obtained. The same fluoroscopic views were obtained with 2mm displacement and 5mm displacement. The images were randomised, and eight orthopaedic traumatologists were asked whether the plateau was reduced. Within each pair of conditions (view and displacement from 0mm to 5mm) sensitivity, specificity, and intraclass correlations (ICC) were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  The AP-lateral view with 5mm displacement yielded the highest accuracy for detecting reduction at 90% (95% CI: 83–94%). For the other conditions, accuracy ranged from (37–83%). Sensitivity was highest for the reduced lateral view (79%, 95% CI: 57–91%). Specificity was highest in the AP-lateral view 98% (95% CI: 93–99%) for 5mm step-off. ICC was perfect for the AP-lateral view with 5mm displacement, but otherwise agreement ranged from poor to moderate at ICC=0.09–0.46. Finally, there was no additional benefit to including the joint-line view with the AP and lateral views.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Using both AP and lateral views for 5mm displacement had the highest accuracy, specificity, and ICC. Outside of this scenario, agreement was poor to moderate and accuracy was low. Applying this clinically, direct visualization of the articular surface may be necessary to ensure malreduction less than 5mm.Orthopaedic surgeons use fluoroscopy and radiographs to assist with decision-making during the management of tibial plateau fractures, particularly in regard to the adequacy of articular congruity. There is various types of evidence regarding the importance of anatomic reduction for preventing post-traumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA) and improving patient outcomes following tibial plateau fractures Despite the potential importance of reduction accuracy in the management of tibial plateau fractures, there are few studies that analyse the ability of a surgeon to grade reduction based on radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging. In a study by Martin et al., the authors reported the tolerance limits for tibial plateau articular depression is ±12 The purpose of this study was to determine if malreduction of the lateral tibial plateau could be detected with the use of fluoroscopy. The authors chose to use fluoroscopy, as opposed to radiographs, as this represents the clinical scenario where the surgeon has the ability to makes changes intra-operatively if reduction is deemed to be unsatisfactory. Specifically, we posed the following questions: (1) Can a 2-mm and a 5-mm malreduction of the lateral tibial plateau can be detected on anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral views using fluoroscopy?; (2) Does the inclusion of a joint-line view improve our ability to detect malreduction?; and, (3) What are the sensitivity, specificity, and interobserver agreement in assessing articular reduction in a tibial plateau fracture model using fluoroscopy? Ten formalin-fixed human cadaveric specimens (five male and five female) with an average age of 65.7 (range, 32–79 years) were selected. After gross examination of the specimens, the lower extremity (six left and four right) of each cadaver was sectioned in the diaphysis of the femur and the diaphysis of the tibia. The extremities were fixed with an external fixator frame (Synthes large external fixator, West Chester, PA) with two 5.0-mm half-pins in the femur and two half-pins in the tibia. The positions of the bar to the clamps was measured and recorded. The frame was then removed and the surrounding soft tissues were removed. The patella tendon was released from the tibial tubercle, and the anterior cruciate ligament, lateral collateral ligament, posterior cruciate ligament, and posterior capsule were all released. Both menisci were removed. The lateral tibial plateau was sagitally sectioned into 7-mm slices using a band saw (0.25 Lateral, AP, and joint-line (AP 10° cephalic to caudad) fluoroscopic views were obtained with C-arm (GE OEC 9600 series, Fairfield, CT) and saved ( Eight blinded, fellowship-trained orthopaedic traumatologists (years in practice ranged 7–15 years) participated in the study. The surgeons practice at five different academic medical centres. Each surgeon was asked to independently grade whether the plateau was reduced (yes/no) on each slide. Reduced was defined as anatomical alignment of the subchondral bone visualised on the fluoroscopy image. All surgeons were unaware of the step-off scenarios. There were three views (lateral, AP-lateral, AP-lateral-joint line) and three step-off conditions (0 Accuracy was 37% (95% CI: 26–50%) using only the lateral view for a reduced tibial plateau ( Accuracy was 62% (95% CI: 49–74%) using AP, lateral, and joint line views for a reduced plateau. Similar to the other views, the accuracy improved to 81% (95% CI: 72–89%) and 83% (95% CI: 74–90%) using all three views with 2 In this situation, sensitivity was the number of correctly graded reductions divided by the total number of slides where anatomic reduction was present; and specificity was the number of correctly graded step-offs divided by the total number of slides where step-off was present. Sensitivity was highest, 79% (95% CI: 57–91%), using only the lateral view with a reduced tibial plateau ( With the goal of obtaining anatomic articular reduction, orthopaedic surgeons routinely use fluoroscopy to evaluate the joint surface. While the importance of anatomic articular reduction remains debatable, our ability to assess articular reduction of the tibial plateau using fluoroscopy was previously unknown. Postoperative CT may be used to judge malreduction of the joint surface, but this if this is obtained, it is usually after the patient has left the operating theatre, making the revision of malreduction much more difficult than if it is detected intra-operatively. The purpose of this study was to determine if malreduction of the lateral tibial plateau could be detected with the use of fluoroscopy. We specifically tested this subject with three questions and showed that: (1) using AP and lateral fluoroscopic views, surgeons were able to detect a 2 This study has several limitations. This is an artificial scenario, where osteotomies were performed to simulate a plateau fracture, and the associated curf from using a 0.25 The lateral view alone was associated with especially poor ability to assess reduction in this study. This poor accuracy may be related to sagittal orientation of the created fracture lines. The lateral view may be more useful in detecting malreduction in coronally oriented fractures. Additionally, this study further emphasises the importance of obtaining orthogonal views when evaluating articular reduction. The use of the AP and lateral fluoroscopic views resulted in 89% and 90% accuracy in detecting a 2 The joint line view was developed to provide a view tangential to the 10–15° posterior–inferior slope of the tibial plateau. This view has previously been shown to more accurately predict initial depression of a tibial plateau fracture The specificity was relatively high for detecting articular step-off of 2 In summary, this study demonstrates that the use of the AP and lateral fluoroscopic views resulted in 89% and 90% accuracy in detecting a 2 None of the authors have conflicts of interest related to the project to disclose. The authors would like to thank Dr. David Morton and Luke Sanders for assistance with cadaver preparation.