The present study focuses on the use of lignin, which is the second most abundant constituent of the biomass, as sustainable flame retardant additive for polylactide (PLA). Indeed, thanks to its aromatic structure, lignin could be advantageously used, in polymeric matrices, as a char promotor agent that can allow some reduction of the combustion rate. An original and simple approach, based on a two-step phosphorus/nitrogen chemical modification, is proposed to enhance the flame retardant effect of lignin in PLA. This approach has been applied on two different lignins, i.e. kraft and organosolv lignins. The effect of the plant origin, extraction mode of lignin as well as it chemical modification on both its structure and properties was investigated by using several characterization techniques. Fire properties and thermal behavior of PLA composites containing 20 wt% of both untreated and treated lignins were characterized by using cone calorimeter, UL-94 and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Results showed that the incorporation of untreated lignins led to a flame retardant action in PLA thanks to the formation of char but also to a significant loss of the thermal stability of PLA and to an important decrease of its time to ignition. In contrast, both phosphorus/nitrogen chemically treated lignins were found to limit PLA thermal degradation during melt processing as well as during TG experiments and also to significantly improve fire retardant properties allowing to reach V0 classification at UL-94. In this paper we also deeply investigated the nature of the gases evolved during thermal decomposition of treated and untreated lignins by using TGA-Mass spectrometer and cone calorimeter – FTIR couplings.Polymer materials play a significant role in our daily life thanks to their wide range of advantages such as versatile mechanical properties, ease of processing and possibility of recycling. Great interest is more and more devoted to improve the sustainability of polymers with the growing concern over the environmental protection Flame retardancy is an active research subject developing numerous and efficient strategies to endow polymers with good fire-resistant properties As far as PLA is concerned, the FR approaches that have to be used to improve its fire behavior have also to be sustainable in order to maintain the good environmental profile of this biobased polymer. Actually, biobased compounds have already attracted research interest in the field of polymer fire retardancy. The use of agro-based phosphorous compounds in PLA has been recently studied by some of us Reti et al. This contribution aims at studying and comparing the flame retardant behavior of PLA containing two lignins, i.e. kraft and organosolv, obtained by two extraction methods. Lignins were chemically modified by using a two-step method allowing phosphorus and nitrogen grafting in order to improve their fire retardant action in PLA. The properties of the different types of unmodified and modified lignins and their effect upon PLA properties when incorporated in this matrix were investigated by original characterization techniques. This work allows to reach a high understanding concerning the relation between the additive structural and physical properties and the effects it induces in a polymer matrix. PLA resin (3051D) with a number average molecular weight of 100,000 The chemical modification of lignin was performed in two steps (  Lignin (100  Lignin-PCl (30 Blending of lignins within the molten PLA was carried out in a Brabender internal mixer at 160 Thermal decomposition of the different lignins, pristine PLA and PLA-based composites were studied by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Approximately 10 TG-MS analysis were performed on lignin samples using TGA Q5000 device from TA Instruments coupled with a mass spectrometer. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded using a Bruker IFS 66V/S spectrometer. Spectra were recorded using a spectral width ranging from 600 to 4000 Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) analysis were recorded with an IRIS Intrepid II (Dual view) from Thermo Fisher Scientific. It was used for the determination of the amount of phosphorus in the phosphorylated lignins and the char residues of PLA/phosphorylated lignin composites. Before ICP analysis, phosphorus containing samples were prepared by the destruction of the organic matrix by a mineralization process with H Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was used to determine the number average molecular weights of both PLA and PLA/lignin blends. The number average molecular weights and molecular weight distributions were determined in CHCl Besides, the peak average molecular weights of lignins were evaluated by using a high performance size exclusion chromatography (HPSEC) with UV detection at 280 Aqueous potentiometric titration was used to determine the carboxyl and phenolic hydroxyl contents of lignins. To 0.25 Scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDX) was used to attest for the atomic composition of the untreated and treated lignins. Morphological investigation was performed to highlight the dispersion of lignin in PLA using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) Hitachi SU8020 (100 Cone calorimeter tests were performed according to ISO 5660 standard procedures with a FTT cone calorimeter. Samples (100 A FTIR spectrometer Nicolet 6700 from Thermo Scientific was coupled to the cone calorimeter. The sampling point was located on the drain pipe of the smokes of the cone calorimeter just before the exhaust blower. A filter was positioned after the sampling probe to trap solid particles. The sample was then transported to the gas cell through a transfer line heated at 180 The evolution of the concentration of hydrocarbon compounds present in the smokes released during the fire test was obtained from a flame ionization detector (FID) from JUM Engineering. UL-94 vertical burning tests were performed on a FIRE apparatus according to ASTM D 3801 standard procedure. Five specimens of 125 The type of lignin appears as a very important parameter that can influence its performance as flame retardant additive. In this study, two untreated lignins and two modified lignins were used to improve the fire behavior of PLA. Kraft and organosolv lignins do not display the same chemical composition and this variability is due to their plant origin and to the extraction method employed to separate the lignin from the other biomass components. Lignin is constituted of a tridimensional network with phenylpropane as a base unit. It is polymerized in the plant from p-coumaryl, synapyl and coniferyl alcohols which differ from each other by the degree of methoxylation of their aromatic rings. These monolignols are subjected to a radical oxidation allowing the radical monomers to create covalent links between each other. After the polymerization, the different monolignols result in p-hydroxyphenyl, guaiacyl and syringyl units. The composition in the different units of the lignin is mainly linked to the plant species In order to highlight the differences between the lignins used and understand their effects when incorporated into PLA, we investigated the chemical structure and physical properties of unmodified and modified lignins. As it can be observed in The difference in the proportion of C and O between the two lignins has to be pointed out. The amount of carbon in kraft lignin is similar to that of oxygen while there is much more O than C in organosolv lignin. Several reasons could be speculated for this difference in C/O ratio. One of them is related to the composition in Infrared analysis was also performed ( The use of this semi-quantitative approach proved to be very useful to compare the two lignins. In fact, the relative absorbance of aliphatic C Aqueous titrations were also used to quantify the acidic and phenolic hydroxyl groups of both lignins. The results presented in Thus it is established that the organosolv lignin used in our study contains higher amount of carboxylic functions than kraft lignin. This is due to the organosolv process that induces some depolymerization reactions by ring hydroxylation, oxidative ring opening, cleavage of ether bonds and epoxidation The thermal stability of lignin is mainly dependent on its structure which is strongly affected by both the plant origin and the extraction process used. In fact, the nature of chemical bonds created during the polymerization of lignin depends on the monomer units that constitute the plant. Thus, the thermal stability of lignin depends on the nature and on the amount of the monomers. Furthermore, the extraction method affects the structure of the lignin by breaking some chemical links and modifying others by oxidation for example. The thermal behavior of kraft and organosolv lignins was evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis and the results are shown in The amount of residue of kraft lignin at 800 The gases released during the thermal degradation of the lignins were analyzed by mass spectrometry. At a given temperature, many different gases were released making the distinction between particular compounds difficult. However, some masses which are specific of a compound have been selected Even if the TG curves of the two unmodified lignins display similar profile, their decomposition pathways and the volatile products released are slightly different. The first weight loss, below 150 The fire behavior of lignins during cone calorimeter test was evaluated ( To further investigate the origin of these different fire behaviors between the lignins, the evolution of the concentration of CO ICP analysis was performed on both treated lignins in order to determine the amount of phosphorus grafted. Results indicate that both treated lignins contain similar phosphorus content (9.1 Infrared analysis of modified lignins were performed to determine whether the chemical grafting of phosphorus and nitrogen was successfully operated. Results presented in As it is observed in the case of unmodified lignins, the modified lignins contain also bimodal distribution ( The incorporation of phosphorous groups into lignin structure triggers some modifications of its thermogravimetric behavior. Without taking into account the water released in the case of untreated lignin, Cone calorimeter tests ( The investigations performed on lignins reveal several differences concerning their chemical composition and physical properties between them, i.e. (i) differences between the native lignins; (ii) differences when the lignins are modified. All these differences could influence the thermal and fire behavior of PLA composites when incorporated as additive in this polymer matrix. Lignin could be advantageously used to improve the char formation during the combustion of polymeric matrices The dispersion of the fire retardant additive into the matrix is an important parameter which can affect the fire behavior of the composite. Lignin is constituted of micron-size particles which tend to agglomerate when incorporated into PLA highlighting poor affinity between PLA and lignin. Indeed, the SEM pictures of PLA/20 unmodified lignin sample ( The addition of untreated lignin, whatever its nature, leads to similar thermal behavior in TGA ( It is worth mentioning that the presence of 20 The incorporation of 20 The incorporation of lignin triggers some modifications of the fire behavior of PLA during cone calorimeter test ( The incorporation of treated lignins results in some interesting modifications of the fire behavior of PLA composites; i.e. significant increase of time to ignition up to that of pristine PLA for both treated lignins and significant reduction of pHRR but only when modified kraft lignin is used ( As far as kraft lignin is considered, the incorporation of the chemically modified version instead of unmodified one allows to obtain further reduction of the pHRR, of about 40% regarding pristine PLA and of about 25% in comparison with unmodified kraft lignin. However, at the end of the combustion, the amount of char recovered is less important than for the PLA/20 kraft lignin ( In contrast, using 20 PLA/20 untreated lignin composites were also tested in UL-94 fire test and the results demonstrate that these compositions do not allow to reach a classification at UL-94 fire test since the samples burn completely after the second flame application. The chemical treatment of the lignins improves their fire retardant properties by reducing their flammability. The use of phosphorus/nitrogen modified lignins in PLA provides it with auto-extinguishment ability. Indeed, the incorporation of 20 This study compared the use of organosolv and kraft lignins as flame retardant for PLA and highlighted the dependence of the composite properties on the type of lignin employed, since both had different compositions and structures due to their extraction method and their botanical origin. When compared to kraft lignin, organosolv lignin was less thermally stable and contained more carboxylic acid functions and phenolic OH, which were responsible for higher PLA degradation during melt processing. The use of these lignins as flame retardant for PLA proved to reduce the heat released along the combustion owing to the formation of an insulating char layer at the surface of the burning sample. Those lignins improved the fire retardant behavior of PLA by decreasing the pHRR and the THR, however they also decreased drastically the TTI and the thermal stability of PLA. In order to address this problem, both lignins were chemically modified by grafting phosphorus and nitrogen. The efficiency of the grafting was established and the flame retardant effect of the modified lignins was then evaluated. The so-modified lignins proved to be highly effective to reduce the flammability of PLA composites. PLA/modified lignin composites were V0 at UL-94. The TTI and thermal stability of PLA were also maintained. Once modified, the effect of both lignins became similar and neither the plant origin nor the extraction process of the lignins were affecting the properties of the PLA composites. This work was supported by the