The floatability of seven plastics (POM, PVC, PET, PMMA, PC, PS and ABS) in the presence of methyl cellulose (MC) and separation of plastics mixtures were investigated in this paper. It was found that the seven plastics can be separated into three groups by using the wetting agent MC. Group one includes POM and PVC. They are depressed at very low MC concentrations. Group two, including PET, PMMA and PC, has an intermediate floatability. Group three (ABS and PS) has a high floatability. They are almost not depressed within the given MC concentration range. In order to understand the mechanism of selective flotation of plastics and the chemical conditioning process, surface chemical factors, such as wettability of plastics and surface tension of flotation medium, and gravity factors, such as particle density and shape, were studied. It was found that the depressing effect of MC on plastics is ascribed mainly to its adsorption on the plastics surfaces. The MC molecules absorbed on plastics expose some of their polar groups oriented towards the aqueous phase, hence making the plastics surfaces hydrophilic. In addition, flotation selectivity for the plastics is dominated not only by wettability of plastics, but also by particle size, density and shape.In plastics material recycling it is often necessary to separate mixtures of plastics into individual plastics in order to get a useful recycling plastic product because some plastics are not compatible when re-melting. In plastics waste incineration, or application of plastics waste as a reductant in ironmaking, removal of some harmful plastics (such as PVC) is also necessary since they produce harmful gases when they are burnt ( Since most plastics are hydrophobic by nature, wetting of plastics is necessary for plastics flotation. One of the commonly-used methods for wetting of plastics is by chemical conditioning with wetting agents. For example, as early as in 1975, one of the earliest US patent on plastics flotation used this method to separate PVC from PS, PP, PE, or PA ( In the present paper, the floatability of seven plastics in the presence of methyl cellulose (MC) and separation of plastics mixtures are investigated. Then the relations of floatability of the plastics with surface chemical factors, such as wettability of plastics and surface tension of flotation medium, and gravity factors, such as particle density and particle shape, are studied. Finally, the depressing effect of MC on plastics and the mechanism for selective flotation separation of the plastics by chemical conditioning are discussed. The objective is to understand the mechanism of selective plastics flotation by chemical conditioning and to find effective ways for separation of plastics by flotation. Seven virgin plastics plates, namely PS, ABS, PET, PVC, POM, PC and PMMA, were cleaned with de-ionised water and dried at room temperature. Then the plates (5 mm thickness) were shredded by a cutting mill (pulverisette 19 made by FRITSCH GmbH, Germany) and screened into several size fractions. The −2.38+2.00 mm samples were used for the flotation tests. For the contact angle measurements, the plates with dimensions of approximately 9×100 mm were used. The chemicals used for flotation tests include the wetting agent MC, frother MIBC, and pH regulator NaOH and HCl. All reagents are of analytical grade. MC has molecular weight approximately 3000, made by Carl Roth GmbH. Flotation tests were carried out in a laboratory flotation machine with 700 ml cell volume at constant temperature 25±1 The sessile-drop method was used for the contact angle measurement with a FIBRO 1100 Dat dynamic adsorption tester (FIBRO System AB, Sweden). Dynamic contact angles versus time are reported. The liquid surface tension was measured using the ring method. The density of the plastics samples for flotation test was determined with Multivolume Pycnometer 1305 (Micromeritics Instrument Corporation). The floatability of seven plastics in the presence of MC is shown in Similar results can be found from the separation tests of several plastics mixtures, as shown in MC is one of the several cellulose derivatives which are commonly used as an organic depressant or flocculent in mineral flotation. Different from another wetting agent tannic acid, MC can reduce liquid surface tension to a minimum value of 58.1 mN/m, but the surface tension of the MC solution is still much higher than the surfactant alkyl ethoxylated nonionic surfactant (TERGITOL 15-S-7, Union Carbide Corporation), as shown in Therefore, the depressing effect of MC on plastics is ascribed mainly to its adsorption on the plastics surface. MC is a soluble polymer with numerous polar groups (CO group and OH group), as shown in To understand the differences of plastics in floatability in From the results, it can be seen that the contact angles of all the plastics are reduced with the addition of MC. In the presence of MC, the dynamic contact angles of the plastics follow the below order: In addition, it can be seen that the dynamic contact angles of PS and ABS are distinctly higher than those of the other plastics from If other factors are not taken into consideration, the contact angle order in Where, The plastics samples used in the flotation tests have the same narrow particle size fraction −2.38+2.00 mm and the particle shapes are similar except for PC and PET which are observed containing more plate-shaped particles. This indicates that From In case the densities of plastics are different, it is also possible to realize the differences of the plastics in floatability according to From Chemical conditioning is a process in which the adsorption of wetting agents on the plastic surfaces leads to a decrease in hydrophobicity of the solid–liquid interface ( From the results in Using MC as a wetting agent, seven plastics, namely POM, PVC, PET, PMMA, PC, PS and ABS, can be separated into three groups. Group one includes POM and PVC. They are depressed at very low MC concentrations. Group two, including PET, PMMA and PC, has an intermediate floatability. Group three (ABS and PS) has a high floatability. They are almost not depressed within the given MC concentration range. The depressing effect of MC on plastics is ascribed mainly to its adsorption on plastics surface. The MC molecules absorbed on plastics surface expose some of their polar groups oriented towards the aqueous phase, hence making the plastics surface hydrophilic. van-der-Waals force is the main interactions between MC molecules and plastics surfaces. In the presence of MC, the flotation selectivity for the plastics with identical particle size is not only dominated by wettability of plastics, but also by particle density and particle shape. A plastic with lower density, larger contact angle, and lower shape parameter (and smaller particle size if particle sizes are different) has a higher floatability. The differences in particle density and shape parameter, and the differences in natural wettability of plastics are the main reasons for the selective flotation of plastics, provided the particle size is identical. It could be reasonable to assume that most wetting agents mainly play just a role of wetting in plastics flotation, rather than ‘selective depressant’. The authors are grateful to the Minerals and Metals Recycling Research Center, Luleå University of Technology, Sweden, for financial support and approval of this paper for publication, and Martin Cohn at Carlsson & Möller, AB, Sweden, for supplying the plastics samples. The authors also thank Dr Bertil Pålsson and Dr Allan Holmgren for solving contact angle device problems.