The particle settling is a basic phenomenon: however, it determines the design of many unit operations and machines of mineral processing. A new test device has been developed in order to measure the terminal settling velocity of large steel balls settling in fine particulate solids - water mixtures. The developed inductive sensor does not influence the motion of the ball and it can be applied for non-transparent and non-Newtonian fine suspensions. A new hypothesis, namely a continuity theory for coarse disperse systems is introduced here. According to this theory, if the particles of a fine suspension are so small that they fit into the laminar sub-layer around a settling coarse particle, the fine suspension can be treated as a continuum. If they do not fit, hindered settling dominates between the coarse and fine particles. It was also recognised that if a particle settles at a constant speed in any media that is in an equilibrium state, therefore, the “equilibrium mean surficial shear stress (τe)” and the “equilibrium mean surficial shear rate” have been introduced. The equilibrium mean surficial shear stress can be calculated initially, because it is simply the force of gravity minus the buoyant force over three times the total surface of the particle. Once τe is known, the equivalent Newtonian absolute viscosity can be determined and the terminal settling velocity of particles falling in non-Newtonian media can be calculated by the known procedures for Newtonian fluids.In mineral processing particle motion is an important fundamental phenomenon and the design of many unit operations and machines are based on the terminal settling velocity and the initial acceleration of the settling particles. One fundamental case is the particle settling in a given force field, such as gravitational, centrifugal or electrostatic. Another very important question is how a fluid flow drags particles. In chemical engineering the particles move in typically one-phase media, in liquids and gases, but these one-phase media can often be non-Newtonian because of the complex material structure. In mechanical processing, namely in mechanical waste water treatment processes, in hydraulic transport of solid granular materials and in wet mineral- and waste processing it is typical that fine particulate solids and water suspensions become non-Newtonian with increasing solids concentration ( The particle motion in one-phase media is widely examined in the literature (e.g. The flow around the particle can be characterised based on the particle Reynolds number (Re Enormous efforts have been made to describe the phenomenon of a single sphere settling in a non-Newtonian medium ( If a wall or a kind of boundary is near to the settling particle the well-known wall effect occurs. This phenomenon has also been widely investigated ( By reducing Eq. According to Munroe ( If two particles are settling next to each other the flow displaced by one of the particles might affect the motion of the other one. It is said that it hinders the settling of the other. This is the well-known phenomenon called hindered settling ( Coarse disperse systems, generally solid – liquid and solid – gas dispersed mixtures, containing particles coarser then 0.1 Let's introduce a hypothesis called the continuity theory for coarse disperse systems. The behaviour of the coarse disperse system (continuum-like or discrete-elements-like or mixed) depends on the ratio between the characterising sizes of the process (machine, phenomenon) and the dispersed material. The determination of the characterising size of the dispersed material seems to be the easier task. The 80% particle size is high enough and well defined, for example. The characterising size of the process, machine or phenomenon might be functions of many variables. Let's narrow it down into two notable cases namely the pipe flow and the sphere settling phenomena. The fine suspension- coarse mixture flows model was introduced in 1998 ( In the literature the terms homogeneous – heterogeneous slurry or slurry flow are still widely used ( The basic objective of the research described in this paper is to experimentally prove this continuity theory for another notable case, namely sphere settling. If there are many particles, hindered settling occurs. But if there is just one large particle and the fine particles fit into the laminar sub-layer around it, can this fine suspension be treated as a continuum? If yes, the fine suspension should be characterised by its mixture density and rheological behaviour, if not, the concentration of the particles will determine the rate of hindering. For the rheological and settling tests three different solid granular materials were used. These were a fine glass sand sample from the Fehérvárcsúrgó (Hungary) glass sand mine and processing plant, a perlite sample from the Pálháza (Hungary) perlite mine and processing plant and a fly ash sample from the electrofilter of the Mátra Lignite Power Plant (Gyöngyös, Hungary). Samples were prepared for the analysis and for the tests. All tests were carried out at room temperature. A cooling pipe section was installed in the applied tube rheometer, so the temperature was set generally at 22 °C for all the described tests. Only tap water was used for the preparation of model suspensions for all the rheological and settling tests. The particle densities of the granular materials were measured in a laboratory pycnometer using denaturated alcohol as the wetting medium. The empirical particle size distribution of the granular materials was measured by a laboratory 200 Four steel balls were used for the settling tests. The diameters of these were 28, 30, 38 and 40 The rheological tests of the prepared suspensions were carried out by the tube rheometer with three measuring tubes developed earlier ( For the settling tests a new test instrument was developed. The crucial part of a settling test instrument is the sensor to sense the passing of a particle. Real industrial suspensions are not transparent so the application of optical methods is limited. Another requirement is that the sensor should not influence the particle motion. An inductive sensor was developed to sense the passing of ferromagnetic balls. 150 coils of 0.3 A special aim of the research was the testing of particles settling in real solid–liquid two-phase suspensions, when the suspension is made of the so-called “fine” particles, namely the 1–50 (160) μm size range ( The prepared suspension was fed into the suspension vessel (6). The screw pump (5) transported this suspension through the measuring tube (1) section. The inner diameter of the measuring tube was 120 Before a settling test the ferromagnetic ball was gripped by the computer controlled electromagnet (8) and the start of data acquisition and settling was synchronized. The settled ball was removed through the two valves (3) installed at the bottom of the measuring tube. A computer data acquisition system was also developed by with the time left between the coils could be measured. The accuracy of the measuring system was better than 0.01 Calibration tests were carried out in tap water as well. The equation of the flow rate measuring “fountain” (Eq. The terminal settling velocity of a ball settling in a given fluid was measured 3, 6 or 15 times, 3 times for a given upflow fluid velocity. The true terminal settling velocity is estimated by the mean (V The purpose of the first experimental series conducted was the testing of settling in Newtonian media. The terminal settling velocities of the balls in quiescent and in up-flowing water were measured. The tube rheometer test data showed that the applied Fehérvárcsúrgó glass sand – water (0.17…0.29 volumetric concentration range) and Pálháza perlite – water (0.13…0.44 volumetric concentration range) suspensions behaved like Newtonian fluids. The terminal settling velocity of the balls was measured in up-flowing suspensions each time. The measured mean terminal settling velocities (V The second experimental series focused on non-Newtonian suspensions. The tube rheometer tests showed that the Mátra Power Plant fly ash – water (0.15…0.28 volumetric concentration range) suspensions were Bingham Plastic fluids and the 0.33 volumetric concentration Fehérvárcsúrgó glass sand – water suspension was a Power Law (shear thinning) fluid. The measured mean terminal settling velocities (V In The average p value of the 38 different Newtonian settling tests is 1.7, therefore, the following wall effect equation (Eq. The last column of  The real challenge is how to calculate the terminal settling velocity of a falling ball in non-Newtonian media. According to the Before mechanically applying the Wilson et al. non-Newtonian model let's think it through. Why isn't it a theoretical equilibrium stress instead of a reference stress determined by a numerical mathematical method? When the particle falls down at constant speed, that is a steady state phenomenon and an equilibrium shear stress and equilibrium shear rate must develop around the particle surface in any medium. Of course both the shear stress and the shear rate might change along the surface of the particle, but the surface integral results in the equilibrium values. Let's place the well-known Stokes terminal settling velocity equation (valid only in the IV Stokes settling regime) and the Wilson et al. reference stress equation next to each other and instead of 0.3 let's apply 1/3. The consequence is that the equilibrium shear stress and equilibrium shear rate can be easily calculated within this settling regime. Therefore two new parameters should be introduced, these are the “equilibrium mean surficial shear stress (τ The equilibrium mean surficial shear stress can be calculated initially for any terminal settling calculation task because it depends on only some known physical parameters of the particle and the fluid. For a given equilibrium mean surficial shear stress the equivalent Newtonian absolute viscosity can be determined, and then the known calculation protocol of Newtonian fluids can be applied. This is a universal method because it is applicable to any time independent fluid rheology. The calculated values (in italics) in Altogether there are 56 different terminal settling velocity values in the paper, each measured several times. Data of the Newtonian media fit well on the 45° straight line: however, those of the non-Newtonian media scatter a little. In order to quantify the results, we calculate the so called relative deviation. The empirical standard deviation of the velocity and the relative deviation are defined by Eq. The low 1.7% relative deviation of the tests and models of Newtonian suspensions verifies the test instrument, the applied continuity theory and the applied simple wall effect equation. The relative deviation of the tests and models of non-Newtonian suspensions is quite high, it is 11%. The test instrument and the applied continuity theory have been verified by the Newtonian tests. We have no reason to question the presented non-Newtonian terminal settling velocity calculation protocol, on the one hand because it was deduced theoretically, on the other hand because Results of the experimental work confirmed the hypothesis that the fine suspensions in which the steel balls were settling can be treated as a continuum, because the calculation procedure using the suspension density and rheology results in a good fit. Some more experimental verification and theoretical analysis is necessary to explore the size ratio between the “large” ball and the fine particles to distinguish the continuum like behaviour and the hindered settling phenomenon. This would allow further verification of the hypothesis that the characterising size of the settling sphere phenomenon is the laminar sub-layer around the sphere. The presented continuity theory can be applied to ball milling, because the continuum or discrete elements like behaviour of the ground suspension can change during grinding as the particle size range becomes finer and at that point the behaviour of the total system changes. When a particle is settling at a constant speed in any media that means it is in an equilibrium state: therefore, equilibrium mean surficial shear stress (τ Eq.   The described work/article was carried out as part of the “Sustainable Raw Material Management Thematic Network – RING 2017”, The following calculation procedure, introduced by The shear velocity (V Based on the shear velocity, a new dimensionless number can be defined, the so-called shear Reynolds number. For a given calculation the shear Reynolds number can be initially calculated, while the traditional particle Reynolds number can not. The relationships between the traditional and the Wilson et al. parameters can be written as. In the I Full turbulent settling regime the shear Reynolds number is higher than 22,361, and the relative terminal settling velocity is constant: In the IIIB settling regime the shear Reynolds number falls in the In the IV Stokes settling regime the shear Reynolds number is smaller than