Cobalt ferrite nano particles were synthesized by Pechini sol-gel method and calcined at 700°C in electrical and microwave furnace. The microwave calcined sample was coated with mesoporous silica by hydrothermal method. Characterization was performed by XRD, FESEM, TEM, VSM, BET and FTIR analysis. The cytotoxicity was evaluated by MTT assay with 3T3 fibroblast cells. The XRD and FTIR results confirmed spinal formation in both cases and verified the formation of silica coating on the nanoparticles. For microwave calcination, The XRD and SEM results demonstrated smaller and flat adhesion forms of nanoparticles with the average size of 15nm. The VSM results demonstrated nearly superparamagnetic nanoparticles with significant saturation magnetization equal to 64emu/g. By coating, saturation magnetization was decreased to 36emu/g. Moreover, the BET results confirmed the formation of mesoporous coating with the average pore diameters of 2.8nm and average pore volume of 0.82cm3
                     g−1. Microwave calcined nanoparticles had the best structural and magnetic properties.Among the family of ferrite materials, nanosized cobalt ferrite with a partially inverse spinel structure has been widely studied due to its excellent chemical stability, mechanical hardness, high magneto crystalline anisotropy, high intrinsic coercivity, and moderate saturation magnetization Superparamagnetic property is one of the exclusive properties of magnetic nanoparticles, which is directly dependent on their magnetic anisotropy. In small size NPs, magnetization can randomly flip direction under the influence of temperature. The typical time between two flips is called Neel relaxation time. In the absence of an external magnetic field, when the time used to measure the magnetization of the NPs is much longer than the Neel relaxation time, their magnetization appears to be in zero, they are said to be in superparamagnetic state. Possible reasons for imperfect superposition could be anisotropy effects and change of spontaneous particle magnetization with temperature In order to calculate the temperature dependence of the magnetic response of NPs, it is necessary to consider the effect of thermal fluctuations that allow transition between magnetic states. M-T curve is usually presented in the form of zero field cooling- field cooling (ZFC-FC) curve. A sample is cooled from a temperature where all particles show superparamagnetic behavior to the lowest reachable temperature, then a small constant field is applied and sample is heated to a temperature high enough to observe an initial growth and subsequent decrease in magnetization. Blocking temperature (T Due to superparamagnetic property, low toxicity and high biocompatibility, cobalt ferrite nanoparticles are good candidates for many biomedical applications such as addressing targets like cellular therapy, tissue repair, nano biosensors, drug delivery, magnetic resonance imaging, and magnetic fluid hyperthermia. All these applications require high magnetization values of NPs and size of less than 100 Several methods have been developed for synthesis of CoFe The surface coating of nanoparticles is very important in determining the fate of magnetic nanoparticles for both in-vitro and in-vivo applications. Without a coating, magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have hydrophobic surfaces with large surface area to volume ratios and propensity to agglomerate. A proper surface coating allows MNPs to be dispersed into homogenous Ferro fluids and improves MNP stability. Biocompatible coating such as silicon, gold, polyethylene glycol, etc. may provide their optimal use Cobalt ferrite nanoparticles have been investigated in a large number of previous studies. Chinnasamy et al. In the present work, we prepared CoFe The chemicals used for the preparation of the samples were Cobalt nitrate (Co(NO Nanoparticles of cobalt ferrite were synthesized by Pechini method. A stepwise description of the synthesis procedure of CoFe A stoichiometric ratio of cobalt nitrate and ferric nitrate was dissolved in distilled water using a magnetic stirrer. The solution was then heated to 60 Silica coated magnetic NPs were prepared using the hydrothermal method as described in First, 0.1 The cobalt ferrite and CoFe Cytotoxicity was evaluated using standard MTT (3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay. For the in-vitro cytotoxicity experiments, 3T3 fibroblast cells were acquired from Pasteur Institute of Iran's cell bank. The cells were cultured in Dulbecco Modified Eagles medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37  This fact confirmed the suitability of both microwave and conventional calcination routes to achieve the single phase cubic cobalt ferrite with the lattice parameters of 0.833 The crystallite size of the samples was observed to decrease by microwave calcinations and could achieve smaller crystallite in shorter time. This issue can be attributed to the limitation of particles grain growth in microwave calcination. Microwave calcination affects the microstructure and improves their properties. Conventional electrical calcination furnace has a surface heating mechanism with a relatively low efficiency depends on the heating rate. In these furnaces, a large thermal gradient from the surface to the center of the sample is created. On the other hand, microwave calcination furnaces have self-heating mechanism and do calcination by absorbing microwave radiation and create internal and volumetric heating. Therefore, they can improve the amount of energy required, reaction time, cost and uniformity of products and prohibit the exaggerated grain growth during heating. The heating rate and thermal efficiency of microwave heating are higher than those of the conventional method  In the small-angle X-ray diffraction patterns of MFC-MSC nanoparticles ( Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was applied to study the surface chemistry and different bonds existing in the nanoparticles. Ferrites have Mg.Al In   EFC nanoparticles had regular spherical shapes with broad size distribution between 30 and 60   The porous nature of the prepared mesoporous silica coated cobalt ferrite nanoparticles was shown in nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms curve. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface areas and BJH pore size distribution are shown in The nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherm curve exhibited a type IV adsorption-desorption isotherm pattern according to IUPAC standard for the porous structures. The adsorption of nitrogen gas was beginning to increase at pressure of 0.15 in nitrogen adsorption-desorption curve and continued with sudden jump observed at pressure of 0.29–0.3 in nitrogen adsorption-desorption curve of this sample ( The surface area of the nanoparticles was found to be 713.63 The average pore volume and pore diameter were found to be 0.83 Retention of magnetic properties and achievement of higher magnetization values and superparamagnetic nanoparticles are of utmost importance for applications in MRI studies and drug delivery. To investigate the influence of calcination route and create silica coating on the magnetic properties of cobalt ferrite nanoparticles, the magnetic nature of microwave calcined nanoparticles, electrical furnace calcined nanoparticles and mesoporous silica coated nanoparticles was analyzed by VSM-SQUID measurements, as presented in following figures. The values of saturated magnetization (M On the other hand, magnetization as a function of temperature was measured for field cooled (FC) and zero field cooled (ZFC) of MFC and MFC-MSC nanoparticles to determine the blocking temperature. The value of T The change in the magnetic properties of cobalt ferrite can be attributed to the modification of the particle sizes and shapes, which was dependent upon the preparation method. Indeed, the modification of calcination method led to smaller particles and, by decreasing the particle sizes, M There are two magnetic sub-lattice in every cobalt ferrite nano particles, that they are named octahedral and tetrahedral sub-lattice. Magnetic properties of ferrites are directly related to the distribution of the cations over tetrahedral and octahedral lattice sites. The magnetic moments of the ions are ordered parallel within each sub-lattice and anti-parallel between both sub-lattices, the difference in the magnetic moments between both sub-lattices gives magnetic moment to the ferrite crystal. Microwave calcinations can lead to micro strains and ion distribution in sub-lattices, which decrease the M Several factors such as, micro strain, size distribution, magneto-crystallinity anisotropy, shapes of nanoparticles and magnetic domain have an effect on coercivity The remanent ratio (R=M Sudden decrease of magnetic saturation in the mesoporous silica coated cobalt ferrite nanoparticles can be related to the separation of neighboring nanoparticles by a layer of non-magnetic silica which lead to the decrease of magneto static coupling between the particles. Indeed, the magnetic behavior of these nanoparticles is due to the surface coating effects such as, existence of a non-magnetic silica layer on the surface of nanoparticles, canted spins, or a spin-glass-like behavior of surface spins. The 3T3 fibroblast cells were exposed to CoFe In this method of analysis, the cell viability was reduced to 99.99, 96.26, 92.97, 100, and 99.99 for the EFC cobalt ferrite concentration of 25, 50, 100, 250, and 500 Microwaves radiation is a form of the electromagnetic radiation with the wave number ranging from 300 The third sample belonged to the mesoporous silica coated cobalt ferrite nanoparticles calcined with microwave radiation at the beginning. As shown in In this project, Cobalt Ferrite nanoparticles and core/shell CoFe