The evolution of microstructure, texture and fraction of annealing twin boundaries is studied in Ni–60wt.%Co and equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi high entropy alloy (HEA) with similar low stacking fault energy (SFE). The two materials are cold-rolled to 90% reduction in thickness and subjected to different annealing treatments to achieve very similar average grain size. The twin boundary fraction in the two materials was found to be similar for the same average grain size. This indicated that twin boundary fraction depended on the final grain size. The two alloys revealed a strong brass type deformation texture typical of low SFE materials. However, the texture after grain growth in the two alloys was strikingly dissimilar. The Ni–Co alloy showed strong α-fiber (ND//〈110〉) components, namely, G ({110}〈011〉) and G/B ({110}〈115〉) due to the preferential growth of these components. In contrast, the microstructure of the HEA showed no preferential grain growth and texture components in HEA revealed only minor changes. These sharply different microstructure and texture formation mechanisms in the two alloys could be explained on the basis of sluggish diffusion in multicomponent HEA which greatly diminished grain boundary mobility and restricted preferential grain growth.High entropy alloys (HEAs) are recently proposed equiatomic multicomponent alloy systems which often exist as a single phase solid solution with simple crystal structures, such as, FCC or BCC An important directions in the HEA research for a wide range of structural applications is understanding the behavior during thermo-mechanical processing It has been clarified that the origin of annealing texture is strongly influenced by deformation texture which in turn depends upon the stacking fault energy (SFE) of the materials The early studies on the recrystallization texture of low SFE materials, such as brass show the presence of the brass recrystallization texture component (BR) {2 Recent investigations on equiatomic FCC HEA CoCrFeMnNi estimates the low SFE of this alloy (∼20–25 The as received Ni–Co plates with dimensions 50 The experimental equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi alloy was vacuum arc-melted and cast into a slab of dimensions 40 Samples were cut from the two 90% cold-rolled strips of the two alloys and subjected to annealing treatment in a salt bath furnace at temperatures ranging from 873 The microstructure and texture of the deformed and annealed materials were characterized using an electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system (Oxford Instruments, UK) attached to a scanning electron microscope (SUPRA 40, Carl-Zeiss, Germany) equipped with field emission gun (FEG) electron source. The samples for EBSD measurement were prepared using careful mechanical polishing followed by electropolishing. The EBSD scans were acquired using the AztecHKL software (Oxford Instruments, UK). For the deformed samples the scan step size was 0.04 The microstructure of Ni–60%Co alloy (  As already stated before, the annealing temperature and time of the 90% cold-rolled materials are decided in order to have a similar average grain size in the two materials.  The evolution of twin boundary fraction (defined as the ratio of the number of twin boundaries to the total number of grain boundaries) in the two materials is compared in In order to have a detailed understanding of the texture in different heat-treated conditions, the ODFs of different annealed Ni–Co alloy ( Perceptible change in texture is observed in the Ni–Co alloy in the H2 treated condition. The The It might be noted that to achieve similar grain size the cold-rolled HEA has to be annealed at higher temperature or for significantly longer durations ( Although the two alloys are having low SFE, the microstructure evolution during grain growth is quite different. The Ni–Co alloy shows an inhomogeneous or less uniform microstructure in the H1 treated condition i.e. when the grain growth is limited so that the average grain size is significantly lower than the other two heat treated conditions. During subsequent grain growth, the microstructures of alloy continue to show inhomogeneity or non-uniformity revealed by large preferentially grown recrystallized grains ( The fundamental difference in the microstructural evolution of Ni–Co and HEA may be attributed to the whole solute matrix of HEAs which significantly affects the recrystallization and grain growth. The inherently sluggish diffusion in the HEA can significantly diminish the grain boundary mobility. This would evidently result in more homogenous growth in HEA which would evidently lead to a more homogenous microstructure as compared to Ni–Co alloy. This fundamental difference in the two alloys also greatly affects the texture evolution during grain growth which would be discussed later. The annealed microstructures of these two alloys show profuse annealing twins in good agreement with the low SFE of these alloys. However, an interesting point is that the two alloys show a similar fraction of annealing TBs when the average grain size of the two materials is similar. Since different temperature or time has been used in this work to achieve similar average grain size in the two materials, these observations indicate that the fraction of annealing TBs depends on the final recrystallized grain size. Otto et al. Very similar twin boundary fraction in the two materials in the H2 and H3 treated conditions seems to support the observations of Otto et al. The heavily cold-rolled Ni–Co and HEA show a strong brass type texture which is clearly established by the quantitative and qualitative texture analyses. This behavior is quite expected for low SFE materials. As compared to the Ni–Co alloy, the HEA shows the retention of deformation texture components in a stronger proportion. However, the Bs component is not the major component of the recrystallization texture in both Ni–Co and HEA. In case of HEA experimental observations suggest that this could be attributed to the slow recrystallization kinetics of the near B The formation of BR component which is observed in both Ni–Co and HEA needs to be discussed further. The strong presence of this component in brass is attributed to nucleation at shear bands and subsequent twinning if the original orientation is supposed to be the G/B orientation The texture of the two alloys in the H1 treated condition is similar, represented by same components. The most remarkable difference in the recrystallization texture of the two materials is, however, the much stronger α-fiber components G/B and G in Ni–Co alloy as compared to those in HEA after grain growth i.e. in the H2 and H3 treated conditions. The much stronger G/B and G components can be attributed to the preferential growth of these grains as is clearly evidenced from the microstructures. It might be noted that these components have the least volume fractions in the H1 treated condition ( In case of the HEA, the α-fiber components, G/B and G do not show any preferential growth as is observed in case of Ni–Co alloy. The microstructure remains rather homogenous or uniform after grain growth as already pointed out before and the texture component plot ( The present results clearly indicate that while the two low SFE materials develop similar deformation textures after heavy cold-rolling, the textures after grain growth are quite different. It might be noted that Ni–Co is also a highly solute rich single phase alloy, however, unlike HEA is not a multicomponent system and diffusion is much easier. Therefore, the present results clearly show that inherently sluggish diffusion in the multicomponent HEA systems can have a great influence on texture development and result in different texture formation during grain growth.  Ni–Co and HEA show strong brass type deformation texture after heavy cold-rolling. The fraction of annealing TBs in the two materials is found to depend on the annealed grain size. The recrystallization textures of the two materials in the H1 treated condition, where the grain growth effect is limited so that the grain size is significantly lower than in the other two treated conditions, reveal retained deformation texture components along with twin-related, BR and other orientations. However, the textures after grain growth in the H2 and H3 treated conditions in the two materials show major differences. Ni–Co alloy shows strong α-fiber orientations G/B and G after grain growth, which is attributed to the preferential growth of these grains. In sharp contrast, only minor variation of texture components in HEA and more homogenous grain growth could be observed in HEA. The sharply different texture during grain growth in the two materials is attributed to the sluggish diffusion in multicomponent HEA which greatly diminishes mobility of boundaries and effectively prevent preferential growth of grains. The authors acknowledge the financial support of