It is widely believed that interosseous loop wire fixation of metacarpal shaft fractures alone is not rigid enough to allow immediate postoperative mobilisation. In this report, the author reviews the results in 36 cases of metacarpal shaft fractures of the fingers treated by interosseous loop wire fixation and immediate postoperative mobilisation of all finger joints. The study included 30 males and six females, with a mean age of 31 (range 12–52) years. The fracture pattern was transverse in 26 and oblique, or spiral, in the remaining 10 patients. Following loop wire fixation, the wrist was immobilised using a volar plaster splint for 3 weeks but all finger joints were mobilised immediately after surgery. After a mean follow-up of 8 weeks, all patients, except two, had regained full range of motion of the fingers and no complications were noted. It was concluded that interosseous loop wire fixation of metacarpal shaft fractures is rigid enough to allow immediate postoperative finger mobilisation in a wrist splint and achieve good functional results.Options for the treatment of metacarpal shaft fracture include: (a) non-operative immobilisation in casts and splints, (b) closed reduction and percutaneous K-wiring, (c) closed reduction and external fixation and (d) open reduction and placement of implants, including plates and screws, clamp-on plates, intramedullary wires, various uses of interosseous (dental) wires (as cerclage wires, simple loops, tension band wiring) and combinations of interosseous and K-wires ( The use of simple interosseous wire loops for fixation of metacarpal shaft fractures has fallen out of favour for several reasons. Firstly, several in vitro studies of static loading of various metacarpal internal fixation techniques clearly showed the superior strength, hence stability, of plates, screws, crossed K-wires and K-wires with tension banding ( In this paper, the author reviewed the results in 36 cases of metacarpal shaft fractures of the fingers treated by simple interosseous loop wires and immediate postoperative finger mobilisation in a wrist splint for 3 weeks. All patients with metacarpal shaft fractures of the fingers who were treated with simple interosseous loop wire fixation and immediate postoperative finger mobilisation in a wrist splint for 3 weeks between 1996 and 2004 were reviewed retrospectively. Fractures with comminution, segmental bone loss or associated tendon injury were excluded, as were fractures which were treated with a combination of interosseous loop wires and circlage wires. Patients who were lost to follow-up before 6 weeks were also excluded. The following data were documented for each patient: age, sex, site of the fracture, circumstances of injury and complications, including postoperative pain. The procedure was carried out under either general or axillary block anaesthesia. Peri-operative prophylactic cephalosporins antibiotics (one dose before surgery and two doses after surgery) were given to all patients. A longitudinal dorsal incision was made over the fractured metacarpal and the fracture site exposed. The periosteum was reflected for only 3 In the operating room, a palmar wrist plaster splint, maintaining the wrist in 20° of extension, was applied, leaving the distal palmar crease free to allow motion of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints. Mobilisation of the finger joints was started by the patient, without formal physiotherapy consultation, immediately after surgery. The plaster splint was removed at 3 weeks and mobilisation of the wrist initiated. The patient was instructed not to carry heavy objects for another 2 weeks. Total active motion (TAM), viz. active flexion of the metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal and distal interphalangeal joints minus the extension deficit in these joints, was used to assess range of motion of both the injured and uninjured fingers of the involved hand at final follow-up. During the study period, between 1996 and 2004, we treated 56 patients with metacarpal fractures using interosseous loop wire fixation and immediate postoperative finger mobilisation in a wrist splint for 3 weeks. Twenty patients were excluded for the following reasons: fracture comminution ( Clinical and radiological results were assessed at a mean of 8 (range 6–20) weeks from surgery. Thirty-four patients had a full range of motion of all (injured and uninjured) fingers (TAM=260°). In the remaining two patients, who were the oldest two patients in the series, aged 52 and 53 years, the injured fingers had a TAM of 245° and 250°, respectively, and the uninjured fingers had a full range of motion. Clinically, all of the fractures united at final follow-up with no tenderness at the fracture site and no pain on use of the hand. No cases of infection, haematoma or CRPS Type 1 (reflex sympathetic dystrophy/algodystrophy) were noted. No complications related to the presence of the wire, such as impingement on the extensor tendons or extrusion, occurred and none of the patients required late removal of the loop wires. No wire breakage was noted in any patient radiologically. Two male patients developed hypertrophic scars which were treated successfully with silicone sheets. Many dorsal hand scars were wide and three female patients had cosmetic concerns regarding the presence of the scar, although these particular scars were not hypertrophic. Six industrial workers, covered by insurance, complained of prolonged dull aching pain in the hand on carrying heavy objects, despite radiological fracture union. These six patients were pain free and able to go back to work between 4 and 5 months. In our workers’ compensation system, the worker is fully compensated while off work. The remaining patients returned to work or to normal daily activities between 6 and 12 weeks after surgery. It should be noted that, at our insurance hospital, it is allowed to re-open the insurance file for the worker if further problems are noted after returning back to work. None of our compensation patients reported new complaints. The current series is one of the largest reported series of metacarpal shaft fractures treated by open reduction and interosseous loop wire fixation and immediate postoperative finger mobilisation in a wrist splint. Several disadvantages of interosseous loop wire fixation should be taken into consideration. The use of single loop wires may allow some degree of rotation at the fracture site. Although no postoperative scissoring was seen in our patients who had single loop wires ( 