Fundamental rock-drilling studies are aimed at optimizing the drilling efficiency by identifying the optimal drilling conditions and rock drillability. In this study, a field-drilling test is performed using a rotary non-percussive drilling machine equipped with a new drilling-monitoring system to investigate the effects of drilling parameters on the specific energy (SE) and rate of penetration (ROP). During the drilling test, different thrusts (8.5–70 kN) and rotation speeds (40–400 r/min) are applied on a predrilled borehole re-injected with pure concrete. The magnitudes of the thrust, torque, ROP, and rotation speed are measured simultaneously by the new drilling-monitoring system to calculate the changes in SE. A modified SE model, which only includes a few controlled drilling parameters, is then proposed to determine the optimal drilling conditions. The results first show that torque has a linear relationship with thrust but shows no obvious changes with respect to the rotation speed. According to the energy balance principle in rock drilling and the relationship between SE and ROP, the optimal drilling efficiency with the maximum attainable ROP is then innovatively identified around the lower point of the second reduction in SE. In conclusion, the slope of the linear relationship between the thrust and penetration rate per revolution is only related to the rock properties and can be used to define the strength parameters of stratification by using the measured drilling parameters.Area of the excavation (m Thrust (kN) Rotating speed (r/min) Rate of penetration(cm/min) Specific energy (MJ/m Torque (Nm) New-surface energy Crack zones energy Total drilling energy Heat dissipated energy Uniaxial compressive strength (MPa) Tensile strength (MPa) In the evaluation of the economic feasibility and technological possibilities of a project, drillability optimization mainly focuses on mining engineering, deep exploration industry, and oil gas wells ( For the past 60 years, specific energy (SE), defined as the energy required to excavate a unit volume of rock ( As another important index, the rate of penetration (ROP) has also been used to evaluate drilling efficiency and rock properties. Similar to SE, various empirical models have been proposed and experimental studies on ROP have been conducted based on rock properties ( To further explore the effects of drilling parameters on SE and ROP, a drilling field test was conducted using a conventional rotary non-percussive drilling machine, and the detailed drilling process parameters were measured and recorded using a newly developed drilling-monitoring system. Based on the mutual relations among SE, thrust, and rotation speed, only a few control parameters were incorporated into The examination of the drilling mechanism revealed that the drilling energy is dissipated in different drilling stages, as shown in To address the above-mentioned problems about the mechanical efficiency in rock-working processes and physical properties of a rock, To facilitate the monitoring of the drilling process, a new drilling-monitoring system was developed for the conventional rotary non-percussive drilling machine by improving Yue's (2004) innovative drilling process monitoring (DPM) adopted in field drilling. The drilling-monitoring system, as shown in The application of different values of thrust and rotation speed on the drill bit during drilling allows for the measurement and collection of drilling mechanical parameters by the sensors in the data-processing system; these are then uploaded to the cloud for preprocessing. The changes in thrust, ROP, torque, and rotation speed with drilling depth are then output in the form of an Excel file. This drilling-monitoring system for conventional rotary non-percussive drilling machine has been successfully applied in several projects in China, such as the Datengxia and Dehou water projects. A field drilling test was conducted at the Datengxia hydropower project, which is located in the southern area of China. Before the test, an open borehole was drilled and filled with pure concrete under zero grouting pressure. The plain concrete was subsequently cured in the hole for 14 days. The authors assume that the mechanical properties of this cured concrete remain constant along the borehole depth. The drilled borehole was then transformed into a cemented hole with a depth of 15 m and diameter of 90 mm. Ten concrete core samples were then obtained from the borehole during the drilling process, and a uniaxial compressive test and a Brazilian tensile test were applied to obtain their mechanical properties. According to the test results, the concrete core properties remain constant along the borehole depth, with 14.70 ± 0.50 MPa of uniaxial compressive strength and 1.57 ± 0.32 MPa of tensile strength. During the drilling, different thrust values (varying from 8.5 to 70 kN) and rotation speeds (varying from 40 to 400 r/min) were applied to the plain concrete of the borehole through orthogonal experiments, as shown in Magnitudes of thrust, ROP, and torque for each rotation speed were obtained through a field test based on the measured pure penetrating parameters, and the SE was then calculated through energy analysis, as summarized in The relationship between torque and thrust for each rotation speed is presented in The refinement of ROP is the primary goal in practical engineering, and it is entirely controlled by thrust, rotation speed, and rock properties. As graphically represented in By analyzing the effects of thrust and rotation speed on Note that the accuracies of most previously developed SE models is mainly improved by introducing a reduction coefficient or supplying more energy to Teale's SE model ( The coefficient values are entirely dependent on the drilling conditions and can be determined before the field tests. In addition, the ROP can be calculated based on the displacement measured by a displacement sensor, and is required for the calculation of SE. The advantage of the rewritten SE model of Teale is that it only includes a few controlled parameters in true drilling practices, clarifying the principle of rock drilling and allowing for the refinement of the optimal drilling conditions. However, the effects of drilling depth and drilling fluid have not yet been considered in this modified version of Teale's SE model; this is certainly a topic for future studies.  A fundamental task for drilling operators is to select or evaluate drilling efficiency to optimize ROP ( In recent years, several studies have attempted to establish an empirical formula to define rock strength and drillability with respect to SE ( However, drilling operators always change drilling parameters to achieve higher drilling efficiency. Hence, a new index that is only related to rock properties and can be successfully applied under different drilling conditions should be developed to define rock properties. According to the drilling data, the thrust and penetration rate per revolution have a linear relationship and share almost the same gradient ( Therefore, in practical engineering, two types of gradients can be used to define the rock strength, which can be measured by the drilling-monitoring system. Obviously, the feasibility of the gradient related to thrust is higher than that of the gradient of torque to penetration per revolution because it is easily recollected in practical engineering. Although a relationship has been demonstrated between the gradient and rock strength, an empirical formula has not yet been proposed owing to limited amount of drilling data. To establish such an empirical formula, sufficient drilling data of rocks with different strengths should be further measured. To verify the effectiveness of this method, we applied a rotary non-percussive drilling equipped with the new drilling-monitoring system in a real drilling hole with a depth of 20 m in the Datengxia water project to identify the stratification conditions. Changes in the drilling distance were measured in a real time series between 5 and 17 m of the hole depth, as shown in During the rotary drilling, torque has an approximately linear relationship with thrust but is unaffected by the rotation speed in drilling. The optimal rotary drilling conditions in the field can be successfully obtained by the modified SE model first proposed by  This study was conjointly supported by the