Pre-existing 3-D defects are common and ubiquitous elements of microstructures in heterogeneous and brittle materials like rocks. It is well believed that brittle fractures are due to the initiation and subsequent growth of cracks from pre-existing defects. Therefore, a thorough knowledge of 3-D crack growth under different loading conditions (mainly in the compressive stress field) is necessary to understand the macroscopic constitutive behaviour of rocks, i.e. the pronounced nonlinearity of rock deformation and ultimate failure modes. The current paper reviews experimental preparation, techniques, and experimental results of 3-D crack growth (both from the studies of 3-D surface crack and 3-D internal crack). In addition, potential factors which may influence the experimental outcomes of crack growth process are discussed. The current findings are: the main feature of 3-D crack growth in uniaxial compression is wrapping of the formed wing cracks around the initial crack, and the same can be found from the wings produced from an initial spherical pore. The crack interaction in uniaxial compression is found when the initial cracks are close to each other and located on a line normal to the loading axis, in which their combined stress field creates a new crack surface extensively growing up to the sample ends causing splitting. For 3-D surface crack growth in uniaxial compression, the results depend upon the depth of the initial crack penetration as compared to the sample thickness: with large depth of penetration the subsequent crack pattern resembles that of 2-D tests (with a through initial crack), with small depth – 3-D tests. In 3-D crack growth, the intermediate principal stress suppresses wing wrapping enabling extensive crack growth up to the sample ends. The same phenomenon is also observed for wing cracks emanating from an initial spherical pore. The thresholds of the biaxial load ratio for the extensive 3-D crack growth are quite low: in the case of an initial penny-shape crack inclined at 30° to the major principal stress axis, the intermediate principal stress should only exceed 5.7% of the major principal stress. For an initial spherical pore the threshold is somewhat higher – 8.5%, but still small. Numerical modelling studies of 3-D crack growth face challenges related to the determination of the direction of crack growth in 3-D as well as the considerable computational resources required for the modelling of extensive crack growth.Rocks contain various types of pre-existing defects, e.g. cracks, voids and grain boundaries. These pre-existing defects may not account to considerable percent by volume but profoundly influence the mechanical properties of rocks The majority of crack growth studies concentrates on the simplest two-dimensional (2-D) case. In 2-D crack growth studies the pre-existing defects in rocks were simplified as two-dimensional representation, in which through (fully penetrating) flaws were usually machined in the samples. In uniaxial compression, the wing cracks emanating from the pre-existing crack can grow extensively and have the capability of causing the splitting failure of the sample Essentially, the rock fracturing and failure are attributed to the crack initiation, growth and interaction in response to a specific stress field. These include crack growth from pre-existing cracks, pores, grain boundaries and other types of inhomogeneity in rock samples; joints, faults and other natural planes of weakness in larger rock masses This paper summarizes and reviews three core aspects of the studies on 3-D crack growth in brittle materials under compression: (1) materials chosen for sample preparation; (2) manufacturing methods of introducing pre-existing 3-D cracks in samples and most importantly (3) crack growth patterns in different stress fields. In some previous studies, the effect of pre-existing cracks on some macroscopic responses of samples under compression, e.g. peak strength, strain distribution, post-peak behaviour, and the characteristics of acoustic emission events during testing, etc. was also investigated. In this review, however, we mainly focus on the crack growth patterns and the corresponding mechanisms in different loading conditions. Hereafter terms of “pre-existing crack” or “initial crack” are used to describe an artificially introduced “flaw”, “fracture” or “slot” in an intact sample in order to eliminate the possible confusion. Under compression, new cracks initiated from a pre-existing crack have respective terminologies associated with the corresponding mechanisms, e.g. wing crack, anti-wing crack, etc. The materials adopted in studies of 3-D crack growth are summarized in Essentially the fabrication of 3-D initial crack is to artificially create discontinuities in an intact sample (on a surface of a sample (3-D surface crack) or inside a sample (3-D internal crack)). In the following, we review manufacturing methods used in crack growth studies. It should be noted that some original studies mentioned below may belong to the category of 2-D crack growth, while the methods of manufacturing pre-existing cracks are still applicable to the 3-D crack growth study, especially for producing 3-D surface initial cracks. Hoek and Bieniawski Yin et al. The following procedure was used to introduce 3-D surface cracks on the surface of a PMMA sample by Cannon et al. Up to date, the mechanical method of preparing pre-cracked samples is one of the most commonly used methods in the study of 3-D surface crack growth. For castable materials such as polyester casting resin, cement and gypsum, 3-D surface cracks can easily be introduced by inserting metallic shims during the casting procedure This is the main technique of sample preparation in 3-D internal crack growth studies of Dyskin et al. This method was firstly introduced by Adam and Sines It is however difficult to create several initial cracks in a sample by the cutting method. This is because in order to insert pre-existing cracks at different horizontal and vertical planes, more than one cutting planes need to be produced, which may introduce instability to the sample and hence the uncertainty of test results. Therefore, this method was only used for simple initial crack arrangements. Zhou et al. Germanovich et al. This method was used by Dyskin et al. The 3-D printing is a promising technique in the field of 3-D crack growth study. Zhou et al. Technically, the initial crack created in Zhou et al. The pre-existing flaws in brittle materials are of various and irregular shapes. The penny-shape crack is often used only because it is the simplest flaw geometry that incorporates an adequate set of flaw variables The studies available in the literature (see Before reviewing experimental results of 3-D crack growth, we consider the concepts of open and closed initial cracks to demonstrate the important effect of the contacted surfaces of an initial crack on subsequent crack growth mechanisms. In the field of brittle crack growth study, pre-existing cracks in compression can either be closed or stay open (at least at the stage of wing production). As defined by Bobet and Einstein Apparently, the most important parameter of a 3-D surface crack is the value of Teng et al. The 3-D surface crack growth in glass samples was described in Teng et al. In an experimental study conducted by Cannon et al. Systematic studies of 3-D surface crack growth in uniaxial compression were conducted by Wong and her colleagues on a variety of materials, including PMMA Wing cracks were induced from the upper and lower tips of an initial crack when 70% of peak stress (≈ 160 MPa) was reached, followed by the appearance of petal cracks at the front of pre-existing surface crack, see the stress-strain curve of the uniaxial compression test on a PMMA sample containing an initial 3-D surface crack in When inclination angles ( According to The main advantage of using natural rocks to prepare pre-cracked samples is their inherent brittleness. However, rocks are typically heterogeneous materials which contain various pre-existing defects, e.g. pores, cracks and grain boundaries, whose sizes are comparable to that of the structural elements Wong et al. Wong et al. The effect of It is interesting to note that in some real rock samples, the first appearing crack (primary crack) was a special type of crack that was observed to initiate at the sample surface near the tips of 3-D surface crack rather than directly at tips. It grew in the direction opposite to the conventionally observed wing crack and then propagated towards the tips of 3-D surface crack. In this case, wing cracks or compressive cracks appeared at the latter stage. This special type of crack was firstly defined as “anti-wing crack” by Wong et al. Lu et al. As reported in Lu et al. One should note that different heterogeneities of materials (e.g. real rock and PMMA stand for heterogeneous material and relatively homogeneous material, respectively) could significantly contribute to the notable discrepancies of crack growth patterns. In particular no anti-wing crack was observed in samples made from relatively homogeneous materials, as listed in Some studies focused on crack growth under uniaxial compression in the presence of several 3-D surface cracks. Huang and Wong  The abovementioned coalescence was not obvious when samples with different values of Yin et al. Yang et al. In summary, to investigate the crack coalescence process in uniaxial compression, samples with more complex initial crack arrangements are necessary to be prepared and tested in future studies. In addition, it needs to be distinguished that whether the fracture between pre-existing cracks are due to the crack growth and coalescence or due to the failure of the carrier material, i.e. the sample. The 3-D surface crack growth in biaxial compression was mentioned by Wong et al. Investigating 3-D internal crack growth can provide insights into rock fracture under compression as pre-existing defects are usually three-dimensional and fully embedded in rocks. If prepared samples contain a limited number of pre-existing cracks with regular shapes, the study of 3-D internal crack growth should focus on crack growth patterns rather than the failure of carrier materials. This is due to the fact that the heterogeneous materials like rocks and concrete contain multiple ubiquitous pre-existing defects such as grain boundaries and thus the ultimate failure is apparently not resulted from cracks sprouting from a limited number of pre-existing cracks with regular shapes in uniaxial compression. Pre-existing defects crucially relate to the macroscopic behaviour of rocks subjected to compression. However, direct observation of cracks and pores is difficult because of their small sizes and the non-transparency of rock materials. To view the interior of a rock sample, usually sections should be prepared The motivation of 3-D internal crack growth studies is to model the crack growth from pre-existing defects in heterogeneous materials like rocks and concrete subjected to compression. This type of crack growth study should of course start from a single 3-D crack growth in a homogeneous material under compression. The crack growth observed in laboratory studies may provide indications of failure mechanisms in rock samples and in underground rock masses. When designing this type of experiments, the following critical factors needs to be taken into account: (1) the end friction at the sample-loading platen contacts; (2) the effect of the free surfaces of a sample; (3) the contacted opposite surfaces of pre-existing cracks. The majority of 3-D internal crack growth studies focused on the crack growth in uniaxial compression. The loading condition of uniaxial compression applies to underground pillar structures and samples tested in uniaxial compression tests conducted in the laboratory assuming that the stress distribution is not disturbed by other factors such as end friction and imperfect sample shapes. The study of Adams and Sines The appearance of “fish-fin” cracks could result from the absence of the contact between the opposite lips of the machined slot modelling the initial crack Systematic experimental study of 3-D internal crack growth in uniaxial compression was conducted by Dyskin et al.  It is seen that wing crack wrapping is a common phenomenon which restricts the size of growing wing cracks to the size of the order of the initial crack dimensions. In glass samples There are also some numerical studies focusing on the 3-D model of wing crack growth in uniaxial compression. Dyskin et al. The petal crack formation in the horizontal section passing through the crack centre was occasionally observed in PMMA and resin samples with laser induced cracks The effect of shape and location of the initial 3-D internal crack on wing crack growth in uniaxial compression was also investigated by Dyskin and his colleagues When the initial crack centre had a distance of 3 radii from a free surface of the sample, the wing cracks, which were subparallel to the free surface, increased by about 1.5 times compared to the case where the initial crack was located at the centre of the sample. This indicates that the enhancing effect of the free surface on 3-D internal crack growth in uniaxial compression is limited. The contacting crack surfaces slide with respect to each other leading to the formation of wing cracks. However, in the course of the wedging of the opposite surfaces of an initial crack, the friction at contacts and the material’s intrinsic resistance hinder this process and thus suppress the opening of wing cracks. When designing the test of 3-D internal crack growth in the laboratory, although the initial crack was lubricated (e.g. the initial crack is made of two greased aluminium foils), wing cracks still cannot grow extensively. In real rocks, pre-existing crack-like flaws having rough contacts, e.g. the grain boundaries, In a subsequent study of Fu et al. It should be noted that Fu et al.  It is worth noting that a secondary oblique crack appeared in transparent resin samples in Zhou et al. Using the same material and 3-D printing technique, a resin cylinder (50 mm in diameter and 100 mm in length) containing a square-shaped initial crack, A general hypothesis exists that macroscopic fractures of rocks are formed from the interaction or coalescence of microscopic pre-existing defects Dyskin and his colleagues The samples with several initial cracks are difficult to prepare using traditional introducing methods, e.g. slot cutting and inclusion embedding. Two examples are presented in  Yang et al.  Guo et al.  It is seen in Rock fracture and instability (e.g. spalling and strainburst) at excavation walls are very dangerous phenomena encountered in underground mining. The distinctive feature of these phenomena is that the rock elements are subjected to biaxial compression. This implies that 3-D crack growth in biaxial compression must be investigated. Biaxial compression tests of PMMA samples each with a 3-D internal crack (penny-shaped crack) were firstly mentioned in an early study of Adams and Sines Sahouryeh et al. Biaxial compression tests were also carried out on frozen resin samples containing a single 3-D internal cracks by the use of a true triaxial loading system in Fu et al. Following the study of Sahouryeh et al. In Understanding of mechanisms of crack growth in compression forms a basis of the branch of Fracture Mechanics aimed at revealing mechanisms of rock failure in the Earth’s crust (rock mass) where compression is the prevailing type of stress state. Almost 100 years has passed since Griffith’s original theory of fracture in compression The use of relatively homogeneous materials such as PMMA, glass and transparent polyester casting resin was descend from the 2-D crack growth studies Some early methods of initial crack fabrication could not quantitatively control the geometry of initial cracks and some methods induced (additional) internal damage into samples. Traditional fabrication methods such as cutting of slots or embedding inclusions have their limits of applicability. Therefore recent development of 3-D printing techniques shows great potential in preparing pre-cracked samples, especially for 3-D internal crack growth investigation. Regardless of the manufacturing approaches adopted, the open and close initial cracks (in the course of fabrication and loading) need to be clearly distinguished. Studies of 3-D surface crack growth has the advantage of easing the difficulties of manufacturing initial cracks and some of them demonstrated the transition process of crack growth from 2-D to 3-D in uniaxial compression. However, the effect from free surfaces of a sample cannot be eliminated in this experimental design and needs to be paid more attention when interpreting the experimental outcomes. Study of 3-D internal crack growth is a more promising research field that could contribute to the field of rock mechanics from a microscopic point of view. Given the complexity of 3-D internal crack growth (wing crack wrapping) in uniaxial compression, more tests on different arrangements of initial cracks need to be carried out in future studies to investigate the crack interaction so as to understand the failure modes of rocks tested in uniaxial compression. Mechanisms of crack growth in compression are characterised by complex patterns and strong dependence upon the dimensionality of initial (pre-existing) defects or cracks as well as the type of loading. Crack grows in uniaxial compression in 2-D situations, that is the growth of inclined pre-existing cracks extending through whole sample to its opposite face, is inevitably characterised by the development of two branches (wings) extensively growing in the direction of the applied load. The lateral compression quite efficiently inhibits the crack growth. 2-D situations are rarely encountered, so investigations of crack growth in 3-D are important. The main feature of 3-D crack growth in uniaxial compression is the wrapping of the formed wing cracks around the initial crack (effect of the third dimension). The wrapping eventually arrests wing crack growth such that the maximum sizes wing cracks can reach are of the order of dimensions of the initial crack. In other words, the growth of a single 3-D crack in uniaxial compression cannot be sufficient for creating the ultimate failure. Importantly, this feature is independent of the sample material, shape of the initial crack, the method of its fabrication and the presence of the contact between the opposite faces of the initial crack. Furthermore, the same can be said about the wings formed from an initial pore. Similarly to the 2-D case the application of lateral compressive load (mainly the component normal to the wings and thus preventing its opening) efficiently hampers the wing crack growth. The 3-D crack growth also exhibits some secondary features such as formation of small, “petal” cracks at the lateral (with respect to the load direction) parts of the initial crack contour, as well as secondary, “anti-wing” crack growing in the direction opposite to that of the wings. (The anti-wing cracks were also detected in 2-D crack growth experiments.) More research is needed to reveal the mechanism of formation of those cracks. A number of investigations were aimed at experimentation with so-called surface (semi-disc-like) cracks as a simpler way of investigating 3-D crack growth. In these tests the result depends upon the depth of the crack penetration as compared to the sample thickness: with large depth of penetration the crack pattern resembles that of 2-D tests, with small depth – 3-D tests. The mechanics of 3-D crack growth in compression radically changes when the intermediate principal stress is added acting in the direction parallel to the plane of the initial crack. (This is a stress state typical for the walls of underground excavations.) The intermediate principal stress suppresses wing wrapping enabling extensive crack growth up to the sample ends. The same is observed for wing cracks emanating from an initial pore. Interestingly, the threshold for the extensive crack growth is quite low: in the case of initial penny-shape crack inclined at 30° to the major principal stress axis the intermediate principal stress should only exceed 5.7% of the major principal stress. For the initial pore the threshold is somewhat higher – 8.5%. Another aspect of crack growth in uniaxial compression is related to crack interaction. There exists configurations of initial crack unfavourable to wing crack growth as well as configuration conducive to it. Furthermore, when the initial cracks are close to each other and located on a line normal to the loading axis, their combined stress field creates a new nearly planar crack extensively growing up to sample ends causing splitting in uniaxial compression. Extensive crack growth in such homogeneous materials as the model material is only controlled by the sample dimensions. Therefore the main features of the mechanism of crack growth in compression (wing crack formation, wing interaction and the condition of wing arrest) are scale independent, which suggests that the observed mechanism of 3-D crack growth can be upscaled from the laboratory to the large-scale fracture behaviour. The correct upscaling would require the development of adequate models of fracture propagation, which can now be based on the observations reviewed in this paper. Further research is needed to uncover the mechanisms of formation of oblique (“shear”) fracture in compression. This will enable adequate interpretation of the results of laboratory tests, as well as the prediction of large-scale (and hence dangerous) rock failures. Meanwhile, numerical investigations should be carried out and focused on the stress distributions within rock samples under practically conducted uniaxial compression tests, which may provide more references for crack growth patterns. None.