In our previous work on the application of DFT method to the study of Cu adsorption on the sphalerite (110) surface, we found that two stable adsorptions of Cu2+ exist on the S sites of sphalerite surface, i.e., Cu adsorption on the top site of S atom and on the bridge site between two S atoms. In present study, the possibility of the migration of Cu from the S-sites to Zn vacancy of sphalerite surface was calculated using transition state (TS) search method. The results of TS search indicated that the Cu adsorbed on the S sites of sphalerite surface can further migrate spontaneously from their adsorption sites to the Zn vacancy and coordinate with the surrounding S atoms. The Cu adsorbed on the bridge site migrates faster than the Cu adsorbed on the top site. The study provides an insight into the mobility of copper during the process of sphalerite activation and helps to in-depth understanding the activation mechanism.Sphalerite (ZnS), the most abundant Zn-bearing mineral, occupies more than 90% zinc output in industry. Compared with other sulfide minerals, sphalerite has an inferior natural floatability and does not respond well to short chain xanthate collectors. Thus, it is usually activated by copper sulfate, prior to the addition of ethyl xanthate and flotation. The mechanism of copper activation of sphalerite has been extensively studied. For examples, Cu Actually, the surface atomic structure of sphalerite has an important effect on the mechanism of copper activation. Numerous experimental ( The TS search method ( According to our previous work ( where Δ According to the TS theory ( As shown in  TS search results show that the Cu adsorbed on the S sites of sphalerite surface can further migrate spontaneously from their adsorption sites to the Zn vacancy through a transition state and coordinate with the surrounding S atoms. The Cu adsorbed on the bridge site of S atoms migrates faster than the Cu adsorbed on top site S. In a real flotation pulp, the bond of Zn–S on sphalerite surface is weakened by the dissolving action of H Financial supports from the