Background
                  Some LMNA mutations responsible for lipodystrophies, and some HIV-protease inhibitors (PIs) induce accumulation of farnesylated prelamin A and premature senescence in some cell types. Patients with LMNA mutations or under PI-based therapy suffer from early atherosclerosis. The metalloprotease ZMPSTE24 is the key enzyme in prelamin A maturation.
               
                  Aim
                  We studied whether altered expression of ZMPSTE24 could contribute to vascular cell dysfunction in response to LMNA mutations or PI treatments.
               
                  Methods
                  Protein expression of prelamin A and ZMPSTE24 were evaluated in patients' cells and in human cultured VSMCs. Oxidative stress, inflammation, senescence and transdifferentiation/calcification were evaluated in VSMCs.
               
                  Results
                  Fibroblasts from LMNA-mutated lipodystrophic patients (mutations R482W, D47Y or R133L) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells from PI-treated-HIV-infected patients expressed increased prelamin A and decreased ZMPSTE24, which was also observed in VSMCs overexpressing mutant LMNA or treated with PIs. These alterations correlated with oxidative stress, inflammation, senescence and calcification (all p < 0.05). ZMPSTE24 silencing in native VSMCs recapitulated the mutant LMNA- and PI-induced accumulation of farnesylated prelamin A, oxidative stress, inflammation, senescence and calcification. A negative regulator of ZMPSTE24, miRNA-141-3p, was enhanced in LMNA-mutated or PI-treated VSMCs. The farnesylation inhibitors pravastatin and FTI-277, or the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine, partly restored ZMPSTE24 expression, and concomitantly decreased oxidative stress, inflammation, senescence, and calcification of PI-treated VSCMs.
               
                  Conclusions
                  ZMPSTE24 downregulation is a major contributor in VSMC dysfunctions resulting from LMNA mutations or PI treatments that could translate in early atherosclerosis at the clinical level. These novel pathophysiological mechanisms could open new therapeutic perspectives for cardiovascular aging.A-type lamins are intermediate filaments of the nuclear lamina, a filamentous network located below the inner nuclear membrane and required for structural and functional integrity of the nucleus. A-type lamins interact with B-type lamins at the nuclear envelope, as well as to heterochromatin and transcriptional regulators, highlighting their important role in chromatin organization, gene expression, and DNA repair. Alternative splicing of the Several studies have shown the cellular toxicity of accumulated prelamin A, pointing to the role of the retained farnesyl group, which alters the binding properties of the partially processed prelamin A to several partners Mutations in Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV)-infected patients display an increased cardiovascular risk, attributed to multiple synergic factors including the therapeutic use of some antiretrovirals belonging to the class of HIV protease inhibitors (PIs), which target the HIV aspartyl protease VSMCs contribute to the initiation of atherosclerosis by transdifferentiating into osteoblast-/chondrocyte-like cells. This process results, amongst other factors, from the activation of osteoblastic transcription factors, like Runx2, and from oxidative and inflammation pathways Therefore, the objective of our study was to explore the potential link between ZMPSTE24 deregulation and the development of VSCM dysfunctions in response to We show, for the first time, that prelamin A accumulation observed in cells from patients harboring FPLD or progeroid syndromes-associated Human coronary artery vascular smooth muscle cells (or VSMCs) were obtained from middle-aged healthy donors (PromoCell, Heidelberg, Germany) and cultured from passages 2 to 8. The cells were either transfected with void, wild-type (WT) or mutant We studied different heterozygous HIV-infected patients participated to the ANRS157 ROCnRAL study Flag-tagged wild-type (WT) and D47Y-, R133L- and R482W-mutated prelamin A cDNA were cloned in pSVK3 to yield WT or mutant lamin A expression vectors (GeneCust, Dudelange, VSMCs were fixed in methanol and incubated with antibodies against alpha-smooth muscle (α-SM)-actin (A5228, Sigma–Aldrich), phospho-histone γ-H2AX (Ser 139) (05–636, Merck Millipore, Billerica MA), and prelamin A (sc-6214, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and visualized by immunofluorescence microscopy Cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Antibodies previously described The antibodies sc-7292 recognizes lamin A/C and prelamin A, and sc-6214 recognizes prelamin A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Western blot quantification data were performed in triplicate using Fiji software. Results from three independently performed experiments were used. ROS production was measured by nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT, Sigma–Aldrich) reduction and by CM-H Senescence was evaluated by the senescence-associated (SA)-β-galactosidase activity (X-gal staining at pH-6/pH-4), the presence of γ-H2AX-associated foci, and the protein expression of the senescence markers p16 Osteoblastic transdifferentiation was evaluated by the protein expression of the osteogenic markers osteocalcin and Runx2, and the enzymatic activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP, kit B5655, Sigma Aldrich). Calcium deposition was evaluated after Alizarin Red S (Sigma–Aldrich) staining and measured by spectrophotometry at 415 nm and by phase contrast microscopy. VSMCs were incubated 6 h with 100 pmoles of a pool of three target-specific human siRNA for ZMPSTE24 (FACE1, SC-45524, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or Runx2 (SC-37145) or scrambled siRNA (SC-37007) in transfection reagent. Cells markers were evaluated 7-days later. Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy mini kit (74104, Qiagen). The QuantiTect Primer Assay was used for detection of IL-13, IL-33, IL-6 and MCP-1 mRNA (Qiagen). The miScript PCR system was used for detection of the miR-141-3p (miScript II RT and miScript SYBR Green PCR kits). RT-qPCR assays were performed in triplicate on the All experiments were performed at least four times on triplicate samples. Quantitative results were expressed as means ± SEM. Statistical analyses were performed using the GraphPad Prism version 5.0c (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). Comparison between groups used the non-parametric Mann–Whitney test. P values were considered significant when less than 0.05. We initially evaluated the protein expression of ZMPSTE24 in fibroblasts from The heterozygous Three Flag-tagged mutants, D47Y, R133L, or R482W and wild-type (WT) prelamin A were ectopically expressed in cultured human VSMCs ( Taken together these results indicated that defective ZMPSTE24 expression might play a role in altered lamin A maturation observed in lipodystrophic patients bearing Defective ZMPSTE24 expression in  We, and others, previously reported that the altered maturation of prelamin A correlated with the setup of a cellular senescence program Thus, downregulation of ZMPSTE24 observed in VSMCs bearing lipodystrophy-linked To go further into the impact of We then checked whether ZMPSTE24 knock-down by specific siRNA could reproduce in native VSMCs the effect of As expected, ZMPSTE24 silencing decreased ZMPSTE24 protein expression and induced prelamin A accumulation in control VSMCs ( These results confirmed that the modulation of ZMPSTE24 negatively affected the vascular cells and reinforce the hypothesis that ZMPSTE24 plays a role in adverse effects of The data lead us to investigate the mechanism whereby To go further into the mechanisms involved in ZMPSTE24 downregulation, we used a series of pharmacological molecules to decrease farnesylation of prelamin A or oxidative stress in our model. We previously observed that pravastatin, which inhibits the synthesis of the farnesyl moiety, and FTI-277, a farnesyl transferase inhibitor, can, at least in part, prevent or revert the cellular toxicity of prelamin A Interestingly, the effects were similar when FTI-277 was added during the last 72 h of LPV/r treatment. FTI-277 partly prevented ZMPSTE24 downregulation, and decreased the effect of LPV/r on oxidative stress, inflammation, senescence, and calcification/transdifferentiation ( Thus, the cellular toxicity associated with farnesylated prelamin A accumulation could play a role in ZMPSTE24 downregulation. We and others previously observed that decreasing the cellular oxidative stress by anti-oxidants had beneficial effect on the adverse effect elicited by Taken together, these results indicated that increased oxidative stress could participate to ZMPSTE24 downregulation in cells accumulating farnesylated prelamin A. Finally, we studied the consequences of a direct inhibition of calcification in PI-treated VSMCs, by using Runx2 siRNA-mediated silencing or the anti-calcifying agent, etidronate. Importantly, etidronate, unlike other bisphosphonates, suppresses osteoclastic activity without impacting the mevalonate pathway Runx2 silencing or co-treatment with etidronate decreased osteogenic markers and calcium deposition in LPV/r-treated VSMCs, as assessed by osteocalcin and Runx2 levels, ALP activity (1.2- Runx2 knockdown or co-treatment with etidronate partially inhibited LPV/r-induced ROS production (by 50–60%) and weakly altered the inflammation status ( Therefore, an efficient inhibition of VSCM calcification was unable to prevent PI-induced senescence, further pointing to the initiating role of ZMPSTE24 downregulation and prelamin A accumulation in the cellular dysfunctions leading to the activation of the senescence program and finally resulting in vascular calcification. Our study demonstrated for the first time in cells from patients with The impact of the three tested In addition, substituted amino acids are replaced by a hydrophobic residue, resulting in a loss of charge in the three cases. Farnesylated prelamin A has to penetrate twice profoundly in the buried catalytic site of ZMPSTE24 for its complete proteolytic processing PI combinations, LPV/r, ATV/r and DRV/r, were used at clinical Cmax concentrations. All, except DRV/r, were previously shown to directly inhibit ZMPSTE24 activity and induce cellular accumulation of prelamin A, although the mechanisms were not precisely described We reveal here the major role of defective ZMPSTE24 expression in the dysfunction of Thus, ZMPSTE24 could be negatively modulated via several pathways that probably concurred to a global dysfunction of VSMCs. Continuous accumulation of farnesylated prelamin A could lead to enhanced toxicity, which, through oxidative stress and inflammation, could reinforce the inhibition/downregulation of ZMPSTE24. We also showed that the calcification process was not a major initiating factor of premature senescence in VSMCs. Indeed, LPV/r-induced senescence, including dysregulation of ZMPSTE24 and prelamin A, was not modified when osteogenesis/calcification was blocked by either Runx2 silencing, or a co-treatment with etidronate. This suggests that the senescence features resulting from PI treatment preceded and controlled the calcification process. Our study has some limitations: 1- We could not directly address the association between prelamin A accumulation, ZMPSTE24 depletion and calcification in arterial samples from patients 2- Our results do not exclude that metabolic disorders or lipodystrophy could also contribute to the risk of atherosclerosis observed in patients bearing In conclusion, we propose that arterial calcified atheromatous plaques prematurely observed in patients with This work was supported by Institut National de la Santé Et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC) and Agence Nationale de Recherches sur le Sida et les hépatites virales (ANRS). P. Afonso is a recipient of a fellowship from the Ministère de l'Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche. None. No conflict of interest. The authors thank Thomas Aranias and Yoann Schumacher who participated in the initiation of this study. The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Fig. S1: Evaluation of inflammation, senescence and calcification/transdifferentiation in Fig. S2: Role of ZMPSTE24 in VSMC dysfunctions. Western Blot of control VSMCs transfected with ZMPSTE24 siRNA were quantified for (A) prelamin A, ZMPSTE24 and NF-κB expression, and for (B) p16 Fig. S3: Beneficial effect of pravastatin on Fig. S4: Beneficial effect of FTI-277 on PI-induced VSMC dysfunctions. VSMCs were cultured for 21 days with LPV/r or with the solvent only (DMSO) and FTI-277 (20 μmol/L) was added for the last 3 days. Protein expression of (A) prelamin A and ZMPSTE24 and of (B) p-p65/p65RelA (NF-κB activation), (C) markers of senescence (X-gal staining, p16 Fig. S5: Beneficial effect of NAC on PI-induced VSMC dysfunctions. VSMCs were cultured for 21 days with LPV/r or with the solvent only (DMSO) and NAC (1 mmol/L) was added for the last 4 days. (A) Protein expression of prelamin A and ZMPSTE24 and markers of senescence (X-gal staining, p16 Fig. S6: Impact of Runx2 silencing or etidronate on LPV/r-induced VSMC dysfunctions. LPV/r-treated VSMCs were transfected with Runx2 siRNA at day 15, or co-cultured with etidronate for 21 days. Impact of Runx2 silencing and etidronate on markers of (A) osteogenesis/calcification (Runx2 and osteocalcin expression, ALP activity and Alizarin red staining), (B) oxidative stress (NBT reduction) and inflammation (NF-κB activation) and (C) protein expression of prelamin A and ZMPSTE24 and markers of senescence (X-gal staining, p16 Supplementary data related to this article can be found at