Electroless Ni–P–Al2O3 nanocomposite coatings were deposited on steel surface from a plating solution with alumina (α-Al2O3) nano-particles prepared by mechanical milling in a high energy density ceramic stirred bead mill. The size and specific surface area of the nano-sized alumina particles were determined by acoustic particle sizer and nitrogen adsorption surface area analyzer. The phase structure, morphology and elemental composition of Ni–P–Al2O3 nano-composite coatings were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), respectively. Effect of the nanoparticle concentration in the plating bath on the micro-hardness, wear resistance and corrosion resistance of the as-deposited and the heat-treated coatings was investigated. The results show that the incorporation of alumina nanoparticles can enhance the micro-hardness and wear resistance of electroless Ni–P–Al2O3 nanocomposite coatings, but affect the corrosion resistance.Ni–P coating is one of the most important surface-engineering technologies, which is widely used in industry, due to its excellent mechanical property and/or corrosion resistance. The incorporation of submicron-sized and micro-sized particles onto the Ni–P matrix in order to improve the surface properties has attracted much attention Recent work on the electro-deposition and electroless coatings mainly focus on the incorporation of nano-sized ceramic particles such as Al The objective of this paper was to investigate the structure, composition and performance of electroless Ni–P–Al A micron-sized alumina powder (α-Al The Al The prepared powder was characterized by a mode X’Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical Co. The Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation (40 The deposition was performed on the surface of steel substrates with the cubic size of 10 Polishing the substrate surface with fine sandpapers. Ultrasonic cleaning with NaOH:Na Washing samples with distilled water. Pickling in 20 Washing samples with distilled water. The basic composition of the plating solution was prepared (see The structure of the composite coatings was determined by a mode X’Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical Co. Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation (40  It is known that mechanically treatment in prolong grinding induces crystal-structural distortion of materials with a particle size in the nanoscale besides surface extension. The X-ray diffractograms of the original samples and that mechanically ground for 12     In addition, In addition,  To investigate the corrosion performance of the nanocomposite coating, the polarization corrosion test was carried out in 3.5 Nanoparticles of alumina with the median size of 13 The nanoparticles prepared by milling could be co-deposited in the Ni–P matrix to form the Ni–P–Al The incorporation of nanoparticles in the coatings could improve the micro-hardness and wear resistance of electroless Ni–P–Al