Immersing a graphite disc electrode in the acidic solution of KMnO4 resulted in the deposition of a redox active coating on the electrode surface. Cyclic voltammograms of the coating in various neutral aqueous electrolytes (0.5 M LiCl, 0.5 M LiClO4, 0.5–2.0 M NaCl, 0.1–0.25 M Na2SO4 or 0.5–1.0 M KCl) exhibited typical pseudo-capacitive behaviour. In the potential window of 0–1.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), the capacitance of the coating in 0.5 M LiCl increased to 45 mF/cm2 with the deposition time, up to 60 min, following very well the logarithm law. In addition, applying 1000 potential cycles on the coating in 0.5 M LiCl confirmed the high charge–discharge stability of the coating. The energy dispersive X-ray analysis revealed the atomic ratio of oxygen and manganese being greater than 2, indicating the coatings to be likely hydrous manganese oxide. The morphology of the coating before and after potential cycling was examined using scanning electron microscopy. The as-deposited coating appeared amorphous, however, after prolonged potential cycling, cross-linked and needle-like nanocrystallites were observed in the coating. The formation mechanism and capacitive behaviour of the coatings are discussed. It is anticipated that the application of this simple, fast and controllable “redox deposition” process to high surface area carbon materials may significantly improve their performance in supercapacitors.Supercapacitors can be based on either high surface area inert materials exploiting the electrical double layer capacitance or redox active materials taking advantage of the fast and reversible electrochemical reactions In the past, several of these efforts focused on coating a thin film of the redox active materials onto the electrode. For example, very high specific capacitance of 698 F/g was reported for thin films of amorphous hydrous manganese oxides (a-MnO MnO This communication describes a one-step and controllable redox deposition method for coating manganese oxide (MnO It should be pointed out that the anodic deposition method is well suited for coating a-MnO All chemicals were of the analytical grade and used as received from Aldrich. The graphite disc electrode was prepared by encapsulating a graphite rod (0.6 cm diameter, Graphite Technologies) with epoxy resin. One of the ends was free of epoxy for electric connection and the other was polished with ultra-fine SiC paper, degreased with acetone, rinsed in de-ionized water, etched in a solution of 0.1 M HCl at room temperature for 10 min, and subsequently rinsed with de-ionized water. The solution for redox deposition was prepared by dissolving potassium permanganate in de-ionized water and adjusting the acidity with 2.5 M H Once formed, the coatings were analyzed by cyclic voltammetry (CV) on the 273A EG&G Princeton Applied Research Potentiostat. All electrochemical characterizations were performed in a three-electrode, single compartment cell with a Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) reference electrode and a Pt wire counter electrode. The capacitance was calculated by the equation, The redox deposition was carried out for a given time in identical but fresh aqueous solutions containing 0.25 M KMnO It is known that in an acidic permanganate solution, carbon can be oxidized and the products include manganese (IV) oxide and carbon dioxide. Using thermodynamic data, one can derive the following reaction and the Gibbs free energy change is −1829 kJ at 25 °C Typical cyclic voltammograms measured in the 0.5 M LiCl solution for the as-formed coatings of different deposition times are shown in The long-term operation stability of the obtained coatings was investigated in 0.5 M LiCl by potential cycling, and the CVs of the first and 1000th cycles of a coating formed by 20 min deposition are superimposed in The charge–discharge electrochemistry of manganese oxides in aqueous electrolytes has long been known to be complicated. Nonetheless, it is commonly accepted that the reduction of MnO Further investigation is obviously needed to clarify whether the unusual effect of the electrolyte may be an implication of reaction In summary, this communication reports a simple, fast and controllable redox deposition process for coating manganese oxide onto a graphite electrode. That is to simply immerse the graphite electrode in an acidic aqueous solution of potassium permanganate for a prescribed time. The coatings were likely the amorphous hydrous manganese oxide, a-MnO