The preparation of half-Heusler thermoelectric bulk is complex and time-consuming. In the present work, Sb doped TiNiSbxSn1−x bulks (x=0.01, 0.02, 0.03 and 0.04) were prepared via cold press forming, microwave synthesis and sintering in vacuumed sealed quartz in a few minutes. The microstructures of samples were characterized by using X-ray diffractometer (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. The thermoelectric properties i.e. Seebeck coefficient (S), electrical resistivity (ρ) and thermal conductivity (κ) were measured on Seebeck coefficient/resistance analysis system (S/RAs) and laser flash thermal analyzer (LFT). The results show that high purity single phase was obtained after microwave sintering. The point defects came from Sb doping and the in-suit nanostructures attributed to microwave sintering process were found to lead to special microstructure. The variation trends of S, ρ, κ with temperature were analyzed. The influences of Sb doping to electrical and thermal properties were discussed. The electrical resistivity was decreased by ~84% at the cost of decreasing the Seebeck coefficient by ~25–30%. The maximum power factor of 2560 μWm−1K−2 was achieved at 673K. The lattice and total thermal conductivities are merely 1.1–1.3 and 3.8–4.0 Wm−1K−1 respectively. The thermoelectric figure of merit for TiNiSb0.03Sn0.97 was enhanced from 0.30 (773K) to 0.44 (673K and 723K) when compared to that of non-doped TiNiSn.Energy recovery from waste heat is attracting more and more interest due to the increasingly serious problems of fossil energy depletion and environmental pollutions. Thermoelectric (TE) materials offer the possibility of directly converting waste heat into usable electricity basing on the Seebeck and Peltier effects, could be an important part of the solution to today's energy crisis. Half-Heusler alloys are 18-electron intermetallic compounds with cubic MgAgAs-type structure and stoichiometric composition The performance of TE is closely related to the microstructure. Doping or substitution, and In the present work, we proposed an efficient recipe lead to half-Heusler thermoelectric bulks TiNiSb TiNiSb The phase composition of as-prepared samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) on Shimadzu/XRD-6100 diffractometer, operating at 30 The X-ray diffraction patterns for the TiNiSb The microstructures of cross-section for TiNiSb  The measured electrical resistivity and Seebeck coefficient and the calculated power factor for TiNiSb The Seebeck coefficient is inversely proportion to two-thirds power of carrier concentration if the carrier effective mass is fixed. As shown in As shown in The temperature dependence of electronic, lattice and total thermal conductivity for TiNiSb It has been generally understood that the boundary scattering of phonons at low temperatures and the anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions at higher temperatures are important phenomena influencing the lattice thermal conductivity in semiconductors and semimetals As shown in The thermoelectric figure of merit for TiNiSb In summary, the half-Heusler thermoelectric bulks TiNiSb This work was supported by