The effects of uncarbonized (fresh) and carbonized bone particles on the microstructure and properties of polypropylene composites have been studied. The addition of the bone particles ranges from 5 to 25wt% in uncarbonized and carbonized forms in the polypropylene matrix. The physical and mechanical properties were used as criteria for the evaluation of the composites. Microstructures of the composites were assessed with scanning electron microscopy (SEM/EDS). The results revealed that the addition of carbonized bone particles reinforcement has superior properties than uncarbonized bone particles composite based materials with an increase in the compressive strength, hardness values, tensile strength and flexural strength by 53%, 45% and 35% respectively, and a decrease in the % elongation and impact energy by 75% and 32%, respectively at 25wt% carbonized bone, with 28% increase in tensile strength at 15wt% carbonized bone addition. The increase in strength and hardness values was attributed to the distribution of hard phases of bone particles in the ductile polypropylene matrix.Polymer composite materials are being used in a wide range of structural applications in the aerospace, construction and automotive industries due to their lightweight and high specific stiffness and strength In recent years there is a perceived shortage of wood fiber for composite products due to competition for fiber by pulp mills, reduced harvesting and manufacturing and diminished log quality. Also, there is pressure from environmentalists to reduce forest use and regulatory legislation pending on disposal of agri-fibers Previous studies have proved that Chicken eggshell (ES) is an agriculture byproduct that has been listed worldwide as one of the worst environmental problems, especially in those countries where the egg product industry is well developed. In the U.S. alone, about 150,000 tons of this material is disposed in landfills Patricio Toro et al. Polypropylene (matrix), bone (uncarbonized and carbonized), stain remover (water soluble), aluminum foil, polishing agent, grit paper, etchant, water and lubricant. Set of sieves (mesh sizes; 1000, 750, 500, 250, and 100 The flowchart used in this study is shown in The bone was then degreased so as to get rid of any trace of oil and blood that will inhibit proper bonding between the matrix (polypropylene) and the reinforcement (bone) using a water soluble stain remover. The process utilized the differential weight between the bone and the associating oily substances (gravity separation) by pouring water (mixed with stain remover) and allowing it to settle for about 30 Compounding or mixing was done not only to mix but also to ensure intimate mixing of composite forming constituents. The two roll mill machines, were switched on and set for preheat to a temperature of 180 The blended material was pressed using a hydraulic press at elevated temperature (≈180 The density of the samples was determined by measuring the weight of the sample (m) and then by immersing into a measuring cylinder half filled with water and recording the increase in volume (v) as the volume of the sample. The density of each sample (ρ) was obtained using equation 1 Thus: Bend or flexure test was carried out with the same Hounsfield tensometer. Samples were cut into suitable dimensions, each sample was bend tested using an improvised support and a center point load until it breaks. If a load (P) is applied over the entire span (L), and act on a cross-sectional area (A), then flexure strength could be calculated using equation 5 The impact test was carried out on the samples using a charpy impact testing machine to determine the impact energy. A v-notch of 2 Samples were sectioned from each composition for metallographic examination. The samples were ground with grit papers (80–600 grits) using water as coolant. Polishing was followed using alumina polishing powder mixed with distilled water and later etched with Keller’s reagent. The microstructures obtained were photographically captured using an optical microscope with built-in camera SEM is used to study the morphology of the composites produced. The density of the composites increases with an increase in weight percent of bone ( In As the wt% of bone increase, there is a corresponding increase in tensile strength ( A superior property was recorded while testing PP reinforced with CB particles this is due to the removal of spongy portion and subsequent elimination of volatile matters during carbonization From From From the result of impact test (see It was observed that (see From the data obtained in In the present research, different experimental techniques have been used to characterize the microstructure and properties of PP and its composites containing different volume fractions of bone particles. From the results of the investigations and discussions in the preceding section, the following conclusions have been made. This work shows that successful fabrication of PP and the bone particles composite by compounding and compression molding. The uniform distribution of the bone particles in the microstructure of the polymer composites is the major factor responsible for the improvement in the mechanical properties. There is not much difference between the density of unreinforced PP and that reinforced with bone particles. The hardness values obtained from PP reinforced with bone particles increased with an increase in the weight fraction of bone particles. Absence of volatile matters, high carbon content and high density of carbonized bone are believed to be responsible for its relatively superior properties. The developed composites have better properties at the ranges of 5–15 The work provides a unique combination and a wide range of both physical and mechanical properties of polypropylene, a thermoplastic polymer without much sacrifice to its density through reinforcement with bone which is light in weight, yet hard and strong. The authors wish to acknowledge with thanks the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria for equipment support.