Oil flotation is a separation process that has widely been utilized in the separation and purification of minerals from raw ores. In the current study, this process was combined with coprecipitation process to prepare nanosized 8 mol% yttria-stabilized zirconia (8YSZ) powder. One of the most attractive characteristics of the oil flotation-assisted process is that highly hydrophilic hydroxide precipitate can be transformed to hydrophobic and directly be extracted from aqueous phase to oil phase with the help of SPAN80 (flotation reagent). After laundering with water, the precipitate was dried to recover oil and fired to oxide at 800 °C.There are many solution-based processes for preparing yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) powders, such as coprecipitation Oil flotation is a separation method As a traditional separation process, oil flotation has been widely used in the refinement and purification of minerals. In the current work, we combined the flotation process with chemical precipitation method to separate the hydroxide precipitate prepared by coprecipitation process, and after drying and recovering oil phase, the precipitate was fired to YSZ powders. The preparation route is schematically shown in The adsorption behavior of SPAN80 was studied by Raman spectroscopy (Fourier transform IR/Raman spectroscopy, Perkin-Elmer, USA), and DTA–TG (TGA92-4/DSC92, France) was applied to observe the changes during the heating of precursors. The powder morphology was observed by transmission electric microscopy (H-800, Hitachi, Japan). X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF-1700) was applied to analyze the content of chloride in the final products. The recovery efficiency of precipitation is strongly dependent on the pH value of the solution. Their relationship is shown in The Raman spectra of dried precipitate and pure SPAN80 are listed in The formation of hard agglomerate in ZrO DTA–TG curves of the precipitates are shown in The TEM image of final 8YSZ powder is shown in The dominant impurity ion in the current synthesizing process is chloride, which can form solid salt-bridge between precipitate particles with cations after drying. To eliminate chloride ion, it is need to wash the precipitate for many times with water Several important conclusions can be drawn based on the current study. (1) Conventional oil flotation process can effectively extracted hydrophilic hydroxide precipitate from aqueous phase at moderate solution conditions. This is the most attractive feature of oil flotation process; (2) Finely dispersed 8YSZ powder with nano particle size can be prepared by the novel flotation-assisted coprecipitation process. (3) 8YSZ product prepared has a low level of chloride ion. In summary, the key point of oil flotation is changing the hydrophilic precursor particle to hydrophobic, therefore, the process can be combined with other wet chemical-based routes to extract precursors from aqueous solution.