A contact model based on the discrete element method (DEM) coupled with a simplified fluid model is used to describe the motion of particles during jigging. The 3D DEM model is able to predict the concentration of particles of each and individual particle types across the jig bed. The model is validated against experimental data collected from a properly instrumented and controlled pilot scale jig. The experimental results show a reasonably good agreement with the model predictions.Separation of particulate species with respect to specific gravity across the bed height in jigging is a result of stratification of particulate matter under the influence of hydrodynamic and gravity forces. Various operating parameters affect the stratification process, which include amplitude and frequency of pulsation, bed thickness, rate of hutch water, flow and feed characteristics. Several notable efforts have been made in the past to formulate simple and practically applicable mathematical models of jig correlating the important process variables. These efforts are essentially based on jigging theories or physical concepts that have been proposed by several investigators from time to time. These can be broadly classified as under: Classical theory based on single particle behavior Potential energy theory Dispersion theory of particle suspension Energy dissipation theory Statistical analysis Empirical analysis Considerable interest in the particle stratification during jigging exists in the mineral engineering community for better understanding and control of the process. Analysis of particle stratification requires a microscopic model where description of the particle behavior is of paramount importance. This article presents a numerical model based on the discrete element method (DEM) to describe such microscopic behavior at the particle level. Several earlier attempts in this direction using two-dimensional DEM models The jig model considered here is based on a three-dimensional mathematical description of solid–solid and fluid–solid interactions. In this model, the force balance on a particle is extended to account for the effect of continuously varying fluid on the particle. An idealized version of the fluid behavior is assumed in the sense that the damping of the fluid motion across the bed is not considered. Thus, the force balance on a particle in a fluid medium is: The solid–solid interaction is described by the discrete element method (DEM) as proposed originally by The contact forces are computed from the amount and the rate of overlap of the particles at the contact. A pair of spring and dashpot represents a contact as shown in Frictional sliding is modeled by restricting the magnitude of the shear force at a contact to the maximum value, Following The particle Reynolds number, The body forces such as gravity and viscous drag due to fluid and the contact forces due to spring and dashpot are all incorporated in A computer program incorporating both the contact and the fluid model was developed. For the generation of random assemblage of spherical particles and visualization of numerical data, separate auxiliary programs were also written. The main program takes the operating parameters such as amplitude and frequency of the pulsating fluid as inputs. It also allows input of other pertinent data concerning the particle properties and the geometry of the jig bed. The motion of the particle is due to the movement of the fluid, which transmits its energy through the particle–particle contacts. The jig used in this study is essentially a U-tube of 15 cm diameter. A pictorial representation of the experimental set-up is shown in A properly controlled jig cycle results in a well-stratified jig bed. The density profile of the jig bed is a crucial parameter in deciding the degree and extent of stratification. In order to ascertain this during jigging, a nucleonic density gauge is fitted across the jig bed. This gauge is mounted on a plate that slides vertically up and down by means of a pneumatic linear actuator. Thus, it allows measurement of the density profile of the jig bed across the bed height at any stage of the experiment. Operations of all the valves and sensors are carried out by means of a computer. There are altogether six transducers employed to monitor and control the process. The data collection system comprises of (i) pressure sensors located in the compensator and the air chamber, (ii) level sensor, and (iii) nucleonic density gauge. The transducers that are controlled are the two solenoid valves: one is located between the compressor and the compensator, and the other between the compensator and the air chamber. A personal computer with PCL 208 data-acquisition card is used to collect and transmit signals. The two-way solenoid valve that is used to supply air to the compensator is actuated based on the reading of the pressure transducer located on the air compensator. Monitoring of the pressure inside the compensator and the opening and closing of this valve are carried out by means of a small control loop. The amplitude and frequency of a jigging cycle are the main operating variables in this study. These are controlled indirectly by controlling the pressure inside the air chamber and the upper and lower limits of the water level inside the jigging chamber. The level sensor sets the amplitude, and the frequency is adjusted by changing the compensator pressure. It is also observed from The stratification of particles in the jig bed affects the efficiency of separation. In practice, discharge of the stratified product is decided by the extent of stratification achieved. Many investigators have studied the effect of various parameters such as amplitude and frequency of jig cycle, jigging time, etc., on bed stratification. Nucleonic density gauges are used in practice to determine the water bulk density across the jig bed, which is assumed to be a strong indicator of bed stratification. In the present work, a nucleonic density gauge is employed to study the bed stratification. A variety of experiments are being conducted to study the stratification behavior, which will be the subject of another paper. Here, only a typical set of experimental data is considered for model validation. Jigging experiments were carried out using two types of particles. These are artificial particles conforming to a narrow range of density. The heavy and light particles had a density of 3.01 and 2.64 gm/cm In another experiment, the nucleonic density gauge was used to scan the bed height. The experiment was carried out for 20 cycles with amplitude of 10 and 5 cm and frequency of 30 cycles/s. At the end of 20 cycles of operation, the water bulk density of the bed was determined by traversing the bed height by steps of 2 cm. The results of these experiments are presented in Further validation of the model was carried out for tests where the amplitude of pulsation was fixed at 10 cm, but the frequency of pulsation was varied at three levels: 10, 20, and 30 cycles/s. As before, the nucleonic density gauge was used to scan the jig bed for water bulk density. It is felt that the measurements near the top and bottom surfaces of the bed may be slightly erroneous because a portion of the γ-ray might have interacted with pure water above the particle bed and the bottom plate below it. This error can be minimized by reducing the γ-ray beam thickness. Nevertheless, the readings are quite accurate, elsewhere, as the sensor was calibrated against known density material before the start of the experiment. The separation achieved is quite reasonable, and it takes place rather quickly, which typically is the observed separation behavior in almost all types of jigs. A three-dimensional contact model coupled with simplified fluid model within the framework of the discrete element method has been formulated and used to simulate particle motion in a jig. In order to validate the model, an instrumented jig was designed and put to test. The jig in operation showed all the essential features with respect to the flow of air in the air chamber and that of water across the jig bed. It was also possible to control the pulsation of water by opening and closing of the inlet air valve. It was observed that any change in the frequency of pulsation results in variation in the amplitude of the jigging cycle. Therefore, variation in amplitude and frequency could not be varied independently, but different levels of amplitude and frequencies of pulsation could be attained by controlling the pressure inside the compensator. Several experiments were carefully done to obtain experimental data over a narrow range of amplitude by keeping the frequency of pulsation approximately constant. These data essentially consisted of density profile across the jig bed. Under identical conditions, the model response was compared with the experiment, which showed excellent agreement. The experimental set-up is being modified to replace the three-way on–off valve with continuously opening and closing type valve to vary the amplitude and frequency independently. Authors are grateful to the Department of Science and Technology of Govt. of India for the financial support. The authors also recognize the help of Mr. Anand Katti and Mr. Surendra Agrihotri who have worked in the project.