A new theory of particle discharge in high tension roll (HTR) separation is presented. The discharge dynamics of an isolated charged particle resting on a conducting surface are studied first. The analysis is extended to particle discharge in a homogenous particle bed. Finally, the paper looks at the more realistic scenario of particle discharge in a non-homogenous particle bed. The consequences of the resulting theory on HTR separation are discussed.
                  Predictions from the new theory are tested against experimental HTR separations at the pilot scale.The work presented here is associated with research into the electrostatic separation of titanium minerals. Titanium minerals are found in sand deposits as a mixture of several mineral species, which are separated using a combination of magnetic and electrostatic separation. The high tension roll separator is one of the main electrostatic separation machines used in the industry and is the focus of study here. Previous research into HTR operation has led to a good understanding of many factors that influence separation ( This paper presents an improved theory of particle charge decay in the HTR process. The consequences of this theory and its application in a new mechanistic HTR model are explored. An HTR separator is illustrated in The process of particle discharge is the core of HTR separation. The different discharge rates of different minerals provide the mechanism by which particles are separated. Historically particle discharge, otherwise known as charge decay, has been modelled by a simple exponential decay equation as follows:    In previous work this equation has been applied to describe particle discharge for any situation, with allowances made for external electric fields such as static electrode effects ( A charged particle resting on a grounded conducting plane induces a thin layer of opposite charge on the surface. In the case of a small particle, such as a mineral sand grain, we may choose to consider the particle as a point charge for analysis purposes, as shown in Analysis of this situation is complex, but electromagnetic theory provides a simplifying tool called the method of images. It involves placing a mirror image of the point charge with opposite polarity below the plane surface, allowing To determine the charge decay characteristics of this particle it is necessary to describe the electrostatic situation mathematically. Titanium minerals are best described as linear isotropic homogenous dielectrics, allowing standard electrostatic equations to be used. For a dielectric medium with relative permittivity Applying the method of images, the voltage at the + The particle is assumed to lose charge only to the grounded surface, hence the analysis is only concerned with the    Charge decay is the process of losing charge, or equivalently, the flow of current. An electric field   Substituting in Eq. The solution to this equation is The area Substituting Eq. Eq. The particle loses charge only in the The particle is a linear isotropic homogenous dielectric. The current passing from the particle is proportional to the surface/particle contact area. Note that this equation is in exactly the same form as the standard expression for charge decay given in Eq. This is a very interesting result for decay dynamics because it shows that So far the charge decay of an isolated particle has been analysed. In HTR separation many particles are distributed together, covering the roll surface with a particle bed, which changes the electrostatic characteristics of the system. For a more realistic model it is therefore desirable to study the particle bed situation. The effects of surrounding particles were not considered when modelling particle charge decay in the past. For example, The method of images applied to a homogenous particle bed is shown in The electric field on any point charge can be shown to be If, for example, a circular particle packing model is used as shown in The current flow can be calculated following the same procedure as with the single particle case. To describe the non-homogenous particle bed situation, the simplest option is to assign average values to the size and charge decay characteristics of the surrounding particles.  The charge decay of the surrounding particles can be described using the results from the previous section. Their charge decay is assumed to be that of a homogenous particle bed given by Eq. We can show that the charge decay of an individual particle with charge If we use the circular particle packing approach again the two factors are given by The charge decay time constant, This result may serve to explain the variation often observed in charge decay behaviour for a single mineral. This variation was often attributed to inherent random effects. The new definition of In the new model the rate of charge decay is dependent on inter-particle spacing, particle size and average particle bed size (EF Simulations were performed using a MATLAB program to model the charge decay of particles according to Eq. Particles will lose charge faster in a particle bed than they would otherwise. The tighter the packing, the greater the effect (see In a non-homogenous particle bed, small particles will lose charge faster than large particles (see Particles that are much larger than the surrounding bed may not pin at all. This is a particularly significant point with feeds that have large non-conductors, as they will tend to be thrown with the conductors. Simulations showed that a 250   The results above show only the effects of bed packing on charge decay according to the new model. Static electrode effects are not included. A circular bed spacing model was used ( Experimental separations were completed at the JKMRC using a laboratory scale HTR machine with a 240 A series of tests was conducted in which different mixtures of ilmenite and zircon were separated, a summary of the tests is given in Separation parameters not explicitly mentioned in this paper were held constant for all separations. The product distribution of ilmenite at a very low feed rate (effectively isolated particles) and standard feed rate (a homogenous particle bed) is shown in Eq. As mentioned earlier, the new model predicts faster charge decay for a small particle in a large particle bed. The new model also predicts that large particles lose charge slower in a small particle bed. This implies that large particles would remain pinned to the roll longer in such a case. Large particles, however, are forced off the roll early due to greater centripetal forces and particle bed forces (see This paper has introduced a new theory for particle charge decay in HTR separation. The new model introduces some interesting concepts for separation dynamics, with the following two main factors emerging from the new theory: A particle’s charge decay time constant, A particle’s discharge rate is dependent on inter-particle spacing, particle size and average particle bed size. This makes the discharge behaviour of any particle dynamic as particle bed characteristics change over the course of a separation. These points have significant consequences regarding HTR dynamics, and predict separation behaviour that has been difficult to explain in the past. Experimental separations support these factors, with actual HTR separation data confirming model predictions. The work described in this paper was funded by Cable Sands, Iluka Resources and Tiwest through AMIRA Project P255. Their financial support is gratefully acknowledged.