The relationship between the fracture surface and mechanical properties of siderite and hematite was studied by density functional theory (DFT). The mechanical properties of crystals with an O-vacancy defect were also investigated to take into account the ubiquitous defects present in both minerals. Colored contour surfaces were generated to illustrate the elastic anisotropy of siderite and hematite with or without a defect. The calculated elastic-constant matrixes showed that shear deformation is the most likely deformation type in the crystals with or without a defect. The O-vacancy defect in both mineral types alters their crystal. Specifically, for siderite, the B/G ratio decreased to 1.66 in the presence of this defect, indicating a significant change in the brittle/ductile behavior of the crystal. The contour surfaces indicated that the symmetry of the distribution of mechanical properties was unaffected by the defects. For both siderite and hematite, the diagonal surfaces were weakest, so the (110), (101), and (011) planes were predicted to be the most commonly fractured surfaces. This was consistent with the surface fracture behavior of trigonal systems according to previous literature. This study provides a novel understanding of the link between the fracture surface and the mechanical properties of crystals.Crystal surfaces are a ubiquitous topic of research into crystal properties, specifically their bonding [ When ground simultaneously, the ground siderite have smaller particle size than hematite resulting from the difference in mechanical properties of minerals, which was reported to determine the distribution of particle size and the nature of the exposed surface of different minerals, the two important factors for mineral beneficiation technologies such as flotation and magnetic separation [ Crystal defects have been demonstrated to greatly affect crystal properties as thermodynamic, electrical, magnetic, and mechanical properties. P. Pecheur [ Computational simulation has been used successfully to investigate the crystal properties and give an intuitive exposition of the theory which cannot be achieved by experimental techniques. Density functional theory (DFT) calculation is a computational modeling method used in materials science, which can reveal the properties of a many-electron system at the atomic scale [ In this regard, the mechanical properties of hematite and siderite with defects were investigated in the present study using density functional theory (DFT), which is established as a reliable tool for research into material properties such as structural, magnetic, optical and superconducting. DFT has found application recently in studies of electronic transfer in hematite [ In this study, the mechanical properties of siderite and hematite supercells with and without a defect were studied by DFT. The supercell method [13,21]was used to control the defect concentration at a reasonable level and eliminate the influence of interaction among defects. The mechanical properties of crystal such as the bulk modulus, shear modulus, and Young's modulus were calculated via the elastic-constant matrix. The spatial distributions of Young's modulus on the surfaces were mapped to study the elastic anisotropy. This research into crystalline mechanical properties using DFT will provide new insights into the relationship between mechanical properties and fracture surfaces. The supercell method greatly reduces the interaction between defects [ The optimization of supercells was conducted using the CASTEP module, which refines the geometry of a periodic system to obtain a stable structure. This is done by performing an iterative process in which the coordinates of the atoms and possibly the cell parameters are optimised until the total energy of the computed structure is minimized. After the convergence tests, the exchange-correlation functional of GGA-WC, cutoff energy of 480 eV, and k-point of 6 × 6 × 2 were screened for siderite, and correspondingly for hematite, GGA-PBESOL, 500 eV, and 6 × 6 × 2 were determined [ The elastic constants of siderite and hematite supercells were calculated using CASTEP. The actual calculation of elastic constants was based on the values of initial strains and calculated stresses. The main computational parameters used to calculate the elastic constants of a crystal were the maximum strain amplitude and the number of times that each strain level was applied. From the operational manual, it is specified that the strained steps for each strain pattern should be more than 3 times, and 5 steps of strains were performed in the study. Maximum strain amplitude, the ratio of lattice elongation or compression, excessing 1% will be beyond the range of linear elasticity, while lower than 0.1% will generate a set of similar structures. Therefore, 0.5% for maximum strain amplitude was set. After these calculations, the elastic constants of every single crystal were shown as a 6 × 6 matrix. There is a maximum of 21 independent parameters for the elastic constants; however, as the symmetry of the crystal system increases, the number of independent parameters will decrease. For the defect-free siderite and hematite, which both belong to the space group Based on the elastic constants of siderite and hematite, the crystalline mechanical properties were calculated, namely the bulk modulus ( Two main approximations were used, namely the Voigt and Reuss schemes. In the Voigt approximation, the bulk modulus In the Reuss approximation, the two modulus are defined by Eqs. When estimating the elastic constants of polycrystalline materials, the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) approximation is widely used [ The averaged compressibility can be easily computed from Eq. Next, Young's modulus On a practical note, elastic anisotropy has been related to cracking near grain boundaries (in the form of microcracks and delamination) in polycrystalline materials [ As stated in As shown in The O-vacancy defects in siderite and hematite were calculated to have formation energies of −18.01 eV and − 7.90 eV, which confirmed that these defects can form in both crystals. The optimised siderite and hematite crystals with an O-vacancy defect are shown in The crystal systems of hematite and siderite are both trigonal, so their supercells have trigonal symmetry. In the calculation of the elastic constants, the space group The elastic-constant matrixes of siderite and hematite with an O-vacancy are as follows:  In our previous study, the elastic constants of the unit cell of hematite and siderite were calculated [ As described by the standard crystal stability criteria, a stable crystal needs to satisfy the following conditions [ As shown in the elastic-constant matrixes of siderite and hematite with defects, the values of Based on the calculated elastic constants in The calculated supercell mechanical properties show better agreement with the literature than do those of the unit cell. The calculated bulk modulus of hematite 186.65 GPa, was consistent with the value of 190.3 GPa [ As shown in The Crystal anisotropy is a spatial property that has a non-negligible relationship with thermal conductivity, electrical conductivity and mechanical properties. When characterising crystalline materials, it is rarely valid to assume a single value of Young's modulus throughout the crystal, thus in this study, the distribution of Young's modulus was calculated based on the elastic constants and plotted in spherical coordinates. The computed Young's modulus values of siderite are shown in The minimum of Young's modulus is a very important indicator of the level of stress sufficient to cause the destruction of a crystal. As shown in However, comparing the appearance and symmetry of the calculated elastic constants in The elastic constants, the calculated mechanical properties of crystal and the distribution of the computed Young's moduli can be considered together to characterise the crystals. Specifically, the X-ray diffractometry (XRD) is a reliable method to identify the exposed surface of a crystal. Consulting the trigonal crystal XRD data in the literature, it was found that hematite [ According to the results of this study, it can be concluded that defects in a crystal affect its mechanical properties. In the case of siderite, the defect changed the behavior of the mineral from ductile to brittle, which might be the cause of the sliming of siderite during the grinding process. Additionally, the (110), (101), and (011) surfaces were found to be the most common fracture surfaces in these trigonal crystals. This will provide a basis for the selection of crystal surfaces in future simulations, and aid in reagent screening for machining specific crystal surfaces. To probe the relationship between the fracture surface and mechanical properties of two crystal species, the supercell method with DFT was applied, and the effect of O-vacancy defects on the mechanical properties of the crystals was investigated. The elastic-constant matrixes showed that Defects have an important effect on the brittleness/ductility of the crystals. According to the observed change in its The spatial distribution of Young's modulus on the crystal surfaces illustrated that the symmetry of the mechanical properties of the crystals was unaffected by the defects. A combined consideration of the elastic constants and distribution of Young's modulus led to the conclusion that the diagonals are the weakest surfaces in terms of mechanical properties of crystal surface, namely, the (110), (101) and (011) surfaces. This was consistent with the reference XRD data on trigonal systems, thus supporting our deduction.      None. This study was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at