Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) is a reliable therapy for the treatment of urolithiasis. Nevertheless, improvements to enhance stone fragmentation and reduce tissue damage are still needed. During SWL, cavitation is one of the most important stone fragmentation mechanisms. Bubbles with a diameter between about 7 and 55μm have been reported to expand and collapse after shock wave passage, forming liquid microjets at velocities of up to 400m/s that contribute to the pulverization of renal calculi. Several authors have reported that the fragmentation efficiency may be improved by using tandem shock waves. Tandem SWL is based on the fact that the collapse of a bubble can be intensified if a second shock wave arrives tenths or even a few hundredths of microseconds before its collapse. The object of this study is to determine if tandem pulses consisting of a conventional shock wave (estimated rise time between 1 and 20ns), followed by a slower second pressure profile (0.8μs rise time), have advantages over conventional tandem SWL. The Gilmore equation was used to simulate the influence of the modified pressure field on the dynamics of a single bubble immersed in water and compare the results with the behavior of the same bubble subjected to tandem shock waves. The influence of the delay between pulses on the dynamics of the collapsing bubble was also studied for both conventional and modified tandem waves. For a bubble of 0.07mm, our results indicate that the modified pressure profile enhances cavitation compared to conventional tandem waves at a wide range of delays (10–280μs). According to this, the proposed pressure profile could be more efficient for SWL than conventional tandem shock waves. Similar results were obtained for a ten times smaller bubble.Urinary stone disease is a significant health problem. In Europe and North America, up to 15% of all people develop urolithiasis in their lifetime All extracorporeal lithotripters consist of a shock wave generator, a focusing device, a coupling medium, a treatment table, and a stone localization system The stone pulverization mechanisms responsible of the shock-wave damage produced to the urinary stones are complex. During SWL, stones fracture due to spallation, dynamic fatigue, shear, circumferential compression, and erosion produced by inertial cavitation Extensive in vitro and in vivo experimentation is still required. One problem with conducting experimental investigations is that the cavitation process is difficult to photograph because the bubble collapse occurs on a microsecond time scale and the final bubble radius may be less than 1 The object of this study is to analyze the influence of modified tandem shock waves, i.e., a conventional shock wave followed by a relatively slow pressure pulse (see Evidence of cavitation produced in the neighborhood of kidney stones during SWL has been evaluated with different techniques At the focal point of a lithotripter the positive pressure of the incoming shock wave compresses any preexisting microbubbles. An instant later, the pressure inside the bubble and the negative-pressure tail of the shock wave produce rapid bubble growth, which results in a second, more violent, collapse During SWL, microjet emission and secondary shock waves are especially useful for obtaining small fragments At a shock wave generation rate of 1 Microjet and secondary shock wave emission can be enhanced if a second shock wave impinges on the bubble during its collapse phase The second compressive pulse of a conventional tandem shock wave is similar to the first one and also lasts about 1 The main objective of these simulations was to study the influence of a lasting second pressure pulse on the collapse energy of a single bubble in water and to verify if, in principle, modified tandem shock waves could improve SWL outcomes even more than conventional tandem waves. The influence of the delay between pulses on the dynamics of a collapsing bubble was also studied for both conventional and modified tandem pulses. Detailed quantitative information on the pressure profiles used in this study is given in Section 3.2. The radial response of a single spherical air bubble to different variable pressure fields was modeled by the Gilmore–Akulichev formulation In this article The Gilmore formulation was used because it models very well the radial response of a single spherical bubble to a lithotripter pulse and is applicable to the pressure fields of lithotripters where the compressibility of the liquid is important. Many formulations of bubble dynamics associated with SWL use this model The ideal case of a single spherical bubble immersed in water was chosen for simplicity. We believe that our model is valid because the main objective of our study was to provide a preliminary comparison between the effects caused by conventional and modified tandem shock waves on a single bubble. As already mentioned, close to a kidney stone, a bubble would not elastically bounce several times until reaching equilibrium. It would only suffer a first collapse due to the positive pressure pulse of the shock wave, and after between 250 and 500 Iloreta and colleagues The effects of (a) a single-pulse lithotripter shock wave, (b) tandem pressure profiles, and (c) modified tandem pressure profiles on the dynamics of a single bubble were analyzed. All lithotripters generate at least qualitatively similar pressure profiles. In this article, the well-known analytical description defined by Church A so-called “slow” pulse ( Finally, the modified tandem pressure profile ( Other authors Numerical simulations were repeated for different delays between first and second shock wave, starting from a delay of 290.5 As expected, our results show that in response to the standard lithotripter shock wave The behavior of the bubble subjected to a As anticipated, at delays smaller than 290.5 The dynamics of the bubble after passage of the modified tandem pressure field ( Shrinking the amplitude of the The main advantage of using modified tandem shock waves is shown in The response of a bubble to a single lithotripter shock wave was analyzed to compare our results with previously published data. The code was verified by simulating the response of a single bubble in water to a standard lithotripter shock wave, using the same initial bubble radius ( As reported by other authors The cavitation model used in this study is based on the theoretical computation of the behavior of a single spherical bubble immersed in an infinite liquid. In reality, bubble collapse is influenced by the proximity of the bubble to the stone and the inertial effect of the surrounding fluid. Furthermore, a bubble cloud is formed at the lithotripter focal point after shock wave passage In some cases, if the trailing pulse arrives while a large number of bubbles (produced by the previous shock wave) are still present in the fluid, the negative phase of the shock wave may be attenuated. This occurs especially when performing SWL treatments at high shock wave rates (above 2 Comparing our results obtained with a bubble radius of An advantage of piezoelectric lithotripters is that the pressure profile may be altered by modifying the excitation of the piezoelectric crystals. Methods for producing a prescribed pressure field from a piezoelectric system have been published by other authors Although the results obtained with the model herein presented are limited, they indicate that further research and evaluation of tissue damage due to Modified tandem shock waves may have unique advantages over conventional tandem shock waves because they enhance bubble collapse over a broader range of delays. In the future, this principle could be used to upgrade existing extracorporeal lithotripters for improved performance. Roberto Zenit is acknowledged for useful discussion and careful revision of the manuscript. This study was financed by the DGAPA-UNAM (project PAPIIT-IN108410).