Attrition is applied to sandy material to remove particle surface contamination or undesired cuttings before flotation. Working in stirred mills and applying special process conditions, attrition can be intensified enabling abrasion of particles in the size range between 20μm and 1000μm. Subsequently, the resulting highly contaminated fines fraction <5μm can be separated. The applied process conditions preventing particle breakage are characterized by low particle stress, using small grinding media, low energy input and a high solids content.The attrition process for particle suspensions is applied to clean sandy particles whose surfaces are aged or adsorbtively contaminated by pollutants. Applications range from the pretreatment before mineral flotation to the cleaning of mineral residues, ( In many cases, the technological result is nonsatisfactory, especially with the attrition of fractions <100 Particle surfaces are abraded by applying intense shear and friction stresses between the agitated grinding elements. As seen in A test installation has been developed. Speed and torque receptors have been connected to the control unit transmitting the data to a PC for evaluation. In addition, samples have been periodically taken for particle size analysis. When contaminated material has been used, after having performed the grinding attrition process, the fines <10 For basic research, quartz sand fractions 50–150 The photographs in The particle size distribution shown in Power input measurements and particle size analysis of samples taken during grinding attrition show a correlation between the power input and the amount of generated fine particles (see  According to  Firstly, it should be examined, whether autogenous grinding attrition without recirculation of the coarse fraction is possible. Normally, the result is more satisfactory if additional coarse fractions are used as grinding elements. Adding additional coarse fractions to the contaminated material is an efficient variant. The sandy feed material, which previously should have been deslimed, is fed to the stirred mill at a constant flow rate, together with the recirculated grinding elements. The optimum solids content >50 v% is stabilized by measuring the electric power consumption of the stirrer and by regulating the addition of water. A vertically designed stirred mill with an overflow at the top is preferred. After a residence time of 10–20 The underflow of the screen is pumped to a hydrocyclone for classification. There, the fines <10  To investigate the efficiency of grinding attrition in fine soil remediation, further experiments have been carried out with an artificially contaminated sand fraction 63–150 Further, it was possible to clean a mineral oil (MHC) contaminated soil fraction from an initial contaminant concentration of 1.845 Grinding attrition can be successfully applied to abrade and therefore to clean the surfaces of sandy particles. No breakages occur. Under defined process conditions, about 5–20% of fines are generated in the size range <10