The detailed reaction profiles of the neutral–neutral as well as the cation–neutral direct hydroamination reactions between ethylene and ammonia are analyzed using MP2 (Full)/6-31++G(2df,2p) and B3LYP/6-31++G(2df,2p) methodologies. Analysis shows that both neutral–neutral, as well as the cation–neutral reactions are exothermic and the latter is >100kJ/mol more exothermic than the former. Calculations show that a very large barrier height (>200kJ/mol), and very large negative reaction entropy prevent the neutral–neutral reaction from proceeding in the forward direction. Analysis of the cation–neutral reaction, which is barrierless (the transition state is more stable than the reactants) and highly exothermic, indicates that the direct hydroamination reaction is thermodynamically attainable via a cation–neutral reaction pathway without a catalyst. Our calculations also suggest that although the cation–neutral direct hydroamination reaction is very fast, the cation of either ethylene or ammonia goes through a structural relaxation process before reacting with the other neutral reactant.The hydroamination of alkenes, which proceeds through the formal addition of an N–H bond across a carbon–carbon double bond ( As can be seen from In the recent work of Hamann et al., the traditional organometallic catalyst of the hydroamination reaction of CH All the calculations were carried out using MP2(Full)/6-31++G(2df,2p) and B3LYP/6-31++G(2df,2p) level of theories, implemented in the Gaussian 03 program package, at the default 298.15 Thermodynamic quantities like Δ The two reactants in the neutral–neutral direct hydroamination reaction considered are ethylene (CH The transition state in the reaction path was also optimized using MP2 and B3LYP methodologies. The observed transition state is To account for the nature of interaction, the orbital interaction diagram for the reactants, product and the transition state obtained from the B3LYP population analysis is shown in Now, analyzing the interaction, which is a two orbitals-four electron type of interaction, it is well known that the interaction will be repulsive as the resultant bonding and antibonding orbitals will both be filled. The potential energy surface of the neutral–neutral direct hydroamination reaction path is shown in The recent experimental work of Hamman et al. is a positive step towards achieving stoichiometric and environmentally friendly direct hydroamination. Radical cations of either ammonia or ethylene can be calculated in two different ways. First, without any structural relaxation, single point energies can be calculated for the cation of the ammonia and ethylene at their corresponding neutral optimized geometries. In this way the cations of ammonia and ethylene have the same geometry as that of their neutral counterparts, but because of the positive charge, properties (like dipole moments and charges) will be expected to change. Second, the cations of ammonia and the ethylene can be fully optimized and the relaxed geometries thus obtained are completely different from neutral ammonia and ethylene, respectively. Combined with the structural changes and positive charges, these cations also show different properties compared to their neutral counterparts. As expected, the dipole moments of the unrelaxed geometry of the cation of the ammonia are 1.11 The fully minimized key structural parameters of the cations of ethylene and ammonia along with their dipole moment values for MP2 and B3LYP methods are shown in Cationic ethyl amine, [CH Our search for a transition state in the cation–neutral hydroamination reaction potential energy surface resulted in a structure, which has a similar arrangement to that of the transition state, that is, obtained in the neutral–neutral hydroamination reaction. Frequency analysis shows that there is only one imaginary frequency (−1771.5 The detailed potential energy surface of the cation–neutral reaction with all four possible reaction pathways is shown in   Comparing case-1 and case-2 it can be seen that, if the unrelaxed geometry of the cation is involved in reaction, then path (1), where the ammonia cation is involved is more exothermic than path (2), where the ethylene cation is involved in the reaction. The situation is reversed when the relaxed cation geometry is involved in the reaction. In other words, when the relaxed geometry of the cation is involved in the reaction, then path (3), where the ethylene cation is involved is more exothermic than path (4), where the ammonia cation is involved in the reaction. As explained in the work of Hamann et al., the reaction of the ethylene cation with the neutral ammonia is preferred over the reaction of the ammonia cation with neutral ethylene (more product is obtained if the ethylene is ionized than if the ammonia is ionized). In summary, we have carried out a computational study on the reaction paths of the neutral–neutral as well as cation–neutral direct hydroamination reaction, using MP2 and B3LYP methodologies. Our calculation for the neutral–neutral hydroamination reaction involving ethylene and ammonia shows that, although the reaction is exothermic in nature, it is forbidden by a large energy barrier and large negative reaction entropy. Our B3LYP results agree well with the experimental Δ S.S. thanks Claude-Leon foundation of South Africa for the postdoctoral fellowship. This material is based on work supported by the