Devitrification behavior of plasma sprayed cordierite (2MgO–2Al2O3–5SiO2) modified by addition of 6.3wt.% TiO2 was studied in the as-sprayed condition and after laser surface melting. Laser treatment was performed using a pulsed Nd:YAG laser and the melt depth was maintained within the plasma sprayed coating. Laser surface melting produced a chemically homogeneous glass surface that contained extensive microcracks in both the melted and unmelted portions of the coating. Laser surface melting was found to be effective in reducing porosity and surface roughness. Roughness of the as-sprayed surface was reduced to R
                     a 2.5μm or better from a roughness of R
                     a 14μm. Devitrification of as-sprayed cordierite was dependent upon TiO2 distribution in the coating, whereas crystallization in the laser melted coating was dominated by nucleation at microcracks. Microcrack density was significantly reduced by viscous glass flow and transformation induced volume expansion during devitrification.Cordierite-based materials have drawn attention because of their low thermal expansion, low dielectric constant, and high chemical durability. Devitrification of cordierite is complex and can be drastically altered by the presence of dopants and structural defects. The manner of devitrification has proven crucial in the manufacture of many glass–ceramic products In general, devitrification of cordierite-based glasses begins with precipitation of a metastable β-quartz structure, which is usually described as a solid–solution phase (β-quartz Although devitrification of cordierite glasses is not yet fully understood, some conclusions can be drawn from the literature Additions of TiO Laser surface melting has been utilized to improve the microstructure and physical properties of plasma sprayed coatings Air plasma spray coatings were produced from a 2MgO–2Al The Nd:YAG laser used in this study was a Lee Laser Model 818TQ-40 with a wavelength of 1.06 Roughness measurements were performed using a Perthometer M1 profilometer from Mahr Federal Inc., USA. The measured roughness reported here is the arithmetic mean of the deviation of the roughness profile ( Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were used to characterize the structure of the cordierite coatings. A collimated X-ray beam utilizing a 45 Air plasma sprayed coatings were applied in two passes to produce a coating that was approximately 600 Standard metallographic techniques were employed to examine cross-sections of the as-sprayed specimens. A backscattered electron (BSE) detector was employed to contrast chemical differences between splats and chemical differences within the splats. The cross sections of the as-sprayed coatings (see Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was used to study the relative chemical composition differences in the as-sprayed coatings. Three levels of contrast can be observed when the coatings are imaged using the Percent porosity and microcrack density were measured to be 5.5±6.5% (95% CL) and 1400±150 The surface roughness of the laser treated coatings was examined qualitatively using SEM and a considerable reduction in surface roughness was observed (see The multiple pass treatment produced a melt depth of approximately 140 X-ray diffraction patterns from the as-sprayed coatings and the laser treated coating revealed an amorphous structure as shown in All sprayed and laser treated specimens were crystallized using a two step process that consisted of an isothermal hold of 6 The most significant change to the coating upon devitrification was a dramatic decrease in the number of microcracks. Microcrack density was reduced to 46±18 and 260±100 The hardness of the coating increased with crystallization as a result of both healing of the microcracks and because of the higher hardness of the crystalline phases. The hardness profiles for the as-sprayed and Nd:YAG laser treated coupons are shown in One of the interesting aspects of this study is related to the nature of crystallization of cordierites containing <8 It has been shown that laser surface melting can be used to reduce the surface roughness of APS cordierite coatings and that the depth of laser melting can be controlled such that only the APS coating is affected during the treatment. Regarding the surface quality of the laser melted coating, caution must be exercised to prevent spattering of the surface coating during rapid heating. Indeed, the purpose of making three scans of the surface was to eliminate the spatter defects by the elimination of subsurface pores in the first two passes. However, as the power level was increased a deeper laser melt zone was obtained and some pores were encountered, which produced minor spatters on the surface. In practice, it may be better to make the second scan the most powerful and finish the surface in the last, passed at a lower power setting. Furthermore, the quality of the APS coating can be expected to have a significant effect on the final surface roughness obtained by laser treatment, since surface tension smoothing is restricted to the local area of beam heating. Thus, surface irregularities in the APS coating should first be minimized by eliminating unmelted particles. This can be accomplished by a technique of spraying through an aperture where by unmelted particles in the outer periphery of the plasma are deflected away from the coating surface. Laser treatment will also cause a series of complex events that affect the dimensional stability of the cordierite coating. Near surface porosity is eliminated within the laser melt zone and this will produce a volume shrinkage in the coating due to pore closing. Thermal shock during laser treatment will also produce microcracking; and upon cooling, these microcracks can open to accommodate the thermal expansion mismatch between the substrate and the amorphous coating. The amorphous coating has a higher thermal expansion than the substrate and would thus be in tension upon cooling. A 2% increase in the apparent coating thickness would be observed if the thermal expansion mismatch was accommodated entirely by expansion of the microcracks. Unfortunately, variations in the APS coating with respect to deposited thickness and levels of porosity make it impossible to reliably measure changes in the thickness of the coatings for comparison to the calculated values. However, it is interesting to note that the large vertical cracks below the laser melt zone shown in Laser surface melting also produced significant chemical homogenization of the TiO It might also be argued that the devitrification of the APS coating is related to a chemical change induced by the plasma during deposition. However, it should be noted that Al, Mg and Si have only one possible oxidation state and charge neutrality would fix the oxygen content. Variance in oxygen content would be dictated by the thermodynamics of defect formation and easily equilibrated over small distances above the glass transition temperature. The Ti-cation could accommodate a small oxygen vacancy concentration by a change in the oxidation state from a 4+ to 3+. However, it is doubtful that oxygen depletion would encourage the nucleation of Al Laser surface melting was shown to reduce surface roughness of a cordierite glass coating that was applied by air plasma spraying. Subsequent devitrification of the cordierite was found to depend upon the physical and chemical alterations induced by the laser treatment. Crystallization in the as-sprayed coating was controlled by TiO The authors wish to express their appreciation to Professor Hai-Lung Tsai of the Mechanical Engineering Department at University of Missouri–Rolla for performing the laser treatments. Equipment and instrumentation support from NSF under Contract DMI-0116158 is also gratefully acknowledged. Boeing Commercial Aircraft provided financial support with Mr. Dan Sanders as technical monitor.