Hydrometallurgical facilities refining nickel sulfide ores produce waste residues in the form of sludges which contain concentrations of metals as well as iron and sulfur-bearing minerals and phases. The geochemical and mineralogical character of hydrometallurgical residues is important for the management of this type of industrial waste. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis indicate that the minerals produced in the process are principally gypsum and the iron oxides, hematite and magnetite, iron hydroxides and residual sulfur and sulfides in the form of FeS, chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite and pentlandite. The iron oxide particles in the leach residue exhibit an atypical framboidal structure that is relevant to its metal leaching properties. The mineralogy and microstructure of mini plant residue is compared to that of the demonstration plant residue through the SEM and XRD. Sequential extractions are used to determine the association between different phases/minerals and select metals in each residue.Vale Inco Newfoundland and Labrador Limited (VINL) has tested a novel hydrometallurgical process to refine its nickel, cobalt and copper from the nickel sulfide concentrate derived from Voisey's Bay mine site, in Labrador, Canada. A demonstration plant operated from 2005 through 2008 with construction of a full-scale plant starting in 2009. The nickel hydrometallurgical process eliminates SO As the residue contains a high percentage of sulfur and sulfur-bearing compounds as well as a small percentage of non-processed sulfide minerals there is potential for the sulfur oxidizes to produce acid and cause leaching of residue metals. This work outlines mineralogical characterization work and sequential extraction experiments completed on the hydrometallurgical residues from the demonstration plant and mini-plant which are 1:100 and 1:1000, respectively of the full-scale plant under construction. Understanding how metals and sulfur are partitioned with iron-bearing phases and minerals present in the residue and the relative availability of the metals will aid in predicting the operation of the full-scale plant residue disposal system and the long-term residue stabilization requirements. Hydrometallurgical residue samples were taken from test campaigns conducted at the demonstration plant in Argentia, Newfoundland. The demonstration plant operated under continuous concentrate feed and variable operation conditions while the mini-plant operated under both batch and continuous feed operation. The residues from the plant are derived through either precipitation processes or pressure leaching and are in the form of sludges. There are two main sources of sludges/residues. The solids remaining when the pulp from the concentrate pressure leaching is washed by Counter Current Decantation (CCD) and neutralized with lime slurry (Neutralized Leach Residue; NLR) and the precipitate (Neutralized Gypsum Residue; NGR) formed from the pregnant solution during the iron removal and neutralization stage through addition of lime and air. The Neutralized Combined Residue (NCR) sent for disposal at the full-scale plant will consist of a mixture of approximately 55% NLR and 45% NGR; with a pulp density of approximately 40% adjusted through addition of wastewater ( The oxidation of the iron sulfide mineral, pyrite, by oxygen or ferric iron on exposure to dissolved oxygen follows a chain of chemical reactions ( Marcasite or pyrite, another potential mineral present in the VINL NLR, has been formed during pyrrhotite oxidation as described by Characterization work for potentially acid generating material includes: the geology, mineralogy, static tests, kinetic tests, elemental analysis, standard waste assessment characterization and site components The mineralogy of iron-bearing residue derived from copper and zinc hydrometallurgical extraction processes has been widely reported ( There exist numerous techniques to investigate the minerals present and their surfaces.   In this study, the minerals present are determined through elemental analysis, SEM and XRD analysis. XRD was used to determine the primary minerals because the analysis of the bulk sample did not readily permit the identification of low levels of constituents in the sample mass. The SEM was used to assist in the identification and quantification of both the minerals and elements present and their microstructure. Both methods are used to compare residues generated during the VINL mini-plant stage and the demonstration plant operation. The FEI Quanta 400 SEM with JKMRC Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA) and Rigaku Ru-200 12 The NCR and NLR samples were analyzed with the MLA software of the SEM to determine the percent distribution of mineral groups/phases in the sample. First, the main mineral groups/phases for each type of particle are identified by spot assessment of sample particles with variations in elemental composition. After many such assessments a select number of spectrums are chosen to represent particles present in the mounted sample. These spectrums are put into the MLA database, and the MLA software is run to determine the quantity and distribution of each mineral group or phase in the sample. In this paper, the terms “phases” or “iron-bearing phases” are used to refer to amorphous or poorly crystalline minerals present in the residues. The principal residue minerals, present in crystalline or amorphous form, are gypsum, iron hydroxide, and iron oxide with residual sulfur and sulfides in the forms of FeS, chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite and pentlandite. All but the metal sulfides (chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite) are secondary minerals produced by the leaching and/or precipitation processes. FeS is an iron sulfide phase identified by the SEM consisting largely of iron and sulfur with little oxygen. This amorphous pyrite or mackinawite may be similar to the FeS precipitate described by Sequential extractions were conducted on the NGR, NLR and NCR in order to assess to which mineral/phases metals are associated. The method selected was a five-step extraction used for the speciation of particulate trace metals ( In each step of the extraction there is dissolution of different minerals/phases freeing any attached metals as the same time. It is assumed that reagents are able to selectively extract a specific mineral/phase without affecting other minerals/phases. The extraction solutions and target minerals/phases which are dissolved for each step are provided in The wet mount SEM image ( During the iron removal step in hydrometallurgy, there are advantages and disadvantages to iron precipitation as jarosite, goethite, hematite or magnetite ( SEM and optical microscopic examination of a polished demonstration plant sample, One of the interesting aspects of NLR is the spherical amorphous iron oxide particles, shown in Examination of the EDX SEM spectrums of a number of individual iron oxide spheres provides semi-quantitative data and indicates the percentage of sulfur varies significantly from particle to particle (5%–25%) as does the percentage of calcium. Some particles are largely comprised of iron and sulfur (FeS) or iron and oxygen (potentially Fe An area, or whole sample, SEM spectrum of a NLR sample shows a sample composition which includes iron, sulfur, calcium, oxygen, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, nickel and copper. The chloride and carbon also shown in the spectrum are likely from the carbon coating and epoxy material. The magnesium, aluminum and silicone could be associated with plagioclase, albite or amphibole type minerals that are present in minor quantities in the concentrate. The copper and nickel are either associated with the unreacted concentrate or adhered to the iron oxide particles. A processed MLA image on the NLR sample ( The iron oxides were separated into those with high (FeO_S_high) and low (FeO_S_low) sulfur content; then further divided into those with appreciable amounts of calcium (FeO_S_high_Ca and FeO_S_low_Ca). When a mass balance was conducted between the percentages of minerals and thus elements determined from The XRD spectrum ( The presence of very minor quantities of metal sulfates detected by XRD analysis in either the NLR or NGR was also reported by Results from sequential extractions are provided as concentrations of specified metals for each step of the extraction (details of steps are shown in In general, metals associated with the NGR are more available than those attached to the NLR where the majority of metals are bound to the extraction residual suggesting they are less available for leaching. Also the metals usually exhibited highest concentrations in the NLR, lower in the NCR and lowest in the NGR. After the last step of the extraction the NGR dissolved completely while NLR and NCR did not. Iron remained in the residual in the NCR and NLR indicating it is very stable and in a different form from that in the NGR where it was removed at step 3. XRD analysis suggests hematite is the stable predominant iron bearing mineral in the NLR and its associated metals are resistant to dissolution by strong acids as found by Several of the metals followed similar extraction patterns; although their overall concentrations differed. NLR had the highest total concentration for cobalt and nickel ( The SEM and XRD analyses were able to reveal mineralogical characteristics of the hydrometallurgical residue valuable in understanding how it will weather on disposal. NLR exists mainly as very small framboidal, spherical particles comprised largely of iron with varying and significant quantities of oxygen, calcium and sulfur. A total of 16 different phases were identified in the NLR by SEM analysis. They include: Fe–S phases, pure sulfur and several Fe–O phases. XRD analysis, which does not reflect the amorphous nature of some NLR minerals, indicated that the main minerals present were hematite, sulfur and pyrite. The SEM work on the NGR clearly showed two types of particles, gypsum and a small percentage of an iron-bearing mineral. The XRD analysis confirmed the strong presence of gypsum, potential iron hydroxides minerals as well as other metal bearing compounds. The SEM and XRD work indicated that both the mini-plant and demonstration plant residues were similar in micro-structure and composition with variations in gypsum percentages generally indicating that the mini-plant residue is representative of the larger scale plant residue and could potentially be used in residue weathering and treatment/management studies. The results of the five-step sequential extraction on the residues suggested that the metals were more available in the NGR than the NLR. The iron (hematite) in the NLR is very stable while that in the NGR is less stable (iron hydroxides). The trace metals, nickel, copper, cobalt and zinc are associated not only with the hematite in the NLR but also with other minerals or phases resulting in a significant portion of these metals being more susceptible to weathering. During treatment and disposal of the residues it will be important to consider the metals associated with all the phases present in particular those that are more susceptible to weathering. This study provides limited information on the micro-structure, mineralogy and stability of trace metals in these residues, further work is now required to confirm these results and to determine the weathering properties of the sulfur-bearing phases present particularly in the NLR. This work was supported by the research funds from the Memorial University of Newfoundland, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Canada (NSERC) and Vale Inco Atlantic Innovation Fund. The authors would like to thank D. Stevens of Vale Inco.