Particle size variation plays a key role in jigging performance, and despite extensive research in the area, very little attention has been given in the case of pneumatic jigging. The aim of this study was to look into particle stratification in a pilot-scale pneumatic jig when varying the particle size and the range of the particle size distribution in ternary mixtures of aggregates. Jigging tests were especially designed to reduce contamination of jig products and a stratification index was elaborated to evaluate stratification efficiency. Experimental results provided compelling evidences that widening the particle size distribution of the system or using beds composed of particles of smaller sizes can enhance stratification by density. Similarly, smaller particles showed a remarkable tendency to concentrate in the upper zones of the stratified bed, whereas larger particles tended to concentrate more in lower zones. The obtained results suggest that particular operating features of pneumatic jigging together with differential packing effects should play a decisive role in the stratification extent of beds formed by particles of different sizes. Experimental results are of practical importance since, among other benefits, they point to the possibility to increase pneumatic jigging performance in some cases by using wider size distributions of the feed, thus reducing the need of prior stages of narrow size classification.Coarser fraction separated better than the other size fractions; Reducing the size range of the feed improved separation efficiency. Pneumatic jigging has attracted significant interest over recent years, especially due to the inherent advantage of not using process water. Though it is strongly associated with coal beneficiation [ Jigging has been known for centuries as an ore concentration process [ Provided that there is vertical motion of the bed, the mentioned mechanism is expected to occur independent of pulsation amplitude and frequency [ Jigs can be categorized into several types depending on their design and operational features. The pulsating mechanism, method of products discharge, condition of the jig screen and the medium fluid are typical criteria used to distinguish among the different types of jigs. A brief discussion on the influence of medium fluid is presented here, but a more detailed review of the several jig types as well as their applications can be found in Sampaio & Tavares [ Besides water, jigs can operate with air as the medium. These are known as pneumatic jigs, air jigs or dry jigs (for the sake of clarity, we have chosen the designation Larger values of CC indicate an easy separation by gravity methods and vice versa. Also, the larger the value of CC, the wider the particle size range in which separation by density can be efficiently carried out. Eq. The role of particle size on density separation has been extensively investigated for the case of hydraulic jigs. A summary of these experimental studies are shown in Segregation by size, which involves geometric interactions among different species/individual particles, can display complex patterns due to its non-monotonic behavior, since the segregation order can be varied and even reversed due to changes of size ratios between small and large particles [ In the case of dry jigging, Weinstein and Snoby [ It is worth to note that few studies have explored the possible existing links between size segregation in jigs and the mechanisms of size segregation in similar granular systems. For example, Schröter et al. [ The present study focuses on examining the effect of varying particle size and the range of the particle size distribution on stratification by density in a pilot-scale pneumatic jig. For this purpose, a procedure aiming to minimize experimental errors has been developed and a stratification index has been proposed as a useful way to quantify stratification efficiency. The results obtained reveals that the use of mixtures composed of particles of smaller sizes or with a wide size distribution can be surprisingly beneficial for stratification. The experiments were conducted in a batch pilot-scale pneumatic jig model allair® S-500 from allmineral GmbH & Co. with an operating size range of 1 to 25 mm and an average capacity of approximately 50 kg per batch ( All experiments were performed with ternary mixtures containing 37.5% of gravel, 37.5% of gypsum and 25% of brick (in bulk Vol%) ( When slicing the stratified bed, each layer that compose the separation chamber is horizontally pulled away, so that particles that lie inside a given layer are discharged into a collector for subsequent composition analysis (here accomplished by hand separation of all particles contained in the layer followed by weighing individual constituents). However, given the intrusive nature of this process, misplacement of particles to the wrong layer is a common phenomenon. In order to quantify and so minimize the occurrence of such error, a procedure was developed to assess it. For this purpose, three large layers of the jig chamber (500 × 500 × 50) mm were each one fully filled with gravel (lower layer), brick (middle layer) and gypsum (upper layer) as shown in Aiming to enhance repeatability over the tests, the layers distribution was modified as shown in Further to the evaluation of the stratification in terms of grade and recovery of products, a stratification index was introduced in order to quantify the separation efficiency, given by: where In the present case, the index was determined considering only the concentration of gypsum and gravel in their predominant strata versus their concentration in the rest of the system ( In all cases, the overall stratification pattern consisted in the division of the bed in three distinct strata: a lower stratum filled with large quantities of gravel; an intermediary layer preferably containing brick particles; and an upper layer almost entirely composed of gypsum particles. This pattern was already expected beforehand on the basis of prior work developed by our group [ The influence of misplacement contamination was assessed by analyzing the standard deviation (SD) of the content and recovery measurements of the main constituent in each sampled stratum for each test in triplicate ( The effect of varying the size class of the bed particles is schematically shown in The distribution profiles (mass recovery of each material in each stratum) exhibited in The overall response to the widening of the size distribution was similar to that observed when decreasing the absolute particle size of the bed ( The individual recovery patterns of each size range are displayed in From a practical standpoint, the results points to the possibility that a greater recovery could be obtained in the dense product as fractions of smaller particles are included in the feed, which could be removed from the concentrate by screening just after the jigging stage, if necessary. On the other hand, adding a fraction of larger particles in the feed could have a similar effect on the recovery of the light product. However, experimental evidences underpinning this assumption only for systems in which different particle size classes have similar volumetric fractions. Also, the effect of post-classification of the concentrates on their mass content should be assessed. The same trend can be also observed when splitting the light product of mixture M2 in their constituent size classes, with exception by a slight decrease in gypsum recovery (≈ 5% in mass, see The obtained results corroborate and extend to pneumatic jigs an already accepted trend about the effect of varying particle size in jigging beds: that larger particles tend to concentrate in the lower zones of the bed, whereas smaller particles tend to concentrate in upper zones when jigging mixtures containing particles of different size classes [ Despite being based on the same basic mechanisms, for being an air-based separator the pulsating conditions in pneumatic jigs are somewhat different from that of hydraulic jigs. The most obvious difference is that, in contrast to water, the density of air is insignificant in relation to the solid particles of the bed. Thus, in order to compensate this discrepancy of densities, much higher fluid velocities must be employed in order to reach the required drag force to lift the bed. Since the required fluid velocity increases with particle size and also must be enough to lift all the bed, the air velocities used to elevate coarse particles can be much higher than those necessary to elevate existing small particles, giving rise to segregation by size due to the displacement of the smallest particles towards the top of the bed [ This phenomenon is probably intensified in pneumatic jigs due to two inherent operational features of the equipment. Firstly, pneumatic jigs usually employ a constant upward air flow together with the pulsating flow in order to keep the bed open and thus facilitate stratification [ An illustration of such a trend is displayed in Since the upward air flow was kept constant in all tests, it may be assumed that the observed unstable behavior of bed motion can be attributed to the comparatively higher drag force acting on existing small particles within the system. This is consistent with results obtained by Formisani [ Similarly, the core concept of the potential energy theory of jigging [ In order to examine the existing connection among particle size, bed packing and stratification efficiency, the packing density (solid volume in a unit total volume) of the lower layer was compared to the stratification indexes obtained in all tested conditions, as shown in However, although a greater packing should be expected to systems containing larger distribution in particle size [ It is important to emphasize that other phenomena can influence the observed results. For instance, results obtained by Metzger et al. [ Particle size variation is a key contributor to particle separation in jigs and despite much research in the area, very little attention has been given to the case of pneumatic jigging. In the current work, the influence of varying the particle size and the size distribution on particle stratification in a pilot-scale pneumatic jig was evaluated. The bed composition after several tests with ternary mixtures of different sizes has been examined in detail and an analytic expression for the estimation of the stratification efficiency has been proposed. Under the tested conditions, our results provide compelling evidence that stratification by density can be enhanced when using particles of smaller sizes or when widening the particle size range of the system by means of shifting the size distribution towards the small particles. Similarly, it has been found that the use of mixtures containing particles of different sizes contributed to increase the recovery of heavy large particles in the dense product and light small particles in the light product. On the other hand, the decrease of the bed particle size and the expansion of the particle size distribution skewed towards the small particles increase contamination of heavy small particles in the light product. From the operational standpoint, the results consider the possibility that a greater recovery and content of the coarse, dense product could be obtained through the inclusion of smaller particles in the feed, which can be easily removed by screening after jigging. On the other hand, no significant gain in recovery or content would be obtained when compared to the jigging of mixtures containing smaller size particles only. The obtained results were discussed in the light of the particularities involved in pneumatic jigging operation together with the existing differences in bed packing derived from the variation of particle size within the system. The combination of differential drag on the particles of varied sizes, the absence of the suction stroke and the existence of a constant upward air flow seem to benefit all together the concentration of smaller particles in the top of the bed and coarse particles in the bottom. In parallel, mixtures formed by particles of smaller sizes or by wider size distributions tend to produce more compact beds, thus leading to greater recovery of the dense product. It is important to emphasize that the obtained results correspond to a limited range of conditions. Full experimental data was only obtained from mixtures containing similar volumetric fractions of each constituent, and although the effect of particle shape has not been addressed experimentally, it can be assumed to exist. Also, pulsating parameters were kept constant in all cases. Future studies should be undertaken to evaluate the effect of expanding differences in particle size within the system and also working with different operating conditions, number of constituents and different particle densities and shapes. A deeper understanding of particle stratification in pneumatic jigs and developing ways to optimize it can be of great benefit for future applications of the technique. Dr. Simões dos Reis is grateful to the Council for the