Reducing gas content via cross-measure boreholes is one of the primary gas control technologies in China, where most outburst-threat coal seams are soft and highly gassy. Regardless of the significant costs associated with drilling boreholes, the gas drainage rate remains low because of the low permeability of the soft coal seam and the small influence zone of a single borehole. In this paper, the effect of increasing borehole diameter on coal seam permeability is discussed and a new method for drilling large diameter cross-measure boreholes by using the water-jet technique is proposed. Numerical modeling results indicate that the plastic zone and the effective influence zone of one borehole expand as borehole diameter increases, and the interaction between adjacent boreholes is strengthened. The field test shows that when the borehole diameter is 1.0 m, the effective influence zone radius reaches 4 m which is 2.67 times larger than that of an ordinary borehole. After using the new method, the number of cross-measure boreholes per hundred meters and the length of cross-measure boreholes per meter can reduce by 32.5% and 42.9%, respectively. In addition, the gas drainage rate reaches 52.1%, and the monthly excavation length of coal roadway increases from 50–70 m to 109 m.China produced and consumed 47.4% and 50.3% of the world's coal in 2013, respectively ( A large quantity of cross-measure boreholes are needed to effectively control gas before excavation in soft coal seams. For example, at least 3000–5000 cross-measure boreholes must be drilled to reduce gas content in soft coal seam to meet the requirements of constructing a 1000 m roadway. Although drilling cross-measure boreholes is costly, the gas drainage rate of China is only 23%, which is substantially lower than that in other coal mining countries ( To improve the gas drainage rate, many pressure-relieving and permeability-increasing methods via boreholes have been presented by scholars including deep-hole presplitting explosion ( In this paper, the influence of borehole diameter on gas drainage was discussed and a new method of drilling large diameter cross-measure boreholes by using the water-jet technique was proposed. Meanwhile, the influence zone of large diameter cross-measure borehole was studied, and field tests of the new method were conducted. Coal permeability is recognized as the key physical parameter for gas drainage in coal reservoirs ( The existing permeability models are commonly adapted for effective stress redistribution caused by excavation of working face or roadway, or pore pressure changes and coal matrix shrinkage caused by borehole gas drainage. In their relationship, the coal permeability is assumed to be isotropic at all times and the initial permeability is typically considered to be constant. Therefore, coal permeability changes caused by the construction of the cross-measure boreholes are ignored as the drilling impact on the surrounding coal is considered to be negligible. However, this simplification is only suitable for coal seams with high permeability, such as coal seams in America and Australia. For highly gassy soft coal seams in China, the majority of which took shape in Carboniferous-Permian period, coal's original fracture system was destroyed and hence the coal became a soft, low porosity medium with low permeability ( Under above assumptions, the stress around cross-measure boreholes is considered to be axisymmetricaly distributed in the direction parallel to bedding plane. Because the tangential stress around the borehole in the deep coal seam is higher than the strength of coal, the plastic zone and the elastic zone appear ( Previous studies show that it is the coal bedding structure that leads to the horizontal permeability being higher than the vertical permeability ( As the soft, highly gassy coal seam is the reservoir with complex construction and low porosity, the coal cleat system can be weakened and simplified into a part of the aperture, so that the coal structure is similar to the structure of a coal briquette which is made from coal powder. Thus, the anisotropic permeability around a borehole in this soft coal seam is mainly influenced by stress redistribution. As the boundary between the plastic and elastic zones around the borehole is under higher stress, the permeability is lower than the initial permeability in the direction parallel to the bedding plane ( Because the permeability is sensitive to stress changes, the exponential form of the stress-dependent permeability model is widely used to study gas drainage ( Experimental results suggest that the permeability of coal samples increases with the decrease of effective stress during the unloading process ( After drilling a borehole in coal seam, the gas emission is less before pumping. Therefore, an assumption can be made that the pore pressure of coal is invariable. Thus, Eq. Substituting Eq. From Eq. The radial permeability should be used as initial permeability to calculate in the process of gas drainage, as shown in Eq. For a particular coal seam, the ratio between radial permeability and initial permeability can be considered as a function of distance ( According to the results, the radial permeability ratio around the borehole varies as borehole diameter varies.  Therefore, it is reasonable to improve the radial permeability before gas drainage by increasing the borehole diameter in coal seam. For a large diameter cross-measure borehole, the radial stress around the borehole decreases, and hence the coal permeability significantly increases. Thus, the influence zone of borehole extends, improving the gas drainage rate of soft, highly gassy coal seams. However, the diameters of cross-measure boreholes drilled in China only range from 0.04 m to 0.15 m ( By using water-jet technique, drilling large diameter cross-measure borehole is a new method to drill borehole directly, in which the diameter is small in rock seams and large in coal seam. Through the special method, the cross-measure borehole is more stable during gas drainage and the gas can be extracted more with less time and cost. The technique involves the following steps: A special drill bit is used for drilling the borehole with the water pressure of 8–12 MPa up to 0.5 m above the roof of coal seam. At this moment, the side nozzles are closed due to the force on the drill bit, while the pressure water flows from the front nozzles which are used for fracturing the rock mass. The threshold pressure of rock fracture is easier to be exceeded, and the process of forming borehole is speeded up. After drilling the borehole with a small diameter to the roof of coal seam, the pressure sealing drill pipe backs out rotationally from the roof to the floor at a constant speed, with the water pressure raises to 18–25 MPa. Meanwhile, the pressure water flows from the side nozzles of the drill bit to slot the coal seam around the borehole, which expands the diameter of borehole in the coal seam. The soft coal is constantly broken by the cutting of water-jet, and then discharged through borehole along with the water. The diameter of borehole can be controlled by the water pressure and cutting time, and it also can be validated by measuring the volume of coal outside. After the cutting of water-jet in coal seam, turning down the water pressure to 6 MPa, and then pulling out the rotating drill pipe and bit from the borehole. Based on this new technology, the special cross-measure borehole can be developed as needed with the borehole diameter in coal seam ranging from 0.2 m to 1.0 m. With the help of water-jet, fractures and permeability of soft coal seam increase, effective stress and strain energy reduce, and the gas drainage rate of single cross-measure borehole increases significantly. Based on the water-jet technique, a system ( The pressure water output device, which is used to provide high pressure water to the system, consists of emulsion pump (type: BRW200/31.5, rated pressure: 31.5 MPa, rated flow: 200 L/min) and water container (volume: 1500 L). The safety control device, which is developed to control water pressure and monitor flow, includes a pressure controller (adjustable range: 6–50 MPa) and a flowmeter (flow range: 20–400 L/min). The high pressure water transport device contains high pressure water tube, high pressure sealing rotator and high pressure sealing drill pipe. The high pressure water tube (pressure resistance: 55 MPa) connects devices to carry water to the drilling rig, the high pressure sealing rotator (nominal pressure: 35 MPa, applicable rotary speed: 0–400 r/min) is used to connect high pressure water tube and high pressure sealing drill pipe, and the high pressure sealing drill pipe (working pressure: 0–35 MPa), which is sealed with O-ring, is used for driving the special drill bit to revolve. The special drill bit is used for drilling and forming water-jet, which has six nozzles: three of them are fixed averagely in the front of drill bit with 15° angle to the axes, the others are fixed vertically to the axes in the side of drill bit. The drilling rig (type: ZDY4000L, rated speed: 60–215 r/min, rated power: 75 KW, torque: 4000–1050 N m) is used to provide power for drilling. It is believed that soft, highly gassy coal seams have a higher risk for outburst. To effectively solve Chinese gas control problems, the coal seam is required in the range of effective influence zone of gas drainage boreholes. Therefore, a considerable number of boreholes must be reasonably arranged. The borehole density is the key parameter affecting the gas drainage drilling layout, which determines the amount of gas drainage boreholes in a certain area and is determined by the effective influence zone radius and the distance of cross-measure boreholes. For clarifying the arrangement parameters of large diameter cross-measure boreholes, numerical simulation software FLAC The models are developed in association with Ji This numerical simulation has two main purposes: (1) to analyze the influence of increasing borehole diameter on the radial stress and the plastic zone, and to clarify the effective influence zone of boreholes with different diameters; (2) to study the stress redistribution interactions between adjacent boreholes, and to evaluate the optimal distance between two boreholes with varying diameters. It is important to note that the size of cross-measure borehole has a significant effect on the stress redistribution. Previous researcher has indicated that the maximum slotting depth in coal seams is 1.0 m when using the water-jet technique is used ( The radial stress is 0 MPa at the borehole wall, then quickly increases to 15–18 MPa (75–90% of the original stress) as radial distance to the borehole wall increases. It then gradually increases to the original stress over a long distance. In general, the zone where the radial stress is significantly reduced can be regarded as the high efficiency gas drainage area because the coal permeability in this area increases as the effective stress decreases. Comparing the coal seam radial stress and permeability based on different diameters, the large diameter boreholes (  In addition, internal fractures in the coal seam have significant effects on the permeability. A greater number of internal fractures contribute to higher coal permeability. After a borehole being drilled in soft coal, a plastic zone is formed, which contains a large number of new fractures around the borehole. With the borehole diameter increasing from 0.1 m to 2.0 m, the area of the plastic zone around the borehole increases significantly, and the plastic radius increases from 0.30 m to 2.82 m. As the stress of the coal exceeding the yield limit of the plastic zone, the radical stress and elastic energy decrease and numerous micro-fractures are formed. Thus, the coal permeability in the plastic zone is larger than that in the elastic zone, and the plastic zone around the borehole is the high efficiency area. Beyond the plastic zone, it is the elastic zone where the radial stress gradually increases as the distance to the borehole increases, and the permeability also decreases to the initial value. In China, a stress reduction of 10% is used as a boundary condition for the effective influence zone ( The effective influence zone radiuses of various diameter cross-measure boreholes are shown in  The distance between two boreholes is the key parameter for the gas drainage drilling layout. Based on design requirements, the larger the distance between two gas drainage boreholes is, the more effect it has on the gas drainage rate of the boreholes. Due to difficulties in testing the optimal distance between two gas drainage boreholes, most collieries in China use twice the effective influence zone radius of one borehole as the largest distance between two boreholes. By using numerical simulations, the stress distribution between adjacent boreholes of different distances can be obtained. Affected by the adjacent borehole, the radial stress of coal around an ordinary cross-measure borehole ( When the distance between two large diameter cross-measure boreholes is 3 m, the maximum radial stress decreases to 3.4–15.2 MPa (or 17–76% of the original stress) with the increase of borehole diameter. As the distance increases from 3 m to 15 m, the radial stress decreases, while the decreasing trend gradually becomes insignificant. When the distance is 15 m, the maximum radial stress ranges from 18 MPa to 19.6 MPa (or 90–98% of the original stress). Therefore, the smaller the distance between two boreholes is, the more effect it has on the decrease in radial stress. Thus, for cross-measure boreholes of different diameters, there is a maximum distance between two boreholes, where the radial stress of the coal reaches a critical limit. As noted above, the radial permeability increases as the radial stress decreases, which reduces the gas flow resistance and improves the gas drainage rate. When all of the radial stresses are 10% less than the initial stress, the coal between boreholes is located in the effective influence zone, and the gas can be effectively controlled. According to the simulation results, the effective influence zone radius of a single borehole with diameter of 0.4 m, 0.6 m, 1.0 m and 1.6 m are 1.91 m, 2.53 m, 3.78 m and 4.8 m, respectively. The corresponding maximum distances of large diameter cross-measure boreholes are 5 m, 7.5 m, 10 m and 15 m, respectively. By comparing the maximum distance of different diameter boreholes with twice the effective influence zone radius, the former is 1.31–1.54 times larger than the latter, which indicates that the effective influence zone of a borehole expands due to the effect of adjacent boreholes. After clarifying the influence zone and interactive effect of the large diameter cross-measure borehole, field tests have been conducted in Ji To test the effective influence zone radius of the large diameter cross-measure borehole, a group of parallel boreholes were designed to drill from the low located drainage roadway of Ji P1–P10 were completed via “dry drilling” (the rotation speed of drilling rig is 70–85 r/min and the diameter is 75–80 mm). After one borehole was completed, a piezometer tube was immediately placed into the bottom of the borehole, and polyurethane and expansive cement were used to seal the hole to the floor. Then, a pressure gage was connected to the piezometer tube, and the gas pressure data from the boreholes were collected daily. Twenty days later, when the pressure gages stabilized, T1 was drilled. Special devices were utilized to drill to the roof, with a water pressure of 8–12 MPa (the rotation speed of drilling rig is 70–85 r/min and the diameter is 74–76 mm). When the borehole reached 0.5 m into the roof, the drill rotationally backed out to the floor of the coal seam at a constant speed of 0.05 m/min with an increased water pressure of 18–25 MPa. After cutting the coal seam, the water pressure was decreased to 6 MPa, and the rotating drill pipe and bit were removed from the borehole. Then, the borehole was sealed with polyurethane and expansive cement, and the sealing length was 10 m. Finally, T1 was connected with the gas drainage system (negative pressure is 20 kPa), and the gas concentration and gas flow data were collected daily. T1 is drilled by using the new method, with a small diameter (74–76 mm) in the rock seams and a large diameter (980–1020 mm) in the coal seam. The gas flow and gas concentration of T1 are shown in The application site of the new method is chosen in the low located drainage roadway of Ji To avoid gas disasters in Ji Comparing the railway roadway of Ji After gas drainage via cross-measure boreholes, the risk of coal and gas outburst in the railway roadway is evaluated by two parameters. One is initial velocity of gas emissions from the borehole (q The parameters of the two roadways are detected during the excavation process from 65 m to 335 m, and the comparison is shown in Due to the difficulties in improving the gas drainage rate and reducing the cost of cross-measure boreholes in soft, highly gassy coal seams, a new method for drilling large diameter cross-measure boreholes by using water-jet technique is proposed, and a special equipment system is developed. Meanwhile, a special borehole with a small diameter in rock seams and a large diameter in the coal seam is created. Based on our study, the following conclusions can be obtained: Increasing the diameter of cross-measure boreholes in coal seams can directly expand the radial stress-relief zone, which increases the permeability and the effective influence zone radius, making gas drainage much easier. Numerical modeling indicates that the plastic zone and the effective influence zone of one cross-measure borehole expand as the borehole diameter increases. The effective influence zone radius of different diameter cross-measure boreholes can be calculated by r The modeling of several adjacent cross-measure boreholes indicates that the radial stress between large diameter boreholes decreases due to the adjacent borehole construction. The smaller the interval is, the more greatly the radial stress decreases. Meanwhile, as the borehole diameter increases, the influence becomes more significant. The decrease in radial stress results in permeability increase, consequently enlarging the effective influence zone. The maximum effective interval of adjacent cross-measure boreholes is 1.31–1.54 times larger than twice a single borehole's effective influence zone radius. The field tests indicate that when the diameter of a cross-measure borehole in a coal seam reaches 1.0 m, the effective influence zone radius can reach 4 m, which is 2.67 times larger than that of an ordinary borehole. After using the new method, the number of cross-measure boreholes per hundred meters and the length of cross-measure boreholes per meter reduce by 32.5% and 42.9%, respectively. The gas drainage rate reaches 52.1%, the outburst forecast predictors (q The authors would like to thank the Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and valuable suggestions. This work is financially supported by the