This communication presents the approaches set up for processing spinner flowmeter well logs in vertical wells with a single fluid phase, which is the most widely used in assessing wells productivity. These focus on improving the pipe hydraulics relationships so that the different fluid inputs throughout the well can be quantified. Since vertical flow inside wells varies with depth between laminar flows (very low Reynolds number, i.e. Re < 103) and turbulent (Re > 4·103) the aim has been to reduce the uncertainty in the transition interval. Starting from bibliographical data and/or well-known formulas for laminar and for turbulent flow, several continuous relationships have been developed for any regime: 1) an expression for the radial distribution of velocity inside the pipeline (velocity profile) was developed. 2) A relationship between the average velocity and the velocity at the axis (velocity factor) was created. 3) A third equation was generated to obtain the friction factor in smooth pipes (and starting from this, a new explicit equation for rough pipes). The purpose has been to have a set of empirical expressions of easy and continuous application for any regime, as an alternative to the use of computer simulations.Flowmeter well logging is used to determine variations in the flow velocity along the pipeline of a well, and serves to quantify the fluid inputs at different depths that contribute to the extraction rate. These quantities are useful in estimating changes in the hydraulic characteristics with depth, enhance the rational exploitation of reservoirs and optimize the resources management. Flowmeter sondes were developed in the late 1950s for use in oil wells [ To obtain the average velocity Moreover, as described in Section To estimate the hydraulic characteristics of the different permeable layers in the well, the head loss values must be determined with depth, starting from the Head loss produced along the pipe casing is determined based on the diameter and the length of pipe, the flow velocity for each depth interval, and the friction factor. The friction factor gives ambiguous results for the transition interval based on conventional relationships (further described in Section Given the stated problems in the transition interval, this work attempts to develop relationships for the velocity profile and the velocity factor over the entire range 10 The need to develop new relationships for these hydraulic parameters has arisen regarding the spinner flowmeter processing, since it is one of the most affected measurement systems by these parameters. In addition, determination of flow velocity requires that these new relationships can be applied in a continuous way for any intermediate values. The use of empirical equations is supported by well-known laws of fluids mechanics, such as those of Darcy [ The validity of the relationships developed is verified by their high degree of adjustment either to empirical data or to widely accepted functions. In the conventional process for determining the flow velocity from flowmeter well logs, certain principles of pipe hydraulics have obviously great relevance [ As is well known, the movement of a fluid along a pipe does not occur at the same velocity across its section, but depends on the distance from the axis. The velocity In general, three types of flow regimes can be distinguished as a function of the value of Since the flow velocity is the focus of this study, the Thus, the first step uses a velocity law that is generally given by the relation between the velocity For laminar flow in smooth pipes, the most widely accepted expression governing this velocity ratio was set by Hagen-Poiseuille equation [ For turbulent flow, logarithmic relationships and potentials of the velocity, depending on the turbulence degree, have been historically considered [  In order to follow the process proposed in [ Theoretically, the average velocity should match the integral of Equation The third step in the process of [ The followed process is delineated in the flow chart in As discussed further below, the main drawback of this process is the difference between the flow velocity and average velocity obtained from the velocity law. The head loss (Δ The friction factor for laminar flow in smooth pipes is given by the Hagen-Poiseuille equation [ For turbulent flow through smooth pipes, the friction factor is given by the Blasius equation [ Later, Colebrook [  In addition to the above relationships, the inflectional behaviour shown by Nikuradse [ As stated in the introduction, for this conversion, a new expression for the velocity law must first be developed that considers the entire range between laminar and turbulent flow, since along wells, flows range from very low Reynolds numbers ( The conditions imposed to generate this law are (i) that its results must match those from Eq.   Moreover, for 1 < τ < 5.2, Eq. For turbulent flow corresponding to pumping rates higher than 1·10 In contrast to the process described for the integration of Eq. Equation It is necessary to obtain one of these two relationships in order to know the regime of the flow. To generate suitable fitting functions, the empirical values of Patel and Head [ Given that ( For values of This exponent and the distance to the axis, which is equal to the radius of the well minus the outer radius of the spinner case, can be entered into Eq. Since the average velocity should not exceed the maximum velocity, this expression must be generated so that for increasing  The mean relative deviation of the fitting of Eq. Bearing in mind that the Colebrook equation was established for the turbulent regime, its numerical solution when the flow tends towards laminar gives lower values for the friction factor than those of Eq. To obtain a new explicit relationship, a fitting function is developed for the friction factor values for smooth pipes resulting from the Hagen-Poiseuille [ The established function for the non-roughness friction factor, This equation has a relative mean deviation of 0.01% with respect to the original functions in the 10 The next step was to develop a fitting function for the difference between the solution of the Colebrook's equation (1939) in the turbulence regime for the set of points of Eq. A continuous expression for the friction factor for any value of roughness can be determined by the sum of Eqs. The resulting curves are shown in Given the very high accuracy of the approximations in Eq. With reference to the calibration process of well flowmeters, it is not a similar process than the precise method realised in laboratory (see for example [ Another problematic feature of the flowmeter well logs would be the effects of lateral fluid input in the screened section. Since most wells are not continuously screened, to minimise this effect the fluid input at each screened section is therefore obtained by subtracting the flow measurement in the axial direction, before and after each section. Related to the relationship for the velocity profile, the transition interval is problematic since the distribution of the fluid velocity inside the pipe is particularly heterogeneous. In laminar flow, the fluid advances homogeneously along the length and width of the pipe, and when the flow is completely turbulent, the fluid becomes homogeneously disordered. Within the transition interval, heterogeneity arises in terms of space and time, and instantaneous images or punctual measurements can give different results. In the transition from laminar to turbulent flow, where turbulence is first encountered, it only occurs in localized patches, so called puffs, which are spatially separated by laminar flow [ About the expression for the velocity factor It should also be pointed out that the above fittings are based on the <V>/Vmax data for each value of Concerning the friction factor, although Joseph and Yang [ For turbulent flow in rough pipes, after the charts elaborated by Rouse [ For the interval 10 Lastly, besides the inflectional behaviour discussed above, Nikuradse [ New expressions for the velocity law, the velocity factor and the friction factor have been developed and their validity is verified using the deviation analysis presented and graphically illustrated in In future research, the influence of this reformulation on the resulting permeability values in wells with conventional relationships versus depth should be quantified.  Part of this study was funded through the