This work reports the effectiveness of sugar-beet pectin xerogels for the removal of heavy metals (cadmium, lead and copper) after multiple batch sorption–desorption cycles, with and without a gels regeneration step. Metals were recovered from xerogel beads without destroying their sorption capability and the beads were successfully reused (nine cycles) without significant loss in both biosorption capacity and biosorbent mass. Metals uptake levelled off or increased after using a 1M CaCl2 regeneration step after each desorption. Calcium, as a regenerating agent, increased the stability and reusability of the gels repairing the damage caused by the acid and removing the excess protons after each elution providing new binding sites. Because of their excellent reusability, pectin xerogels are suitable for metal remediation technologies.The treatment of effluents charged with highly dilute heavy metal concentrations is becoming an important issue because of environmental and sanitary problems, and increasingly restrictive legislations. Such effluents pose serious problems for the industry due to the high cost of metal decontamination using conventional technologies. Biosorption is a cost effective alternative for the purification of effluents containing low metal concentrations. Certain types of biomass (biosorbents) can passively bind metals and other pollutants such as dyes or organic compounds on chemically active sites or functional groups Different materials under different conditions have different metal uptake capacities and metal affinities. Recently, attention has been focused on byproducts or wastes of biological origin produced in large scale industrial or agricultural operations Compared to other pectins obtained from other sources, like citrus, apple and sunflower pectins, sugar-beet pectins have the advantage that the raw material is already dried and does not depend on seasonality. There are previous studies characterizing sugar-beet pectin xerogels as a biosorbent Once the biosorbent is exhausted, the metal-loaded biomass is in the form of residual muds. A decision has to be taken about the priority of removing a polluting or toxic substance from effluents and/or water that could be used for drinking or agricultural purposes, and about the problems that arise from the handling of exhausted biomass from the biosorption process. In this sense, desorption and reutilization of the biosorbents in adsorption–desorption cycles could help in reducing these residues. Desorption can be carried out by proton exchange using acids, chelating agents (EDTA) or exchange with other ions (i.e. CaCl After metal desorption with acids, a regeneration step can be used to prevent biomass deterioration or loss of biosorption capacity. The choice of regenerating agent depends on the kind of biosorbent used and the metals adsorbed which determines the type of metal ion interaction with the solid material. In some cases, a simple wash with distilled water has been used The aim of this work was to determine the effectiveness and resistance of sugar-beet pectin gels for the removal of Cd Azucarera Ebro Agrícola provided the sugar-beet pulp from the Toro plant in Zamora, Spain. The pulp was collected directly from the final drying line to ensure freshness. Sugar-beet pectin was extracted following the protocol proposed by Harel et al. The product of the extraction process, a highly methoxyl pectin, was demethylated in order to enable calcium gelation to produce adequate gels as described in a previous publication The pectin gel beads were prepared by dropping a 1.5% pectin aqueous solution into a cooled 1 Biosorption experiments were carried out at room temperature (23 The amount of metal ions adsorbed per gram of biomass ( After adsorption, the metal-loaded gels were filtered, weighed and placed in contact with a 0.1 The stability of the xerogels was controlled by weighing the gels after filtration at the end of each cycle. Since xerogels were weighed prior drying, the calculation of the metal uptake capacity after each cycle was made taking into account the initial amount of biosorbent, that is, without considering possible biomass losses. In this way, heat and desiccation during the dehydration process would constitute an additional pre-treatment procedure that could alter the xerogel characteristics in the next biosorption–desorption cycle, adding an unnecessary step that would make the process less feasible. After each biosorption, the final amount of metal adsorbed (Me After each desorption, the desorption performance (%Me The residual amount of metal retained per g of biosorbent at the end of each desorption experiment (Me The following experiments were performed in order to evaluate the regeneration properties of 1 Five sorption–desorption cycles, washing the beads with deionized water after each 0.1 Nine sorption–desorption–regeneration cycles, washing the beads with deionized water after each 0.1   Similarly, Yan and Viraraghavan  The effect of 1 Similarly, Jalali et al. Lead was difficult to elute showing performances lower than 100% with or without regeneration (  With CaCl With regeneration, the amount of metal retained in successive cycles followed the order: Pb Biosorption after CaCl Sugar-beet pectin hydro- and xerogels revalue an agricultural residue. Sugar-beet pectin xerogels are stable sorbents able to resist multiple sorption–desorption–regeneration cycles, using 0.1 The authors acknowledge the financial support received from the