This study aims to analyse the sensitivity in decision-making which results in the selection of the appropriate underground metal mining method using the fuzzy-analytical hierarchy process (FAHP) model. The proposed model considers sixteen criteria for the selection of the most appropriate mining method out of the seven. The model consists of three-layer viz. the first layer represents the criteria (factors which influence the mining method), the second layer represents the sub-criteria (categorisation of the factors) and the third layer represents the alternatives (mining methods). The priority of the different mining methods was determined based on global weights. The global weights of seven mining method were determined using a different fuzzification factor under different decision-making attitudes (optimistic, pessimistic and unbiased). The sensitivity of the decision-making results was analysed in order to understand the robustness of the model.There are many metal mining methods available such as block caving, sub level stoping, sub level caving, room and pillar mining, shrinkage stoping, cut and fill stoping, and square set stoping for excavating ore reserves from underground. The selection of a particular metal mining method depends on multiple factors, and thus the selection can be made using the multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) technique. It is very important to select the suitable mining method for excavating an ore deposit for economic reasons and for safety. MCDM aims to select the most promising alternative based on the defined criteria and sub-criteria. In the past, many types of MCDM techniques (AHP, FAHP, TOPSIS, etc.) have been developed and used for the selection of mining methods. The selection of a mining method for excavating an ore deposit is a crucial task for the planners at the decision making stage. The selection of a mining method depends on various qualitative and quantitative factors of the ore deposit. These qualitative and quantitative parameters include geometry, geo-mechanical, operational, economical, etc. Mine planners face the difficulty while selecting the mining method due to more number of interdependent parameters. Once the operation for ore extraction has begun with a particular mining method, it is not possible or difficult to alter the mining method. Among all the MCDM techniques, the most popular technique that solves decision-making problems is the analytical hierarchy process (AHP). However, AHP is ineffective when applied to ambiguous problems like uncertainty of the criteria parameters ( It is clear from the literature that the selection of mining method depends on multiple factors and thus it is important to analyse the degree of sensitivity of decision-making due to either a change in a factor's uncertainty level or a decision maker's attitude. The literature study revealed that sensitivity analysis of decision-making on the type of mining has not been conducted by any other researcher to date. Thus, the present study attempts to analyse the decision-making results in selecting the best mining method using the proposed FAHP model under different fuzzification factors and decision-making attitudes. The model performance was analysed by changing the uncertainty levels of the factors from minimum to maximum in different decision-making attitudes, i.e. optimistic, pessimistic and unbiased. The analytical hierarchy process (AHP) is a decision-making process used to select the best choice from multiple alternatives. The AHP method was initially proposed by The proposed study attempts to develop a FAHP model for decision making on the selection of the best mining methods out of seven alternatives based on the criteria. The sensitivity of the model output was analysed by changing the values of the fuzzification factors in different decision-making attitudes. The relative priority of each mining method was determined based on the global weights in different condition. The flowchart of the working procedure is shown in The first step of the proposed model is to select the criteria and sub-criteria for the prioritization of the alternatives (underground metal mining methods). The selection of a suitable mining method depends on various criteria like ore-geometry, the geo-mechanical conditions of the ore, the production capacity of the deposit and various operational parameters ( The hierarchical structure of the proposed FAHP model was designed based on different criteria and sub-criteria. All the identified criteria, sub-criteria and the evaluation alternatives (mining methods) were arranged in different levels of the hierarchy (shown in The next step is to develop relative importance matrices for each level using the corresponding parameters. The relative importance matrices for each level were built by using the FAHP scale of The relative importance values of criteria in selecting the mining method were considered from past studies ( Similarly, the relative importance matrices for sub-criteria in the second level and mining methods in the third level were developed based on the UBC technique of the selection of a mining method ( In general, the α value ranges between 0 and 1, and it may be any fractional value in between 0 and 1. The higher values of α (i.e., close to 1) represent more uncertainty and the lower values less uncertainty. Using eqn. The fuzzy pair-wise comparison matrices for each level were converted into crisp comparison matrices using the following eqn. In the above eqn., the The value of The local and global weights of the parameters at each level were determined using the geometric mean concept. The geometric mean of the The local weight of the variable can be determined using eqn. After determining the local weights, determination of the global weights at the third and fourth levels needs to be performed. The fuzzy global weights ( The global weights of each mining method were determined using the above equation. The sensitivity analysis of the proposed decision-making model was conducted by varying the fuzzification factor (α) in eqn. The sensitivity of decision-making in the ranking of seven mining methods was analysed by considering the fuzzification factor in 16-criteria and 54-sub-criteria. The results indicated that the ranking or priorities of seven mining methods were not altered by either changing of the fuzzification factor from 0 to 1 or changing the decision-making attitude. Therefore, for any value of λ and α, the rank of a particular mining method remains the same. The rank of a particular mining method is decided based on global weights. The higher the global weight of the mining method, the higher is the rank or priority. To demonstrate the sensitivity of the ranking of various mining methods under different degrees of uncertainty (α) and different decision-makers’ attitudes (λ), the results of one criterion (dip) is shown in the text in order to reduce the manuscript length. The sensitivity of the decision-making results for all other parameters are shown in  Similarly, In the same way, The validation of the proposed decision-making model was conducted with ore deposit data of the Tummalapalle mine of the Uranium Corporation of India Limited (UCIL). The latitudes of the deposit ranges from 14°18‘36.6″N to 14°20′20″N and the longitude from 78°15′16.57″E to 78°18″3.33″E. The deposit is located in the Cuddapah district of Andhra Pradesh, India as shown in In the proposed study, the FAHP model was developed by considering 16-criteria. However, model validation and sensitivity analysis were conducted based on 8-criteria due to the unavailability of the remaining data, these being: dip, shape, thickness, grade distribution, depth of the deposit, the RMR of the ore zone, RMR of hanging wall, and RMR of foot wall. The characteristics of the ore deposit are shown in The global weights of these characteristics were taken from the model developed for the selection of the best mining method for the specified ore deposit. Global weights corresponding to the flat dip, tabular shape, narrow thickness, moderate depth, uniform grade distribution, the moderate RMR of the ore, the weak RMR of the hanging wall, and the moderate RMR of the foot wall, with respect to each mining method, were determined for α value 1 and λ value 0.5 using eqns. The total score (shown in Sensitivity analysis for the ranking of the mining methods for the specified ore deposit was carried out for six fuzzification factors (α = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1) in three decision-making attitudes, these being pessimistic (λ = 0), unbiased (λ = 0.5), and optimistic (λ = 1). The global weights of each combination of λ and α were determined using eqns.  The study aims to analyse the sensitivity in decision-making for the selection of a mining method using the FAHP model. The results indicate that the proposed FAHP decision-making model could be robustly used for the selection of a mining method, as the factor's uncertainty levels do not influence the final decision. It was observed that the rank of the highest priority alternative never alters with either changes in the fuzzification factor (α) or the decision-making attitude (λ). It can be inferred from the results that the ranking of the most suitable alternative remains the same irrespective of the fuzzification factors and decision-making attitudes. Authors state that there is not any conflict of interest. Authors state that the research was conducted according to ethical standards. There is no special funding for this work. The work has been carried out at the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at