Agglomeration is commonly used for processing clay-rich ores in order to prevent undesirable effects, especially the risks of clogging or preferential channelling within the heap leaching piles. Several parameters such as agglomeration time, agglomerates water content or agglomerates binder content were identified as having a strong influence on the agglomeration process. In the present study, the impact of water content, sulfuric acid and addition of a polyacrylamide binder on the porous structure and mechanical strength of uranium-ore agglomerates were investigated, before as well as after 10 days of leaching. A multi-analytical approach, combining SEM, MIP, ICP-OES, X-ray tomography analyses and oedometer tests was used for this purpose. Increasing sulfuric acid concentration at agglomeration was found to enhance uranium extraction extent but reducing agglomerate strength during leaching. In addition, the increase of L/S ratio caused a decrease of agglomerate porosity due to the formation of higher amount of primary aluminous silicate matrix. Finally, the use of a polyacrylamide binder improved leaching resistance of agglomerates, allowing an increase of both agglomerate porosity and uranium extraction rates between 24 and 240 h of leaching while keeping a better compressive strength.The agglomeration process represents a way used by nickel, copper and uranium industries to enhance acid heap leaching of low grade ores containing large amount of fines and clays ( Agglomerate quality is often related to the uniformity of particle size distribution, water content prior and during leaching, by their porosity and their strength ( Agglomeration of nickel laterite and copper ores has been intensively investigated, but the only published study on uranium-ore agglomerates is our previous work ( Most agglomerate quality tests are qualitative and data obtained reflect only some aspect of macroscopic averaged properties of a batch of agglomerates, while the microstructure which plays a crucial role on agglomerate quality and behaviour during leaching remains poorly understood ( The agglomerates used in this study were produced from clay-rich sandstone containing about 900 ppm of uranium and more than 10 wt% of clay minerals (mainly kaolinites, illites, mixed layered illite-smectite phases and chlorites) provided by AREVA and originating from Somaïr, Niger. A particle size analysis of the ore was conducted with particles ranging from less than 80 µm to more than 10 mm and a P Different agglomeration conditions have been investigated as detailed in For each batch, about 120–150 g of 10-mm-diameter agglomerates were leached in a 10 cm high column over 10 days with sulfuric acid at a concentration of 10 g/L and a flowrate of 7.2 mL/h (i.e. about 5.7 L/m A similar multi-analysis approach to the one used in After drying in open air, some agglomerates were freeze-dried and analysed by scanning electron microscope ( Nalco-bound agglomerates were also analysed by X-ray tomography with a The effect of sulfuric acid addition was investigated for acid-bound agglomerates with sulfuric acid additions of 0, 25 and 40 kg of acid per ton of ore (batches #1, #2 and #3 – see SEM analyses performed on 10 mm agglomerates from each batch prior to leaching revealed that each sample shared a similar structure composed by the coalescence and layering of micro-agglomerates and fine particles. Rock forming minerals such as quartz, feldspars, muscovite, kaolinite and pyrite are still identifiable as the main constituents. Chlorites are still found in experiments free of sulfuric acid ( As previously reported, the initial aluminous matrix formed during agglomeration and maturation dissolved and after 10 days of leaching, a secondary aluminous silicate matrix was found in every batch of agglomerates, but its localisation differs, depending of the agglomeration conditions: for 0 kg/t acid-bound agglomerates, the secondary matrix is located at the edge of the agglomerates, whereas internal parts of the agglomerates display non altered minerals, meaning that leaching solution did not reach these parts, as shown by for 25 kg/t and 40 kg/t acid-bound agglomerates, the secondary matrix is present everywhere. These analyses highlight the increase of agglomerate structure degradation during leaching with the increase of sulfuric acid concentration at agglomeration. MIP analyses performed on both un-leached and 10-days leached agglomerates of each batch showed that they all shared a porosity distribution between total connected porosity and effective porosity (i.e. part of the connected porosity that participates to fluid flow) similar to that of materials with a cluster-like texture as described by  After 10 days of leaching, connected and effective porosity increases for each batch of agglomerates ( Leach solutions from the three batches of agglomerates were analysed by ICP-OES. The results show that uranium extraction extent increases with sulfuric acid concentration at agglomeration, as exhibited by L/S = 0.11 agglomerates were analysed and compared to RC agglomerates (i.e. L/S = 0.08 agglomerates) (batches #1 and #5 – cf. SEM analyses on unleached and 10-days leached agglomerates revealed that the two batches of agglomerates shared similar structural features (micro agglomerates, aluminous silicate matrix), independently of the L/S ratio. However, After 10 days of leaching, new meso-pores were formed in L/S = 0.11 agglomerates, coming from leaching of the primary matrix. Just as with RC agglomerates, large trapped areas of secondary aluminous silicate matrix phase were also identified, as shown in These analyses showed that L/S ratio might have minor influence on agglomerate texture, except for the increase of the primary aluminous matrix phase content. Dissolution rate of minerals during agglomeration is similar for both batches since acid concentration is the same (25 kg/t) but with the increase of dilution of primary matrix with L/S ratio. MIP analyses on unleached agglomerates showed that L/S = 0.11 agglomerates had less micro- and meso- pores than RC agglomerates, as illustrated in After 10 days of leaching, L/S = 0.11 agglomerates porosity increased (from 19.1% to 21.7% for connected porosity and from 1.5% to 4.1% for effective porosity) but remained lower than RC agglomerate porosity ( Leached solutions were analysed by ICP OES and the extent of uranium extraction was compared for both batches of agglomerates. As illustrated in Finally, the impact of a polyacrylamide binder, namely the binder (Nalco 71760) produced by Nalco Chemical Company, has been tested. This binder has been added in addition to sulfuric acid at agglomeration ( X-ray tomography analyses on un-leached and 10 days-leached agglomerates from each batch are presented in  MIP analyses on Nalco-bound and RC un-leached agglomerates showed that both type of agglomerates had similar porosities. However the addition of the Nalco binder caused a slight decrease of effective porosity and of the ratio between effective porosity and connected porosity from 0.18 (for RC agglomerates) to 0.15 (for Nalco bound agglomerates) ( These results tend to confirm that the addition of the Nalco binder enables a better stability of pore structure during leaching. This leads to an increase of effective porosity after 10 days of leaching, unlike for RC agglomerates whose meso-pores clog partially during the second stage of leaching process due to the formation of the secondary aluminous silicate matrix and its dispersion everywhere within the agglomerates. Such results are also consistent with structural analyses showing that Nalco-bound agglomerates displayed a better structure conservation after leaching. Note that porosity measurements on 10 days-leached agglomerates using X-ray tomography reveal a higher porosity in case of RC agglomerates (7.6%) than for Nalco-bound agglomerates (4.9%). At first sight, these results could appear inconsistent with the previous MIP analyses. But X-ray tomography encompasses both connected and non-connected porosity (only for pore sizes higher than the voxel size, i.e. 2.5 µm). In other words, RC agglomerates are still more porous than Nalco-bound ones after 10 days of leaching but a large part of pores are no longer interconnected, an observation consistent with the pore clogging phenomena affecting RC agglomerates during the second stage of leaching.  To complete the structural and porosity analyses of the agglomerates, oedometer tests were carried out, aiming to assess the effect of agglomeration parameters on their compressive strength. Compression (quantifying the material leaning to compression) and swelling (quantifying the deformation of a material under the consolidation constraint it has already been subject to) indexes and pre-consolidation constraint are presented in The increase of sulfuric acid concentration at agglomeration has no major influence on the evolution of compression index before leaching. However, considering SEM results, we expect that compression index of 10 days leached agglomerates would increase with the initial sulfuric acid concentration at agglomeration. The increase of L/S ratio during agglomeration causes a high increase of the compression index (by a factor 3). The compression index decreases with a factor 5 when the Nalco binder is added. These results highlight the increase of agglomerate strength of Nalco-bound agglomerates compared to RC agglomerates, which is consistent with the previous analyses.  Moreover, pre-consolidation constraint remains similar for all the batches of agglomerates. Usually, this parameter quantifies the constraint already applied to the tested material prior to odometer test. In our case, we infer that it characterises the constraint applied on agglomerates within the agglomeration drum. This would be consistent with the low pre-consolidation constraints measured and with the similar values obtained for the all the batches of agglomerates, as their agglomeration conditions (drum speed and agglomeration time) were the same. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of sulfuric acid concentration, L/S ratio and polyacrylamide binder content at agglomeration on agglomerate structure and behaviour during leaching, to improve uranium-ore agglomerates. The combination of different analytical methods allowed us to identify structural and porosimetry modifications due to agglomeration parameter changes: Sulfuric acid concentration at agglomeration drives the formation of primary aluminous silicate matrix by dissolution of chlorites, illites and uranium mineral. In this way, increasing sulfuric acid concentration increases primary matrix content within agglomerates by an increase of pre-dissolved minerals. Thus, the extent of uranium extraction during leaching increases in parallel with the agglomerate degradation. However, the rise of sulfuric acid concentration at agglomeration also contributes to higher degradation of agglomerate structure during leaching and hence to a decrease of leached agglomerate strength. This effect could be a cause of agglomerate breakdown and clogging phenomena within heaps. In this way, the present results highlight the importance of finding a good balance between agglomerates stability and extent of extraction in uranium. This is consistent with Water content at agglomeration controls primary matrix amount, which affects agglomerate size and effective porosity. This parameter also leads to a decrease of agglomerates strength. These results are in agreement with Finally, analyses on Nalco-bound agglomerates showed that before leaching, the polyacrylamide binder induces a slight decrease of agglomerate effective porosity. However, at the same time, it also leads to an increase of agglomerate compressive strength. During short term leaching (e.g. the first stage of leaching of about 24 h), the addition of the Nalco binder causes a slight decrease on uranium leaching extraction. Nevertheless, at a longer term, during the second stage of leaching, it allows an increase of extraction rates, due to the better agglomerate strength, assuring a better conservation of agglomerate structure and so porosity during leaching. These results suggest that Nalco-bound agglomerates could be leached longer than RC agglomerates without causing clogging due to agglomerate deterioration, and ultimately increasing uranium recovery. It is worth to noting that the increase of agglomerate mechanical resistance due to this binder has been only assessed before leaching, i.e. for the initial moisture conditions. This gain could be lost with the increase of water content and acid dissolution during heap leaching since the use of polymeric binders tends to increase water retention within heaps as pointed out by several studies (e.g.,  The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of Finally, we are grateful to the two anonymous reviewers for their careful proofreading and their helpful comments which greatly improved the quality of this publication.