The role of frother controlling bubble size and froth properties is reasonably well understood in the air–water system. A concern is how well this relates to the three-phase flotation condition. As a model hydrophobic solid talc was used. A column was run at fixed froth depth and air rate with overflow and underflow recycled. Four frothers were examined, two polyglycols, polypropylene glycol (F150), polypropylene methyl ether (DF250), and two alcohols, 1-heptanol and 1-pentanol. At steady state, pulp zone gas holdup and bubble size were measured along with water and solids overflow rate as a function of talc addition. For 1-heptanol and DF250 there was no impact of talc on bubble size or gas holdup. For 1-pentanol the presence of talc had no effect on bubble size but gas holdup increased; in contrast, for F150 addition of talc increased bubble size and decreased gas holdup. There was a reversal in water overflow rate between the F150 and 1-pentanol on adding talc, the 5:1 ratio in favour of F150 in air–water becoming 3:1 in favour of 1-pentanol at 5wt% talc. The solids overflow rate likewise favoured 1-pentanol in presence of talc.
                  The increase in bubble size in the talc/F150 system implies coalescence, as further evidenced by the bubble size distribution becoming bi-modal. The mechanism proposed was a combination of talc adsorbing frother from solution, demonstrated by TOC analysis of residual frother, and directly from the bubble surface due to the orientation of adsorbed F150. In the talc/pentanol case the increase in gas holdup was attributed to bubbles not being at terminal velocity and attached talc particles increasing deceleration, i.e., slowing bubble rise. The increase in water overflow rate in the talc/pentanol system corresponds to increased froth stability imparted by hydrophobic solids. Froth stabilization by talc with F150, however, is offset by the increased bubble size that means less water is carried into the froth. The reversal in water overflow ranking of the frothers can, therefore, be interpreted as due to frother/solid interactions. Similar interactions may account for reversals noted in other systems.The role of frother in the air–water system in controlling bubble size and froth properties is reasonably well understood ( Using a sulphide ore, These studies gave the overall flotation result and to help interpret the observations the impact of solids on both the pulp and froth zone properties needs to be considered. In the former gas holdup is perhaps the most common characterization tool ( Compared to gas holdup few studies include bubble size data. The recently developed techniques suited to three-phase systems are changing the situation ( There is more discussion in the flotation literature concerning the role of solids on froth properties, a recent review provided by The initial focus of our work was to study the impact of bubble loading by increasing the mass of solids floated using a naturally hydrophobic material. Talc was selected rather than, say graphite, as the latter is known to interact with frother. The impact of increasing wt% solids on pulp zone (gas holdup and bubble size) and froth zone properties (water and solids overflow rate) was monitored in the presence of four frothers. Unexpected results were obtained with two, the polyglycol F150 (also known as PPG425) and 1-pentanol, which are the focus of this communication. A 250 Solids and frother were added to water (Montreal tap) as required and the slurry conditioned in the tank using a mechanical stirrer. The column was operated in continuous mode: one pump delivered feed from the tank, and a second pump returned the underflow while the overflow gravity-fed to the tank. Timed overflow samples were collected to calculate flow rates. The slurry was weighed then filtered and the cake oven-dried at 100 Airflow rate was set at 4 LPM ( Frother concentrations were selected with respect to the critical coalescence concentration (CCC) ( Talc (specific gravity 2.5–2.8 and average particle size 2.5 For these two frothers gas holdup (  To illustrate the magnitude, at 25 The suggested explanation is coalescence, which is supported by the bubble size distribution data. One mechanism could be loss of frother by adsorption which would return bubble size to that in water only. With 1-pentanol a different pattern to F150 emerges.  The results for DF250 and 1-heptanol show little impact of talc on the pulp properties and an increase in water and solids overflow rates that reflects the froth stabilizing effect of an increasing amount of floatable solids. In contrast the results show a marked additional impact of talc on the ‘strong’ F150 and the ‘weak’ 1-pentanol. In water only this relative strength is evident, for example the overflow rate with F150 exceeds that with 1-pentanol by a factor of ca. 5, comparable to the findings of With F150 adsorption by talc was demonstrated. The removal of frother would tend to drive the system back to the water only case, typified by large bubbles (>3–4 Interaction via the OH group seems unlikely as this group is common to all frothers and interaction with propoxy groups seems ruled out, as these groups are present in DF250 as well as F150. A notable difference among the four frothers is that F150 has two end OH (hydrophilic) groups. In this hypothesis, talc removes F150 from the surface of the bubble thus directly compromising the coalescence inhibiting action of the frother. There is insufficient data to pursue further this notion of removal of frother from the bubble surface but such loss does appear to be needed to explain the strong coalescence when F150 is still detected in solution. Another line to pursue is where the coalescence occurs: at bubble generation or progressively along the column and presumably the action continues in the froth zone but the experiments did not permit these possibilities to be identified. The pentanol/talc case is different. There is no evidence of coalescence from the bubble size data; nevertheless the gas holdup did change systematically upon talc addition. The initial decrease (up to 1 The changes evident in the pulp zone help explain the overflow results. In the case of 1-pentanol (and DF250 and 1-heptanol), the anticipated effect of floatable particles stabilizing the froth and increasing water overflow rate is supported. (The increase in gas holdup with 1-pentanol may further increase overflow rate, noting the relationship reported by The reversal between two- and three-phase systems for F150 and 1-pentanol can be explained by reference to changes occurring in the pulp zone. We can conclude in general that if there is interaction between frother and solids then water overflow and recovery results different from those in water alone can be expected and measurements of gas holdup and bubble size in the pulp zone will help interpret and elucidate the mechanism(s). We can anticipate that similar interpretations apply to the other noted cases of ‘reversal’ ( Talc proved an illuminating model solid, the results with F150 and 1-pentanol being unexpected. Different frother types need to be explored, for example to test the one vs. two OH end-groups hypothesis advanced to explain coalescence with F150. Other solids should be examined. From the evidence it seems sulphide minerals where hydrophobicity is collector-induced do not interact with typical frothers sufficient to modify pulp zone properties and we would anticipate no change in the order of frother strength between two- and three-phase tests as found by  Interaction between frother and solids may alter the relative water recovery seen in water only systems, including reversal of the order. The results here for F150, a strong frother and 1-pentanol, a weak frother, illustrate this conclusion. In the case of F150, a notable increase in bubble size with the distribution becoming bi-modal was observed on addition of talc (as low as 0.2 In the case of 1-pentanol, bubble size did not change but gas holdup increased. It is suggested that the increase in gas holdup is due to attached talc slowing the bubble which is evidently still decelerating over the height of the test column. Measurements of pulp zone properties, bubble size and gas holdup, should help interpret other cases of reversal in the overflow results between two- and three-phase systems. The authors acknowledge financial support under the Chair in Mineral Processing sponsored by Vale Inco, Xstrata Process Support, Teck Resources, Shell Canada, Agnico-Eagle, Barrick Gold, Corem, SGS Lakefield Research, and Flottec through the NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) CRD (Collaborative Research and Development) program. The authors would also like to thank Wei Zhang for performing the TOC analysis.