Vermicomposting is a dependable waste recycling technology which greatly augments N and P levels mainly through microbial action. This paper aims to identify efficient N-fixing (NFB) and P-solubilizing (PSB) bacteria from earthworm intestines. Various combinations of vegetable market waste, rice straw, and cowdung were fed to two earthworm species (Eisenia fetida and Perionyx excavatus). Total organic C decreased, pH shifted towards neutrality, and NPK availability, and microbial (NFB, PSB, and total bacteria) population increased remarkably during vermicomposting with E. fetida. Therefore, 45 NFB and 34 PSB strains isolated from Eisenia gut were initially screened, their inter-dominance assessed, and 8 prolific strains were identified through 16SrRNA sequencing. Interestingly, two novel N-fixing strains of Kluyvera ascorbata emerged as an efficient biofertilizer candidate. Moreover, both N-fixing and P-solubilizing strains of Serratia and Bacillus were isolated from earthworm gut. All the isolated strains significantly improved soil health and facilitated crop growth as compared to commercial biofertilizers.Remarkable acceleration in the rate of solid waste generation has been observed in all parts of the world in last few years, while the growth is more alarming in developing nations than the developed ones ( The biochemical decomposition of waste materials is primarily attributed to the microbial activity during vermicomposting; wherein the earthworms contribute to fragmentation and conditioning of the substrate which stimulate the microbial population thereby increasing the surface area available for microbial activity ( Under these perspectives, the present study was designed to isolate productive N fixing (NFB) and P solubilizing (PSB) bacteria from the intestinal microbiota of Fresh vegetable wastes (VW) [basic properties: bulk density (BD) The vermicompost and compost samples obtained from the vermibeds were analyzed for pH, bulk density (BD), total organic carbon (TOC), easily mineralizable nitrogen (Av. N), available phosphorus (Av. P), exchangeable potassium (Ex. K) following standard procedures ( The performance of the three biocomposting systems ( 1 5 well grown matured specimens of earthworms were collected after 2 The selected pure colonies of N-fixing and P-solubilizing bacterial strains were independently grown in respective media (Burk’s and Pikovskaya) as described before. We have used modified and simple processes (relative dominance (RD) for NFBs and solubilization index (SI) for PSBs) to assess the dominance of the isolates based on previous reports ( 5 NFBs and 3 PSBs were selected for molecular analysis on the basis of the RD and SI data. Genomic DNA was extracted from 65 The partial nucleotide sequence was performed at 1st BASE (Malaysia) using Sanger’s method using 27FA or 27FC or U1492R primers ( The evolutionary history of the 8 nucleotide sequences was inferred using the UPGMA method ( The efficiency of the NFB and PSB isolates was compared with commercial cultures of The temporal data of the bio-composting experiment was analyzed using a two way ANOVA followed by Least Significant Difference (LSD) test to differentiate the efficiency of various treatments at the probability level of p The initial physico-chemical properties of VW, RS, and CD have been given in Section In general, significant reduction in pH and BD of the feedstock was observed under In general, N availability significantly increased under both Although the available K content increased at the end (60 In general, the TOC levels gradually decreased over time in all three biocomposting systems ( The growth of bacterial community (total count, NFB, and PSB counts) was assessed during biocomposting and the data presented in On the basis of previous results of this study, we attempted to isolate efficient N-fixing and P-solubilizing bacteria from the intestines of Among all the screened isolates, 8 strains were selected based on their dominance as discussed above and undergone for detail characterization. Complete 16S rRNA gene was amplified from all the isolates and were partially sequenced. The A high similarity was observed between the strains of The experimental soil was inherently acidic in nature with moderate SOC content as given in Section There was about 2–5 folds increase in N availability in soil treated with the isolated strains. Whereas, the enhancement in N availability in soil was 1.40–1.90 folds under two commercial cultures (Az and Rh) used in the study. According to the DMRT, the impact of various bacterial strains on N-availability in soil may be arranged in the order: IN3 In this experiment we detected 2 strains of The results of pod yield, crude protein in pods, and nutrient uptake (N, P, and K) in pods and stems are presented in Distinct benefit in The authors are thankful to Department of Biotechnology (