Planetary ball mills feature attractive properties, like the possibility of dry or wet operation, straightforward handling, cleanability and moderate costs. Consequently they are very well suited for lab scale process development in diverse industries, including pharmaceuticals and new materials. A number of questions still remain unanswered regarding this mill type. These include the stress conditions as well as transfer of the grinding results to other types of mills with free moving balls, such as stirred media mills, which can be built in large scales and operated continuously.
                  In order to measure the ball motion and, thus, the stress conditions, a planetary ball mill was equipped with a high speed video camera, so that the grinding ball motion during the comminution process can be recorded and analysed. The influence of important process parameters on the ball motion pattern was assessed in this study, namely speed ratio, ball filling ratio and friction conditions, the latter by applying different mill feeds. The experimental results show considerable influences of the ball filling ratio and friction conditions. The measured ball motion patterns differ significantly from ball trajectories which were calculated using kinetic equations proposed in older publications.
                  In addition to the measurements the ball motion was simulated using a three dimensional Discrete Element Model (DEM). An attempt was made to account for mill feed via altered friction coefficients. Correlations of the DEM results and experimental findings at different operating conditions show a good agreement. Based on simulation data the frequency distribution of the stress energies in the mill could be calculated and compared for different operating conditions.Due to their high energy density planetary ball mills are especially suited for fine and ultra-fine grinding of hard and brittle material down to the nanometre size range A transfer problem occurs then, when taking such a newly developed process to production scale: due to their working principle, large installation sizes of planetary ball mills show major technical difficulties in the mills' drive systems In order to characterise the stress conditions in planetary ball mills, detailed information about the motion patterns of the grinding balls present in this mill type is needed. The grinding ball movement varies depending on the mill operating parameters, including ball type and size and feed type and size, so these have to be considered carefully. DEM modelling has become a very popular technique for of the evaluation of these dependencies in ball milling. It provides insight to additional quantitative information which is not readily accessible via experiments, like complete velocity and force distributions. The combined effort of researchers in this area aims at a predictive model, which could be used, amongst others, for the above-named transfer problem. A comprehensive review of previous work on the DEM modelling of tumbling mills was given by Mishra Despite many valuable contributions, the understanding of the correlations of stress conditions, grinding ball motion and operating parameters in planetary ball mills is only intermittent. The objective of this work is to deepen this understanding by the joint use of experimental and DEM modelling techniques. Effects of influencing parameters like friction shall be clarified and DEM results are evaluated with respect to the calculation of a stress energy distribution, which could be used for the direct comparison of the prevailing stress conditions in a planetary ball mill. This output can then be used in an improved grinding process model. A laboratory scale planetary ball mill ( The camera enables recording and analysis of the images on a computer at a rate of 250 Using different gear sets, the mill's speed ratio, In addition to the experimental investigations, the grinding ball motion is examined by DEM simulations. The DEM-approach used in this work was originally introduced for geological investigations The resulting contact force is given by: The restitution coefficient The effect of mill speed ratio k on the grinding ball motion was investigated using the described mill test rig. The other parameters were set to the standard values as given in The grinding ball filling ratio was varied between 0.3 and 0.7 without mill feed. Other parameters were kept at standard values (see It is known for a varied filling ratio in planetary ball mills In order to analyse the influence of feed material on the grinding process, a comparison of the grinding ball motion in presence of different mill feeds was conducted. Median particle sizes of the powders were about 60 Considerable differences in motion can be observed depending on the feed material ( These experimental results explicitly reveal the influence of changed friction conditions on the grinding ball motion due to mill feed. The friction conditions do not vary only for different material types, but also with decreasing feed particle size and, accordingly, increasing adhesion due to an increasing grinding time. Thus, a comprehensive characterisation of the grinding ball motion and their correlation to the process parameters, especially the friction conditions, is necessary in order to fully understand the stress conditions inside the planetary ball mill. Since the experimental results show the importance of the friction conditions for the ball motion and, therefore, the stress conditions, an attempt was made to simulate the effects of mill feed by altering the friction coefficients in the DEM simulations without actually simulating small feed particles. Consequently, supplementary studies of the planetary ball milling process would be feasible. Additional information can be gained about the stress conditions, like the amount of collisions and the stress energy distributions which are not accessible in the experiments. A sensitivity analysis was carried out in order to evaluate the effects of the static and rolling friction coefficients on the simulation results. Based on the standard values, corresponding to the case without mill feed in the grinding chamber as shown in The effect of friction on the simulation result was analysed quantitatively by evaluating the velocity data of all collisions for different combinations of the static and rolling friction coefficients. The basis of the variation is the standard case without mill feed. In this work, the term For increased static friction (“marble”-case) the distribution is shifted to higher relative velocities (see In order to characterise the stress conditions, the so called stress energy SE can be applied which was introduced, among others, by Kwade Based on the results shown in The increase of static friction (“marble”-case) results in increased median values of the stress energy per collision, while increased rolling friction (“limestone, alumina”-case) causes a slight decrease in the median value of the stress energy per collision. Of interest is also the domain of high stress energies (> Consequently, the possibility to qualitatively model the effect of feed filling by use of adequate friction coefficients could be demonstrated. Nevertheless, quantitative investigations are also topic of future work. Moreover, the friction coefficients for the simulations shall be determined experimentally by model experiments in shear testers On the basis of video camera images, no considerable influence of speed ratio on the grinding ball motion pattern could be observed in the range − Different ball motion patterns exist at varied grinding ball filling ratios, namely with increasing filling ratio cascading over cataracting to centrifugation. Furthermore, the grinding ball motion is strongly affected by the friction arising, among others, from different feed materials. Thus, friction necessarily has to be considered in studies on stress conditions in the planetary ball mill. Utilizing a Discrete Element simulation model, a sensitivity analysis shows that both friction coefficients, i.e. static and rolling friction coefficients, strongly influence ball motion, relative collision velocities and stress energy distributions. The results fortify the approach to account for mill feed by changing friction coefficients. The experimental as well as simulation techniques are currently being refined to gain further insight to the grinding ball motion as well as stress conditions and their dependency on the process parameters in the planetary ball mill. Corresponding experiments with the presence of feed material have to follow in order to identify the ball motion resulting in optimum product fineness. Other operating parameters, like geometrical changes, have to be looked at, too. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the