A method for the design of flotation circuits is presented. The design problem is represented by several superstructures. The first superstructure represents separation tasks (STS), which include: feed processing superstructure (FPS), concentrate processing superstructure (CPS), and tail processing superstructure (TPS). The FPS commonly uses a single stage, i.e., rougher. The CPS represents the circuit needed to carry out the cleaner task, and the TPS represents the circuit needed to carry out the scavenger task. These superstructures are flow networks between several separation stages. In each separation stage two kinds of cells are allowed, bank and column. In several streams in the CPS and TPS, the incorporation of regrind mills is also included.
                  The optimal selection of the circuit is made with an appropriate objective function, upon which the values of the operational and structural variables may be determined. The problem is formulated using disjunctive programming, which is converted to a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem. The model includes mass balance, equipment models, operational conditions, and logic relationship. The approach is illustrated for a copper concentration plant.Froth flotation is one of the most widely accepted industrial practice for separation of valuable components from associated gangue materials in metallic minerals. The aim of the flotation process is to achieve maximum recovery and highest grade. Due to many reasons the separation is rarely complete, and in order to improve the process efficiency it is normal practice to make use of a number of interconnected flotation cell banks, flotation column and regrind mills. Optimization of flotation circuits has been considered because a typical flotation circuit may process thousands of ore ton/year, and a marginal improvement can have a considerable economic impact. The early attempts at developing numerical methods to determine the optimal design of flotation cells started with the work of  The outline of this paper is as follows: In The design strategy includes the use of flow network superstructures, which embeds many alternative configurations for a flotation circuits. In each superstructure, discrete decision variables are employed to represent configuration alternatives for the circuit, e.g., existence or non-existence of a flotation column, stream interconnection arrangements, stream splits, etc.; and continuous decision variables are used to represent alternative steady state design specifications. The formulation may be supplemented with performance requirements that the flotation circuit must meet, e.g., constraints specifying minimum production or maximum stream flow rates. The upper level includes a separation task superstructure (STS), in which a flow network is included between three processing superstructure. At the second level, three superstructures are considered. Feed processing superstructure (FPS), concentrate processing superstructure (CPS), and tail processing superstructure (TPS). The FPS commonly uses a single stage, i.e., rougher. The CPS represents the circuit needed to carry out the cleaner task, and the TPS represents the circuit needed to carry out the scavenger task. These superstructures are flow networks between several separation stages. The CPS and TPS have the same appearance with the STS, but each processing superstructure in the STS is changed by a flotation stage in the CPS and TPS. This same appearance makes easy the mathematical representation. Also the superstructures representation avoids the presence of symmetrical structures avoiding double counting and reducing the number of flow sheet configurations. In addition some streams (e.g., streams between cleaner and scavenger subsystems) can be eliminated as needed. In each stage two kinds of cells are allowed, bank and column flotation cells. Also the regrind mill is incorporated for some streams. This superstructure is called equipment selection superstructure, ESS. The problem can then be defined as follows: given its technical characteristics, costs, prices, and the feed mass flow find the topology or structure of the process circuits, by searching through a group of hierarchized superstructures, as well as the operational conditions that maximize the profits of the plant. The strategy to be utilized includes establishing the previously mentioned superstructures, and then generating a mathematical model for the superstructure. The mathematical solution to the problem should deliver mass flows (zero mass flows represent the non-existence of streams), equipment selection and size, and the configuration of the plant. The mathematical models for the STS, CPS, TPS are similar to those developed by The principal sets are: Also, the following sets are necessary: Since the superstructures are analogous, the sets Each stream The mathematical model in the STS, CPS, and TPS includes material balances in the mixers and splitters, disjunction expressions for the selection of the level of division in splitters, the assignment of the feeds flows for each species The mass balance equations for one stage (rougher) FPS are In the CPS and TPS each stage can include bank cells or column cells with or without grinding mill ( Where In Eq. The disjunctive Eq.   In these equations Several logic expressions are also included, for example the designer may want to include only one grinding mill. The procedure of The optimal selection of the circuit requires that an appropriate objective function be defined upon which the values of the operational and structural variables may be determined. Since the income depends on the structure and operational conditions, a useful function is the difference between income and costs. Different relations may be applied for calculation of the income depending on the type of product and its market. For base metals the formula net-smelter-return may be utilized, ( The annualized costs of the plant may be considered as the sum of fixed and variable costs: The objective functions and the subject to restrictions represent a problem of mixed integer linear programming (MILP). The procedure was applied to the design of a copper concentration plant, whose species are: The optimal integer solution gives an annual profits of 3.5 millions US$, while income from sales was 16.2 million US$. The problem, including a total of 594 equations and 408 variables, was solved using the GAMS and OSL2 solver, in a Pentium IV processor in 0.33 s. The sensitivity of the solution to levels of stream division was considered. The streams were split between two and five levels. The solution obtained for all cases were the same as of To study the potential effect metal price on the structure of the flotation circuit, the metal price was changed until to find a different structure. In the base case a copper price of 0.85 US$/pound was considered. The copper price was decreased and no changes were observed in the circuit structure until 0.72 US$/pound, where the circuit becomes an alternative nonprofitable. Then the copper price was increased and a change in the structure was observed for prices over 1.06 US$/lb. Other considered variables were the grade and species distribution in the feed stream to the circuit. The optimal circuit in Case 3 is similar to the Case 1, while the optimal circuit in Case 4 is similar to Case 2. Cases 3 and 4 have a copper grade (0.71%) lower than Cases 1 and 2 (0.81%), but the specie distribution is similar among circuits 1 and 3, and among 2 and 4. This means that the species distribution has a bigger effect on the circuit structure than the change in the ore grade. Finally, to show that the procedure is able to select the number of stages, all stages were allowed for the CPS and TPS. The circuit selected included one additional stage: scavenger–scavenger using bank cells. The new optimal integer solution gives an annual profits of 3.8 million US$ compared with the 3.5 million US$ of the original solution, while income from sales was increased from 16.2 to 16.7 million US$. A procedure for the design and improvement of mineral concentration plants including equipment selection is presented. The mass balances and equipment selection in flotation stages and grinding were represented by disjunctive equations, and changed to MILP expressions. The results showed that the division of flows had no effect on determination of the most efficient circuits. This result agrees with practice since it is unusual to divide a stream in mineral concentration circuits. Also it has been demonstrated that a particular circuit configuration will be optimal only for interval value of the metal price. This is important because there is a great uncertainty on the future value of several metal prices. Based on the examples studied, it can be concluded that the valuable mineral mass distribution can be more important than the metal grade in the selection of a flotation circuit. We have examined a hypothetical copper flotation plant, and the situations studied prove that the model can be useful in the analysis and design of circuits for mineral concentration. Several situations can be evaluated, such as: removal of crossover streams, changes in logic relationships, adjustment in the number of banks, selection of number of cells in each bank. The authors wish to thank CONICYT for financial support, through Fondecyt Project 1020892.