The need to understand and predict the long- and short term behavior of railway ballast calls for extensive experimental programs as well as the development of reliable numerical models. From the modeling point of view, the granular nature of ballast in connection with the high onset speed of dynamic loading makes it ideal for the application of the Discrete Element Method (DEM).
                  The paper describes the employment of the DEM to simulate ballast behavior in large-scale oedometric testing. Ballast grains are represented by convex polyhedral particles whose shapes are randomly generated via Voronoi tessellation. The effect of the aspect ratio of particles is investigated. A novel algorithm to compute repulsive contact force based on the intersecting volume of polyhedrons is presented. Crushing of grains is included via splitting the particles into smaller polyhedrons when a certain stress-based criterion is fulfilled. The results obtained from the model are compared with the published experimental investigations.The power of modern computers is being utilized to help engineers in designing and understanding their technological solutions more frequently than ever. The need to deal with various types of problems has led to the development of many different methods, among which the Discrete Element Method (DEM) is especially suitable when granular media under highly dynamic loading are studied. The DEM treats every grain as an ideally rigid body which interacts with other particles through forces at their common contacts. In most cases, the simplest spherical elemental shapes are used. However, it has been reported that particle shape has a strong influence on the resultant behavior of a particle assembly An extensive effort has also been made to use polyhedral particle shapes. To determine contact forces between polyhedrons, a technique developed by Cundall Railway ballast is used worldwide to support sleepers and rails on both normal and high speed railways. However, its short and long term behavior is still not fully understood. It is a highly heterogeneous material with strongly nonlinear behavior further complicated by its previous compaction and crushing. Robust models of ballast are needed to improve design of sleepers, under sleeper pads, and ballast itself, as well as for determining optimal maintenance schedules for tracks. There have been several attempts to simulate railway ballast using DEM. The reported results seem to be promising. Ballast particles are represented either by spherical clumps The paper presents a simulation of a railway ballast experiment – large-scale oedometric test – performed at the University of Nottingham The paper is structured as follows. The creation of randomly-shaped particles using the Voronoi tessellation is presented in The algorithms presented in the paper were implemented in YADE open source DEM software Particles are created using a procedure that contains a random process; however, control of particle size and aspect ratio is kept. This method of particle creation was inspired by Asahina and Bolander Initially, a volume 5 This Voronoi cell is further rescaled in all three directions by factor The volume, centroid and inertia of the polyhedral particle are calculated by dividing the polyhedron into tetrahedrons. The contributions of these tetrahedrons to each of the required quantities are found using analytical formulas from Tonon Different approaches are currently being used when dealing with contact between polyhedrons in DEM. Yet, another approach is introduced here. It is straightforward and simple to understand; these are the main reasons for developing it. Its computational complexity is probably higher than that of other available algorithms such as the Let us start with the definition of the convex polyhedron Vector At every time step, there is a loop seeking all possible contacts between polyhedral elements. This is simply performed by creating bounding boxes around every polyhedron and detecting any overlapping between the bounding boxes. Box overlapping exists if and only if bounding boxes overlap along all three axes. The problem is therefore reduced to the triple overlap detection of segments in 1D. If bounding box overlapping is detected, one must examine the actual overlapping of the polyhedrons, denoted The polyhedral intersection is assumed to exist until some separation plane is found. Only a limited set of candidates for the separation plane must be tested to prove or disprove its existence. The minimal set of candidates contains (i) bounding planes of the polyhedron Whenever this condition is fulfilled, the separation plane is found and the polyhedrons do not overlap. If the loop finishes without approving any separation plane, contact between polyhedrons must exist. To save computational time, one can store the separation plane from the last time step and try it prior to testing all the possible candidates. An even better approach is to store the structure of the previous separation plane (the faces or edges from which it was created) and construct it again using updated polyhedral positions and orientations. Time savings can be also gained for polyhedrons, which were in contact at the last time step. One can simply check if the centroid When two particles come into contact, repulsive force arises. In DEM simplification, the particles are ideally rigid and the contact between them is accompanied by overlapping of particles. In the case of convex polyhedrons, the intersection is a convex polyhedron as well. It is denoted Eq. The definition of It is necessary to transform the coordinate system so that its origin lies inside the polyhedral intersection. Initially, when a new contact is established, a point The Both of the intersecting polyhedrons are dualized. Bounding planes Because The convex hull The polyhedron Resulting points Finally, the convex hull of points Volume Besides the magnitude of the normal force, its direction must be estimated as well. The inspiration for the presented algorithm originates from the 2D sketches shown in After a polyhedral intersection  Shear force Standard Coulomb friction is applied. Therefore, whenever the shear force violates the following condition The proposed model was validated by simulating a large-scale oedometric test on railway ballast performed and published by Lim The same test was simulated with polyhedral particles. Initially, randomly shaped polyhedrons were generated at random positions in a cylinder with a magnified depth of 1 The polyhedrons used in the simulation were generated by Voronoi tessellation. About 400 of them were initially placed, but only about 120 polyhedrons remained in the simulation after the removal of those exceeding depth 0.18  Material parameters of the ballast and steel are specified in Five simulations were computed for every considered variant, differing in the input random seed controlling the random generation of particle shapes and the placement of the polyhedrons into the domain. Initial simulations with the Views of the ballast assembly at the beginning of loading, at maximum load and after the load was released are shown in Displacement The effect of compaction can be also seen in Though there is a correspondence between experiment and simulation as regards unloading stiffness, the overall experimental and simulation responses are different. The loading branch cannot be corrected without the implementation of the crushing phenomenon which was extensively present in the experiment. The crushing of ballast grains is responsible for the degradation of ballast and modeling should take it into account. Implementation of the crushing phenomenon is simply done via splitting the polyhedral particles into smaller polyhedrons whenever they fulfill a certain failure criterion. Since the particle is assumed ideally rigid, there is no information about stress inside the particle in the DEM model. Unless an additional detailed analysis of each particle is performed (e.g. finite element modeling as done in The criterion is based on the comparison of equivalent stress, The equivalent stress is compared to material strength Whenever splitting stress exceeds the strength of a particle, the polyhedron breaks. Initial attempts to break the particle into halves along the direction of the minimal principal stress through the particle centroid were abandoned, because the resulting pieces sometimes suffered the same external load as the original particle. This led to subsequent ruptures of the pieces. Described rupture chain is demonstrated in The initial grading of the experimental sample was 37.5–50 Evaluation of the failure criterion was run every 0.001 The sieve size of a particle can be estimated from its volume, but such method does not take into account the shape of the particle. Thus, the following primitive method is used instead. The sieve size is measured in a plane perpendicular to the lowest inertia axis of the polyhedron (the longest dimension of an elongated particle is perpendicular to that plane). The side of the smallest square enclosing the particle projection into the plane is then taken as its sieve size. For sake of simplicity, it is assumed that the greatest inertia axis of polyhedron is identical to the diagonal of the square sieve (so a flat particle will extend from one corner of the sieve to the opposite one). The sieve curves at the end of the simulations are shown in  The paper presents a method of generating random convex polyhedral shapes for ballast particles using Voronoi tessellation. The randomness is brought into the algorithm by random sequential placing of nuclei on which Voronoi tessellation is built. Scaling of Voronoi cells allows the user to specify size and aspect ratio of particles. Novel method to estimate the repulsive force and the normal direction between two overlapping polyhedrons is developed. It is based on the calculation of volumetric and hull intersections. The linear relation of the repulsive force and the intersection volume implies a power-law dependence of the contact stiffness on the penetration depth with exponent dependent on shape/curvature of the protruding bodies. Crushing of grains is represented in the model by dividing polyhedral particles into four smaller pieces. The criterion for deciding whether some particle breaks or not is based on estimation of von Mises stress inside the particle, which is compared to size-dependent particle strength. The proposed methods are used in simulations of a large-scale oedometric test Crushing of particles is necessary to bring simulation responses closer to the experimental data. Without the crushing, the simulated displacement of the upper plate is much lower than the experimental one. This outcome has been achieved with the financial support of the