FTO and platinum free steel counter electrode substrate based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are fabricated with few layers graphene (FLG) composite conductive inks. FLG are synthesized by liquid phase high shear exfoliation and the FLG based composite conducting inks are formulated with multi walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) and carbon black (CB) in polyimide matrix. The developed ink formulations are suitable for high temperature processing at 500 °C which enables to form graphene based composite conducting films on steel. Polyamic acid (PAA) intermediate layer provides superior adherence and potentio-dynamic polarization studies suggest that PAA coating also provides barrier layer and passivates the corrosion rate. Dye sensitized solar cells have been fabricated with these graphene composite coated on steel substrates which serves as the back electrodes. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) results of FLG composite conductive ink coated steel shows encouraging catalytic activity for the redox reaction of I−/I3
                     − redox mediator. The developed FLG based composite ink formulations and fabrication of working DSSCs with conducting graphene composite coated steel substrate can be a potential step towards the realization of Pt free large area roof top DSSCs.Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) has aroused an intense research interest in the recent years to improve the efficiency and stability which has now attained over 14% power conversion efficiency ( Being one of the indispensable parts of DSSC, rigid CE is one of the major requirements for the applicability of DSSCs in the outdoors. Over the years, platinum (Pt) films coated on the conductive glass are most commonly used as the CE. However, due to the limited natural abundance and the high cost of Pt, several other counter electrode materials have been explored in the past including metal sulfide/nitrides/carbides/selenides like cobalt sulfide (CoS), molybdenum sulfide (MoS), nickel nitride (NiN), molybdenum carbide (Mo Graphene, a 2-Dimentional hexagonally arranged single layer carbon atoms have received exceptional attention than other materials due to its exciting physical, mechanical and chemical properties, transport of charge carriers with high mobility as well as superior electrical conductivity. Among the various methods of graphene productions like chemical vapor deposition ( High shear liquid phase exfoliation of graphite into graphene in N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) has been extensively studied by As prepared FLG, multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) (Sigma) and carbon black (CB) (Cambot) based composite conducting ink formulations have been developed. Polyamic acid (PAA) is used as a binder and also acts as the matrix for the graphene conductive layer. The stock solution of as prepared FLG is mixed with PAA with different weight ratios with MWCNT and CB. Three formulations FLG + PAA, FLG + MWCNT + PAA and FLG + CB + PAA. When the FLG based thin film is coated over steel or any other substrate, there is a problem of interconnectivity among the sheets of graphene, which leads to low conductivity. To improve the interlayer connectivity, the second formulation (FLG + MWCNT + PAA) was used with the addition of MWCNT in different weight percentage. For the fabrication of SS counter electrodes, stock solution of FLG ( TiO The confirmation of the exfoliation of graphite into few layers of graphene has been carried out by using XRD and Raman analysis. X-ray diffraction studies,    Cyclic voltammetry (CV) analysis were used to examine the charge transfer mechanism between counter electrodes to electrolyte. The CV was done at 100 V s The corrosion studies were carried for bare steel, ink coated in steel, PAA coated on steel and Pt coated FTO in I Corrosion potential is an indication of the tendency of material to corrode. Lower is the corrosion potential; greater is tendency to corrode ( Accordingly, PAA though having the tendency to corrode will corrode at very low rates (as evident by low passive density value). Hence, PAA layer provides additional benefit as the corrosion barrier layer; this layer was utilized as intermediate layer before conductive ink coating (as shown in After the encouraging electrochemical results from CV, FLG ink coated on top of steel with full adherence were employed as CE for the DSSCs. To study the stability of the ink coated SS based DSSCs, two cells were kept under constant illumination with LED light source (24 W, 3600 Lumens, Lucifer Lights Ltd) in short circuit conditions( In summary, we have successfully prepared the few layers graphene (FLG) in NMP by high shear liquid phase exfoliation method and the composite ink with various formulations has been prepared. Graphene based conducting composite coatings on steel are successfully employed as back electrodes for DSSC and efficiency of about 3.23% has been achieved. The FLG based composite ink provides an effective substitute for conventional expensive Pt based counter electrode. With the prepared ink, we can fabricate Pt and FTO free counter electrodes, which decreases the overall device cost significantly. The corrosion test using potentiodynamic polarization studies evidentially exhibits that PAA coating provides superior corrosion protection against the liquid electrolyte. The ink coated SS based DSSCs shows encouraging stability, with negligible efficiency drop, for more than 500 h under constant illumination. This realization of Pt and FTO free steel substrate based working DSSCs is an encouraging step to achieve the large area DSSCs for roof top and outdoor applications in the near future. Authors would like to thank Talga Resources Ltd & Mr Mark Thompson for providing high purity (99.9%) electrochemical exfoliated graphite samples for IITB for this work. The financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 