Underground mining involves development of shafts, ramps, drives or other types of excavation to gain access to mineralized zones and later to serve as the infrastructure for mining. Therefore, the time taken to access the excavation becomes a critical factor in mine planning. This work proposes a simulation algorithm based on stochastic probabilistic methods that can provide the best estimation for the opening excavation times when considering the classic methods of drilling and blasting.
                  The proposed methodology is based on stochastic numerical methods, specifically, the Monte Carlo simulation method, together with the technical conditions that affect the tunnel excavation cycle; the simulation is developed using a computational algorithm.
                  To use the Monte Carlo method, the unit operations involved in the underground excavation cycle are identified and assigned probability distributions that, by means of random number generation, make it possible to simulate the total excavation time.
                  The results obtained by this method are compared with a real case, where it can be seen that the times obtained by the simulation are a better fit with the real tunnel construction times than those planned by means of conventional methods. The simulation results generate different scenarios which contain important parameters to use in the decision making in the planning process.Ramps, shafts, drives or other development excavations are of great importance for the exploitation of underground mines, as they generate access to mineralized sectors and prepare exploitation units. Therefore, the construction time for the work becomes an important factor in the success or failure of a project of this kind. This research proposes a method for the simulation of the excavation times of tunnels, which is presented as a decision-making tool in the planning stage of mining or civil engineering projects where it is necessary to develop this kind of infrastructure. There are several tunnel excavation methods. For our study, we will focus on excavation by drilling and blasting. The difficulty in estimating the times of each of the unit operations in the tunnel excavation process is mainly because all the activities have variations that depend on unforeseen events, but they can be associated with probabilities of occurrence. Due to associated costs, knowing the real excavation times becomes a priority in any mining project. Estimating the exact execution time is a complex task in which one runs the risk of getting it wrong, giving rise to increased problems with respect to planning and associated budgets. Estimating a time and its probability of occurrence, or the possible time scenarios related to the excavation is a useful parameter for decision making. In this way, the proposed methodology will be a tool for reducing the risk associated with excavation time estimates in mine planning. It is convenient to use the Monte Carlo method as a tool for predicting excavation times of development openings, keeping in mind that it is a stochastic simulation that allows analysis of complex systems with several degrees of freedom. This method is commonly used to solve complex mathematical problems by random sampling ( At present, the Monte Carlo method has become a very efficient tool to determine financial scenarios or to estimate costs ( On the other hand, some studies have used Monte Carlo simulations in areas of mining engineering, such as geomechanics, resources estimation or mining design, mainly considering the uncertainty and complexity that there is in the estimation of design parameters belonging to this activity ( The proposed methodology was applied to estimation of the excavation times of a tunnel for Compañía Minera San Pedro in a copper deposit in Chile. Excavation of underground structures by drilling and blasting consists of a cycle composed of different activities. The general principle is to carry out drilling on the face of the excavation to load explosives which, when blasted, break up the rock, producing an opening that becomes the “tunnel” (  As described throughout this paper, tunnel excavation by drilling and blasting is a cyclical operation (see The activities considered in the cycle can vary according to the mining operation. For example, underground support may not be part of the cycle time, depending on the needs and requirements of the development of the excavation. A large part of the improvements in these kinds of operations is aimed at decreasing the excavation time of each of its component activities, in this way achieving increased advances over shorter times, consequently leading to a reduction of excavation costs ( In general, the estimation of excavation time ( The formulation currently used has an excavation time as a result, which does not consider variability. On the other hand, noncompliance with excavation times in these kinds of infrastructure project is certainly a problem in the case of mining that affects ore extraction, mainly because the planning is subject to access and preparation of the mineralized bodies. The frequent noncompliance with the planned times occurs mainly because during the estimation of the excavation times for the underground openings, a fixed and unchanging value of advance per unit time in relation to the length of the tunnel is calculated, Eq. (2), which gives a fixed excavation time with 100% probability of success. However, it is well known that this is not the case, because as long as there is variability in carrying out the operations, the times can change.  In view of the variability of the operations, it is possible to establish the occurrence of pessimistic, probable, and optimistic scenarios, and to know the degree of certainty of the planning. Therefore, a methodology based on the Monte Carlo simulation is proposed to estimate operational time for the underground excavation. For this purpose, the excavation cycle model proposed by It can also be supposed that, in addition to the variability in the times of the operations that compose the cycle, there is also a variability in the efficiency or advancement measured in meters per blasting, Eq. (1), which adds one more component to the variability of the system. The method used to simulate tunnel excavation time will be obtained from the tunnel effective advance over each cycle related to its duration, both items resulting from the generation of random numbers between 0 and 1, which act on the inverse PDs that represent the unit operations, in this way, obtaining an advance as a function of time. If this operation is carried out over the total length of the tunnel, it will have a time associated with the excavation, giving rise to a sample. Carrying out this operation as many times as necessary will produce simulations that can be fitted to a PD of the time associated with the construction of the tunnel. Because of the need to make an iterative calculation of the order of thousands of cycles for the construction of the PD of the tunnel excavation time to solve the problem, the algorithm shown in The algorithm is composed of three loops that control the required number of simulations, the tunnel length, and the relationship between the duration of the work shift and that of the tunnel excavation cycle. All these items are necessary to be able to simulate the total excavation time and, for clarity, they are shown schematically in the flow chart of The proposed scheme consists of three inclusive loops that are dependent on one another. The procedure is that the first loop, which contains the other two, controls the number of simulations required, knowing that each simulation will be the length of the tunnel construction. The second loop provides the control that the excavation does not exceed the defined tunnel length, and every advance will be estimated by the PD of the efficiency of the blasting times and the length of the drilling, which has a fixed value. It will be added consecutively until the required tunnel length is achieved. Finally, the third loop has the function of consecutively adding the times of the building operation cycle and verifies its relationship with the established work shift. This last loop is the key to the simulation because it builds the cycle within the shift. This construction is carried out by means of the Monte Carlo simulation, where the statistical distributions associated with the execution times of each of the unit processes are applied to the excavation of the tunnel. The times obtained from this unit operation simulation are added, and then determined if the cycle will be finished during the operating shift. The details of the operation of each of the loops are given in the sequence. As already mentioned, the function of the first loop is to control the required number of simulations, and it must be considered that each simulation involves the estimation of the time required to excavate a tunnel of the predefined length. Within this structure, the loop that contains the other two starts with the variable “ Variable “ The first loop also has the variable “ The variable “ Finally, variable “ The second loop controls that the advance of the simulated excavation does not exceed the proposed length, and to that end, the excavation is developed in the third loop, whose purpose is to control the duration of the cycle as a function of the duration of the work shift “ The verification expression is true as long as the summation of the duration of the operations cycle “ The duration of the cycle within the work shift is built successively through a “CASE” selection routine that attaches the time of each operation until the cycle is finished. Once a cycle ends, the following cycle can start within the same shift or can stop its execution to retake it at the following one. This depends on the operational tolerance “ The “CASE” routine included in the third loop has the function of arranging the operations so that they take place one after the other, at the same time that their time is evaluated according to the condition of the loop, in order to see if it is still within the duration of the chosen shift. The time of each operation will belong to the PDs used to represent the process. In the present case, the variable “ The “ Once the third loop has ended, there is a routine condition that depends on whether the cycle ends together with the shift or is interrupted. This routine evaluates whether “ Also, at the end of the second loop, a work shift is added to the variable “ In this way, the successive simulations are built, delivering the time taken for the construction of each simulated tunnel, expressed in work shifts. Given sufficient iterations, it will have a representative sample of the population from which the most probable duration for the construction of the tunnel can be inferred. Minera San Pedro Limitada (MSP) has several copper ore deposits in the Lohpan Alto district ( To gain access and prepare the mineralized body for its later exploitation, MSP has planned the construction of a 560 To estimate the duration of the construction of this tunnel from experience of similar projects, MSP has considered that for every three work shifts of nine effective hours each, it would be able to carry out four cycles considering a hole depth of 1.8 Considering the planed conditions, MSP has estimated that the project should take 117 To apply the proposed methodology, obtaining data from zones of similar geological and operational characteristics as those of Mina Romero has been considered. For this purpose, there are some exploration tunnels made in the upper part of the deposit, with the same cross-section as the one that will be built and in rocks of similar characteristics to those of the access tunnel of Mina Romero. For this purpose, the cycle has been divided into five activities: drilling, loading explosives and blasting, ventilation, scaling, and mucking. In MSP, there is no support installation because the rock is very strong. The Rock Mass Rating –RMR geomechanical classification of the rock mass ( The methodology for obtaining the times of the different activities of the excavation cycle in the exploration tunnels, was to measure each activity with chronometer by qualified personnel for three months. The quantity of used data for obtain the PD for each activity of the excavation cycle is 135 events, After a period of measuring operational times in the exploratory work, each of the activities was characterized by means of statistical analysis that allows the determination of the PD that best fits the behavior of each activity.  The distributions shown in To carry out the simulation, making 10  As stated in the simulation model, each simulated event consists of the construction of a tunnel of the given length, taking into account the duration of the shift and the tolerance to end the activities within the cycle. This means that if there is less time left than that specified for this item to finish the shift, the activities are suspended to be retaken on the following shift. Finally, it is also necessary to consider the time for restarting the activities, which is the time required to redo the activities if the operation is interrupted by the end of the shift. For the simulation, a section tunnel of 3.5 Thirty minutes have been considered for restarting the activities, implying that if the cycle time lasts more than the shift time, this value is added to the cycle time because all the distributions presented in From the data presented in  In contrast with the conventional planning method, which only determines one value for the required number of shifts, one of the advantages of the simulation method for the excavation time of tunnels presented in this study is that it makes it possible to get both pessimistic and optimistic scenarios with respect to the number of shifts needed to perform the job. These scenarios can be considered as the lower and upper limits of the confidence interval that describes the time for making the tunnel in shifts. In this case, the simulation gave an excavation time of 267 shifts, with a minimum value of 257 and a maximum value of 277 shifts (See Comparing the means of the simulation results, a 0.37% error was obtained, while the conventional planning method used by MSP gave 12.28% with respect to the actual excavation time. This difference is significant, because translated into days of execution it is seen that the conventional planning method used by MSP gives 16.5 A simulation methodology based on a Monte Carlo algorithm is presented that can estimate the time required for the excavation of a tunnel used in underground mining. The data analysis obtained at MSP shows that this kind of stochastic simulation is a very effective tool for planning the excavation time of a tunnel. Beside the accuracy of the means, the minima and maxima range obtained by the simulation is interesting because it delivers a practical parameter for setting planning criteria. Based on the minimum and maximum range obtained by the simulation, optimistic and/or pessimistic scenarios can be presented that can serve as background for decision making in mining planning. Because of the random nature of the excavation times of the activities involved in the mining works, it was determined that a planning methodology based on the Monte Carlo method fits reality much better than a conventional methodology, because operating by means of PDs incorporates the variability inherent to planning processes. Through the incorporation of variability in mining planning it is possible to know with a greater degree of certainty the range over which the execution time of the work varies, and this makes it possible to decrease the financial risks associated with an error in the planning and at the same time maximize the utilization of the resources. This work was supported by DICYT/Universidad de Santiago de Chile, USACH (code 051215VN), CONICYT Becas de Postgrado de Chile and PPGE3M Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul.