In this paper the influence of hexylamine, as an example of a short chain alkyl amine, on the flotation behaviour and interfacial properties of quartz was investigated. It was shown that hexylamine enhanced the flotation performance of quartz regardless of the type of flotation device. The foaming properties of hexylamine and its adsorption at the liquid/gas interface showed that hexylamine in the flotation process plays a role of a frother. It was also shown that hexylamine “uncovers” the natural hydrophobicity of quartz, which is sufficient to be attached to the liquid/gas interface.Wettability of solid substances is a crucial parameter in flotation. Wettability, characterized by hydrophobic properties of the solid/gas/liquid system, can be expressed by the so-called contact angle. For a given solid/gas/liquid system different contact angles such as advancing, receding, rest, and equilibrium can be distinguished ( According to many investigations pure quartz is a hydrophilic substance ( There are only a few papers which discuss the influence of short chain alkyl amines on the flotation performance and hydrophobicity of quartz. The goal of this paper is to investigate the influence of hexylamine, as an example of a short chain alkyl amine, on the flotation behaviour of quartz. The effect of hexylamine dosage on the recovery of quartz in the Hallimond tube and laboratory mechanical flotation machine, froth height in the flotation machine and quartz hydrophobicity will be presented and discussed in the paper. The results should help to understand the role of short chain alkyl amine in the flotation process. High purity (≥ The experiments were carried out with high purity quartz (98% SiO The flotation tests were conducted in two different flotation devices: mono-bubble Hallimond tube with volume 200 In the Hallimond tube flotation tests, a sample of 2 In the mechanical flotation machine (Mekhanobr) flotation tests, 35 The results of flotation tests of quartz in the mono-bubble Hallimond tube and laboratory mechanical flotation machine are presented in   High recovery of quartz floated only in the presence of hexylamine suggests that this short chain alkyl amine can act both as a frother, producing the stable foam, and as a collector, exhibiting the collecting properties of quartz. All the flotation tests of quartz in the presence of hexylamine were conducted at pH The adsorption of hexylamine at the liquid/gas interface and insensitive-to-the presence of hexylamine hydrophobicity of quartz suggest that this surfactant in flotation plays a role of frother. The frothers produce fine bubbles, prevent coalescence of bubbles and stabilize the bubbles in the pulp froth layer (   The capillary theory of static flotation is based on the assumption that spherical particles attach to the gas/liquid interface ( For the spherical particles at the gas/liquid interface (surface flotation), the rest (equilibrium or Young) contact angle Another approach of contact angle determination is a probabilistic model based on the first order kinetic equation. The Also flotometry can be used for contact angle determination. The flotometry, similarly to the capillary theory of flotation, is based on the balance of forces acting in the flotation system. Since in the capillary theory of static flotation the spherical particle is attached to the gas/liquid interface, in the flotometry the particle is attached to the bubble ( The calculated values of detachment (Eqs. Although quartz is slightly naturally hydrophobic mineral (contact angle greater than zero), it does not float in distilled water. Quartz started to float in the presence of hexylamine, which in quartz flotation process plays role of a frother. It was shown that hexylamine, a short chain alkyl amine, does not exhibit the collecting properties for quartz. It ruptures the liquid film between the bubble and slightly naturally hydrophobic quartz. Hexylamine also “uncovers” the natural hydrophobicity of quartz, and therefore its flotometric contact angle increases with the concentration of hexylamine from 0 to 36°. The author thanks Prof. Jan Drzymala for his help in many aspects of this work. Financial support by the