Although Australia and New Zealand have nutritious and abundant food supplies, nutrition policies continue to be important in guiding food regulation in these countries. This paper documents the regulatory nutritional principles that serve to meet the Australia New Zealand Food Authority’s key objectives, in particular the protection of public health and safety, and their implementation in the development and recent review of food regulation in Australia and New Zealand. These principles, based on a cautionary approach to risk, have been applied particularly to the compositional aspects of the food regulation. These aspects include the regulatory control of voluntary and mandatory addition of nutritive substances such as vitamins and minerals to foods; particular standards that regulate foods for general consumption; and standards for special purpose foods. Labelling controls on nutrient information are also discussed.Blackcurrant Guava Other fruit juice Mango Pawpaw Other fruit juice Australia and New Zealand have abundant, varied and nutritious food supplies that, with the exception of one or two trace elements, readily sustain the health of their respective populations. In this context, do nutrition compositional considerations have a place in the development and review of food standards? Most certainly––but implementation of fundamental regulatory policy, encapsulated in the phrase ‘minimum effective regulation’, means that these considerations do not impact on all standards to the same extent. The Australia New Zealand Food Authority’s (ANZFA) primary statutory objective in developing food standards is the protection of public health and safety. From a nutritional perspective: public safety is protected by establishing maximum limits, where required, on the content of nutrients and related food components; public health is protected by developing or maintaining food standards that establish minimum nutritional requirements where appropriate, for a number of food categories that are important in sustaining the nutritional health of the population at large, or particular population groups. Such food standards relate to certain basic foodstuffs, and all special purpose foods. ANZFA’s second and third regulatory objectives of providing adequate information to enable informed consumer choice, and preventing misleading or deceptive conduct respectively are achieved by setting parameters for nutrition-related information on labels and in advertising. This paper discusses ANZFA’s nutrition-related regulatory principles and their implementation in the recent review of food standards, with particular emphasis on compositional issues. It focuses on three major aspects, namely the addition of nutritive substances to food; nutrient compositional requirements of general foods; and the nutritional requirements relating to special purpose foods. The review of nutrition information requirements is discussed in the companion paper on food labelling (see Historically, Australian and New Zealand food regulations separately imposed only limited control on the use of food ingredients in standardised foods but generally prohibited the addition of food additives, including micronutrients, unless specifically permitted. In the review of additive permissions, explicit permissions for the use of food additives and processing aids to achieve technological functions were retained, however the nature of those permissions was broadened to apply to either all or broad categories of foods within the constraints of good manufacturing practice, or up to prescribed limits in a smaller range of specified types of foods (see With the advent of novel and functional ingredients, the previously distinct categories of food additive and ingredient have blurred to become a continuum in which the differentiation is no longer obvious, and the regulatory requirement to conduct a pre-market assessment is less certain. The recent review of food standards undertaken by ANZFA provided an opportunity to identify more precisely the boundary between added nutrient and ingredient. The definition of food additive, which had previously encompassed vitamin and minerals, was revised during the review (see The definition of nutritive substance thus became: The meaning of Australia and New Zealand have traditionally taken a cautionary approach to regulating the addition of vitamins and minerals to foods intended for general consumption. Since the 1960s, Australia permitted up to 11 vitamins and minerals in different subset combinations to be added to 15 categories of foods, whereas in New Zealand, general foods were not permitted to contain voluntarily added vitamins and minerals. By the mid 1990s, both countries had regulations (Australia: a revised standard; New Zealand: a new regulation based on Australia’s revision) that permitted voluntary addition of subsets of 16 vitamins and minerals to 21 categories of general foods. A new two-tiered approach to controlling the level of addition of vitamins and minerals was also developed in which each food-vitamin/mineral combination was prescribed a maximum label claim, and in the case of higher risk vitamins and minerals, an additional absolute maximum amount. Maximum label claims apply to the total (natural and added) content of the vitamin or mineral; they are an indirect means of controlling the added amount so as to allow for some overage above the claim in recognition of the potential micronutrient deterioration over shelf life of the product. The rationale for this indirect approach is that manufacturers are unlikely to add significantly more vitamin or mineral than they could claim on the label. Absolute maximum amounts set slightly above the maximum claim are also imposed for higher-risk micronutrients such as fat-soluble vitamins A and D. Both the maximum claim and maximum amount are determined according to a food’s prescribed reference quantity, which, while controlling the relative concentration of the vitamin or mineral in the food, does not necessarily determine the amount claimed on the label per manufacturer’s nominated serve. From the mid 1990s onwards, the underpinning regulatory principles for the standard(s) controlling vitamin and mineral addition to general foods were largely based on the first three of four Codex restoration to pre-processed levels; nutritional equivalence of substitute foods; and fortification to address public health need. The fourth Codex Principle is discussed in relation to special purpose foods (see Regulatory consideration of Conversely, the third Codex General Principle––fortification to address public health need, requires overt consideration of the potential effectiveness of nutrient addition to improve public health as well as an assessment of risk from excessive nutrient consumption. Where permission is given in regulation for voluntary addition, it is the food manufacturer who decides whether to add vitamins or minerals to his product, and commercial considerations are a significant factor in such decisions. From a public health perspective, permission for voluntary addition cannot be relied upon to target improvements in public health. Whether fortification remains voluntary or is ultimately made mandatory depends on the extent of the health problem under consideration, the capacity and willingness of the targeted industry sector to volunteer specific nutrient addition to relevant foods, as well as the potential effectiveness of non-regulatory strategies.  The Australia New Zealand regulatory principles for voluntary addition of vitamins and minerals to general foods and examples of their application are given in The regulatory principles developed in the mid 1990s were reaffirmed as appropriate to underpin the development in 1999 of the joint Australia New Zealand vitamins and minerals standard (Standard 1.3.2 of the Standard 1.3.2 was formed by amalgamating the two national standards and incorporating the respective amendments separately made in Australia and New Zealand since the mid 1990s. The effect of the amalgamation was to newly permit in Australia vitamin and mineral addition to several dairy foods and protein analogues, and to newly specify in New Zealand the particular vitamins and minerals permitted to be added to specific protein analogues. An excerpt from Standard 1.3.2––Vitamins and Minerals is given in  Two levels of vitamin or mineral content claim are permitted for all fortified, and ‘claimable’ unfortified foods. To prevent claims being made for trivial amounts of vitamins or minerals, no claim is permitted where the total content of a nutrient, including from addition, is less than 10% RDI (or other prescribed dietary reference value) in a prescribed reference quantity or normal serve. Claims that a food ‘contains/is a source of’ a vitamin or mineral can be made only if that food contains at least 10% RDI or other value of the nominated vitamin or mineral in a reference quantity or serve. Similarly, for a claim of ‘good source’, the amount of vitamin or mineral should be at least 25% RDI or other value per reference quantity or serve. Because a claim is defined in this context as information volunteered by the manufacturer, these same criteria apply to voluntary declarations of vitamin or mineral content in the Nutrition Information Panel (see Historically, Australia and New Zealand have adopted different approaches to mandatory fortification. Since 1991, Australia mandated the addition of thiamin to bread-making flour such that the total thiamin content was at least 6.4 mg/kg. This regulatory measure was instituted to reduce the incidence of Wernicke–Korsakoff Syndrome in alcoholics as well as to improve the thiamin status of the Australian population considered to be potentially at risk. Vitamins A and D had long been required to be added to margarine and table spreads at levels equivalent to those found in butter; also iodised table salt was required to contain Mandatory fortification decisions are based on a risk-benefit assessment for the community as a whole. Such assessments examine the estimated reduction in risk for the affected population groups balanced against any increase in health risk for the non-target community, as well as the effectiveness and cost of mandatory fortification compared to or in combination with other risk management strategies. Mandatory fortification to meet serious public health need is an intervention that may legitimately differ between any two countries based on factors such as: the epidemiology of the disease in question, the evidence for deficiency or inadequate dietary intakes, food consumption patterns, the potential effectiveness of alternate means of increasing dietary intake such as education strategies, access to supplements, and the capacity of a particular food industry sector to voluntarily implement regulatory permission. The outcome of the review in respect of mandatory fortification was that: Australia’s former requirement for mandatory addition of vitamin A to edible oil spreads and table spreads was deleted (a voluntary permission was maintained); and Australia and New Zealand agreed on a mid-range of iodine in iodised salt (the category of table salt no longer exists) of 25–65 mg/kg. The two countries are now assessing their respective public health need for mandatory thiamin and vitamin D fortification to determine whether a harmonised approach to such fortification can be justified. Nutrition considerations in relation to commodity standards take account of the role of the food in the diet, the dietary contribution of key nutrients by that food, the nutritional status of population groups and the impact of any food regulatory measure to maintain or improve nutritional status. The outcome of such considerations generally results in setting a minimum regulatory requirement where a target population group may otherwise be at nutritional risk. Two examples illustrate the point. (i) (ii) In the review of the food standard for fruit juice and vegetable juice, dietary intake assessment indicated that the average diet in Australia was high in vitamin C: every population age group consumed a mean intake of three to four times the RDI. Primary dietary sources of vitamin C for young children were fruit and vegetable juices and drinks (49%) followed equally by vegetables and fruit. For adults, the primary sources were vegetables (40%) followed by fruit and vegetable juices and drinks, then fruit. Other smaller dietary sources included beer and fortified breakfast cereals and supplemented powders designed to be mixed with milk. The small proportion of people (∼8%) recorded as consuming no fruit or vegetable products including juices in the 1995 (Australian) National Nutrition Survey ( This review also included an assessment of technical and industry issues such as the extent of destruction of vitamin C on processing, the reasons for the high proportion of the Australian fruit juice industry voluntarily adding vitamin C to fruit juice above the minimum requirement, and the likely proportion that would cease doing so if the minimum vitamin C requirement was deleted. The risk assessment of both public health and technical issues concluded that protection of the few at-risk individuals within a context of considerable fruit and vegetable promotion, vitamin C fortification of other foods, and potential vitamin C intake from supplements, was not considered sufficient grounds to burden industry with the compliance costs of mandating a minimum vitamin C content, and thus the former Australian requirement was not maintained. Special purpose foods differ from general foods because they are designed to deliver nutrition to at-risk groups whose dietary requirements cannot be satisfied by a normal (solid food) diet. In Australia New Zealand such foods are characterised by one or more of: texture modification and particular nutrient addition (e.g. infant foods); significant fortification of foods to supplement otherwise generally inadequate diets (e.g. supplementary foods); or nutritional substitutes for partial (e.g. meal replacements [including products designed to assist weight loss]) or complete (e.g. infant formula) dietary replacement to meet normal nutritional requirements, other than energy in some circumstances. The definition of special purpose foods developed during the review was based on the definition for these foods in the New Zealand Food Regulations, which in turn, was based on the Codex definition of Foods for Special Dietary Uses. In the Australia New Zealand context, the phrase The definition of special purpose foods is firmly grounded within a traditional nutrition paradigm that has as its basis, dietary adequacy to support physiological growth, development and maintenance of health. Implied in achievement of dietary adequacy is the regulatory need to establish minimum nutrient levels where necessary, in special purpose foods. However, the aforementioned fourth Codex General Principle (see The regulatory control of the nutrient composition of special purpose foods is determined according to the purpose of these foods. The greater the contribution of the food to overall dietary intake, the greater the need to ensure an appropriate nutritional composition to mitigate the risk to the target group from consumption of an otherwise nutritionally inferior product, and the more regulatory control required to be exercised over nutrient and occasionally ingredient composition. Modified texture foods such as infant foods have few regulatory controls over composition although only a few vitamins and minerals are permitted voluntary addition. In contrast, infant formula as an example of a sole source of nutrition, has a high level of regulatory control over nutritional composition––both in terms of the range of nutrients involved, and minimum and maximum levels established for energy and nutrient content. Consistent with their intended use, special purpose foods may be permitted to contain some added vitamins and trace elements (biotin, pantothenic acid, vitamin K, selenium, molybdenum and chromium) that are not permitted to be added to general foods. Maximum limits are determined in accordance with the purpose of the special purpose food, and the risk to the target group from consumption of the product. Because there are potential risks from consumption of excessively fortified products, the cautious approach underpinning regulation of special purpose foods requires, for every special purpose food standard, the establishment of maximum vitamin and mineral levels expressed in terms of only a maximum claim for lower risk micronutrients, or in combination with a maximum amount for higher risk micronutrients. This cautionary approach however, needs to take account of situations where a significant proportion of product market share is sourced from overseas and thus manufactured in accordance with other countries’ regulations such as for infant formula. Risk assessments require careful judgement to determine the best possible outcome in terms of adequacy and safety of the food, and to ensure that regulation does not unwittingly serve as a trade barrier that restricts availability either through reduction of supply or a substantial increase in cost. Regulatory decisions on product composition are complemented by appropriate risk management strategies such as the labelling of special purpose foods to inform of: product content; directions for appropriate consumption and use, including where necessary, reference to appropriate care by health professionals; and advice, where relevant, against inappropriate consumption and use. More stringent risk management strategies for high-risk products are theoretically available through the power conferred by the ANZFA Act (1991) to restrict access to products. The standards for special purpose foods are grouped under Part 2.9 of the The regulation of the nutrient content of special purpose foods varies according to the specific purpose of the food. Australian dietary reference values for macronutrients, the RDIs for vitamins and minerals, as well as overseas dietary reference values for some vitamins, amino acids and trace elements guide decisions about appropriate nutritional criteria for addition. Reference quantities are used to standardise expression of minimum and maximum amounts. For standards that regulate foods that supplement the diet and are promoted or likely to be consumed in multiple serves per day, for example, sports foods, the reference quantity is expressed in terms of a one-day quantity. For other supplementary foods that are not promoted in multiple daily serves, the reference quantity is expressed per single serve. For standards that regulate foods that are partial dietary replacements (e.g. meal replacements), the reference quantity is expressed in terms of a one-meal serve, which relates to the promoted use of the food. Compositional limits set in the infant food standard are set per 100 g as infants’ intake of these foods varies considerably. The compositional limits set for infant formula are expressed in terms of per 100 kJ, since babies regulate their intake according to energy content. Standards that regulate nutritional substitutes for complete dietary replacement such as infant formula have minimum levels established for macro- and micronutrients such that all requirements for essential and other nutrients and energy should be provided in the appropriate daily quantity of the food. It is recognised that some minimum nutrient levels can be achieved naturally through the use of particular ingredients. Products intended to replace one meal are required to contribute at least one quarter of daily requirements of protein and a range of vitamins and minerals per meal equivalent. Minimum energy contents take account of the purpose of some meal replacements to assist weight loss. Supplementary foods intended to address situations of a generally inadequate diet are required to meet minimum protein and energy criteria and more than 20% RDI of at least one vitamin or mineral in a serve. The Australian sports foods standard however, sets no absolute minimum nutrient requirements although there are compositional parameters that control the use of some types of claims. The general scheme of maximum claim and, where relevant, maximum amount according to level of risk as discussed above has been routinely applied to standards for special purpose foods. These limits are expressed up to twice the dietary reference values per reference quantity in the case of sports foods, or up to half those values for other special purpose foods. The draft Standard for infant formula is an exception to this as it sets either maximum amounts or recommended guideline amounts per 100 kJ. There are many challenges for consideration of nutritional issues in regulation in the future. As the population’s lifestyle becomes increasingly fast paced, many consumers are seeking more than the traditionally promoted healthy diet. They are looking for foods that deliver an immediate- or medium-term, health enhancing, health-protective or other benefit in a convenient form and they want clear and truthful label information. With the previously discrete categories of foods, dietary supplements and therapeutic goods becoming increasingly blurred, one challenge for the food regulator is to apply an appropriate regulatory framework to this emerging continuum to continue to protect the health and safety of the population. As the food industry seeks to respond to market demand, its requirements for more flexible regulation and timely regulatory approval will increase. The cautious approach taken so far to the regulation of vitamin and mineral addition to food generally for example, is likely to come under increasing pressure. In order to continue to achieve the regulatory objective of protecting public health, the boundaries along the foods-dietary supplement-therapeutic good continuum will need to be further defined and the regulatory framework and approach to risk assessment and risk management refined to deal appropriately with the increasing numbers of new ingredients and substances likely to be added to the food supply. A significant challenge will be to develop a whole of diet approach to these assessments and approvals given that externally generated applications seeking such approvals are usually framed in the context of individual commercial interests.