Taking into account the repercussions of fuel oil spills on waste generation and sustainability of the affected industries, in this work 17 polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons were quantified on waste from a fuel oil spill, sewage sludge, wood ash, slate fines, and quicklime. The same hydrocarbons and its time-course evolution were determined on a mixture including all these materials. The aim of this work was to test the efficacy of that novel mixture as an alternative to easily stabilizing the fuel oil waste. Regarding individual materials, the highest hydrocarbons concentrations were found on fuel oil waste, on sewage sludge, quick-lime, wood ash, and slate fines. Comparing the actual hydrocarbons concentrations detected on each individual starting material, and those estimated taking into account the amounts included in the mixture, the mixing process allowed a notable reduction in hydrocarbons concentrations. Specifically, the sum of hydrocarbons concentrations was reduced in 37%, with the highest decreases affecting to pyrene, benzo[e]pyrene, and benzo[b]fluoranthene, which were not detected in the mixture. After 180 days of storage, just fluorene, anthracene, benzo[g,h,i]perylene, and naphthalene presented lower concentrations. Finally, after 365 days of storage, all hydrocarbons showed clearly lower concentrations compared to time 0 from the preparation of the stabilized mixture, with decrease between 23 and 95% for the different individual hydrocarbons. In view of these results, it can be concluded that the preparation of mixtures as that here studied could aid to facilitate the management of wastes from fuel oil spills, also favoring the recycling of the other waste materials included.Fuel oil spills are responsible of environmental pollution episodes that have shown detrimental effects on different organisms, as specifically demonstrated in the case of the Different treatments have been tested for fuel oil spill wastes, most of them focusing on sea spills, including bioremediation products such as nutrients and/or microorganisms and biodiesel ( Mixing with different by-products has been previously assayed as a way to facilitate the rapid stabilization and recycling of other waste materials, such as sewage sludge and wood ash ( In view of that all, the goal of this work was to determine the contents of 17 priority PAHs on samples corresponding to waste from a fuel oil spill, quicklime, sewage sludge, slate fines, and wood ash, as well as on a mixture including quicklime (5%), fuel oil waste (8%), sewage sludge (21%), slate fines (30%), and wood ash (36%), and to study the time-course evolution of PAH concentrations on the mixture at different storage time intervals, from 0 to 365 days. No previous experiments have been carried out in the same way. The results could indicate the degree of efficacy of mixing those materials as a way to achieve fuel oil waste stabilization, as well as an effective reduction in the overall PAH content, both in the short and medium term (0–365 days), which could facilitate the management and eventual recycling of the fuel oil waste and the other waste materials included in the mixture, aspects that can be considered environmentally relevant. The waste from fuel oil spill was sampled at the storage ponds specifically constructed in yards surrounding a facility of the enterprise PMA in Lendo-Laracha (A Coruña province, Spain) (see location map in Supplementary Material). Quicklime was from the enterprise Cedie, in O Barco de Valdeorras (Ourense province, Spain). Sewage sludge was sampled at the wastewater treatment plant in Lugo (Lugo province, Spain). Slate fines were from the enterprise Europizarras, in A Fonsagrada (Lugo province, Spain). Wood ash was from the enterprise Fibranor-Finsa, in Rábade (Lugo province, Spain). All these facilities are situated in Galicia (NW Spain). After testing several hundred of different proportions, a final mixture was selected, consisting of quicklime (5%), fuel oil waste (8%), sewage sludge (21%), slate fines (30%), and wood ash (36%). These proportions were selected following a procedure similar to that indicated in Prior to analyses, all samples were homogenized. In addition to the quantification of the 17 PAHs studied, other parameters were determined in each individual starting material and in the mixture (see The materials analyzed were: individual samples of each starting material used to perform the mixture, samples of the mixture at different storage times after its preparation (0, 7, 15, 30, 60, 90 and 180 days), and in addition another sample of the mixture that was stored for 365 days. In all cases, representative samples were sent to the laboratory in glass containers, protected from direct light to avoid PAHs photo-degradation. In addition, appropriate glass material was used in all steps to avoid possible contamination produced by the release of PAHs from plastics and gums. In each samples, benzo[e]pyrene and the 16 EPA priority PAHs were analyzed. The 16 priority PAH are naphthalene, acenaphthylene, acenaphthene, fluorene, phenanthrene, anthracene, fluoranthene, pyrene, benzo[a]anthracene, chrysene, benzo[b]fluoranthene, benzo[k]fluoranthene, benzo[a]pyrene, dibenzo[a,h]anthracene, benzo[g,h,i]perylene, and indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene. PAHs analyses were performed following the procedure detailed in An optimized saponification-extraction method was used. For this purpose, samples of each of the materials underwent microwave oven assisted extraction by means of an Ethos E-320 (1000 W) Microwave Extraction System (Millestone, Leutleirch, Germany), with maximum values of 260 °C and 35 bar (500 psi) for temperature and pressure inside the extraction vessels. Hexane-dichloromethane (1:1 v:v) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was used as organic solvent, and potassium hydroxide (Sigma–Aldrich, Madrid, Spain) was added to achieve lipids removal. After a 5 min preparation ramp, the microwave operated for 17 min at 129 °C. Once the cycle was completed, the extract was allowed to cool to room temperature and centrifuged at 3000 rpm in 3 min using a Unicen centrifuge (Orto-Alresa, Madrid, Spain). After the solid-liquid extraction, a concentration station Turbo Vap II nitrogen evaporator (Zymark, Hopkinton, MA, USA) was used to remove the organic solvent, reducing extract volume to 0.5 mL. Concentrated extracts were purified by passing through a 500 mg silica cartridge Sep-Pack Vac 3 cc (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and through a 900 mg Florisil Sep-Pack (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). A change solvent on concentrated extracts was carried out by substituting the hexane-dichlorometane by acetonitrile (Merck, Darmstdt, Germany). To do that, 1 mL of acetonitrile is added and the extract concentrated again to 0.5 mL. This operation is repeated twice. The final concentrated extract was transferred to a 2 mL volumetric flask containing 0.5 mL of acetonitrile, and the flask was made to mark with ultrapure water (Milli-Q system, Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA), providing a sample solvent matched with mobile phase in the subsequent HPLC separation. The extract was filtered through a 0.22 μm Millex GV filter (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). HPLC separations were carried out by means of a system consisting of a 600E quaternary pump (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), with a gradient controller (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), UV–vis diode array and fluorescence detectors in series (HP Series 1100, Agilent, Waldbrom, Germany), using an injector Rheodyne Model 7725i (Cotati, CA, USA), with a 20 μL external loop. A MetaTherm 9540 oven (MetaChem, Torrance, CA, USA) was used to control the temperature of the pre-column and analytical column. The analytical column (Agilent, Waldbrom, Germany) was a 250 mm × 2.1 mm I.D. Vydac 201TP52 inverted phase C A binary solvent mobile phase (acetonitrile and water) was used for HPLC separations, with 0.4 mL min The Chemstation software (Agilent, Waldbrom, Germany) was used for processing data in PAH quantification. The Statgraphics V 5.1 statistical package (Statistical Graphics Corp., Rockville, MD, USA), and the Nemrod W 2000D experiment designer software (LPRAI, Marseille, France), were used for statistical treatments and manipulation (optimization of the procedure). Results are shown in The sum of PAHs concentrations in sewage sludge was 10,000 ng g Regarding the mixture, the sum of the 17 PAHs was 81,292 ng g As shown in     Comparing with previous works, a study by Also comparing with previous works, taking into account that commented by different authors, it can be considered that the reductions in PAHs concentrations detected after the preparation of the mixture and during its storage are due to reactions related to stabilization/solidification and to PAHs sequestration into organic materials. Specifically, by the one hand, temperature increases occur due to the exothermic hydration of quicklime reacting with pore water, which favors volatilization of the lighter components of the hydrocarbons immediately after the mixing, although it could hardly be responsible of decreasing levels of heavy aromatic hydrocarbons (  The sum of PAHs concentrations in the mixture here studied was increased by 26% after 180 days of storage, which, together with the few individual PAHs that suffered declines, indicates that once the initial physical transformation of the fuel took place (which did imply decreases in PAHs concentrations compared to those present in the individual starting materials), the 180-day storage did not allow further declines in the overall levels of the hydrocarbons analyzed. However, it was verified that with the passage of time (from t = 0 to t = 180), the concentrations of the majority of PAHs in the mixture (acenaphthene, fluorene, phenanthrene, anthracene, pyrene, chrysene, benzo[e]pyrene, benzo[b]fluoranthene, benzo[k]fluoranthene, benzo[g,h,i]perylene and indene[1,2,3- cd]pyrene) were below the threshold levels established by the Spanish regulations in the RD 9/2005 ( The mixing procedure tested as treatment for the fuel oil waste assayed resulted in an initial overall reduction of the PAH content in the waste, as well as when contact time was high (1 year). Specifically, after performing the selected mixture, consisting of quicklime (5%), fuel oil waste (8%), sewage sludge (21%), slate fines (30%), and wood ash (36%), comparing the actual PAH concentrations detected on each individual starting material, and the PAH concentrations estimated for each one taking into account the amounts included in the mixture, the mixing process allowed a 37% reduction in the sum of PAH concentrations quantified in the mixture. It can be considered a rather rapid response after just 15 days of daily shaking/mixing needed for initial stabilization, with the highest decreases affecting to pyrene, benzo[e]pyrene and benzo[b]fluoranthene, which were not detected after the mixing. After 180 days of storage, the sum of PAH concentrations showed an increase compared to time 0 from the preparation of the stabilized mixture, although fluorene, anthracene, benzo[g,h,i]perylene, and naphthalene presented lower concentrations. When the storage was prolonged to 365 days, the different individual PAHs showed concentrations with decreases between 23 and 95% compared to time 0 from the preparation of the stabilized mixture. In view of that all, working with mixtures technically performed as the one here studied can facilitate the stabilization and management of wastes from fuel oil spills, also favoring the recycling of the other waste materials included (and at a very low cost due to the use of waste and by-products), although the best results regarding PAH decrease are achieved after a prolonged storage. For future research, it would be interesting to carry out additional studies in this line to evaluate the suitability of this type of mixtures in order to promote plant growth, which could be useful in degraded areas (such as mine dumps), favoring the recycling of residues used in the mixtures, always bearing in mind the health of ecosystems. Also, additional determinations would be interesting for future research, such as different total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) fractions, benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX), metals and metalloids concentrations in solids wastes and formulated mixtures, as well as characterization of solid wastes and the obtained mixtures by means of standard procedures such as toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP), flammability and reactivity. It would be also interesting to include a non-treated fuel oil waste control to compare its time-course evolution with that of the mixtures. Finally, future appropriate experiments could be designed to allow the correct use of control charts and/or other statistical analysis that enable the closed pattern monitoring of PAH concentrations. In this regard, the application of chemo-metric techniques linked to cluster analysis, discriminant analysis, support vector machines for clustering of PAHs compounds, could be very useful. This work was supported by the We also thank the private companies that have collaborated by giving access to the different materials used, as described in the Materials and Methods section and in Supplementary Material. Special thanks to Ángel Méndez (Cedie). We would like to thank the Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their work, which greatly aided us in the improvement of the original manuscript. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at