In vitro studies have suggested that strontium ranelate enhances osteoblastic cell replication leading to an increase in bone-forming activity. Simultaneously, strontium ranelate dose dependently decreases osteoclastic activity. In vivo studies indicate that strontium ranelate decreases bone resorption and maintains a high bone formation and prevents bone loss. This positive uncoupling between bone formation and bone resorption results in bone gain and improvement in bone geometry and microarchitecture in growing animals. In intact female rats, a 2-year period of exposure to strontium ranelate significantly increased bone mechanical properties of vertebrae and midshaft femur. All the determinants of bone strength were positively influenced by the treatment like bone mass, dimension, microarchitecture, and intrinsic bone tissue quality. The increment in bone mechanical properties was characterized by an increase in maximal load but also by a dramatic improvement in energy to failure, which was essentially due to an increment in plastic energy. Such modifications observed with strontium ranelate treatment are in good agreement with the improvement in intrinsic bone quality. These results strongly suggest that new bone formed following strontium ranelate treatment is able to withstand greater deformation before fracture. Furthermore, treatment with strontium ranelate prevents the deleterious effect of ovariectomy on bone strength. In this model, a 1-year period of exposure to strontium ranelate significantly prevents alteration of bone mechanical properties of vertebrae in association with a partial preservation of the trabecular microarchitecture: a dose-dependent effect on the bone volume/trabecular volume ratio and trabecular number and thickness.Various bone resorption inhibitors have been shown to decrease the risk of osteoporotic fractures. However, there is still a need for agents promoting bone formation by inducing positive uncoupling between bone formation and bone resorption. Strontium ranelate (Protelos®), which has a dual effect on bone metabolism, has recently been demonstrated to reduce both vertebral and hip fracture risk and is a good candidate In vitro studies have suggested that strontium ranelate enhances osteoblastic cell replication and activity Strontium ranelate has been studied in various rodent models like intact animals, model of immobilization or ovariectomy-induced osteoporosis. All these in vivo studies suggest that strontium ranelate reduces bone resorption in mice and rats and increases markers of bone formation The aim of any antiosteoporotic treatment is to improve bone strength and thus to decrease the risk of fracture. In humans, the approach for evaluating bone strength is the recording of the fracture rate, which implies a large group of patients. A fracture is not only due to decreased bone mineral mass or alteration of the microarchitecture but is also related to falls, as a result of loss of balance, inappropriate protective responses, or muscle weakness Bone strength is determined by bone geometry, cortical thickness and porosity, trabecular bone morphology, and intrinsic properties of bony tissue. Only the careful investigation of all these determinants of bone strength (including bone tissue quality) should be considered to fully understand the mechanisms of action of antiosteoporotic drugs. Two series of studies were performed in intact male and female rats Strontium ranelate treatment induces a dose-dependent increase in bone mechanical properties at the level of the vertebral body, which contains a large proportion of trabecular bone, as investigated by an axial compression test mimicking a vertebral fracture. The stiffness of the vertebra was not affected by the treatment. Using a 3-point bending test performed at the level of the midshaft femur, which mainly contains cortical bone, a dose-dependent increment in maximal load was observed but without significant effect on stiffness. These effects on bone mechanical properties were also observed in intact male rats. The increase in bone strength was related to positive influences on most of the determinants of bone strength such as bone mass, bone geometry, bone microarchitecture, and bone tissue quality. Bone static histomorphometry and bone microcomputed tomography demonstrated a dose-dependent increase in trabecular bone volume, trabeculae number, trabecular thickness, connectivity, and cortical thickness, as assessed at the level of the tibia ( To investigate the effect of strontium ranelate in an animal model more representative of the clinical situation, 6-month-old ovariectomized (OVX) rats were treated with various strontium ranelate daily doses (125, 250, and 625 mg/kg) mixed in the diet over a 1-year period To investigate bone safety of strontium ranelate treatment in humans, bone biopsies were performed at 24, 36, or 48 months in 20 consenting patients of the Spinal Osteoporosis Therapeutic Intervention (SOTI) study, resulting in 14 samples that could be assessed These results confirm in humans that treatment with strontium ranelate leading to a mean plasma level of strontium of 120 μmol/l is associated with the formation of normal bone, as has been observed in preclinical studies. Furthermore, strontium ranelate increases bone mineral density (BMD) at the different skeletal sites investigated. This increase in BMD is overestimated by the atomic size of strontium, by approximately 50%. These positive effects on bone mass and the presence of normal bone tissue were associated with a significant decrease in vertebral and hip fracture risks. Strontium ranelate, a new treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, has a dual effect on bone metabolism, resulting in a rebalance of bone turnover in favor of bone formation. These data show that strontium ranelate increases bone mass while preserving the bone mineralization process, resulting in increased bone strength and bone intrinsic quality improvement.