Mineral carbon sequestration (MCS) is a type of carbon storage based on natural rock weathering processes where CO2, dissolved in rainwater, reacts with alkaline minerals to form solid carbonates. Although MCS has advantages over other carbon storage techniques, an economic MCS process has not yet been developed. Two approaches were taken in this work to attempt to reduce the cost of MCS. The first approach was to use a waste material, serpentine waste from ultramafic nickel ore processing, as a feedstock. The second approach was to develop pre-treatments to increase the carbon storage capacity of the feedstock. Two pre-treatments were investigated in this work, including microwave pre-treatment and leaching with ligands at neutral to alkaline pH. The carbon uptake of ultramafic ores was found to increase with increasing microwave pre-treatment after a threshold heating time of 4min was surpassed. A maximum carbon uptake of 18.3g CO2/100g ore (corresponding to a carbonate conversion of 36.6%) was observed for microwave pre-treated ore. The increase in carbon uptake was attributed primarily to the conversion of serpentine to olivine in ultramafic ores that occurs as result of microwave pre-treatment. The effect of five different ligands (catechol, citrate, EDTA, oxalate and tiron) on the carbon uptake of ultramafic ores was investigated. Of the ligands tested, only catechol and tiron were found to both improve the leaching of magnesium from the ores and the quantity of CO2 stored. A maximum carbon uptake of 9.7g/100g ore (corresponding to a carbonate conversion of 19.3%) was observed for ultramafic ore pre-leached and carbonated in tiron solution at pH 10. This is the first time ligands have been reported to improve the carbon uptake of mineral carbon sequestration feedstock. Although process optimization work was not conducted, both microwave pre-treatment and leaching with ligands at neutral to alkaline pH show promise as ways to lower the cost of MCS.Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is a strategy that has been identified to reduce carbon dioxide (CO MCS may be achieved by reacting alkaline minerals with CO Ways to reduce the cost of MCS include indentifying inexpensive and readily available mineral feedstocks, reducing the energy associated with grinding and activating mineral feedstocks, and reducing the chemical reagent requirements. The cost of MCS may be further offset by producing saleable carbonation by-products, such as precipitated magnesium carbonate and silica, and by storing CO Microwave pre-treatment has been tested as a way to enhance both mineral processing and MCS operations. Microwave pre-treatment has been shown to successfully convert serpentine in the ores to olivine ( Microwave pre-treatment has been tested in a limited way by previous researchers for the enhancement of MCS. The second pre-treatment, leaching with ligands, was tested as a way to promote the dissolution of serpentine in the ores/tailings for the enhancement of MCS without the need for a secondary pH adjustment. Five different ligands, including catechol, citrate, EDTA, oxalate and tiron, were tested for their capacity to improve the leaching of magnesium from serpentine in ultramafic ores at neutral to alkaline pH. The ligands tested were all found to improve the leaching of ultramafic ores in some capacity, with catechol, EDTA and tiron showing the most potential for enhancing MCS ( While the dissolution of silicate minerals by ligands for the purpose of mineral carbon sequestration has been studied by a number of researchers ( Two ultramafic nickel ores were used as feedstock in this study. The “OK ore” was sourced from the Okanogan nickel deposit in Washington State, USA. The “Pipe ore” was obtained from the Thompson Nickel Belt in Manitoba, Canada. The elemental composition of the ores is given in X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy (Orbis PC Micro-EDXRF Elemental Analyzer, EDAX, Mahwah, NJ, USA) and inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) (Perkin Elmer Elan 6000, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) were used to determine the elemental composition of the ores. ICP-MS was also used to determine the magnesium content of supernatant. Qualitative X-ray diffraction (XRD) (RU-200B Line Focus X-ray System, Rigaku Rotating Anode XRD System, Rigaku, ON, Canada) was performed to determine the mineral phases present in the ores before and after microwave pre-treatment, and before and after leaching with ligands. Quantitative XRD analysis was also performed on some samples by PMET Inc. of New Brighton, PA using the Rietveld refinement technique. Total carbon for the microwave-related tests was measured using a coulometric technique (UIC Coulometrics Total Carbon Analyzer, Joliet, IL, USA). Total inorganic carbon for the leaching-related tests was determined by subtracting the total organic carbon (acidification technique used) from the total carbon. The carbon content of leaching-related samples was measured using a dry combustion technique (Costech Model EA 4010 Elemental Analyzer, Florence, Italy). A Panasonic flat and wide (SF550), 1000 100 After microwave pre-treatment and grinding, slurry samples were diluted to 20 The slurry samples were carbonated at 155 The chemical speciation for magnesium and CO 1.5 The sample for carbonation was transferred to a 300 The net carbon uptake for untreated and microwave pre-treated Pipe and OK ores ground for 15 The increased carbon sequestration capacity of the ores as a result of microwave pre-treatment could be due to several changes that occur simultaneously in the ores. The first is changes in ore mineralogy. As mentioned, the microwave pre-treatment of ultramafic nickel ores results in the conversion of the primary gangue mineral serpentine to olivine. As reported in In addition to changes in mineralogy, the particle size distribution and specific surface area of the ores after grinding changes with different degrees of microwave pre-treatment ( To explain the reduction in carbon sequestration capacity with increased grinding time, microwave pre-treated and carbonated ores ground for different lengths of time were analyzed by XRD. The XRD analysis revealed that grinding the ores for longer periods of time resulted in the formation of oxidized iron products, including hematite (Fe Although increased grinding time led to reduced carbon uptake, a conclusion may still be drawn regarding the effect of surface area on the carbon sequestration capacity of ores. Values published for carbonation of serpentine containing ores by the direct aqueous process are given in The energy required for the thermal dehydroxylation of lizardite serpentine at 630 In theory, the energy used in microwave pre-treatment to achieve serpentine dehydroxylation in ultramafic nickel ores should be less than that calculated for the dehydroxylation of lizardite by conventional means because (1) the ores are not entirely composed of serpentine (the entire mass does not need to be dehydroxylated and the energy required to heat the ore to the dehydroxylation temperature will be less since the heat capacity of serpentine is higher than the other minerals present in the ores ( Obviously the thermal dehydroxylation of serpentine in ultramafic nickel ores by microwave pre-treatment is not viable at the lab scale. However, the energy used in microwave pre-treatment can likely be greatly reduced through scale-up, both by increasing the strength of the microwave field and increasing the sample size. As discussed in Another way to reduce the energy intensity and CO Solution modeling was conducted to determine if MgCO The effect of CO While the solution modeling until this point was completed using a magnesium concentration of 0.1 Although the percentage of magnesium species precipitated as MgCO The calculated net carbon uptake was converted to CO Overall, the modeled result that MgCO XRD analysis of carbonated, ligand leached ores revealed that magnesite (MgCO The net carbon uptake for the OK and Pipe ores in water and 0.1 In contrast to the results achieved in catechol and tiron solutions, carbon uptake was not affected much by leaching in oxalate solutions at pH 7, and was reduced in oxalate solutions at pH 10 as well as in citrate solutions at both pH 7 and 10. It is not surprising that citrate and oxalate did not improve the carbon uptake of the OK and Pipe ores, as these ligands were not shown to markedly improve the leaching rate or total magnesium leached from the ores ( The second potential reason why oxalate and citrate did not improve the carbon uptake of the OK and Pipe ores is that at high temperature they formed strong Mg-complexes that reduced the precipitation of MgCO The carbon sequestration capacity of the Pipe and OK ores increased with microwave pre-treatment time after a threshold heating time of 4 Solution modeling of magnesium-ligand-water systems revealed that MgCO Experimentally, it was found that magnesite was formed in ores pre-leached and carbonated in catechol, citrate, oxalate and tiron solutions. Magnesite did not form in EDTA solutions, which was not surprising since the modeling work suggested EDTA may have been too strong of a ligand to enhance MCS. While oxalate and citrate were not observed to improve the carbon uptake of either ore, the carbon sequestration capacity of OK and Pipe ores leached and carbonated in tiron and catechol solutions was observed to improve. The highest carbon uptakes observed, in tiron solutions at pH 10, were 3.6 This research was supported by