The Copenhagen 2012 Nexus symposium on ‘Bone and the Kidney’ followed the ‘bench to bedside’ approach of the Nexus symposia organized by the International Society of Nephrology. The main goal of the present symposium was to provide a unique forum for scientists and clinicians with an interest in the fascinating world of the many hormones and factors involved in mineral homeostasis, bone disease, and vascular calcification of patients with chronic kidney disease–mineral and bone disorder (CKD–MBD). The possibility of exchanging cutting-edge insights and discussing clinically relevant information on all aspects of the bone–kidney axis was open to all participants. The numerous lectures given at the symposium addressed current knowledge and recent advances in kidney and bone physiology, as well as the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapy of CKD–MBD, inspired by the intention to enhance the translation of basic science into clinical medicine. The lectures were followed by lively discussions of open questions and controversial issues. Our brief summary of interesting novel findings presented at this symposium is necessarily the result of a somewhat arbitrary choice among a wealth of exciting data brought to the attention of an enthusiastic audience.The ISN organized a Nexus symposium in Copenhagen from 20 to 23 September 2012, which was devoted to the topic ‘Bone and the Kidney’. The scientific program was set up by a committee of seven experts in this field. The attendance was one of the highest ever among Nexus symposia, with approximately 700 people registered. The symposium would not have been possible without the most generous support from the industry. The program, which followed the ‘bench-to-bedside’ approach, was composed of six plenary lectures, three basic science sessions, three clinical science sessions, three translational sessions, four industry lunch or dinner symposia, two ‘meet-the-professor’ breakfast sessions, and two poster sessions. Of importance, there were also numerous breaks, which allowed fruitful discussions and exchanges on an individual basis. As indicated by its title, the main focus of the symposium was on interactions between bone and kidney from both a physiologic and a pathophysiologic point of view, with particular attention paid to the mineral and bone disorder associated with chronic kidney disease (CKD). In this context, the contribution of the intestine as the main entry site for minerals taken up by the body was addressed as well. The normal transport of calcium, magnesium and phosphate across the intestinal and renal epithelia, their uptake into and release from bone, and the disturbances of these processes in CKD with pathological deposition of the two ions in vascular and other soft tissues occupied an important place, as did the normal and abnormal regulation of calcium, magnesium, and phosphate transport, and accumulation by an increasingly complex endocrine system. Another important focus was on various diagnostic and therapeutic aspects of CKD–mineral and bone disorder. Here we would like to outline several among of the most striking new observations presented at this meeting. We know that the choice we made is somewhat arbitrary, and hope that those whose presentations have not been mentioned will not feel offended. Furthermore, not all statements are followed by a reference, as a great number of new and unpublished data were presented. One of the most rapidly evolving fields in the CKD–mineral and bone disorder arena is the role of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) and Klotho, and their interaction with the traditional parameters, such as calcium, magnesium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH) and vitamin D (or more precisely, 1,25(OH) It has progressively become clear that both Klotho and FGF23 can exert actions, which are independent from each other, in addition to their well known interaction at the level of FGF receptor 1. Our understanding of the regulation of FGF23 synthesis and catabolism is still fragmentary. At the end of the century, we thought we knew how intestinal phosphate uptake and its handling by the kidney were mainly regulated, namely by 1,25(OH) The regulation of PTH synthesis and secretion continues to be a subject of intensive investigation. The post-transcriptional regulation of PTH synthesis in response to calcium, phosphate, and state of CKD involves changes in PTH mRNA stability and degradation via AUF1 and KSRP binding, respectively. Increased parathyroid activity generally goes in parallel with excessive parathyroid cell growth. Enhanced transforming growth factor-α/epidermal growth factor receptor co-expression is the major mitogenic signal for polyclonal proliferation in uremic parathyroid tissue. The calcium channels TRPV5, mostly expressed in the kidney, and TRPV6, expressed more ubiquitously, have a major role in calcium uptake into epithelia. The renal magnesium channels TRPM6 and CNNM2 have been identified via monogenic diseases. In the kidney, they are located in the distal convoluted tubule, the main site of transcellular magnesium transport. The expression of the CaSR in the kidney has again become a matter of debate. The presence of this receptor in all segments of the renal tubule seemed firmly established, with differing expressions on either the luminal or the basolateral side of the epithelial cell according to specific tubular segments. Bone has clearly been established as an endocrine organ, as indicated by the endocrine axis between kidneys, parathyroids, and bone. The important role of the osteocyte in bone structure and function, including its participation in endocrine and metabolic regulations, has only been recognized recently. Bone appears to have a role in energy metabolism as well. The importance of skeletal vascularization in bone remodeling and hematopoiesis has been largely neglected in the past, whereas the involvement of blood vessels in local bone diseases, such as osteonecrosis and Paget’s disease, has long been known. There is an increase in fracture risk in CKD patients at both predialysis CKD and CKD5D stages. The observation that mechanosensing by cilia has a role in cyst formation in adult dominant polycystic kidney disease led a research group to screen the presence and potential importance of cilia in bone. Conditional deletion of the The present concept of uremia-mediated calcification is that the vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) converts into an osteoblast/chondroblast-like cell and releases matrix vesicles that promote the calcification process. VSMC-specific deletion of the phosphate transporter Pit1 was found to leave cellular phosphate uptake unchanged. This unexpected finding could be explained by the concomitant, compensatory doubling of the expression of another phosphate transporter, Pit2. The two transporters may be redundant. However, overexpression of Pit1 in wild-type mice stimulated phosphate uptake by VSMC and led to vascular calcification. Pit2, but not Pit1, was found to be present in VSMC-derived matrix vesicles. Matrix vesicles released from osteoblasts or chondroblasts have been shown to stick to collagen type I and form a nidus for calcification An interesting pathogenetic avenue is the possible role of premature senescence of VSMC as a consequence of defective DNA-damage repair, possibly in response to excessive oxidative stress. Persistent DNA damage and the A-type nuclear lamins appear to be key regulators of this process. The observation of prelamin A accumulation in blood vessels of elderly people and in calcifying nodules, in concert with findings made in congenital laminopathies, led to the hypothesis that alterations of the nuclear lamina (organizer of nuclear function) could be involved in premature ageing of VSMCs In man, excessive calcium concentrations in the blood are buffered by the formation of so-called ‘calciprotein particles’, which contain high concentrations of fetuin-A. According to a recent study, free, not total, fetuin-A levels should be measured in blood for the assessment of fetuin-A availability for calcium buffering. In humans, numerous associations have been reported of circulating procalcifying and anticalcifying compounds with arterial calcification, respectively. A randomized controlled pilot trial set out to determine the effects of phosphate binders on parameters of mineral metabolism and vascular calcification among patients with moderate to advanced CKD. The EVOLVE trial is an international study, which was aimed to test whether cinacalcet plus standard care therapy was superior to placebo plus standard care therapy in terms of cardiovascular and global outcomes in 3883 patients on long-term hemodialysis. Finally, a randomized controlled multicenter trial of vitamin K1 administration to chronic dialysis patients (‘VITA-VASK Study’) should start in Europe in 2012, testing the hypothesis that vitamin K1, as compared with standard care, reduces the progression of vascular calcification. The sample size will be nearly 500 persons, and the total duration 78 weeks. We thank Marie-Hélène Lafage-Proust, MD, PhD, Saint-Etienne, France, for useful suggestions in editing the symposium report.