In this study, investigations to develop a beneficiation process for separating coal pond ash into various products were undertaken. To this end, coal pond ash samples with different particle size ranges were tested in terms of their washability characteristics in a float-and-sink analysis. It was found that coal pond ash was heterogeneous in nature consisting of particles that varied in terms of their size and composition. However, it can be made more homogenous using a gravity separation method. Therefore, the possibility of separating coal pond ash was tested on standard equipment typically used for gravity concentration. To increase the separation efficiency, coal ash was separated according to the size of the particles and each size fraction was tested using equipment appropriate for the corresponding sizes. A hindered-settling column and a shaking table were tested for their ability to treat the 1.19 × 0.074 mm size fraction, and a Falcon concentrator was evaluated for its ability to treat the −0.074 mm size fraction. The results showed that various marketable products, such as lightweight aggregate, sand and high-carbon fuel, can be recovered from coal pond ash using simple physical separation techniques.Coal ash is formed when coal is burned in boilers that generate steam for power generation and industrial applications. There are two types of coal ash: fly ash and bottom ash. Fly ash is composed of the fine particles that are entrained with hot flue gases, as captured by electrostatic precipitators. This type of ash accounts for about 80% of all ash generated. Bottom ash, too large or heavy to be entrained, settles to the bottom of the boiler and accounts for about 20% of the ash generated. Due to the increased use of coal for power generation, the yearly amount of coal ash generated has shown a continual increase in Korea. In 2010, coal ash amounting to nearly 7.6 million tons was produced. In the past, almost all of the coal ash produced from coal power stations was disposed of in ash ponds. This led to environmental concerns and to an increased need for additional landfill spaces, prompting the passing of regulations pertaining to the recycling of coal ash. As a result, coal power plants achieved ash utilization level of 70% in 2010. The main use of coal ash in Korea, however, has been limited to fly ash as a partial replacement for Portland cement in concrete. Consequently, almost all of the bottom ash and unused fly ash continue to be dumped into ash ponds, increasing environmental concerns and the burden on management due to increasing landfill costs. Therefore, power plants are constantly looking for ways to increase the utilization of coal ash. There have been several attempts to use bottom ash productively.  These applications obviously depend upon the characteristics and engineering properties of the bottom ash. However, the composition and physical characteristics of the bottom ash can vary considerably depending upon the source of the coal being burned and the type of boiler. Furthermore, coal ash stored in ash ponds is composed of various materials, including the fly ash and bottom ash generated from coal imported from many different mines. Coal bottom ash and fly ash are quite different physically. Most noticeably, bottom ash is coarser than fly ash, with grain sizes spanning from fine sand to fine gravel. From the standpoint of ash utilizers, variations in the ash quality represent a considerable problem that should be mitigated to assure the consistency of the ash-based products they produce. It is the objective of this study to explore the possibility of separating pond ash by physical separation methods typically used in mineral processing. To this end, the characteristics of pond ash were examined in terms of their size, composition and specific gravity distribution. Based on this data, the actual separation performance was evaluated by bench scale tests using a hindered-settling column, a shaking table and a Falcon concentrator, which are typical gravity separation devices used to assess particles ranging in size from intermediate to fine. The separation scheme was focused on a classification of the size and density and the feasibility of the separation of high-carbon ash from low-carbon ash, as unburned carbon is one of the major problems associated with the utilization of coal ash. Tests were carried out using pond ash from a coal power plant, which burns mainly bituminous coals. As shown in Mineralogical characteristics analyzed by XRD indicated that the sample contained mainly quartz, mullite, iron oxide, corundum and calcite ( To determine the beneficiation method of cleaning bottom ash and the required equipment, it is necessary to determine the size and specific-gravity distribution as well as the corresponding carbon content. This can be achieved by washability studies of the type commonly associated with coal cleaning. A washability study of coal is done by a float-and-sink analysis which involves testing a coal sample at preselected, carefully controlled specific gravities ( The original sample was screened into 8 size fractions (+4.76 mm, 4.76 × 2.38 mm, 2.38 × 1.19 mm, 1.19 × 0.59 mm, 0.59 × 0.30 mm, 0.30 × 0.149 mm, 0.149 × 0.074 mm, −0.074 mm). Each size fraction was further separated by density. Density fractionation of the sized samples was performed using a mixture of Certigrav (Dibromoethane 99%, specific gravity 2.5) and carbon tetrachloride (specific gravity 1.6) having various relative densities. The sized samples were first fractioned at a specific gravity of 2.4, and the float fraction was successively refractionated at lower densities. For the fractions larger than 0.149 mm, the separation was done in a breaker. A small amount of the sample was placed in the solutions and was then allowed to separate. The float fractions were removed with the aid of a wire mesh spoon and the sink fractions were retrieved by pouring the material through a filter. The size fractions below 0.149 mm were separated using a centrifuge. Amounts of about 5 g of the sample were dispersed into centrifuge bottles and centrifuged for 1 h at 1500 rpm. After centrifugation, the floating material was siphoned out by vacuum suction and the sink fraction was retrieved by pouring the material through a filter. The retrieved material was filtered, rinsed with acetone and dried before further separation and analysis. From Hindered-settling separation is a type of hydraulic separation that uses the difference in the settling behavior of particles against an upward current of water. Recently, improvements in the separator design and in control systems have been made which have allowed this concept to be used in a wide range of applications, including heavy mineral recovery, coal cleaning and soil remediation ( Another control parameter in the hindered-settling separation method is the bed level, which corresponds to the mass of the settling material held up within the device. The bed level is controlled by a pressure sensor mounted on the bottom of the column. A proportional–integral–derivative (PID) controller continuously monitors the pressure on the sensor and adjusts the discharging valve so as to maintain a preset bed pressure (set point). Increasing the bed pressure set point affects the overflow weir level, and hence increases the separation cut size to some extent. However, if the solid concentration is too high, particles are entrapped within the bed and settle as a whole irrespective of the particle size and density. Therefore, it is important to have a thick but sufficiently fluidized bed so as to allow the selective penetration of dense particles through the bed. In this study, the bed pressure was adjusted to fine-tune the separation based on the test results. The shaking table is one of the most versatile gravity concentration devices and is found in most types of gravity separation plants. It consists of a plane surface, that is inclined slightly from the horizontal angle and shaken with an asymmetrical motion in the direction of the long axis on a rectangular table. Wash water flows over the table at right angles to the direction of the motion. The particles are thus subjected to two forces – force due to the table motion and force at right angles to it, caused by the film of the flowing water. Large and light particles travel across the deck at right angles in the direction of motion while heavy particles travel essentially parallel to the motion. In an ideal separation, smaller, denser particles exit from the upper left corner of the deck, while larger, lighter particles are washed into the tailings edge of the deck, as shown in The Falcon concentrator is an enhanced type of gravity concentrator that uses centrifugal force for the effective separation of fine particles (  The results of In the Newtonian regime, the settling velocity is proportional to The hindered-settling separation method operates by having the particles settle against the upward flow of the teeter water. Larger and denser particles settle to the bottom, and lighter particles flow over the top of the device. Therefore, the fluid velocity of the upward current is the primary parameter that determines the partitioning capability of the solid stream. In this study, two teeter water flow rates, 2 L/min and 2.5 L/m were used. Flow rates below this range made the bed too thick, whereas almost all of the particles overflowed when the flow rates exceeded 3.0 L/m.  More importantly, the separation results showed that the hindered-settling column effectively separated the low-carbon ash from the high-carbon ash. The LOI of the underflow products was substantially reduced compared to that of the feed. The degree of reduction depended upon the teeter water rate, as expected. At a teeter water rate of 2.0 L/min, the LOI of the underflow flow product was 8.52% compared to 13.12% for the feed. It decreased further to 3.8% when the teeter water rate was increased to 2.5 L/min. Clearly, increasing the teeter water rate allows only denser particles with lower LOI content to penetrate though the teeter bed, appearing in the underflow product. The Korean Standard requires the LOI of coal ash to be less than 5% for concrete use. Therefore, in order to meet this standard, the teeter flow rate should be greater than 2.5 L/min. However, in terms of size, the LOI content of the size fractions of the underflow products were not uniform. This was an expected result as the settling rate decreases with a decrease in the size. Hence, the separation density should increase as the size decreases. The separation efficiency can be examined by comparing the test results with the washability data. This requires the amount of the feed recovered as underflow product, which can be calculated from the size distributions of the three streams using the least absolute sum formula ( Here,  The efficiency of the hindered-settling separation method can be determined by comparing the test results with the washability data. Table performance levels are known to be influenced by many operating parameters, such as the deck inclination, the feed rate, the wash water flow rate, and the table movement speed and amplitude. Moreover, the feed size and density compositions are very important parameters because the particle movement on the deck is influenced by the size and density of the particles. During a good separation of the particles, distinct bands of particle streams appear. In contrast, overlapping of the particle bands may occur if the operating conditions were not properly set. Therefore, there is an optimum combination of the operating parameters for a particular set of particles that produces a distinguishable distribution of particles on the table. This approach was taken in this study. In other words, the operating variables were changed until distinct bands were observed (see Tests were conducted for two size fractions (1.19 × 0.074 mm and 2.38 × 1.19 mm). During each test, three products were collected at three different table exit locations numbered 1, 2, and 3 as indicated in Nevertheless, the table separation performance was compared to that of the hindered-settling separation via the grade-yield curve. As shown in The −0.074 mm size fraction was put through the Falcon concentrator. Coal pond ash is heterogeneous consisting of particles of a wide range of sizes and of varying compositions. A washability analysis showed that the higher the density, the less carbon the ash particles contained. This was true for all of the size fractions tested here; therefore, coal pond ash particles could be made more homogenous when subjected to gravity separation process. However, simple float-and-sink type separation may not work because the compositions for the same gravity fraction were determined as non-uniform among the various size fractions. In general, there was a consistent trend of finer particles requiring a higher density cut to produce clean ash with a LOI value of less than 5% by weight This demands a gravity separation device that uses differential settling rates of particles in a fluid, as finer particles settle more slowly than larger particles of the same density. A hindered-settling column was indeed found to be effective for separating coal pond ash with a yield higher than the float–sink results at a size of 1.19 × 0.074 mm. A shaking table was found to be even more effective due to the combined effect of the size, density and shape as regards the separation of the coal ash particles in the same size range. For a size of −0.074 mm, a Falcon concentrator was found to be effective for producing particles with a LOI value of less than 0.6%. Based on the experimental results of this study, we propose a multi-stage process for the beneficiation of coal pond ash as shown in This process is based on one type of coal pond ash. Therefore, the actual yield and quality of the final product can vary depending on the size-density distribution and the composition of the coal pond ash. Washability tests should be made regularly after a processing plant has been into operation to determine the operating performance of the separation unit or to determine whether the characteristics of the raw ash have changed. The results of the testes are used as the basis for making adjustments to the separation unit and for making changes in or additions to the original design of the processing plant.