The purpose of this study was to investigate how optimum mechanical properties (strength-modulus-toughness) of inherently very brittle polylactide (PLA) could be obtained by reinforcing with E-glass fibers (GF) and blending with thermoplastic polyurethane elastomer (TPU). Composites and blends were compounded by twin-screw extruder melt mixing, while specimens were shaped by injection molding. SEM analyses revealed that 15 wt% GF and 10 wt% TPU domains, alone and together, could be uniformly distributed in the PLA matrix leading to significant improvements in properties. Mechanical tests indicated that use of TPU blending alone resulted in enormous increases in the ductility and fracture toughness values, while GF reinforcements led to significant increases in strength and elastic modulus values. When GF and TPU were added together, it was observed that crack deflection, debonding and fiber pull-out toughening mechanisms of GF reinforcements were as effective as the rubber toughening mechanism of TPU blending.Engineering polymers both thermoplastics and thermosets have been taking place of many conventional metallic and ceramic materials day by day due to basically their lightness and ease of processing. Nonetheless, since many of these engineering polymers are petroleum-based, polymer industry has encountered some problems namely difficulty in access to petrochemical resources and rising costs On the other hand, although compared to other biopolymers PLA has rather higher level of mechanical properties, this is not the case if compared to conventional engineering thermoplastics. Therefore, mechanical properties of PLA; not only strength and modulus, but due to its inherent brittleness, toughness should be also improved. It is known that strengthening of polymer matrices can be achieved by fiber reinforcements, while toughening can be achieved by elastomer blending. In this study, effects of E-glass fiber (GF) reinforcement and thermoplastic polyurethane elastomer (TPU) blending would be investigated. In the literature, it was observed that majority of the studies Literature on the use of E-glass fiber (GF) reinforcement of PLA seems to be very limited. In one of these studies, Lin et al. In the work of Huda Literature survey indicated that in order to overcome inherent brittleness of PLA, rubber toughening could be used. In this respect, researches especially focused on the blending of PLA with an elastomeric material such as natural and synthetic rubbers In order to compare mechanical behavior of PLA with traditional engineering thermoplastics, it would be wise to consider effects of fiber strengthening and rubber toughening together. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no study reported on the effects of both GF reinforcement and TPU blending, yet. Therefore, the purpose of this study was, as the first time, to investigate not only strengthening level of PLA with increasing GF reinforcement content but also toughening level of PLA by TPU blending with and without GF. PLA matrix material used was L-lactic acid type polylactide (NaturePlast, PLE 001). As it is indicated in its technical data sheet, it melts between 145°-155°C and degrades in the range of 240-250 °C; with a density of 1.25 g/cm Composites and blends of PLA with GF and TPU were all produced by two industrially compatible steps; i.e. “twin-screw extrusion melt-compounding” and “injection molding melt-shaping” with laboratory size equipment. First, PLA powders and TPU granules were pre-dried for 15 h and 4 h, respectively; in a vacuum oven at 60 °C. Then according to the formulation, PLA, GF and TPU particles were pre-mixed manually, and these mixtures were melt compounded via laboratory size twin-screw extruder (Rondol Microlab 300 with D = 10 and L/D = 20). The temperature profile chosen was 115-170-180-175-145 °C from feeder to die, with the screw speed of 75 rpm. Strands coming from the die were transformed into 2–3 mm pellets by a four-blade cutting mechanism. Before shaping of the specimens required for the mechanical tests, these pellets were re-dried again in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 15 h. In order to shape standard sized specimens, a laboratory size injection molder (DSM Xplore Micro) was used with the barrel and mold temperatures of 160 °C and 35 °C, respectively. GF reinforced PLA matrix composites were produced with the loadings of 5, 10, 15 and 20 wt%. These composites were designated by using the format of “PLA/ Strength and modulus values of the specimens were determined both with tension tests according to ISO 527-2 standard, and also with flexural tests in terms of three-point bending according to ISO 178 standard. Apart from tension and flexural tests; fracture toughness tests with single-edge-notched-bending specimens according to ISO 13586 standard were also conducted. All these mechanical tests were performed with a 5 kN universal testing system (Instron 5565 A). For each composition, tests were repeated 5 times, so that the mechanical properties were evaluated as the average values with standard deviations. Furthermore, morphological analysis on the fracture surface of the fracture toughness test specimens were conducted by scanning electron microscope (SEM) (FEI Nova Nano 430) to investigate the distribution of GF and TPU domains in PLA matrix and also the interface between them. Even distribution of the fiber reinforcements is one of the key factor to obtain enhanced mechanical properties of polymer composites. Thus, SEM analysis on the fracture surfaces of fracture toughness test specimens were conducted first to observe effect of silane sized GF content in the neat PLA matrix, and then also in the matrix of PLA/TPU blend. Lower magnification SEM images in It is known that due to the immiscibility of TPU and PLA, when blended they lead to a two-phase structure, where round shaped TPU domains form in the matrix of PLA. Since these TPU domains are micron sized, it was possible to observe them only in the higher magnification SEM images of Tension tests and three-point bending tests were conducted to investigate the effects of GF reinforcement and TPU blending on the strength and elastic modulus of PLA. The values of “Tensile Strength (  It is seen that increasing GF content increases tensile ( In terms of elastic modulus values both tensile modulus ( The main reason to blend rather brittle polymers with thermoplastic elastomers is to improve their ductility and toughness. On the other hand, due to the “plasticizing” action of especially soft segments of thermoplastic elastomers, strength and modulus values of the polymer matrices decreases. Thus, Besides modulus and strength values, tension test gives information about the amount of plastic strain formed until fracture, in other words “% strain at break” which is regarded as “ductility” of materials. It was observed that tensile stress-strain curves of neat PLA and PLA/GF composites were all rather linear having a plastic strain of around 5%, i.e. there is no significant contribution of GF in the ductility level of PLA matrix.  The most important shortcoming of polylactide is its inherent brittleness; therefore, for most of the engineering applications enhanced improvement in toughness is essential. Consequently, in this study, fracture toughness tests (one of the most important parameter required for structural engineering applications) were conducted to investigate influences of GF reinforcements and TPU blending on the toughness of PLA. Results of this test, measuring the ability of the materials to withstand crack initiation and propagation, were evaluated in terms of both “Critical Stress Intensity Factor ( SEM images in It was observed that compared to the neat PLA, the use of optimum 15 wt% GF content resulted in increased fracture toughness values as 21% in  When PLA/10 TPU blend was reinforced with 15 wt% GF, it is seen that the performance of rubber toughening mechanism decreases substantially. Just like in the case of ductility decrease mentioned above, the main reason for the reduction in rubber toughening action should be due to the lower interfacial bonding between the GF surfaces and TPU domains, that might lead to initiation and propagation of microcracks at the interface. However, the  SEM analyses revealed that up to 15 wt% content, silane sized GF reinforcements were rather uniformly distributed in the matrix. Beyond that content, level of uniformity decreased, consequently mechanical properties started to decrease. SEM images also showed that there was no uniform distribution problem of micron-sized TPU domains in the PLA matrix. Tensile and flexural tests indicated that due to the very efficient strengthening and stiffening actions of GF reinforcements, all strength and elastic modulus values of PLA increased. For instance, use of 15 wt% GF resulted in 32% and 21% rises in tensile strength ( Due to the plasticizing action of the soft segments of thermoplastic elastomers, use of 10 wt% TPU blending resulted in certain decreases in the strength and modulus values of PLA. On the other hand, when this PLA/TPU blend was reinforced with 15 wt% GF, then all these reduced strength and modulus values were recovered. Ductility measurements in terms of % strain at break (%ε Due to the toughening mechanisms of fiber reinforcements; crack deflection, debonding and fiber pull-out, use of optimum 15 wt% GF content also resulted in increased fracture toughness values as 21% in Therefore, it can be concluded that, although blending of PLA with 10 wt% TPU resulted in enormous improvement in Authors gratefully acknowledge the