Tantalum (Ta) and niobium (Nb) are two strategic metals essential to several key sectors, like the aerospace, gas and oil, nuclear and electronic industries, but their separation is really difficult due to their almost identical chemical properties. Whereas they are currently produced by hydrometallurgical processes using fluoride-based solutions, efforts are being made to develop cleaner processes by replacing the fluoride media by alkaline ones. However, methods to analyze Nb and Ta simultaneously in alkaline samples are lacking. In this work, we developed a capillary zone electrophoresis (CE) method able to separate and quantify Nb and Ta directly in alkaline media. This method takes advantage of the hexaniobate and hexatantalate ions which are naturally formed at pH>9 and absorb in the UV domain. First, the detection conditions, the background electrolyte (BGE) pH, the nature of the BGE co-ion and the internal standard (IS) were optimized by a systematic approach. As the BGE counter-ion nature modified the speciation of both ions, sodium- and lithium-based BGE were tested. For each alkaline cation, the BGE ionic strength and separation temperature were optimized using experimental designs. Since changes in the migration order of IS, Nb and Ta were observed within the experimental domain, the resolution was not a monotonic function of ionic strength and separation temperature. This forced us to develop an original data treatment for the prediction of the optimum separation conditions. Depending on the consideration of either peak widths or peak symmetries, with or without additional robustness constraints, four optima were predicted for each tested alkaline cation. The eight predicted optima were tested experimentally and the best experimental optimum was selected considering analysis time, resolution and robustness. The best separation was obtained at 31.0°C and in a BGE containing 10mM LiOH and 35mM LiCH3COO.The separation voltage was finally optimized, resulting in the separation of Nb, Ta, and IS in less than 2.5min, which is three times faster than any CE method ever reported for the separation of Nb and Ta (acidic media included). Some figures of merit of the method were determined such as linearity ranges and limits of quantitation. Finally, the method was successfully applied to the analysis of a real industrial sample.Niobium (Nb; In aqueous solutions, niobium and tantalum exist only as Nb(V) and Ta(V) and are barely soluble in the usual mineral acids HCl, H Contrasting with the increasing interest for processing Nb and Ta in alkaline media, the analytical methods for such solutions are still limited to inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectrometry. We recently developed an UV-based method for the determination of Nb in both synthetic and industrial samples, but this method is not appropriate for tantalum We recently developed a capillary zone electrophoresis method able to separate Nb and Ta directly in alkaline media All stock solutions were prepared with ultra-pure water delivered by a Direct-Q3 UV system (Millipore, Molsheim, France). NaCl (>99.5%), NaHCOO (>99%) and sodium naphthalene-1,5-disulfonate (98%) were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and used without further purification. LiOH·H An alkaline industrial solution of Nb and Ta, coming from a hydrometallurgical process, was provided by Eramet Research (Trappes, France). The pH of the sample was 12.4. The ICP-AES analysis provided by Eramet Research is as follows: [Nb All CE experiments were carried out with an Agilent Technologies 7100CE system (Massy, France) equipped with a diode array detector (deuterium lamp). The detection wavelength, detection bandwidth, reference wavelength and reference bandwidth for Nb and Ta were optimized, as discussed below. Separations were performed in a 30 The three most important parameters that are likely to affect the separation of H The experimental designs consisted of a central composite design with three levels for each factor (ionic strength and temperature). The center point was also repeated 5 times to evaluate the experimental error. Each experimental design corresponds to 13 experimental conditions ( The relationship between the factors and a response Using the Na counter-ion, the coefficients of variations of the peak times were of the order of 15%. All the linear effects were significant with a type I error risk of 5%, but the nonlinear effects were not, be the tests performed with the residual or the pure error mean squares for variance estimation. Using the Li counter-ion, the coefficients of variations of the peak times were of the order of 3% and all the effects were significant at the 5% level except for the temperature quadratic term. The goal was to find an optimal separation conditions in terms of analysis time and resolution between peaks. However, due to changes in the migration order of Ta, Nb and IS (see Table S1), neither analysis time nor resolution were continuous functions of the factors to be optimized. Thus, we developed a strategy based on the systematic evaluation of the constraints to be satisfied and of the criteria to be optimized in the whole experimental domain using the predictions of the previously validated models. The 2D experimental domain was divided in elementary pixels of width 0.1 (hence a total of 21 impose model consistency, i.e. impose strictly no peak overlap, i.e. optimize the resolution by either minimizing the peak widths minimize the analysis time as an option, optimize robustness by maximizing the number of neighboring pixels satisfying the hard constraints (1) and (2) In order to perform the simultaneous optimization of (3), (4) and (5), we chose a desirability approach. The desirability function analysis time: peak width: asymmetry: For the number of neighbors satisfying the hard constraints, we chose either Thus, depending on whether peak widths or asymmetries were minimized, and whether the robustness constraint on the neighbors was relaxed or not, we obtained 4 predicted optima for each counter-ion, see In a previous study In the non-optimized CE method that we previously reported for the Nb–Ta separation in alkaline media Previously reported results As shown in In order to perform a quantitative determination of Nb and Ta, an internal standard (IS) had to be found. The internal standard should not interact with H As expected, preliminary tests confirmed that the two most important parameters that affect the separation of H We first expected to find the best separation conditions using a classical response surface methodology, based on optimizing resolution values between peaks while minimizing analysis time. However, as shown in It is worth noticing that the ionic strength did not change the migration order of Ta and Nb ions, which have very similar electronic and structural features. The migration order observed for H As a consequence of this change in the migration order, it is obvious that for some conditions, the IS peak overlaps with the Nb or Ta peak. This renders the data treatment more complex because the peak resolutions, which are usually chosen as appropriate responses, are not monotonic functions over the whole experimental domain. For example, it can be inferred from To overcome this issue, new responses were chosen and an ad hoc data treatment was developed as detailed in Section The 8 predicted optimal points (4 in LiOH–LiCH Up to now, all the electropherograms related to the experimental designs were recorded with an applied voltage of 10 The robustness of the method with the final conditions (16 The linearity and quantitation limits of the optimized method were also determined (Fig. S3). The linearity of the method was evaluated by regressing the normalized corrected areas against the total Nb The optimized method was then applied to the determination of Nb and Ta in a real alkaline industrial sample provided by Eramet Research company (France). This sample differs slightly from the model samples we used because it was composed of pure hexaniobate ions ([Nb As shown in For the first time, a CE method was developed for the analysis of Nb and Ta in alkaline media. The separation is performed with classical bared-fused silica capillary and does not require any chelating or chromophoric reagent. First, based on a method designed for speciation studies, we optimized the detection conditions and the nature of the BGE co-ion, and we found a suitable internal standard for the analysis of H Financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: