The motion of air and water is characterised in a downflow co-current column reactor. The velocity of the bubble swarm relative to that of the bulk water is determined using a new approach for the computation of the slip velocity in a CFD simulation using a modified drift flux model and incorporating the data obtained from the CFD modeling. The validity of the numerical model is confirmed by comparing the simulation results with those of experimental. The average slip velocity is found to be approximately 3.3cm/s in the down-comer co-current column, which is lower than those prevailing in counter-current columns. It is concluded that in a bubbly flow regime lower slip velocity improves the bubble particle collection efficiency.external body force lift force wall lubrication force gravity acceleration interphase exchange coefficient mass flux mass transfer from phase 1 to phase 2 mass transfer from phase 2 to phase 1 model’s constant volumetric flow rate of gas volumetric flow rate of liquid local radius outer radius of the column slip velocity gas superficial velocity liquid superficial velocity actual terminal velocity of single bubble local velocity phase velocity velocity of phase 1 velocity of phase 2 gas hold up dimensionless radial position in the column (= r/R) volume averaged density of the q phase volume fraction phase density stress-strain tensor of q Flotation is a technology for creation of particle-laden bubbles in order to remove the contaminant concentrated froth. Column flotation is widely used in minerals and wastewater processing Most flotation columns operate counter-currently, i.e. the pulp entering the top and the gas injected at the base of the column through a sparger, forming a concentrated stream of gas bubbles When a hydrophobic particle approaches a bubble it slides over the surface of the bubble, during which attachment may occur due to the attraction out of the water into the surface of the bubble by forming a three-phase contact with a finite contact angle. However, the velocity of particles relative to bubbles plays a key role in their attachment The term slip is widely used in two phase flow to represent the lag of velocity of one phase compared to the other. Zeghloul et al. where Other researchers demonstrated a non-uniform voidage profile with a central maximum, which leads to gulf-streaming This research reports on the velocity measurements in a laboratory scale Jameson cell. It also demonstrates the numerically calculated average velocities of air and water. Improvements are made on the drift flux analytical model by incorporating radial gas hold-up profiles obtained from CFD modeling. Based on the laboratory system specifications, the slip velocity is calculated using the analytical model developed by Shen and Finch  Experiments were conducted for the two phase flow of atmospheric air and water. The liquid inlet pressure was measured by a pressure gauge and at the same time the inlet air and liquid flow rates were measured using float style flowmeters. Water was mixed with a frothing agent (MIBC A tracer monitoring technique is the most viable means to investigate retention time and velocity in the two phase systems The gas phase was also monitored using coal powder as tracer. Finely ground coal is particularly water repellent and immediately attaches to bubbles. Coal particles will attach to bubbles as soon as they are injected by a syringe into the down-comer. Preliminary flotation tests done in a separate 1 The bubble diameter distribution was measured at the top of the tank using a glass bubble sampler. Bubble size measurement using photography has previously been used in research laboratories at many universities using conventional and modern photography The Eulerian-Eulerian model is used for numerical simulation of the bubbly flow in the laboratory Jameson cell, where both continuous and dispersed phases are assumed as two continuous media in order to indicate what is going on in the central regions of the flotation cell. Several Eulerian-Eulerian CFD studies by other researchers in two phase flows have been reported, particularly to estimate the slip velocity (e.g. In order to numerically solve the partial and ordinary differential equations, discretization of the equations has been carried out using commercial computational fluid dynamics software package ANSYS Fluent 14.5. A 2D axisymmetric domain with structured computational elements in the entire domain was used for the bubble column. It has in the order of 100,000 quadrilateral cells and is illustrated in The continuity equation describes the inlet and outlet mass flow rate to the volume control. According to ANSYS Fluent formulation where q is the phase index, α is the phase volume fraction, is the phase density and v is the phase velocity. The right-hand term characterises the mass transfer between phases, which will be equal to zero by neglecting water vaporization and other mass transfer mechanisms between the phases. Using Eq. Because the fluid flow in the Jameson cell is completely unsteady, and we are interested in investigating the performance of the system in the early stages of the flow development too, the flow was simulated using a transient formulation. The conservation of momentum equation was solved for both Eulerian phases. The equation solved by the ANSYS CFD solver for the momentum equation is a particular form derived from the Navier-Stokes equation: Here Lopez de Bertodano Various methods have been investigated for calculating the average velocity. The power factor n, in Eq. Therefore, Eq. Many researchers have presented different models based on the ensuing void fraction distribution. Using CFD data, equations will be developed here for calculation of void fraction distribution across the column radius for the flow field in the next sections. The average velocities of gas and liquid phases were measured to be 22.5 The length of the colored volume was also monitored down the height of the column by tracking the colored volume. As can be seen in Mean bubble diameters of 0.3  The CFD calculated values for the average velocity of bubbles and liquid are shown in Here, Using Eq.  The following is the equation of the approximated curve. It has been extracted from CFD modeling data and used as a function of the air void fraction across the radius: By replacing Substituting Eq. The downward co-current flow in the down-comer is due to high liquid velocity carrying the bubbles with it. However, the same bubbly flow zone as observed in conventional countercurrent columns is obtained The motion of bubble swarm in a column was shown to be associated with some hindrance effect. The hindrance effect observed in the work of Shen and Finch The experimental and numerical results suggest a relatively slower slip velocity in the Jameson cell than those of countercurrent columns. There are a great number of works done on the improvement of the particle-bubble collection efficiency in flotation with almost all of them emphasizing on collision as a key parameter In the downward co-current flow, bubbles are smaller in size and gas hold up is higher than in the counter current case. That the co-current column provides higher particle bubble collection efficiency is due to higher void fraction in the down-comer. However, it can also be implied from the results of this research that in a bubbly flow regime the lower the slip velocity the more the bubble particle collection efficiency. It can be concluded that microscopic particles would get less chance to escape from being captured by bubbles in the down-comer due to this combination of higher void fraction and lower slip velocity. Lower residence time measured in this study brings about higher production rates, which is also due to the lower slip velocities determined in the down-comer Jameson cell. The authors would like to thank Imam Khomeini International University and the University of Nottingham, UK for collaborative research work.