This work investigates the separation of emulsified crude oil in saline water (30gL−1
                     NaCl) with microbubbles (MBs, D32
                     =30–40µm) and nanobubbles (NBs, D32
                     =150–350nm). Bubbles were generated simultaneously by the depressurization of air-saturated water through a flow constrictor (needle valve). The emulsified oil, after gravity separation of the “free” oil, was flocculated with a cationic polyacrylamide (Dismulgan) at pH 7 and removed by: i. Flotation with MBs and NBs; ii. “Floatation” by NBs; and iii. Flotation with MBs and NBs following floc conditioning by NBs. The best oil removal (>99% efficiency) was obtained at 5bar and 5mgL−1 of Dismulgan, reducing the oil content (feed concentration=334–484mgL−1) in the treated water to <1mgL−1. Furthermore, the use of low saturation pressure (Psat=3.5bar), resulted in a treated water with oil concentrations lower than 29mgL−1 (EPA standards for offshore discharge). Best results were obtained at a low energy for bubble formation, followed by efficient precipitation and nucleation, at a fairly low air/feed emulsified oil interfacial tension (55mNm−1). The flotation was very fast and followed a first-order model, with a flotation kinetic constant of 1.3 and 1.8min−1 for Psat of 3.5 and 5bar, respectively. The injection of isolated NBs (3×108
                     NBsmL−1), in a conditioning stage after flocculation (with 1 and 3mgL−1 Dismulgan) increased the hydrophobicity of the aggregates, improved the adhesion between bubbles and oily flocs and the overall efficiency of the flotation process from 73 to 84%, and from 92 to 95%, respectively. “Floatation” (simply flocs rising with isolated NBs) resulted in oil removal efficiencies of 75 and 90% with and without NaCl (30gL−1). It is believed that the NBs entrap and adhere inside the flocculated oil droplets, forming aerated oily flocs, which subsequently assist the MBs in the flotation process. This finding appears to have potential in improving oil separation by flotation.Flotation is extensively employed in the removal of emulsified oils from aqueous dispersions, after destabilization by flocculation. The size distribution of bubbles and oil droplets plays a key role in flotation efficiency. Small bubbles are preferred because of their large surface areas, which are shown to be very useful in the aggregation of droplets Produced water is wastewater generated in petroleum prospecting that is composed of a mixture of water from wells and process water Recent studies have found that in dissolved air flotation (DAF) microbubbles (MBs) and nanobubbles (NBs) are formed Reports and news about flotation with NBs to remove pollutants from waters and wastewaters are scarce. Recent studies have demonstrated the potential of these fine bubbles in solid-liquid separation and mineral treatment It is believed that NBs may play an important role in the aggregation and stabilization of these aggregates (flocs) by adhering to and/or entraining inside (entrapment) the flocs, generating capillary bridges between oil droplets, and improving their hydrophobicity and the probability of adhesion with MBs Ultrapure (DI) water at room temperature (22 The petroleum (crude oil) used in this study was supplied by a local oil refinery (REFAP, Petrobras, southern Brazil). This oil was characterized in terms of its physicochemical and interfacial properties ( The brine solution for synthetic produced water was made by dissolving 30 The destabilization and flocculation of the emulsion was conducted using Dismulgan V3377 (Clariant®, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil) (1 to 10 The experiments were performed using the system shown in The glass column (2) had one input receiving the depressurized flow (MBs and NBs) from the saturator vessel and one output connected to the glass column (3), to inject the isolated NBs. With flotation by MBs and NBs together, the glass column (2) was not employed.  The bubbles formed by depressurization and hydrodynamic cavitation of the flow of air saturated water through the needle valve were injected directly into the glass column (3) (without separation of MBs and NBs). To perform the tests, a volume of 800 The effect of the saturation pressure (P Aliquots of 100 The air/oil ratio (Eq. The effect of Psat on flotation kinetics was evaluated at a P The conditioning of the oily flocs with a NBs suspension ahead of flotation was evaluated. Two different concentrations of Dismulgan (1 and 3 For the F-NBs, the MBs separation procedure Optical microphotographs were taken of the different stages of oily emulsion separation by flocculation-flotation. An optical microscope Olympus®, model BX41 was employed with an objective magnification of 1000X coupled to a high-performance digital microscope camera, Olympus DP73 (17.28 megapixel resolution). Samples of 100 The oil concentration in the emulsions and in the treated effluent was determined with an oil analyzer (Horiba®, model OCMA-350, Japan). Measurements were based on the energy absorption in the infrared spectrum at the wavelength range of 3.5–3.6  The role of coagulant-flocculating agents in the destabilization of oil-in-water emulsions to promote the coalescence of oil droplets is well discussed in the literature and the mechanisms involved are based on van der Waals and hydrophobic forces Oil droplets with a diameter greater than 20 The effect of Psat on oil removal efficiency is shown in More, in terms of residual oil concentration and practical aspects, the results showed that with a Psat of 3.5   Mishchuk  Yet, these results indicate a slightly lower oil removal efficiency of floatation with isolated NBs with NaCl 30 Flocculation with 5 The authors would like to thank all the Brazilian Institutes that supported this study, namely, CNPq, CAPES, FAPERGS, and UFRGS. We would like to especial thank Alex Rodrigues, Prof Adriana Pohlmann and M.Sc. Selma Calgaroto from the Chemistry Department at our university and to all students of LTM for their assistance.