Titanium, a relatively new engineering metal, has been employed principally in high demanding industries due to its high final cost and it is well known for its biocompatibility. Powder metallurgy (PM) techniques could offer the possibility to reduce the production cost without paying it in terms of mechanical properties, thanks to their intrinsic advantages. In this study the Ti–3Al–2.5V titanium alloy was produced considering two powder production routes and sintered under different temperatures in order to address their feasibility as alternative to the wrought alloy. The results indicate that PM Ti–3Al–2.5V alloys studied have comparable mechanical behaviour as their counterpart obtained by conventional metallurgy and, therefore, are potential candidates to fabricate cheaper titanium products for structural applications as well as biomedical devices.Titanium and its alloys have been discovered, developed and employed only in the last century Powder metallurgy (PM) techniques offer well-established advantages, like a more efficient material utilisation, which would permit costs reduction, especially when processing expensive and difficult-to-produce materials. In the case of titanium and its alloys this advantage is combined with the fact that the reaction between titanium and the fabrication tools is prevented or limited because sintering is carried out in the solid state. This aspect is of particular importance for titanium because the metal in the molten state strongly reacts with the ceramic moulds forming a brittle superficial layer, known as alpha-case Even though the production of titanium, mainly focusing on the Ti–6Al–4V alloy, by means of PM methods was considered in the 1980s The raw materials acquired for the production of the Ti–3Al–2.5V powders were: HDH elemental titanium powder and V:Al master alloy (both supplied by GfE Gesellschaft für Elektrometallurgie mbH) as well as an HDH Ti–6Al–4V powder (prealloyed) procured from Se-Jong Materials. Thanks to this set of starting powders, the Ti–3Al–2.5V alloy was produced considering the so-called master alloy addition alternative of the blending elemental approach. Specifically, on the one hand, the elemental titanium powder was mixed with the V:Al master alloy whilst on the other hand the elemental titanium powder was alloyed with the right amount of Ti–6Al–4V powder. In order to differentiate the two Ti–3Al–2.5V powders, they were labelled as a function of the nature of the alloying elements as Ti–3Al–2.5V-MA and Ti–3Al–2.5V-PA, respectively. The preparation of the powders was done by conventional blending by means of a Turbula mixer during 30 Ti–3Al–2.5V-MA and Ti–3Al–2.5V-PA powders were shaped into dogbone tensile specimens (ASTM: B925) by means of a hydraulic uniaxial press and a floating die. The walls of the floating die were lubricated with zinc stearate. No lubricant was intentionally added to the starting powders in order to prevent or limit as much as possible their contamination. The pressure applied to consolidate the powder was set to 700 The sintered samples were prepared for metallography using silicon-carbide papers with different granulometry for grinding and silica gel for polishing. The phases that compose the microstructure were revealed by means of Kroll etching, a mixture of hydrofluoric and nitric acids plus distilled water, as well as identified by XRD analysis. Microstructural analysis was done using an Olympus GX-71 optical microscope. The thickness of the sintered Ti–3Al–2.5V-MA and Ti–3Al–2.5V-PA samples was measured by means of a micrometer and its variation was monitored to study the effect of the sintering step on the final shape of the components. The so-called densification parameter (  From  From the analysis of the microstructure of the samples sintered at 1250 The variation of the dimensions of the green samples experienced due to the sintering step as well as their densification is shown in As it can be seen in The results of the relative density as a function of the sintering temperature are shown in From the data of the relative density shown in The results of the chemical analysis, contents of oxygen and nitrogen, carried out on sintered samples are presented in Analysing the content of oxygen as determined by inert gas fusion technique in the sintered samples ( The results of Vickers hardness (HV30) measured in the cross-section of Ti–3Al–2.5V-MA and Ti–3Al–2.5V-PA specimens are presented in As can be seen from the data plotted in Examples of tensile stress–strain curves obtained from the tensile tests of the PM Ti–3Al–2.5V-MA and Ti–3Al–2.5V-PA alloy samples are displayed in As can be seen in The ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and strain at fracture ( From the analysis of the UTS data shown in No significant differences were found on the bases of the sintering temperature during the fractographic study of the tensile test specimens by SEM. Hence, only the micrographs of the samples sintered at 1300 From the fractographic study results ( The results of the dynamic Young modulus carried out on sintered Ti–3Al–2.5V-MA and Ti–3Al–2.5V-PA alloy specimens are reported in From Independent of the processing temperature employed to sinter the Ti–3Al–2.5V-MA and Ti–3Al–2.5V-PA alloys, they are characterised by the typical lamellar microstructure of the near-α titanium alloys slow cooled from a temperature above their beta transus From this study about the factors influencing the tensile behaviour of PM Ti–3Al–2.5Valloys, it can be concluded that the fabrication of the Ti–3Al–2.5V alloy by means of uniaxial pressing and sintering is a viable alternative to the conventional metallurgical route independent of the nature of the powders used and, in particular, of the way the alloying elements are added. The level of relative density and the total amount of interstitials dissolved are the two main factors which determine the mechanical performances of PM titanium alloys. Although slight differences between the two materials were found, in general, the produced PM Ti–3Al–2.5Valloys show comparable mechanical performances to those of the wrought alloy. Specifically, higher hardness and ultimate tensile strength can easily be obtained whereas care must be taken to keep high ductility. On the basis of the results shown, the materials studied are found to be potential candidates to fabricate cheaper products made out of titanium alloys. The authors want to acknowledge the financial support from the