Optimized design of metal foam heat exchangers, as replacements for finned-tubes in air-cooled condensers of a geothermal power plant, is presented here. Two different optimization techniques, based on first and second law (of thermodynamics) are reported. While the former aims at the highest heat transfer rate with as low pressure drop as possible, the latter minimizes the generated entropy in the thermodynamic system. Interestingly, the two methods lead to the same optimal design. The new design has been compared to the conventional air-cooled condenser designed and optimized by using the commercially available software ASPEN. It is shown that while the heat transfer rate increases significantly (by an order of magnitude) compared to the finned-tube for the same main flow obstruction height, the pressure drop increase is within an acceptable range. Further comparison between the two systems are carried out, making use of Mahjoob and Vafai's performance factor developed specifically for metal foam heat exchangers.cross-sectional area, m characteristic length, m drag force, N average heat transfer coefficient, W/m permeability of the metal foam, m thermal conductivity, W/mK entropy generation number average Nusselt number, 2 mass flow rate, kg/s pressure, Pa performance factor pumping power, ∆PU heat transfer rate per unit length, W/m heat transfer rate, W Reynolds number, radius of solid cylinder, m radius of metal foam layer, m entropy generation rate, W/K temperature, K free stream velocity, m/s porosity of porous metal foam fluid density, kg/m kinematic viscosity, μ/ρ pump efficiency channel fin/finned tube heat exchanger metal foam heat exchanger minimum porous medium pressure drop term solid cylinder heat transfer term free stream Despite the fact that Australia has huge coal mines to feed the coal-fired power plants, the main power generation systems in the country, environmental concerns lead to a renewed interest in the use of geothermal energy on top of the already existing renewable sources in the continent. Studies show that the earth crustal temperature can be close to 300 The overwhelming resistance in such air-cooled condensers is that of the air-side (as phase change occurs in the tube side). Therefore, it has always been of great interest to reduce the air-side thermal resistance. One way to achieve this goal is to use finned-tube bundles as fins increase the heat transfer area and thus enhance the heat transfer from the condenser tubes. Recently, the application of metal foams is proposed, instead of fins, on the outer surface of the condenser tubes; One way to optimize a thermodynamic system is to apply Entropy Generation Minimization (EGM), a combined method of basic thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid mechanics principles, which has been recently applied to measure the significance of irreversibility in different application such as heat exchangers, power plants, and ecological benefits The present study has been conducted to apply EGM to optimize a metal foam-wrapped solid cylinder in cross-flow considering the effects of the key parameters, including the free stream velocity and characteristics of metal foam such as porosity, permeability, and form drag coefficient. Being a determining factor in pressure drop and heat transfer increment, the porous layer thickness is changed systematically, for four commercially available metal foam samples, to observe that there is an optimum layer thickness that minimizes the entropy generation rate. Results are then compared with those obtained following the application of the First Law to observe that the alternatives lead to the same answer. The present study investigates the performance of an aluminum foam-covered single horizontal cylinder in cross flow. Searching for the practical velocities of coolant, used in air-cooled heat exchangers, the analysis is conducted for stream velocities, 2.8 and 5.6 According to It is very interesting to see that if one unboundedly increases the thickness of metal foam wrapped solid cylinder, Nusselt number ratio does not necessarily augment. The ratio of three samples (#2, 5 and 7) dramatically rises to reach a maximum point in which the porous layer thickness ratio (  In addition to the First Law optimization, the Second Law optimization of metal foam-wrapped tubes is implemented to observe that there exists a critical porous layer thickness or optimum geometry (size) for which the balance between heat transfer irreversibility and fluid friction irreversibility leads to the least exergy destruction for the system. The total entropy generation rate associated with heat transfer and drag on an immersed body is given by With the mass flow rate given by In order to generalize the results, the following scale for entropy generation rate is introduced This dimensionless entropy generation rate,  The competition between heat transfer and fluid friction irreversibility terms in Eq. Then, following the use of Eq. Alternatively, one rearranges the above equation to read Once Two sets of figures are plotted here, With Comparing Nevertheless, increasing the velocity magnitude does enhance the fluid friction part of entropy generation number, as it can be seen by comparing Studying pressure drop and heat transfer as the most critical parameters in the heat exchanger design, Mahjoob and Vafai's performance factor The ratio of these two performance factors is defined as The results of the performance factor analysis, based on Eq. According to Numerical and theoretical analyses have been conducted to conclude that the heat transfer from a single cylinder in cross-flow can be increased by an order of magnitude by wrapping a metal foam layer on the tube outer surface albeit at the expense of an increased pressure drop. The first and second law of thermodynamics have been used to optimize the performance of metal foams as alternatives to fins in air-cooled condensers of a geothermal power plant. As mentioned earlier, while there are available data in the literature to predict (or at least estimate)