The soil organic carbon (SOC) is the largest carbon pool in the terrestrial biosphere, second only to oceans, containing twice as much carbon as the atmosphere and three times that stored in global vegetation. Climate change (CC) is expected to impact this carbon pool. To date, large uncertainties still persist on the effects of CC on SOC stocks. In addition, a shortage of data related to regional SOC quantities of tree-covered areas and future changes under CC conditions is recognized. In this work, we used a spatial-explicit modelling approach to estimate the current SOC stock (at 2005) and future changes (at 2095) under CC conditions of the whole forest, tree crop, grassland, and pasture covered areas of Italy. A methodology was preliminarily implemented to obtain spatialized SOC estimates at a regional scale by using the CENTURY 5 model coupled with spatialized vegetation, soil, and climate data. We ran both moderate (RCP4.5) and extreme (RCP8.5) climatic scenarios, and used three Global Circulation Models for each one of the four ecosystems described above. The current SOC stock estimates range from 51.3 (orchards) to 129.5 Mg carbon ha−1 (coniferous forests) and we found an overall SOC stock in Italy ranging from 1320.1 to 1425.1 Tg. SOC projections under CC showed a moderate carbon loss suggesting that forest, grassland, and permanent crop soils could provide an important contribution to climate change mitigation.The soil organic carbon (SOC) is the largest carbon pool in the terrestrial biosphere, second only to oceans, containing twice as much carbon as the atmosphere and three times that stored in global vegetation ( The European Commission Thematic Strategy for Soil Protection ( Although ground and atmospheric carbon measurements suggest that the terrestrial biosphere is a net sink of CO There is scientific evidence that forested areas are a net carbon sink, with SOC stock of global forested soil that amounted to 383 ± 30 Pg C in 2011. Temperate forests contribute 0.75 ± 0.1 Pg C year The amount of SOC stored in forests and permanent crops is also affected by climatic and pedological characteristics, unlike in croplands, where anthropogenic activities have a crucial role in determining these quantities. In addition, permanent crops and forests’ SOC stocks will likely be strongly altered by CC in the near future ( In this work, we used the dynamic SOC model CENTURY ( The CENTURY model is designed to simulate the soil organic matter dynamics using a monthly time step ( The study area is represented by forest, grassland and pasture, and tree crop surfaces of Italy (data refers to the year 2008). These data were derived by IUTI (Italian Land Use Inventory) with 500 m spatial resolution ( Forests, grasslands, and tree crops cover approximately 17.7 Mha (52% of the national territory) and we reclassified these areas according to 7 sub-categories (broad-leaved forest, coniferous forest, Mediterranean maquis, vineyard, orchard, olive grove, natural grassland and pasture) ( Soil data (texture, pH, SOC concentration, bulk density) were obtained from the Harmonized World Soil Database (HWSD), version 1.2 ( Climate data used in this work came from the EURO-CORDEX Project ( CENTURY 5 is not suitable in its actual implementation to be directly used for regional spatialized SOC assessments. We developed and implemented a methodology based on the use of a Geographic Information System (GIS) and on coupling CENTURY 5 with Microsoft Visual Basic© and R scripts to automate a sequential work for obtaining spatialized results by the model runs. Land cover, soil, and climate layers were overlapped using ArcGIS© software package (version 10.1). The land cover layer (630, 276 pixels at 500 m resolution) was used to clip the other layers obtaining a NetCDF file containing all these attributes for each grid cell. We then compiled Microsoft Visual Basic© and R scripts to allow the automated CENTURY 5 sequential pixel-based runs. With respect to the optimal procedure to initialize the model (i.e. to determine the initial SOC pool size), there is not a consensus about a common method ( Our estimates were compared with field data available from different sources (soil databases, forest inventories) reported by other Authors. The ANOVA test was applied to analyze the differences between the current SOC values obtained with the different GCMs. Subsequently, we applied the Tukey’s test to find data statistically different from each other. We applied the same statistical tests to analyze the differences between current SOC values and those referred to 2095 under different GCMs and climatic scenarios. The estimated current SOC stock ranges from 51.3 for orchards to 129.5 Mg carbon ha The spatial distribution of SOC is shown in Considering the three GCMs, we found an overall SOC stock in Italy ranging from 1320.1 to 1425.1 Tg C. The broad-leaved forest, which covers about half of the study area, contributed about 50% to the total SOC storage. The coniferous forest, covering only 17.4% of the study area, showed a total SOC ranging from 294.9 to 399.2 Tg C. Although the high SOC values per ha estimated in the areas covered by Mediterranean maquis, these systems only provide a modest contribution (approximately 3%) to the total SOC stock due to their limited extent. The comparison between the current SOC values with data reported by other Authors is shown in Several studies reported SOC data related to pastures in the Mediterranean area, but only a few of them specifically referred to natural grasslands. Similar or slightly higher SOC values, compared to our study, were found in Southern Turkey ( The projections under climate change scenarios in Italy showed an overall reduction of SOC between 2005 and 2095 ( For most of the land cover categories, both ANOVA and Tukey’s test results suggest significant differences between current SOC values and those at 2095 for each GCM and climatic scenarios ( We are aware that the comparison of our results with those coming from other works is critical, due to differences in climatic databases, models, methodologies, and land cover categories. In general, we found a mean SOC stock decrease of 0.75%, which is less than reports by other Authors. For example, A set of questions arise from this comparison, providing insights for future studies. In general, forested areas appear to be less impacted by CC in terms of SOC stock when compared to agricultural lands. Moreover, it is worth noting that differences between our results and other studies are smaller when considering similar spatial resolutions. For instance, SOC dynamic models coupled with georeferenced information help to better understand the physical and chemical soil responses at the basis of wide-scale SOC dynamics. At the same time, spatial-explicit approaches are needed to understand SOC dynamics distribution as an essential step in quantifying regional and global carbon budgets. This work presents the first estimates of current SOC stock as well as its future change in forest, grassland, and permanent crop soils with a modelling approach at national scale in Italy. Despite the preliminary assumptions of our exercise, the obtained trends strongly suggest that forests, grasslands, and permanent crop soils could provide an important contribution to climate change mitigation strategies. Results suggest not only a potential higher soil carbon content in more structurally and functionally diverse forests but also a higher resilience, supporting one theory of biodiversity and ecosystem function research that suggests a higher stability and resilience of mixed stands to perturbations. This turns out to be particularly relevant in countries such as Italy, where land use changes, and particularly urban growth on agricultural soils, are currently seriously undermining SOC stocks. In this context, the availability of reliable and spatially-explicit data and information on future SOC trends is crucial to both increase the awareness of policy-makers and to better understand possible impacts of emerging policies facing global environmental changes, such as climate and land use changes. In conclusion, this work represents a valuable contribution for improving current knowledge on the role of forests and agroecosystems in Italy both for scientific purposes and in supporting climate change mitigation strategies and policies. The availability of accurate and reliable SOC stock estimates is indeed necessary for both international debates on the post-Kyoto activities and for proficient mitigation policies following the growing need of a roadmap for decarbonization.