Over the past decade there have been increasing reports of atypical femoral fractures (AFFs) associated with bisphosphonate use. Reported cases of bilateral involvement usually refer to sequential injuries, or a complete fracture with an incomplete injury to the contralateral limb. In this case report we describe simultaneous, bilateral, complete atypical femoral fractures following a simple fall. A history of prodromal pain, previous radiological evidence of cortical thickening and long term alendronate therapy for osteoporosis secondary to corticosteroid treatment paint a classical picture of the presentation of an atypical fracture pattern of which orthopaedic surgeons should be aware.Bisphosphonates have been widely used for the treatment of osteoporosis in men, postmenopausal women and those on glucocorticoid therapy to reduce bone loss and reduce fracture risk. Over the past decade there have been increasing reports of atypical femoral fractures (AFFs) associated with bisphosphonate use. A 71-year-old white British female presented to Accident and Emergency following a fall from standing height onto her buttocks whilst out walking. She had acute pain in both proximal femora and initial investigations revealed bilateral complete subtrochanteric femoral fractures (see Medical history included pulmonary sarcoid, for which she had been on prednisolone treatment for 18 years, and she had been taking bone protection in the form of weekly Alendronate 70 She described bilateral thigh pain for 2–3 months prior to the fall and had seen her GP who had advised activity modification and simple analgesia. A previous Pelvic X-ray had been requested in 2014 due to bilateral hip pain and retrospectively there was evidence of subtle cortical thickening bilaterally at the site of the subsequent fractures (see The patient underwent osteosynthesis with consecutive cephalo-medullary femoral nails under a single anaesthetic. She was monitored closely in theatre and transfused 2 units of blood intra-operatively to account for fluid losses. Lactate levels and cardiovascular parameters remained stable and she tolerated the procedure well. Post-operatively she underwent early mobilisation and review with ortho-geriatrician. Alendronate was stopped and she was commenced on vitamin D and calcium replacement therapy. In response to worry from patients and physicians, a working group of the European Society on Clinical and Economic Aspects of Osteoporosis and Osteoarthritis and the International Osteoporosis Foundation reviewed the evidence relating to bisphosphonate use and an association with AFFs in 2010. In 2014 the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR) published an update to their own earlier guidelines. The ASBMR produced a list of major and minor features of AFFs and advised that for the purposes of case definition, at least 4 of the major features should be present (see A key recommendation remains awareness and vigilance amongst patients and healthcare providers. Although cases remain rare, the large numbers of patients treated with bisphosphonates in the UK make AFFs increasingly common and classically the condition is bilateral with prodromal pain. Patients on long term bisphosphonate treatment who complain of hip or thigh pain require prompt imaging of the entire length of both femurs with a high index of suspicion for these atypical fractures. Early diagnosis and management is likely to reduce morbidity and potentially can avoid the need for surgical procedures in this fragile patient group. Mark Higgins was responsible for case selection, literature review and writing of the case report. Sam Morgan-John and Sachin Badhe were responsible for obtaining history from patient, consenting patient, providing senior supervision and proof reading the case report. The authors have none to declare.