Fracture toughness is one the most important parameters for design applications and performance assessment of WC–Co cemented carbides (hardmetals). Different from hardness, fracture toughness is commonly a property more difficult to evaluate, particularly in brittle materials. A large number of different testing methods have been introduced to evaluate toughness of hardmetals, but in general all of them have either theoretically debatable issues or important experimental difficulties. In this study, three different fracture toughness testing methodologies are investigated: three-point bending on Chevron notched specimen (“reference” baseline), Palmqvist indentation test, and Hertzian indentation method. The work is conducted in several cemented carbide grades with different microstructures, in terms of both WC grain size and Co binder content. It is found that Chevron-notched three-point bending test yields suitable fracture toughness values for a wide range of cemented carbide grades with varying hardness. Concerning indentation methods, the Hertzian one may be particularly recommended, as compared to Palmqvist method, as far as hardness (HV30) drops below 1300. On the other hand, if HV30 is higher than 1300 Palmqvist indentation procedure yields reliable fracture toughness measurements. Experimental findings are finally analyzed and discussed on the basis of two theoretical models proposed in the literature.WC–Co cemented carbides, also referred to as hardmetals, exhibit an excellent combination of mechanical properties. This is the main reason for its successful implementation as tool materials in a wide range of applications: metal cutting, mining, machining and metal forming, among others Within the above framework, an effort is here proposed to evaluate different fracture toughness testing methodologies where above experimental limitations are avoided: three-point bending on Chevron notched specimen (e.g. Ref. Nine different cemented carbides with varying grain size and cobalt content were manufactured for the experiments. The materials were consolidated by liquid phase sintering at temperatures in the range between 1390 Microstructure of WC–Co cemented carbides is usually characterized in terms of both single-phase parameters: carbide phase size (d) and cobalt volume fraction (V After obtaining orientation maps MATLAB™ toolbox MTEX, which features a distinctive method for the evaluation of an orientation density function from diffraction pole figure intensities or from EBSD data normally classified by phase, was utilized to determine the number of carbide/carbide ( Microstructural data for the nine hardmetal grades investigated are included in Advantages of toughness measurement of cemented carbides through three-point bending test of Chevron-notched specimens include no pre-cracking requirement and easy testing configuration. Within this context, values assessed following this testing procedure will be used, for comparison purposes, as “reference” baseline for further discussion on testing method and microstructural effects on fracture toughness. Rectangular bars of dimensions (53 Palmqvist indentation toughness was determined on square shaped (12 Many attempts have been made to use Hertzian indentation – where a hard sphere is pressed into the flat surface of a brittle substrate – to determine fracture toughness of brittle materials At this stage, it should be emphasized that Regarding experimental issues, Hertzian indentation tests were conducted using spherical hardmetal indenters with two different radii i.e. 1.25 Mechanical properties of WC–Co composites are dependent on volume fraction of each phase and carbide grain size. As the volume fraction of the carbide phase increases, hardness rises and fracture toughness decreases. On the other hand, grades with fine carbides exhibit higher hardness and lower fracture toughness than those with a coarser microstructure. The combined effect of these single-phase parameters may be captured by means of two-phase microstructural parameters such as carbide contiguity and binder mean free path. In general, contiguity is observed to increase as both binder content and carbide grain size decrease. Microstructural characteristics, including volume fraction of binder phase, determined from EBSD measurements are presented in Chevron-notched three-point bending test is an efficient method for fracture toughness assessment of brittle cemented carbides. In this study, deflection was recorded by a LVDT device and a typical force–deflection curve is shown in A comparison of the fracture toughness values obtained by the different testing methods investigated is shown in Depending on indenter shape, three distinct indentation modes take place in brittle materials. Ring cracks and Hertzian cone cracks are formed when indenter is rounded while lateral vents or median vents are formed when the indenter is sharp. For the case of cemented carbides, median vents are formed in the underlying material and they may be classified in two types: Palmqvist and median cracks. Schematic of this indentation-induced crack system is described in detail elsewhere On the other hand, the combined effect of high binder content and relatively coarse carbides (e.g. H grade) results in a relevant departure from the brittle-like nature suitable for satisfying requirements implicit to application of indentation fracture mechanics Regarding toughness assessment by means of Hertzian indentation (using an indenter of radius 1.25 Aiming for a deeper study on the implementation of Hertzian indentation methodology, the use of indenters with different radii and surface conditions (abraded with SiC 600 grit size and polished with 6 In order to obtain the appropriate toughness values through Hertzian indentation using spheres with radii between 1 and 5 Following the above findings, from a practical view it is finally interesting to evaluate the particular measurement suitability of each method as a function of a basic mechanical property such as hardness. In this regard, Chevron-notched three-point bending test yields suitable fracture toughness values for a wide range of cemented carbide grades with varying hardness. Concerning indentation methods, the Hertzian one may be particularly recommended, as compared to Palmqvist method, as far as hardness (HV30) drops below 1300. On the other hand, if HV is higher than 1300; results estimated from Shetty et al.'s equation may be taken as suitable for assessment of fracture toughness. Based on different microstructural parameters and assuming deformation in cobalt binder and carbides, different fracture toughness models have been proposed in the literature. Using these microstructural parameters, an effort is here carried out to evaluate how experimental data gathered in this study fit within estimations extracted from two specific models. This model uses the idea of ductile fracture proposed by Rice and Johnson Fracture toughness Ravichandran proposed evaluation of the strain energy release rate As a final outcome, fracture toughness can be determined by the following relation A comparison between the “reference” The conclusions obtained in this study can be summarized as follows: Chevron-notch three-point bending test may be taken as “reference” baseline method for determining the fracture toughness for a wide range of binder composition and carbide grain size of hardmetals. Palmqvist method gives a good approximation of toughness for brittle-like cemented carbides, but becomes invalid for grades whose “reference” toughness is higher than 14 Current fracture toughness models overestimates the experimental “reference” fracture toughness values determined in this study. Slight modifications on fitting parameters associated with intrinsic uncertainties (binder flow stress, critical crack tip opening displacement at fracture, etc.) result in satisfactory agreement between experimental and estimated values. The research work was conducted within a cooperative effort among Seco Tools AB, Pramet Tools, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya and Chalmers University. This investigation has been partly funded by the