In this paper, the floatability of seven plastics (POM, PVC, PET, PMMA, PC, PS and ABS) in the presence of alkyl ethoxylated nonionic surfactant (15-S-7) was investigated. It was found that the floatability of all the plastics decreases with the addition of the surfactant; but they are different in floatability and follow the order POM<PVC<PMMA<PET<PC<ABS<PS. From the separation test results of several plastic mixtures, it was shown that Gamma flotation method not only can be used to separate plastics mixture with different density, such as separation of POM and PVC from PC, POM and PVC from PS and ABS, PET and PMMA from PS and ABS, but also can be used to separate plastics mixture with similar density, such as separation of PMMA from PC. Products with grade higher than 99% and recovery higher than 97% can be obtained for the separation of some plastic mixtures. Finally, surface chemical factors, such as wettability of plastics and surface tension of flotation medium, and gravity factors, such as particle density and shape, were studied. It was found that the depressing effect of surfactant 15-S-7 on the plastics is mainly due to the reduced liquid surface tension, and flotation selectivity for the plastics with identical particle size is dominated by contact angle, particle density and shape.Over recent years, several experimental studies have been reported describing the separation of plastic waste particles by froth flotation In principle, selective flotation separation of plastics can be achieved by modifying surface properties of plastics or by using a liquid medium with a specific value of surface tension. The latter is also called Gamma flotation. Several studies have reported the potential of this method in the separation of plastics However, it has been found that plastics flotation is controlled not only by surface chemical factors, but also by gravity factors Seven virgin plastic plates, namely PS, ABS, PET, PVC, POM, PC and PMMA, were cleaned with de-ionised water and dried at room temperature. Then the plates were shredded by a cutting mill (pulverisette 19 made by FRITSCH GmbH, Germany) and screened into several size fractions. The −2.38+2.00 mm samples are used for the flotation tests. For contact angle measurements, the plates with dimensions of ≈9×100 mm The chemicals used for flotation tests include TERGITOL 15-S-7, frother MIBC, and pH regulator NaOH and HCl. TERGITOL 15-S-7 is a surfactant with molecular formula C Flotation tests were carried out in a laboratory flotation machine with 700 ml cell volume at constant temperature 25±1°C. Ten grams of sample for each experiment was conditioned with TERGITOL 15-S-7 in de-ionised water from Luleå University for 5 min and then with MIBC for 2 min. Then, air was introduced and flotation was performed for 8 min. The sessile-drop method was used for the contact angle measurement with FIBRO 1100 Dat dynamic adsorption tester (FIBRO System AB, Sweden). Dynamic contact angles versus time are reported. The surface tension of surfactant solution was measured using the ring method. Density of the plastics samples for flotation test is determined with Multivolume Pycnometer 1305 (Micromeritics Instrument Corporation).  The differences of the plastics in floatability and the potential of separation of plastics by the addition of surfactant are further verified by the test results of the separation of plastic mixtures as shown in Surfactant 15-S-7 has a molecular structure C As listed in To understand the floatability order of the plastics in From the results, it can be seen that the contact angles of all the plastics are reduced with the addition of surfactant 15-S-7. In the presence of the surfactant, the dynamic contact angles of the plastics follow the below order: If other factors are not taken into consideration, the contact angle order in The plastics samples used in the flotation tests have the same narrow particle size fraction −2.38+2.00 mm and the particle shapes are similar except for PC and PET which are observed containing more plate particles. This indicates that values With the help of In case the densities of plastics are different, it is also possible to realise the differences of the plastics in floatability according to The floatability of seven plastics, namely POM, PVC, PET, PMMA, PC, PS and ABS decreases with the addition of surfactant 15-S-7, but they are different in floatability and follow the below order: In the presence of surfactant 15-S-7, the flotation selectivity for the plastics with identical particle size is not only dominated by wettability of plastics, but also by particle density and particle shape. A plastic with lower density, larger contact angle, and lower shape parameter has higher floatability. Gamma flotation method not only can be used to separate plastics mixture with different density, such as separation of POM and PVC from PC, POM and PVC from PS and ABS, PET and PMMA from PS and ABS, but also can be used to separate plastics mixture with similar density, such as separation of PMMA from PC. Products with grade higher than 99% and recovery higher than 97% can be obtained for the separation of some plastic mixtures. The authors are grateful to the Minerals and Metals Recycling Research Center, Luleå University of Technology, Sweden, for financial support and approval of this paper for publication, and Mr Martin Cohn at Carlsson & Möller, AB, Sweden, for supplying the plastics samples. The authors also thank Dr Bertil Pålsson and Dr Allan Holmgren for solving contact angle device problems.