Bicondylar Hoffa fracture involving both the femoral condyles is a rare injury. Conjoint variety with intact bone bridge between condyles in intercondylar notch area is even rare.
                  We report a conjoint variety of bicondylar open grade III A Hoffa’s fracture with patella entrapped in the fracture with quadriceps rupture in an adult which was surgically treated with initial debridement and later open reduction with fixation and quadriceps repair. The final outcome at 1year post injury is satisfactory.
                  To the best of our knowledge, no such case has been reported till date in English literature.Hoffa fracture is an uncommon and difficult articular injury where coronal orientation of fracture line separates a large condylar articular portion of distal femur from distal femur. First described by Hoffa in 1904, We report an open grade III A Hoffa fracture with displacement of patella into the coronal split of the fracture with quadriceps rupture, which was successfully treated by two stage open reduction and internal fixation. To best of author’s knowledge, no such case has been reported. The case highlights complexities associated with such intra-articular injury patterns. A 35 Radiographs revealed displaced coronal plane fracture of both condyles with patella entrapped in the fracture itself [ The injured limb was initially splinted in an above knee posterior splint. Patient was emergently taken under anaesthesia for through debridement of the wounds. The lacerations were extended to adequately visualize the fracture. The anterior articular part of distal femur was buttonholing through the quadriceps muscle with complete disruption of the extensor apparatus from superior edge of patella. The patella was displaced posteriorly to lie in the coronal split of the femoral condyles. Thorough knee joint lavage and wound debridement was done. The patella was reduced to its anatomical position and the quadriceps tendon was tagged to superior pole of patella. The wounds were closed over suction drain and the limb was splinted in extension. Intravenous antibiotics were continued for 5 days. As the suture lines showed good healing and there was no clinical evidence of infection, the patient was planned for definitive fixation of fracture and repair of extensor apparatus of the knee 10 The wound healed uneventfully. Following suture removal, rehabilitation was started slowly and guarded with a hinged knee brace with drop lock to start passive assisted range of motion. Initially patient had 20° of extension lag with 70° of flexion. CPM exercises were started. The knee range of motion was progressively increased with no extension lag and 120° flexion after 1 The isolated tangential posterior articular fracture of the distal femur in coronal plane was first described by Hoffa in 1904. Hoffa fractures are supposed to happen by a shearing force on the posterior femoral condyle; both direct impact and vertical shear with twisting mechanisms have been proposed. Lewis et al. The diagnosis requires high index of clinical suspicion and good radiographs; even a CT scan or MRI especially in pediatric age group. Bicondylar variant may also be missed on plain radiographs due to overlapping of condylar shadows. Open reduction is preferred treatment for Hoffa fractures. Depending on the extension of the fracture line, detachment of the insertions of the popliteus tendon, lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle, anterior cruciate ligament, and lateral ligaments are common and may lead to knee instability or disruption of blood supply to the fragments. Multiple surgical modalities for the definitive treatment of distal femoral fractures comprise of external fixation, intramedullary nailing, and plate osteosynthesis with either open reduction and internal fixation, or minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO). Various plating options for such fracture morphology includes antiglide plating, buttress plate fixation, fixed-angle devices like the angled blade plate (ABP) or the dynamic condylar screw (DCS), and locking plates. External fixation, however, as a temporary fixation device is indicated in polytraumatised pa–tients, patients with massive soft tissue damage, open fractures, and situations with logistic or infrastructural limitations. Arthroscopy-guided fixation of these fractures has also been advocated for acute Hoffa’s fracture with large fragments with minimal comminution; the advantages include avoidance of soft tissue dissection without arthrotomy, decrease blood loss, intra articular visualization, fast recovery and mobilization. This report consists of a combination of a conjoint variety of bicondylar Hoffa fracture with patella entrapped the fracture line with complete quadriceps rupture, which has not been reported yet. Discrete fracture anatomy, difficult diagnosis, difficult surgical exposure, infeasibility of conventional implants for distal femur fractures and variable fixation construct with poor strength, high amount of shear forces across fracture line and high propensity of avascular necrosis and arthrosis add to complexities and prognosis associated with Hoffa fracture. Bicondylar conjoint Hoffa’s fracture with patella displaced in hoffa’s fracture line with quadriceps rupture is a rare injury. Such rare injury should be treated by early open reduction and internal fixation to avert problems like avascular necrosis, joint instability and quadriceps retraction while simultaneously taking cautions to avoid surgical trauma to vascularity of fragments and articular cartilage. This case adds to the literature depicting the rare fracture morphology not described before & its surgical difficulties and complications. None.