Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is a disorder related to progressive mineralization of valvular tissue that is a leading cause of heart disease. Thus far, there is no medical treatment to prevent the mineralization of aortic valves. It is generally thought that pathologic mineralization is linked to apoptosis of vascular cells. However, the role of apoptosis during mineralization as well as the survival signals for valvular interstitial cells (VICs), the main cellular component of aortic valves, remains to be identified. Here, through several lines of evidence, we show that bioavailability of extracellular ATP is a signal which determines survival or apoptosis of VICs and, in doing so, plays a major role in the development of CAVD. Specifically, in CAVD and in VIC cultures undergoing mineralization, we found a high level of the ectonucleotidase ENPP1. In addition, a genetic polymorphism in the intron 9 of the ENPP1 gene was associated with CAVD in a case-control cohort as well as with mRNA expression levels of ENPP1 in aortic valves. A high level of ENPP1 in CAVD promoted apoptosis-mediated mineralization of VICs by depleting the extracellular pool of ATP. We then documented that release of ATP by VICs promoted cell survival via the P2Y2 receptor and the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Hence, our results show that level of ENPP1 modulates extracellular concentration of ATP, which is an important survival signal for VICs. These findings may help to develop novel pharmacological treatment for CAVD.Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is the most frequent heart valve disorder Mineralization of the aortic valve is an intricate process involving a balance between promoting and anti-calcifying mechanisms. In this regard, mechanisms participating to the production of inorganic phosphate (Pi) and pyrophosphate (PPi) are likely to be of key importance into the pathogenesis of valvular calcification Supplementary data CAVD valves and control, non-calcified valves were obtained respectively from aortic valve replacements and heart transplantation procedures. VICs were isolated from control, non-calcified aortic valves. The protocol was approved by the local ethical committee and informed consent has been obtained from the subjects. Human valve interstitial cells (VICs) were isolated by collagenase digestion. To provoke calcification, cells were incubated for 7 A total of five CAVD valves and five normal aortic valves were selected for microarray analysis. Expression studies were performed using the human U133 plus 2.0 Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Tagging SNPs were selected using Haploview and the HapMap European-derived (CEU) genotype data Cusps from human CAVD were studied by microcomputed tomography (micro-CT, Skyscan, model 1072) to visualize mineral deposition and localization. Immunostaining analyses were performed with the following antibodies: ENPP1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), P2Y RNA was extracted from valves explanted from 119 patients (87 CAVD and 32 controls). RNA was also extracted from cells during Calcium content was determined by the Arsenazo III method. Results were expressed as mg of calcium per wet weight of tissue (Ca mg/g ww). Phosphodiesterase activity was measured using the substrate Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assayed using p-nitrophenyl phosphate as substrate (PNPP) (Sigma, Oakville, Ont., Canada). The Cells were transfected with 1 VICs were transfected by incubation in HiPerfect reagent containing 2700 The levels of ATP and ADP released by cells were measured using the ATP SL luminescent kit from BioThema (Cedarlane, Horby, ON, Canada). ENPP1 was detected by immunoprecipitation with mouse polyclonal antibody (Cedarlane, Hornby, ON, Canada) and G sepharose beads (Sigma, Oakville, ON, Canada). For Western analysis, proteins were loaded onto 6% SDS-polyacrylamide gels followed by electrophoresis and blotting onto nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were blocked with TBS-tween containing 5% non-fat dry milk, incubated with mouse antibodies directed against ENPP1, Akt, Bcl2, caspase3, and β-actin followed by an HRP-labelled secondary antibody (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Detection was done with Supersignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce Lab, Rockford, Il, USA). Apoptosis was documented in human VICs, and human cryosections by TUNEL assay using Apoptag Plus Peroxidase In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit (Millipore, Billerica, MA) and quantitative morphometric analysis was performed. In some experiments with VICs, apoptosis was also confirmed by using the Apopercentage apoptosis assay (Biocolor, Carrickfergus, UK) and apoptosis levels analyzed with the image pro Plus Version 6.1 image analysis software and expressed as pixel units. For the comparisons of groups with regards to q-PCR analyses, enzyme activity, and the amount of valvular calcium, the results were expressed as means The family of ectonucleotidases includes: ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterases (ENPPs), ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolases (ENTPDs), 5′-nucleotidase (NT5E), and alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) We tested for an association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene encoding ENPP1 and CAVD. The allele frequencies of 457 patients (Supplementary Table 3) who underwent surgical aortic valve replacement for severe CAVD were compared to a shared control group of 3294 individuals of European ancestry. Twenty SNPs that passed genotyping quality were tested and six of them were significantly associated with CAVD ( To further understand the functional relevance of elevated ENPP1 expression in CAVD valves, we next examined the expression of ectonucleotidases and their role in the mineralization of VIC cultures. Isolated VICs are a population of myofibroblast-like cells ( It should be highlighted that ENPP1 by the hydrolysis of ATP is producing PPi, a known inhibitor of mineralization. Thus, one question arises as to by which mechanism elevated expression of ENPP1 in CAVD promotes mineralization? To elucidate possible mechanisms by which ENPP1 promotes calcification, we evaluated the production of Pi and PPi by VICs. In this experiment after treatment with the mineralizing medium the levels of extracellular PPi and Pi generated by VICs increased significantly ( It has been shown that purinergic receptor signaling reduced the mineralization of bone cells, which is consistent with the increased bone mass of P2Y We then addressed which P2Y receptor prevents calcification of VIC cultures. Only two P2Y receptors are expressed by VICs ( Our results lead to a model where apoptosis is central to the mineralization of the aortic valve. Thus, we next investigated the expression of important control targets of apoptosis. To this end, we found that upon treatment with the mineralizing medium, Akt and its phosphorylated product pAkt, a kinase downstream of PI3K In this study we have identified a mechanism involved in the mineralization of aortic valve, a major process leading to the development of CAVD, a disease for which there is so far no medical treatment. Specifically, using a gene-profiling strategy we found that among the membrane-bound ectonucleotidase family of genes only ENPP1 is highly up-regulated. Furthermore, a polymorphism in the intron 9 of the ENPP1 gene (rs9402349) is associated with the presence of CAVD and a higher level of ENPP1 transcripts within pathological specimen of CAVD tissues. By using a series of in-depth functional studies we next demonstrated that a high level of ENPP1 promotes mineralization in a multi-step process ( In the present study we also documented for the first time that polymorphisms in the ENPP1 gene were associated with CAVD. Three independent SNPs were identified located in intron 9 (rs9402349), in the 5′UTR (rs1800949) and 3′UTR (rs7754586) regions of ENPP1. Rs9402349 has been previously associated with left ventricular hypertrophy in patients with end-stage renal disease, whereas rs1800949 has been associated with obesity It is important to underline that ENPP1 is the major enzyme contributing to the production of extracellular PPi, a crucial inhibitor of mineralization. Loss-of-function mutations of ENPP1 have been found in patients with generalized arterial calcification of infancy, however this phenotype is not constant since reports also described subjects with these mutations and the presence hypophosphatemic rickets and the absence of vascular calcification The present study has also contributed to delineate the process by which increased production of Pi promotes mineralization of VICs. In this regard, we have shown that intracellular channeling of Pi by the Pi transporter, SLC20A1, is an obligatory step leading to mineralization of VICs. In fact, intracellular entry of Pi promotes the expression of ENPP1 in a positive feedback loop. We next found that the mechanism by which Pi exerts a pro-mineralizing effect is through the up-regulation of ENPP1, which in the end promotes an important decrease of extracellular ATP levels. This finding is of great significance since we have documented that ATP acts as a survival signal for VICs and prevents apoptosis of VICs. Specifically, we found that P2Y Insofar this work relied on To conclude, in this study we have identified that the release of ATP promotes the survival of VICs in the aortic valve via the P2Y N.C., D.E.H., A.P., and P. Mathieu conceived and designed experiments. P. Mathieu wrote the manuscript. Y.B designed the transcriptome and genotyping experiments and performed the bioinformatics analyses of the microarray data and genotyping. SGO, VD, and NG performed the genotyping study. P.B-C., N.C. and A.P. optimized and performed experiments with siRNAs and pCMV. N.C., D.E.H., P.B-C. and D.F. performed q-PCR analyses. H.D. performed the The microarray dataset can be found in the National Center for Biotechnology Information's Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository ( P. Mathieu and N.C. have patent applications for the use of ectonucleotidase inhibitors and purinergic agonists in the treatment of CAVD. This work was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at