Phosphate rock needs processing to reduce the content of gangue minerals such as silicates, carbonates, and clays to meet the requirements of the phosphate industry. Froth flotation method has been an important part of the concentration process since the 1920s and today, more than half of the world’s marketable phosphate is produced by froth flotation. The literature on the processing of phosphate rocks by flotation is critically reviewed. Commonly used collectors, depressants, auxiliary reagents, and their mixtures in the flotation of the phosphate ores were tabulated. The advantages and disadvantages of the reagent type and structure (e.g., ionic and nonionic) on flotation were criticized. Based on the literature it was concluded that using surfactant mixtures has certain advantages over single surfactant as synergistic effect between surfactant mixtures were observed at different experiments such as surface tension, contact angle, adsorption, and flotation.Phosphate rock represents a vital nonrenewable resource. It is a commodity which is neither substitutable nor recyclable in agricultural applications. Hence, total demand must be met through the mining, beneficiation, and chemical processing of naturally derived materials. The increased need for world food production assures the long-term growth in world phosphate rock demand. World phosphate production and reserves is given in Phosphate rock requires processing to reduce the content of accessory minerals including quartz, chert, clay, feldspar, mica, calcite, and dolomite. It is necessary in fertilizer industry for the phosphate ores to have (1) P Some carbonate rich phosphate deposits are processed by calcination and acid leaching methods in areas having low-cost energy and limited water resources. Al Jalamid, Saudi Arabia, phosphate ore containing 40–50% carbonate, 8–10% organic matter, and 16–25% P Acid leaching method is applied as carbonates in phosphate rock can be easily leached away by any strong acid (e.g., sulfuric acid) but, strong acids can also leach apatite to some extend. On the other hand, weak acids (e.g., acetic acid and citric acid) are too expensive for utilization. Low-intensity magnetic separation is used in the treatment of igneous apatite deposits which contains appreciable amounts of ferromagnetic minerals, such as magnetite or titanomagnetite. High intensity magnetic separation is applied for rejection of complex iron-bearing silicate minerals from phosphate deposits at Foskor, South Africa ( Sparingly soluble minerals such as apatite (Ca Type of phosphate deposit affects the flotation performance. Sedimentary deposits of phosphate ores can be treated by flotation when the gangue consists essentially of siliceous materials, as the phosphatic sandstone in Central Florida. The sedimentary phosphates with high carbonates (e.g., Southern Florida and Mediterranean area), however, are not amenable to flotation. Beneficiation of phosphate ores containing carbonate gangue is a worldwide problem and adequate technology for processing all such ores on an industrial scale does not exist at present ( The dominant flotation process currently used for processing of siliceous phosphates in Central Florida is the Crago “Double Float” process ( Different types and structures of reagents are used in the flotation of phosphate ores as collectors, depressants, and auxiliary reagents in direct and reverse flotation of phosphate ores. In direct flotation, phosphate minerals are floated at basic pH with usually anionic collectors and depressant/modifier for gangue minerals. In reverse cationic flotation, siliceous gangue materials are floated from phosphate ore at around neutral pH using a cationic amine type collector. On the other hand, reverse anionic flotation includes flotation of carbonate minerals by anionic collector at acidic pH while depressing phosphate minerals with suitable depressants ( Even though fatty acids and amines are the most commonly used collectors in direct and reverse flotation of phosphate ores, respectively, other types of collectors are also available for flotation of phosphate ores as given in The most extensively used types of these collectors are long-chain fatty acids and their salts, especially oleic acid or its soap, sodium oleate. Almost 100% of the fatty acids used in phosphate ore flotation is derived from tall oil, a by-product of paper industry. Due to the increasing use of recycled paper the price of fatty acids obtained from tall oil increases. Additionally, sensitivity of fatty acids to slimes and ions in the flotation cell, the higher temperature requirement, and the relatively high consumption alternative sources of surfactants are under investigation ( Numerous collectors were tested in the flotation of phosphate ores as given in Cationic collectors are employed in the reverse flotation of silicates as well as in the flotation of dolomitic and calcitic minerals from phosphate minerals. In the flotation experiments, A basic rule for depressant selection is to consider what would be a good collector for the particular mineral that needs to be depressed, then select a depressant that includes the same functionality as the collector but in which the hydrophobe is replaced with hydrophile. For example, fatty acids, which contain carboxylate functional group, are effective collectors for carbonates and apatite. Therefore, a carboxylated depressant such as anionic carboxymethyl cellulose would be an effective depressant for these minerals. Similarly, siliceous minerals such as silica are floated by cationic amine collectors. Therefore, depressants based on cationically modified polysaccharides are effective depressants for silica. But, because of their relatively high cost they are not popular in the industry ( Sodium silicate is often used to improve the selectivity between the sparingly soluble and siliceous minerals and also between the sparingly soluble minerals. The beneficial effect of sodium silicate when used with fatty acid and fuel oil mixture was attributed by Phosphoric acid and derivatives (e.g., diphosphonic acid) is the most widely used depressant in reverse flotation of phosphate ore in order to depress the valuable mineral apatite (e.g.,  Fatty acids are commonly used collectors in flotation of phosphate minerals. Nevertheless, their use suffers from sensitivity to slimes and ions, the higher temperature requirement, and the relatively high consumption and increasing price ( The presence of surfactant molecules at the air/liquid interface stabilizes the liquid film surrounding a bubble, inhibits bubble coalescence, aids particle bubble attachment in the liquid phase, and retards the drainage of liquid from the bubble lamella in the froth phase. As a fatty acid collector, sodium oleate decreases the surface tension of the liquid to some extend and has frothing properties. But, it is known that ionic/nonionic surfactant mixtures usually show improved surface activity which arises from special interaction between surfactants in the solution ( Synergism between surfactants was reported by the performance of surfactants in lowering surface tension as well as by calculating interactions (attraction or repulsion) between surfactants in the literature. Synergistic behavior of surfactant mixtures was observed in froth characteristics of sodium oleate and Triton X-100 (an octylphenol ethoxylate) by It is important to increase the cloud point of a nonionic surfactant for beneficial usage at wide temperature range; especially for surfactants those having low cloud point. Emulsification of water-insoluble collector (e.g., fuel oil) is important since emulsification and stability of oil droplets affect the flotation results considerably. Enhanced oil dispersion produces finer droplets and increases the number of collisions between oil particles which, in turn, increases the recovery. The selectivity of the reagents will be increased due to the decrease of entrapment of unwanted particles within floating particles, which is unavoidable in the case of large droplets. Synergism at solid/liquid interface can be considered in three categories when improving flotation by, (1) enhance the collecting ability and selectivity of fatty acids, (2) reduce consumption of fatty acid, and (3) reduce sensitivity of fatty acids to flotation temperature and pH, and presence of ions and slime ( Beneficial effects of some ionic and nonionic ethoxylated surfactants were tested as collectors or promoters with anionic collectors in the flotation of sparingly soluble minerals. A range of ethoxylated nonylphenol (NP-X) reagents having various ethoxylation degrees was examined together with sodium oleate for fluorite flotation from calcite and for flotation of phosphate ores from carbonates by The use of anionic collector The adsorption of dodecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (DTAB), dodecylpyridinium bromide (DBP), sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate, and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) from their individual and binary solutions on silica gel was investigated ( The contact angle studies of surfactant mixtures on sparingly soluble minerals are very limited.  Beneficiation of phosphate-ores by flotation is the best method and more than half of the world’s marketable phosphate is produced by froth flotation. However, sedimentary phosphates with high carbonates (e.g., Southern Florida and Mediterranean area) are not amenable to flotation. Fatty acids and their soaps are commonly used collectors in the flotation of oxide and sparingly soluble minerals. Nevertheless, their use suffers from sensitivity to slimes and ions, the higher temperature requirement, sensitivity to pH variation, and the relatively high consumption and increasing price. An oily collector (e.g., fuel oil) is mostly used together as collector or collector extender to reduce the consumption and excess foaming the fatty acids. Cationic and amphoteric collectors are usually used in the reverse flotation of silicates from phosphate ore in phosphate industry. However, they also found application in the flotation of dolomitic and calcitic minerals from phosphate minerals. Phosphoric acid and derivatives (e.g., diphosphonic acid) is the most widely used depressant in reverse flotation of phosphate ore in order to depress the valuable mineral apatite while sodium silicate and gum arabic are used as depressants for the gangue minerals in direct flotation of the phosphate ores. Recent studies showed that the flotation of phosphate ores with surfactant mixtures (e.g., mixtures of ionic and nonionic surfactants) exhibited superior results over single surfactant. The synergism of surfactant mixtures at air/liquid, liquid/oil, and liquid/solid interfaces arise from the improvement of froth properties, emulsification of the hydrocarbon oil (e.g., fuel oil) and homogenous adsorption of collector on the minerals and protection of the collector from harmful effect of dissolved ions in the presence of auxiliary surfactant.