Neat mahua oil poses some problems when subjected to prolonged usage in CI engine. The transesterification of mahua oil can reduce these problems. The use of biodiesel fuel as substitute for conventional petroleum fuel in heavy-duty diesel engine is receiving an increasing amount of attention. This interest is based on the properties of bio-diesel including the fact that it is produced from a renewable resource, its biodegradability and potential to exhaust emissions. A Cummins 6BTA 5.9 G2- 1, 158 HP rated power, turbocharged, DI, water cooled diesel engine was run on diesel, methyl ester of mahua oil and its blends at constant speed of 1500rpm under variable load conditions. The volumetric blending ratios of biodiesel with conventional diesel fuel were set at 0, 20, 40, 60, and 100. Engine performance (brake specific fuel consumption, brake specific energy consumption, thermal efficiency and exhaust gas temperature) and emissions (CO, HC and NOx) were measured to evaluate and compute the behavior of the diesel engine running on biodiesel. The results indicate that with the increase of biodiesel in the blends CO, HC reduces significantly, fuel consumption and NOx emission of biodiesel increases slightly compared with diesel. Brake specific energy consumption decreases and thermal efficiency of engine slightly increases when operating on 20% biodiesel than that operating on diesel.Crude mahua oil Methyl esters of mahua oil Brake specific fuel consumption Brake specific energy consumption Nitrogen oxide Carbon monoxide Hydrocarbon Exhaust gas temperature Blend with 20 % biodiesel Energy demand is increasing due to ever-increasing number of vehicles employing internal combustion engines. Also, world is presently confronted with the twin crisis of fossil fuel deflection and environmental degradation. Fossil fuels are limited resources; hence, search for renewable fuels is becoming more and more prominent for ensuring energy security and environmental protection. There has been renewed interest in the use of vegetable oils for making biodiesel because it is less polluting and renewable. It is biodegradable and nontoxic, and has low emission profiles. Worldwide biodiesel production is mainly from edible oils such as soybean, peanut, coconut, sunflower and canola oils. Since, India is not self-sufficient in edible oil production, some non-edible oil seeds available in the country are required to be tapped for biodiesel production. With abundance of forest and plant based non-edible oils being available in our country such as Pongamia (Karanja), Ramdas et al. The basic composition of any vegetable oil is triglyceride, which is the ester of three fatty acids and glycerol. The fatty acid composition of mahua oil is summarized in Vegetable oils have to undergo the process of transesterification to be usable in IC engines. Biodiesel is an alternative fuel, which has a correlation with sustainable development, energy conservation, management, efficiency and environmental preservation. In transesterification, mahua oil was chemically reacted with an alcohol in the presence of a catalyst to produce vegetable oil esters. Glycerol is produced as a by-product of the reaction. The mixture is stirred continuously and then allowed to settle under gravity in a separating funnel. Two distinct layers form after gravity settling for 24 The fuel properties were determined and are listed as given below in The present study was carried out to investigate the performance and emission characteristics of methyl ester of mahua oil and its blends in a Cummins 6 BTA 5.9 G2-1, 158 HP, and turbocharged engine. The values were compared with baseline data of diesel fuel. The engine was coupled to a POWERICA A.C. Generator is set and loaded by electrical resistance to apply different engine loads. The specification of the engine is demonstrated in The engine was first started by a battery with diesel as fuel and it was allowed to reach its steady state (for about 10 The engine was sufficiently warmed up and stabilized before taking all readings. The performance of the engine and emissions were studied at variable loads corresponding to the load at maximum power at an average speed of 1500 After pretreatment and transesterification, the colour of crude mahua oil (CMO) changed from yellow to reddish yellow and on an average 80% of recovery of biodiesel was possible. The various fuel properties of CMO and mahua biodiesel were determined. The characteristics of biodiesel are close to mineral diesel, and, therefore, biodiesel become a strong candidate to replace the mineral diesel if need arises. The CMO, however, was found to have much higher values of fuel properties, especially viscosity, thus restricting its direct use as a fuel for diesel engine. Biodiesel has low heating value (10% lower than diesel) on weight basis, because of presence of substantial amount of oxygen in the fuel but at the same time, biodiesel has a higher specific gravity (0.916) as compared to diesel (0.85), so overall impact is approximately 5% lower energy content per unit volume. The engine performance with mahua biodiesel was evaluated in terms of brake specific fuel consumption, brake specific energy consumption, brake thermal efficiency and exhaust gas temperature at different loading conditions of the engine. The BSFC of Cummins engine obtained for different fuels is shown in As the BSFC was calculated on weight basis obviously higher densities resulted in higher values for BSFC. As density of biodiesel was higher than that of diesel, which means, the same fuel consumption on volume basis resulted in higher BSFC in case of 100% biodiesel. The higher densities of biodiesel blends caused higher mass injection for the same volume at the same injection pressure. The calorific value of biodiesel is less than diesel. Due to these reasons, the BSFC for other blends were higher than that of diesel. Similar trends of BSFC with increasing load in different biodiesel blends were also reported by other researchers Brake specific energy consumption (BSEC) is a more reliable criteria compared to BSFC for comparing fuels having different calorific values and densities. The variation in BSEC with load for all fuels is presented in The BSEC for B20 was observed lower than diesel. In case of B40, B60, and B100, the BSEC was higher than that of diesel. This reverse trend was observed due to lower calorific value with increase in biodiesel percentage in the blends. Different trends of BSEC with increasing load in different biodiesel blends were also reported by some researchers The variation of brake thermal efficiency with load for different fuels is presented in The variations of EGT with respect to engine loading are presented in Similar findings were obtained by other researchers Variation of CO emissions with engine loading for different fuel is compared in It is seen in The NOx values as parts per million (ppm) for different fuel blends of diesel and B100 in exhaust emissions of Cummins 6 BTA 5.9 G2-1 are plotted as a function of load in Based on the results of this study, the following specific conclusions were drawn: The fuel properties of mahua biodiesel were within limits except calorific value; all other fuel properties of mahua biodiesel were found to be higher as compared to diesel. The brake specific fuel consumption increased and brake thermal efficiency decreased with increase in the proportion of biodiesel in the blends. A reverse trend was observed with increase in engine load. The amount of CO and HC in exhaust emission reduced, whereas NOx increased with increase in percentage of mahua biodiesel in the blends. However, the level of emissions increased with increase in engine load for all fuels tested. The performance and emission parameters for different blends were better compared with diesel. The emission levels of CO and HC in heavy-duty engines are less compared with small engines. From these findings, it is concluded that mahua biodiesel could be safely blended with diesel up to 20% without significantly affecting the engine performance (BSFC, BSEC, EGT) and emissions (CO, HC and NOx) and thus could be suitable alternative fuel for heavy-duty engines. The authors thank Sri Amar Kumar Khandre, Director, MGSSK(N) Bhalki, for providing Cummins 6 BTA 5.9 G2-1 diesel engine to carry out experimental work. We are sincerely thankful to Sri. Devadas, MD, Sri. K. R. Anagadi, Chief Engineer, Mr. Revanesh Veerasetty, engineer in charge and supporting staff of factory.