In many cases, finest particles in hydrocyclones present higher separation efficiencies than can be expected when considering the theory of single particle sedimentation. The analysis of sedimentation of polydisperse particle systems shows that particle movement is influenced remarkably by solids concentration and particle size distribution. Sedimentation experiments with a special centrifuge confirm the action of combined effects, of particle entrainment, of countercurrent flow of displaced water and of elevated values of pulp density and viscosity due to the disperse solid phase. These influences can be summarized in a sedimentation model which allows better calculation of the separation result of the hydrocyclone. As a consequence, the typical course of the separation curve of the hydrocyclone indicates a more or less marked so-called fish-hook in the fine particle range.exponent of the power function of the particle size distribution centrifugal acceleration field [m/s particle concentration [–] particle size [m] intensity [m mass ratio [–] particle size density distribution [m radius [m] averaged velocity of disturbed settling [m Stokes velocity of free settling Stokes velocity of free settling with correction of Richardson and Zaki [m settling velocity considering particle interaction [m constant [cm coefficient of turbulent diffusion [m particle size function [–] cell radius [m] volume split [–] separation function [–] volumetric flux in the underflow [m volumetric flux in the overflow [m adaptation factors [–] dynamic viscosity [kg dissipation [m kinematic viscosity [m density [kg coarse fine hydrocyclone fraction numbers liquid overflow suspension turbulent underflow volumetric particle sampling point In many cases, hydrocyclone separation curves show an unexpected increase in the fine particle range. This so called fish-hook effect has been subject of different investigations by This paper presents experiments and model considerations regarding entrainment of fine-particles in polydisperse suspensions to be able to explain and compute the fish-hook effect of the hydrocyclone separation curve.  As can be seen from Eq.  Variation of the fluid density and viscosity due to the disperse solid phase. Fine particle entrainment by larger particles (acceleration of fine particles). Generation of a counter flow by displaced fluid of settling particles (retardation of fine particles). Stokes law only applies to solids volume concentrations of Both influences of Eqs. An important microprocess in particle interaction is, however, the entrainment (i.e., the sedimentational acceleration) of fine particles caused by settling of coarse particles. The theoretical treatment of this entrainment effect demands microscopic considerations in the vicinity of the coarse particles. For simplicity, first, a bidisperse suspension consisting of fine particles of diameter The cell volume is correlated with the size The particles that enter the cell near the center All results of numerical calculations can be approximated by the following equation: Thus, the suggested hydrodynamic model supports the entrainment mechanism for fast sedimentation of fine particles in bidisperse suspensions and can be taken as a base for the calculations of the settling velocities in polydisperse suspensions. More details regarding the numerical analysis associated with this cell model (consideration of the rotation of the particles, averaging procedure) were presented in earlier publications of The extension of Eq. The following conclusions for polydisperse particle clouds can be drawn from Eq. The size range of the coarse particles which are capable of accelerating fine particles reduces as particle size Settling particles in a closed volume generate a counterflow of displaced fluid. The counterflow velocity The velocities of the particles The generated counter flow reduces the settling velocity. Under special conditions even a negative settling velocity for the finest particles can be expected. The equation for the mean velocity of disturbed settling was demonstrated in The mean value of the velocity of disturbed settling considers the correction of Richardson and Zaki for fluid density and velocity, for fine particle entrainment and the influence of the counter flow by displaced water. Thus, Eq. The summation of all entrainments starts with the fraction number A special centrifuge has been developed by Gerhart et al. (2002) for the measurement of sedimentation of dense polydisperse suspensions, enabling the determination of the solids content and particle size distribution of samples taken at different times The experiments presented here were carried out with two quartz suspensions of different particle size distributions according to Further, the time dependent local concentrations of different particle size fractions can be seen from On the basis of these experimental data, the sedimentation velocities Experimentally determined settling velocities are presented in  Originally, in the turbulent diffusion model of hydrocyclone separation was assumed that for particle diffusivity Therefore, the turbulent particle diffusion is fast decreasing beneath a critical point To demonstrate the influence of the law of disturbed sedimentation according to Eq. (15) on hydrocyclone separation, some calculations of the separation curve were performed on the basis of Eq. The separation curves presented in If the entrainment effect in case of dilute flow separation can be neglected, the separation curve results for The fish-hook depth On the basis of the hydrocyclone separation model describing the sedimentation equilibrium of sedimentation flux and turbulent diffusion flux, the separation curve for dilute flow separation increases monotonically. For dense flow separation, the separation curve shows a non-monotonic course with the typical fish-hook in the fine particle range. The fish-hook reflects the law of disturbed settling in polydisperse dense suspensions. Here, the fine particle entrainment caused by coarse particle settling plays an important part. In accordance with this law, the fine particle settling or the fine particle separation respectively are not only determined by solids concentration but also by the particle size distribution of the feed. This work was supported by the Bayerische Forschungsstiftung, Germany.