The International Biohydrometallurgy Symposium has long been recognised as the key forum at which research scientists involved in both the biology and hydrometallurgy of mineral bioprocesses exchange research findings and ideas with each other and with industrial practitioners. These practitioners, in return, share experiences and report key challenges of biohydrometallurgical practice requiring further understanding and resolution. In this sense IBS welcomes a diverse range of academic delegates across an interdisciplinary field including biology, chemistry, physics and engineering, as well as industrial representatives. The 16th International Biohydrometallurgy Symposium, IBS2005, in South Africa placed the interaction between academic researchers, industrial researchers and practitioners as its primary objective. In so doing we have returned to the focus of the IBS series in the mid 1990s. IBS95 in Chile and IBS97 in Australia featured industrial application in a prominent role, both, like South Africa, being countries where the active practice of mineral extraction is of key economic importance. IBS2005 welcomed 160 delegates from 34 countries, evenly spread across all 5 continents. The beautiful Vineyard Hotel in the heart of Claremont, Cape Town, offered its unique vista of Table Mountain and luscious gardens as a stunning backdrop to four intense days, not only of presentations and discussions, but also of great food and entertainment. The Symposium featured the following topics: Fundamentals of Bioleaching Applied and Industrial Biohydrometallurgy Novel Applications Bioremediation and Biosorption Microbiology and Microbial Ecology Genetics and Molecular Biology These were accompanied by a number of plenary and keynote lectures reviewing current knowledge in terms of fundamental understanding and practical application. In total, 93 papers were presented either as lectures, full oral presentations or short oral presentations with accompanying poster. In addition, 15 poster-only presentations were made. The Conference Proceedings, which were issued on CD and in print at the Symposium, contain most of the full papers presented. Each paper was reviewed by two independent international experts from academia and industry, thus ensuring that all papers correspond to accepted quality standards. Copies of the full Proceedings of the 16th International Biohydrometallurgy Symposium are available in print (ISBN 1-920051-17-1) or on CD (ISBN 1-920051-20-1) through the Conference Secretariat – Contact: Meg Winter; Dep. Chemical Engineering; Private Bag, Rondebosch 7701; South Africa; Tel: +27 (0)21 650 2752; Fax: +27 (0)21 650 5501; email: The present Special Issue of Hydrometallurgy offers a selection of 34 papers from all topic areas. These have been taken straight from the Conference Proceedings with only minor modifications by the authors, where necessary. Therefore, the numbered referencing style used in the Proceedings has been retained in this Special Issue. The selection begins with the plenary paper presented by Dr. Megan Clark, Vice President Technology, BHP Billiton, who outlined the way biohydrometallurgy has found, and continues to find, increasing application in the minerals industry, as well as some of the key challenges. This is followed by a selection of papers on fundamental hydrometallurgy and biohydrometallurgy. Of key interest here is the bioleaching of chalcopyrite, which continues to draw considerable attention in the research community. Insights into the interactions of arsenic, a review of the kinetics of bioleaching, and modelling of bio-stoichiometry are covered as well. Papers on Applied and Industrial Biohydrometallurgy cover heap bioleaching, tank bioleaching, mixing, wastewater treatment, as well as process mineralogy and biology. An overview of the BioMinE project is also featured. Three papers from the session on Novel Applications feature aspects of biohydrometallurgy which depart from the conventional bio-leaching/bio-remediation route, such as biological production of nano-particles, bio-flotation and biologically supported ion-exchange. Selected papers on Bioremediation cover the potential of abandoned mine sites and tailings dams to generate leachate through biohydrometallurgical interactions, as well as routes to treating such leachates through biohydrometallurgical means, especially involving sulphate-reducing bacteria. Although perhaps outside the usual scope of Hydrometallurgy, a few papers presenting fundamental studies centred on microbiological topics in the context of bioleaching are included in the present selection. IBS has always been at the forefront of bridging the gap between the physico-chemical processes of bioleaching and their interactions with living organisms, exploring the sciences of both. The selected papers elaborate on the iron cycle in biohydrometallurgy, identification of organisms in bioleach operations, microbe–mineral interactions, and a comprehensive genetic and bioinformatic analysis of carbon, ferrous iron and sulphur energetic metabolisms in a typical bio-oxidising microbial strain. The conference organisers wish to acknowledge the generous sponsorship of the Symposium by BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, Merck SA, Goldfields Ltd, Bateman Engineering BV, BioMinE, AMIRA International and the Department of Science and Technology (DST) of South Africa. Thanks are also due to the National Organising Committee and especially the conference Secretariat (Meg Winter, Catherine Mitchell and Heidi Tate). Finally, we would like to draw attention to the 17th Biohydrometallurgy Symposium to be held in Frankfurt/Main, Germany, 2–5 September 2007. For more information contact: DECHEMA e.V., Attn: Heike Geiling; P.O.B. 15 01 04; 60061 Frankfurt/Main; Germany; Tel: +49 (0)69 7564 280; Fax: +49 (0)69 7564 176; (