A generalized physicochemical model of the response of marine organisms’ calcifying fluids to CO2-induced ocean acidification is proposed. The model is based upon the hypothesis that some marine calcifiers induce calcification by elevating pH, and thus Ω
                     A, of their calcifying fluid by removing protons (H+). The model is explored through two end-member scenarios: one in which a fixed number of H+ is removed from the calcifying fluid, regardless of atmospheric pCO2, and another in which a fixed external–internal H+ ratio ([H+]E/[H+]I) is maintained. The model is able to generate the full range of calcification response patterns observed in prior ocean acidification experiments and is consistent with the assertion that organisms’ calcification response to ocean acidification is more negative for marine calcifiers that exert weaker control over their calcifying fluid pH. The model is empirically evaluated for the temperate scleractinian coral Astrangia poculata with in situ pH microelectrode measurements of the coral’s calcifying fluid under control and acidified conditions. These measurements reveal that (1) the pH of the coral’s calcifying fluid is substantially elevated relative to its external seawater under both control and acidified conditions, (2) the coral’s [H+]E/[H+]I is approximately the same under control and acidified conditions, and (3) the coral removes fewer H+ from its calcifying fluid under acidified conditions than under control conditions. Thus, the carbonate system dynamics of A. poculata’s calcifying fluid appear to be most consistent with the fixed [H+]E/[H+]I end-member scenario. Similar microelectrode experiments performed on additional taxa are required to assess the model’s general applicability.Recent experiments have revealed that marine calcifiers exhibit a broad spectrum of calcification responses to CO Many calcifying marine organisms, including scleractinian corals ( Thus, reducing [H Various mechanisms have been proposed for elevating pH at the site of calcification, including conventional H The decrease in seawater pH that will accompany the forecasted rise in anthropogenic atmospheric The removal of H The Nernst potential ( Because To explore the effects of H Carbonate system parameters of the model were calculated for the site of calcification and for the external seawater with the program CO Scenario 1 ( Scenario 2 ( Both scenarios demonstrate that the response of calcification site [ Conversely, the energetic cost of maintaining a fixed [H The calcifying fluid pH of the temperate coral This section should be prefaced with a brief overview of the two general models of coral calcification: the physicochemical model and the biological model (which are by no means mutually exclusive). The physicochemical model of coral calcification (e.g., The biological model of coral calcification (cf. Regardless of which model most accurately describes the mechanism(s) by which corals calcify, the coral’s ability to control pH and, thus, the carbonate chemistry at the site of calcification should play an important role in determining its calcification response to CO Two 10-L batches of 0.2 Ideally, ocean acidification experiments should be performed by varying atmospheric One-mm-diameter silanized glass capillary tubes were heated with a heating coil and machine-pulled to produce a tip diameter of approximately 1 The use of NBS buffers to calibrate an electrode used to measure the pH of seawater (or calcifying fluid) generates an unknown and systematic error arising from the difference in liquid junction potentials between the two media. Comparison of pH calculated from the measured total alkalinity and DIC of a seawater sample with its pH measured using the NBS-calibrated microelectrodes suggests that this error was less than approximately 0.05 pH units, which is less than the standard deviation in calcifying fluid pH amongst the three trials for both the acidified and control treatments. Thus, the error arising from the use of NBS buffers should not materially affect the reported results nor the interpretation of these results. Six ca. 4 Approximately 10 Total alkalinity, [ The pH and The microelectrode measurements revealed that Critically, the [H Although the end-member scenarios presented here were intended only to serve as a tool for exploring the proposed H The microelectrode measurements suggest that The two model scenarios of calcifying fluid chemistry proposed here, which assume that marine calcifiers induce calcification either by removing a fixed number of H It should also be noted that there is considerable variability amongst calcifying taxa, as well as uncertainty amongst workers in the field of biomineralization, as to the nature of the medium from which marine calcifiers produce their shells and skeletons. Corals are thought to accrete CaCO Regardless of the exact composition (e.g., seawater vs. modified seawater) or nature (e.g., fluid vs. gel) of their calcifying media, or the mechanisms by which they accrete their CaCO A potential weakness of the proton-pumping model is that the relative changes in [ A physicochemical model of organisms’ calcifying fluid is proposed and explored through two end-member scenarios: one that assumes organisms remove a fixed number of H The author acknowledges P. Smith and D. Borgdorff for assistance with the microelectrode measurements, and A. Cohen, D. McCorkle, M. Holcomb, J. Erez, A. Szmant, R. Whitehead, A. Taylor, and D. Allemand for their stimulating feedback on the ideas presented herein. The author also acknowledges three anonymous referees and A.E. Mucci, whose reviews improved the quality of this manuscript. This research was supported by a