Wrist injuries are frequently encountered in the emergency department. When a patient presents with such an injury, the possibility of scaphoid fracture must be at the top of the differential for the emergency practitioner. Unfortunately, these injuries can be missed on first presentation, as they are frequently radiographically occult. When left unrecognized and untreated, these injuries lead to a high incidence of long-term functional disability and chronic pain. The emergency physician needs to be vigilant for scaphoid fracture and be aggressive in both its diagnosis and treatment to avoid this practice pitfall. This review examines the clinical presentation, diagnostic techniques, and management options applicable to the emergency physician. (Am J Emerg Med 2001;19:310-316. Copyright © 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company)Evaluating wrist injuries in the emergency department (ED) depends on a good working knowledge of wrist anatomy, awareness of the injury mechanism, and an understanding of the limitations of radiographic studies. Frequently, the physical examination can be more reliable than plain radiographs. Knowing the pattern of injury the patient suffered is key, as is the performance of a careful physical examination. Of all the wrist injuries encountered in the ED, fracture of the scaphoid is one of the most commonly missed. A 16 year-old left hand dominant boy was skateboarding without wrist guards, when he fell while performing a trick. He recalled falling on his outstretched left hand, and felt immediate pain in his left wrist. On presentation to the ED, his wrist was noted to be mildly swollen and diffusely tender. On careful testing, he was found to have snuff box tenderness, as well as pain with axial compression along the long axis of his right thumb. Dorsiflexion and palmar flexion were limited by pain. PA and lateral radiographs were obtained. A middle third scaphoid fracture was identified on the PA view (Fig 1), and no displacement or angulation was noted. The patient was placed in a long-arm thumbspica splint, and arrangements were made to have the patient follow-up with an orthopedist in 7 days. At follow-up, the patient's swelling had subsided considerably. He was placed in a long-arm thumb spica cast for 6 weeks, followed by a short-arm thumb spica cast for 6 weeks. At 12 weeks the patient had radiographic union. At 2 years out from the injury he has normal range of motion and no residual pain. An intoxicated 44 year-old right hand dominant woman fell down 2 steps onto her outstretched right hand. She noted immediate pain and swelling at the wrist. She denied other injuries. On presentation to the ED, diffuse wrist swelling was noted. Maximal tenderness was noted dorsally on the radial side of the wrist. Mild snuff box tenderness was noted. PA and lateral radiographs were obtained (Fig 2A and 2B) No definite fracture of the scaphoid was noted. The patient was placed in a long-arm thumb spica splint and follow-up was arranged. The patient neglected to follow-up as arranged. She presented to the ED 26 months later complaining of continued wrist pain and decreased range of motion. When questioned, she admitted to removing her splint 24 hours after her first ED visit, so that she could return to work. Repeat radiographs were obtained. Advanced degeneration of the scaphoid was noted (Fig 4). A 33-year old right hand dominant man was playing recreational softball. While running the bases, he fell on his outstretched right hand. He had some wrist pain after his injury, but was able to complete the game. He presented to the ED 24 hours later complaining of persistent wrist pain. Examination of the wrist revealed snuff box tenderness and pain with axial load of the thumb. Range of motion was limited by pain. Radiographs were obtained (Fig 5A and 5B). On follow-up, he continued to show snuff box tenderness and pain with axial loading. Repeat radiographs were obtained, which showed a middle-third scaphoid fracture, with minimal displacement (Fig 6). The scaphoid bone links the proximal and distal carpal rows. It is tethered to the proximal carpal row by a number of strong ligamentous attachments, and two-thirds of its surface area is articular. The scaphoid serves as the principle bony block to wrist extension. For this reason, excessive forced extension (as with a fall on outstretched hand-FOOSH) translates force across the scaphoid. The propensity for nonunion and avascular necrosis of the scaphoid is caused entirely by its blood supply. Patients with fracture of the scaphoid usually report a fall on their extended wrist (FOOSH mechanism). Dorsal pain at the wrist is a common complaint. On physical examination, little swelling may be noted, although loss of the concavity of the anatomic snuff box is frequently seen. Snuff box tenderness is classically cited as the most common finding, Many investigators feel a better physical examination test for scaphoid injury is axial compression of the thumb along its longitudinal axis. The emergency physician should remain vigilant for associated injuries that can be found on physical examination. Common associated injuries include fractures of the distal radius, lunate, or radial head at the elbow. Median nerve injury has also been described in association with scaphoid fracture. Even with appropriate films, fractures of the scaphoid can be subtle and diffucult to visualize. Conservative estimates suggest that 10% to 20% of these fractures will not be visible on any view in the acute setting. In cases where there is a high clinical suspicion, a scaphoid view of the wrist should be obtained. This is a clenched fist view with the wrist held in ulnar deviation (Fig 7). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scanning can both make the diagnosis of scaphoid fracture in the acute setting when plain films are negative. Treatment of scaphoid fracture in the ED can be divided into 2 clinical scenarios. The first is when a scaphoid fracture is suspected, but radiographs are negative. The second scenario is when fracture has been confirmed with diagnostic x-ray films. In the first instance, the patient has a mechanism that consistent with scaphoid injury, and a physical examination that is concerning for the injury. Even with negative radiographs, this patient should have immobilization in a short-arm thumb spica splint, with arranged follow-up with a hand surgeon in 7 to 10 days, for reexamination and repeat radiographs. Approximately 15% of such patients will ultimately be shown to have a scaphoid fracture. In the second instance, that is when the diagnosis is confirmed by radiographs, the treatment is dictated by the degree of injury. For nondisplaced fractures, the treatment of choice is a long-arm thumb spica splint, with hand surgeon follow-up arranged for 5 to 7 days. If there is significant displacement, angulation, or comminution, ED consultation with a hand surgeon should be obtained. The most common complication of scaphoid fracture is nonunion (Fig 8). Besides nonunion, patients are also at risk to develop avascular necrosis (AVN) of the scaphoid. This feared outcome occurs in approximately 10% of proximal pole fractures, and 5% of middle third fractures. Wrist injuries are commonly evaluated in the ED. The diagnosis of scaphoid fracture is made by the presence of specific features in the history, a careful physical examination, and appropriate radiographs. It is not uncommon for radiographs to be negative when a scaphoid fracture is present. Hence, the clinician should treat the patient as if such a fracture is present, and refer for appropriate follow-up.  Scaphoid fracture should be suspected in anyone presenting with a FOOSH mechanism and wrist pain. Palpation of the anatomic snuff box or axial loading can be used on physical examination to help evaluate for the presence of scaphoid fracture. A PA, lateral, and scaphoid view radiograph should be obtained in any patient where the diagnosis of scaphoid fracture is suspected. If films are negative but clinical suspicion is high, the patient should be treated with a short-arm thumb spica splint and referred to a hand surgeon in 7 to10 days. Patients with nondisplaced scaphoid fractures should be treated with a long-arm thumb spica splint and referred to a hand surgeon in 3 to 5 days.