Mixed actinide dioxides are currently studied as potential fuels for several concepts associated to the fourth generation of nuclear reactors. These solids are generally obtained through dry chemistry processes from powder mixtures but could present some heterogeneity in the distribution of the cations in the solid. In this context, wet chemistry methods were set up for the preparation of U1−
                     
                        x
                     Th
                        x
                     O2 solid solutions as model compounds for advanced dioxide fuels. Two chemical routes of preparation, involving the precipitation of crystallized precursor, were investigated: on the one hand, a mixture of acidic solutions containing cations and oxalic acid was introduced in an open vessel, leading to a poorly-crystallized precipitate. On the other hand, the starting mixture was placed in an acid digestion bomb then set in an oven in order to reach hydrothermal conditions. By this way, small single-crystals were obtained then characterized by several techniques including XRD and SEM. The great differences in terms of morphology and crystallization state of the samples were correlated to an important variation of the specific surface area of the oxides prepared after heating, then the microstructure of the sintered pellets prepared at high temperature. Preliminary leaching tests were finally undertaken in dynamic conditions (i.e. with high renewal of the leachate) in order to evaluate the influence of the sample morphology on the chemical durability of the final cohesive materials.Several actinide-based materials, including oxides, carbides or nitrides, are currently studied as potential fuels for the future generations of nuclear reactors Mixed actinide dioxides fuels (such as Pu Consequently, two different wet chemical routes were developed in order to perform the synthesis of low-temperature precursors of (U,Th) mixed dioxides. Their physico-chemical characterization was then undertaken through XRD and SEM prior to the sintering step. The densification of the pellets was followed by the means of dilatometry and SEM observations in order to establish the relationships existing between the morphology of the precursors and the properties of the final U This paper gives the first insight on a more global study aiming to correlate the initial conditions of preparation of the nuclear ceramic materials with their final physico-chemical properties, such as sintering capability, chemical durability or resistance to radiation damage. The chemical reagents were supplied by VWR, Merck and Aldrich-Fluka. Concentrated thorium chloride solution ( Two different chemical routes were considered for the synthesis of U Electron probe microanalyses (EPMA) were carried out using a Cameca SX50 or a SX100 apparatus. Thoria ThO The sintering of U The resulting relative densities were determined by water pycnometric using a Mettler-Toledo XP204 apparatus while the determination of the dimensions of the pellets led to the geometric density. Complementary studies were performed on a TMA 92 dilatometer from Setaram working under argon atmosphere from room temperature to 1773 The resistance of the prepared materials to aqueous alteration was evaluated through leaching tests performed in acidic media (HNO In this expression, From EPMA experiments, the powdered samples were found to be homogeneous and single-phase whatever the method of preparation considered. The elementary weight loadings as well as the mole ratios were found to be consistent with that expected even if the uranium amount was sometimes found slightly lower due to the presence of a small amount of U(VI) in the initial solution and/or to the weak oxidation of U(IV) into U(VI) during the precipitation process. In order to evaluate the influence of the preparation method on several physico-chemical properties of the precursors as well as the final dioxides, the microstructural characterization of the powdered compounds was undertaken in terms of crystallization state (XRD), morphology (SEM) and specific surface area (N The structure of the compounds precipitated at low temperature for various Th/(Th The best crystallization state of the oxalate precursors obtained through the ‘closed system’ was confirmed during the SEM observations. Indeed, some large differences in the morphology of the powdered samples depending on the preparation method were evidenced. On the one hand, the powders precipitated in ‘open system’ are constituted by small grains of about 1 The transformation of (U,Th)-oxalate into mixed dioxide was then followed versus the heating temperature by using TG/DT analyses ( The TG/DT study did not allow to clearly evidence the influence of the preparation conditions on the transformation temperatures. Nevertheless, it was found to strongly control the morphology of the powders when heating, especially in terms of the grain size. Indeed, the specific surface area was followed versus the heat temperature and coupled to SEM observations ( After this drastic transformation, the increase of temperature above 673 Considering the changes of the powder morphology versus the heating temperature, the samples prepared during the precipitation step were first heated at 673 In order to determine the heating time and temperature required for the complete densification of the pellets, a dilatometric study was undertaken on samples prepared either in ‘open’ or ‘closed’ systems ( The densification rate of the pellets prepared after firing the samples between 1673 and 1773 Complementary experiments at 1973 Correlatively to the grain size, the occurrence of the grain boundaries is dependent on the way of preparation. An important quantity of grain boundaries could degrade significantly the chemical durability of the (U,Th) mixed dioxides since they are generally well-known to be preferential zones of alteration during aqueous corrosion processes The influence of the synthesis procedure on the behaviour of U The comparative evolution of the normalized weight loss, Finally, since uranium dioxide is known to be more soluble than thorium dioxide in oxidative media U The initial preparation of U Such modifications in the preparation method affect significantly the resistance of the materials to aqueous alteration. Indeed, the normalized dissolution rate was found to be lowered by one order of magnitude when using hydrothermal conditions for the precipitation of precursors ( Several studies are now under progress to improve the understanding of the phenomena, especially near the solid/solution interface. Complementary dissolution tests will be undertaken in order to evaluate the influence of the microstructure on the kinetic parameters and associated data (activation energy, partial orders). A special attention will be also taken to the characterization of the neoformed phases precipitated onto the surface of the leached pellets near to saturation then their solubility constant will be evaluated. Authors would like to thank Alain Kohler from the SCM of the University Nancy-I for the SEM micrographs. They are also grateful to Jean Aupiais and Gilles Lecoq from CEA Bruyères-le-Chatel and to Hawa Badji from CEA Saclay for their help in ICP–AES measurements. This work was financially supported by the MATINEX Research Group (CEA/CNRS/AREVA/EDF/French Universities) included in the PACEN program.