Microstructural analysis of deformed sandstones in thrust fault zones of the Bolivian Sub-Andean Zone (SAZ) indicates that the porosity of fractures and cataclasites is primarily related to the occurrence or absence of quartz sealing resulting from local pressure solution and diffusive silica transport during deformation. Temperature was most probably the main factor that controlled quartz sealing and therefore the distribution of quartz sealing must be a function of the depth of burial at the time of deformation. Consequently, fault zones were sealed at depths exceeding about 3km (T>70–90°C), whereas shallower faults remain unsealed. In the SAZ, due to foothill uplift during fault activity, erosion reduced burial and allowed non-quartz-sealed fracturing to post-date quartz-sealed fracturing in critically buried fault segments. Most of the non-quartz-sealed faults were permeable to longitudinal carbonate-rich fluid flow. This distribution of quartz sealing is compatible with the current role of faults in oil migration in the SAZ and the foredeep. Therefore, we emphasise that the diagenetic conditions of deformation can play a major role in the variability of fault zone permeability in sandstones, this effect being independent of the fault type (normal or reverse) or fault offset.The role of faults as drains or barriers is an important parameter of large-scale fluid flow in the upper crust, with major implications on fault dynamics and distribution of fluids, in particular hydrocarbons. In the oil industry, the sealing capacity of faults is commonly assessed by comparison of the porosity/permeability of rocks juxtaposed along the fault plane (e.g. In the case of siliciclastic sediments, studies of fault rock properties have mainly focused on mechanical processes at the origin of sealing, in particular clay smearing (e.g. In this paper, we describe deformation-related features developed in sandstones in thrust fault zones of the Sub-Andean Zone (SAZ) of southern Bolivia. The SAZ thrust faults affect a Palaeozoic to Tertiary siliciclastic succession about 10 The SAZ is a Neogene foreland fold and thrust belt which constitutes the eastern border of the Andes. In the external SAZ of southern Bolivia ( The stratigraphy of the southern Bolivian SAZ comprises a thick Cambrian to Quaternary succession above a Precambrian basement ( The SAZ thrust system has an eastern vergence, with a main décollement level in the Silurian shales ( The SAZ faults show different hydraulic behaviours with respect to the current hydrocarbon migration, in particular when comparing the foreland and the foothills. In the foreland, reverse faults act as seals in various hydrocarbon fields. In contrast, in the foothills, the classification of oil seeps in relation to their structural position emphasises the capacity of faults and fractures to focus oil migration: 60% of the oil seeps leak from large thrust faults, 30% from the hinge of the anticlines and only 10% from monoclines ( We studied 11 faults distributed along two sections across the whole SAZ ( For each fault, the “fault zone” was qualitatively defined as the interval around the fault surface displaying a higher concentration of deformation-related features (fractures, minor faults, folds, mineral veins, etc.) than is typically present in the host-rocks far from the fault ( Approximately 250 thin sections of colored epoxy resin-impregnated samples were examined using petrographic and scanning electron microscopes (SEM) for petrographic and microstructural study. The SEM was coupled with an energy dispersive system (EDS) for qualitative and semi-quantitative element analyses. Cathodoluminescence (CL) of carbonates was studied with a cold-cathode system on a petrographic microscope and CL of quartz was studied with a SEM. Porosity was estimated by image analysis under the petrographic microscope and was measured by the mercury injection technique on a few samples. Kaolin polytypes were analysed by X The fault-bed angular relationships define either fault flats or ramps ( The fault zones are a few metres to hundreds of metres thick and their internal structure can be described using the damage zone-fault core model ( The most frequent lithology involved in fault zones are sandstones. The main deformation structures in sandstones are cataclastic slip bands ( The kinematics of structures in fault zones is complex in detail and varies from one fault to the other. However, deformation in hanging wall detachment horizons mainly corresponds to bedding-parallel extension ( In all of the studied formations, the sandstone composition is of 70–80% quartz grains and 10–20% alkali feldspar grains. Other grains (0–10%) are mainly micas, clays and rock fragments. There are no early cements except local quartz cements with chalcedony to macrocrystalline texture in Lower Permian sandstones. The degree of sandstone compaction related to sedimentary burial is assessed by the study of samples collected outside the fault zones, in order to avoid possible compactional effects of faulting deformation. Porosity of unfaulted sandstones is high (up to about 20% estimated by image analysis) in the upper part of the succession, where compaction is mainly mechanical and chemical compaction is absent or very little developed ( Sandstone diagenesis during sedimentary burial is also marked by the partial dissolution of feldspar grains and by the precipitation of kaolin, both features being relatively common in unfaulted sandstones of all formations. X-ray analyses performed on a few samples show that kaolin is mainly kaolinite with local small amounts of dickite in the Upper Carboniferous sandstones of the Camiri area and dickite in Upper Devonian sandstones at Rio Pilcomayo and Lower Devonian sandstones at Piedra Larga. As explained above, the maximum burial of the Upper Carboniferous sandstones of Camiri was no more than 3 Deformation of sandstones in the SAZ fault zones is dominated by brittle processes that may be associated, or not, with pressure solution and sealing by authigenic quartz. In both cases, the characteristics of fracturing are closely related to the pre-faulting porosity of the host-sandstone. Below, we first describe the microstructures without quartz sealing, then those with quartz sealing. In porous sandstones, fractures are mostly intragranular: individual fractures generally do not pass from one grain to the other and their geometry shows that they were generated by stress concentration at grain contacts ( In most cases, the cataclastic shear zones are similar to those described in other examples of faulted porous sandstones (e.g. In most cases, the offset and thickness of CSBs do not exceed a few millimetres and cohesion was not lost across the CSB. With larger displacement, a through-going discrete fracture may have formed inside or at the border of the CBS and concentrated displacement. At outcrop, these surfaces bear thin striations parallel to slip direction. Some CSBs differ from the common microstructure described above by the occurrence of a well-developed S–C fabric geometrically analogous to that of metamorphic fault rocks ( To our knowledge, such foliated cataclastic microstructure has not previously been described in naturally deformed sandstones, but it was recently observed in porous sandstones deformed by laboratory triaxial compression ( In low-porosity sandstones, the higher mechanical homogeneity compared with porous sandstones (i.e. the lower mechanical influence of grain contacts) favoured the formation of transgranular fractures that can cross several grains and reach up to several decimetres long ( The typical intragranular fracturing is found in the upper part of the section, from the Tertiary to the Upper Carboniferous formations where porosity is higher than 10%, generally around 20%. The typical transgranular fracturing occurs in the lowermost part of the section (Silurian, Devonian) where porosity is lower than 5%. In the intermediate part of the section, i.e. mainly from the Lower Permian to the Upper Devonian, sandstones with intermediate porosity exist, which show an intermediate fracturing process due to the weak cohesion of grain contacts. In this case, fractures are mostly transgranular but they often have a sinuous geometry because they contain many segments that follow grain contacts rather than cutting the grains, and sets of closely-spaced fractures may have evolved into CSBs. The non-quartz-sealed microstructures can show a fracture porosity that remained empty ( Quartz-sealed microstructures are CSBs in porous sandstones and transgranular fractures in low-porosity sandstones, the general characteristics of which are similar to those of the microstructures described above, but they differ by the occurrence of authigenic quartz cement. Another characteristic is that they commonly comprise pressure solution features affecting the quartz and feldspar grains. In the CSBs, the authigenic quartz is difficult to differentiate under the optical microscope because it forms domains that are very small (micron-scale) and intricately associated with the detrital grain fragments. However, the quartz-sealed CSBs can be differentiated from the non-quartz sealed CSBs by their highly sutured grain fragments when observed under crossed polarisers and by their non-porous texture with quasi non-differentiable grain fragments when observed in plain light ( Similarly to the non-quartz-sealed CSBs, the quartz-sealed cataclasites may show a S–C fabric. In this case, the cataclastic S-foliation is also marked by pressure solution seams, preferentially developed along clay- and oxide-rich accumulations ( The almost complete quartz sealing and compaction resulting from pressure solution give these CSBs a very low porosity. However, the peripheral zones of CSBs usually show quartz cement only in the transgranular fractures and original intergranular porosity is preserved ( In low-porosity sandstones, the transgranular fractures are sealed by quartz, thus forming veins up to a few millimetres thick ( Six of the studied fault zones display only microstructures without quartz sealing (upper Camiri, Rio Azero, Cuevo, Tunal, Rio Pilcomayo, Aguarague) and five display both quartz-sealed and non-quartz-sealed microstructures (lower Camiri, Piedra Larga, Canaletas, Honduras, Pajonal) ( Microstructures with quartz sealing have been observed in the Lower Devonian (Piedra Larga, Canaletas, Honduras), Lower Carboniferous (Piedra Larga, Canaletas), Upper Carboniferous (lower Camiri), Upper Permian (Piedra Larga) and Tertiary (Pajonal). Microstructures without quartz sealing are observed in all the formations involved in all the studied fault zones, from the Silurian to the Tertiary. In the cases where the two fault zone compartments are visible at outcrop, each type of microstructure (i.e. with or without quartz sealing) represented in the fault zone was observed in both compartments. Most of the quartz-sealed microstructures are CSBs. A few quartz-filled veins have been observed only in the hanging wall part of the Piedra Larga, Canaletas and Honduras well fault zones, i.e. in the sandstones that have the lowest porosity (<5%) among those featuring quartz-sealed microstructures (Lower Devonian). Cross-cutting relationships show that the microstructures without quartz sealing systematically post-date those with quartz sealing ( We have never observed the chronology opposite to that described above, or fault zones featuring only quartz-sealed microstructures. The descriptions above show that the deformation processes affecting sandstones in the SAZ fault zones were dependent on the diagenetic conditions from two aspects. Firstly, the type of fracturing was controlled by the degree of diagenesis reached before faulting, with mostly intragranular fracturing in porous sandstones and transgranular fracturing in low-porosity sandstones. The correspondence between these fracturing types and the present host-sandstone porosity shows that fault zone deformation occurred after most of the burial compaction was achieved, i.e. that faults are recent structures formed when (most of) the Tertiary foreland sediments were already deposited. This conclusion is consistent with the kinematic analysis of large-scale structures (see above, Secondly, the conditions of diagenesis during faulting controlled the presence or absence of microstructure quartz-sealing. The discussion below concerns this aspect and its implications on the hydraulic behaviour of faults. In the samples observed, fluid inclusions in authigenic quartz cementing microstructures are scarce and smaller than 2 Quartz cementation is the final product of a three-step process: dissolution, transport and precipitation. The question of the origin of quartz covers the determination: (i) of the sites and processes of dissolution, which can occur on free or stressed surfaces and (ii) of the mechanism of transport that can be achieved by fluid flow (advection) or diffusion. In the case studied here, the quartz-sealed microstructures systematically show the evidence of pressure solution features (indented grain contacts or stylolites) affecting quartz and feldspar grains, whereas these features are absent or very scarce in the non-quartz-sealed microstructures. The geometrical relationships show that pressure solution features are coherent with the centimetre-scale stress pattern responsible for local fracturing. The assumption of a local origin of quartz is also coherent with geochemical modelling. Indeed, when transported by diffusion, most of the dissolved silica precipitates at small (<1 The formation of dense fracture networks in fault zones is likely to have favoured the efficiency of local transfer of silica: In the pressure solution model, fracturing partitions the grain contacts where dissolution occurs and thus accelerates the transport of silica by reducing the length of the slowest diffusive path ( In the case of the CSBs, it is also possible that the strong grain-size reduction favoured free surface dissolution. Indeed, small fragments have a higher surface energy than the larger grains or fractures and this difference can promote diffusive transfer from small fragments to larger grain or fracture surfaces ( Whatever the origin of quartz may be, fracturing is likely to accelerate quartz precipitation by increasing the surface/volume ratio close to the dissolution sites. These new surfaces are clean, which is also favourable for precipitation ( Although the considerations above suggest that most of the quartz cement was produced within the fault zone and transported over a short distance, it is possible that the fractures have also acted as sinks for silica dissolved by pressure solution at the periphery of the fault zone. In the case of silica, the increase of temperature results in the increase of the dissolution/precipitation and, to a lesser degree, diffusion rates ( The consequence of this interpretation is that quartz-sealing distribution should have been a function of the depth at which the deformation was active. With the geothermal gradient of about 22°C/km and the average surface temperature of 15°C, which characterise the SAZ foredeep ( This interpretation corresponds with data from the North Sea, where recent works showed that normal fault zones buried to 3 Chemical compaction related to sedimentary burial is also a process of diffusive silica transfer from pressure solution to precipitation sites (see above, Although the discussion above implies that both chemical compaction related to sedimentary burial and fault-zone quartz sealing would develop below approximately the same depth, some differences can be expected because pressure solution and diffusive silica transport are time-dependent ( The inferred depth distribution of quartz-sealing in fault zones is coherent with three major facts ( Non-quartz-sealed microstructures are observed in all the studied fault zones, which were sampled at the surface or, in the case the Honduras well fault zone, at 2450 Most of the observed quartz-sealed microstructures occur in Palaeozoic rocks that were buried at least 3 Where quartz-sealed microstructures are present, they are always post-dated by the non-quartz-sealed microstructures. This can be explained by the fact that, for a given fault segment, the deformation conditions could also vary through time. In the foothills, due to anticline uplift and consecutive erosion contemporaneous with displacement along faults, the burial progressively decreased and, in critically buried fault zone segments, deformation could begin with quartz sealing and terminate without quartz sealing. A few observations apparently do not fit with our model, but they may be explained as follows: The footwall fault core cataclasite in Tertiary sandstones at Pajonal is quartz-sealed. However, local lithological and structural features support the assumption that this cataclasite developed in a tectonic lens derived from the lower part of the Tertiary succession. This may be a case where fault zone quartz sealing developed at a depth shallower than for chemical compaction. Quartz-sealed microstructures are not observed in Palaeozoic rocks in some fault zones. At upper Camiri, Tunal and Aguarague, this may be due to pre-thrusting erosion (see above, In the deep, quartz-sealed microstructures, quartz precipitation occurred quasi-simultaneously with fracture formation, resulting in microstructures with low porosity. In particular, the CSBs form virtually non-porous seams across host-sandstones that have often preserved original porosity ( In the shallow, non-quartz-sealed microstructures, fracture porosity is preserved and carbonate cements are frequent ( We note that our study excludes a significant strain dependence of fault zone sealing, since both quartz-sealed and unsealed microstructures occur in large-displacement fault zones (several tens of kilometres), as well as in small-displacement fault zones (<1 The inferred distribution of fault zone quartz-sealing and its influence on fault permeability can explain the current role of faults in oil migration along the Andean front. In the foothills, the oil-seeps are often located at no more than a few hundred metres from the source rock (Middle–Upper Devonian) and hence the oil drainage distance is short and drainage is favoured by the occurrence of unsealed fractures and possible extensional stress. In contrast, reservoirs in the foredeep are buried to depths where faults are sealed by quartz, and hence lateral closure on fault can be efficient. Discussing further the origin and conditions of carbonate-rich fluid and hydrocarbon migrations in fault zones is beyond the scope of this paper. The structural and chemical characteristics of carbonate cementation in the SAZ fault zones and their implication for interpreting fluid drainage in the SAZ thrust system are presented separately ( In faulted sandstones, fracturing processes are largely controled by the initial porosity of the rocks, with intragranular fracturing (cataclasis) typical of porous sandstones and transgranular fractures typical of low-porosity sandstones. In the siliciclastic succession, about 10 In conclusion, the major implication of this work is that the burial-related diagenetic conditions at the time of deformation are likely to be a first-order parameter in the evaluation of the sealing capacity of faults in sandstones. This parameter is independent of the type of fault (reverse or normal) and of the amount of fault offset. We thank Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos for access to data and support during field work. We are especially grateful to our Bolivian colleagues, J. Oller, G. Montemuro, E. Aguillera and E. Mendez. We thank Y. Géraud for Hg-porosimetry measurements at Strasbourg University, B. Lanson for kaolin analyses at Grenoble University, E. Rosenberg and P. Guéroult for SEM imaging at IFP, and Ph. Blanc for CL–SEM imaging at Paris VI University. J.P. Gratier, A.M. Boullier and F. Renard are greatly acknowledged for fruitful discussions and criticism during this study, as well as K. Bjørlykke and J.P. Evans for their constructive reviews of the original manuscript. The work was funded by Elf, Maxus and Pluspetrol, and partially by Repsol, Mobil and Exxon.