This paper studies several kinetic aspects of flotation of celestite and calcite in a mechanical cell with sodium dodecylsulphate as the collector agent, using pure minerals ranging in average particle size between 137 and 74 μm, respectively, with a constant pH 3 in the flotation bath in all experiments. The results obtained indicate that both minerals float rapidly and that the flotation rate constant responds to a non-integral order equation. Likewise, a linear relationship exists between flotation rate and particle diameter.In froth flotation, air bubbles are injected into a moving stream of aqueous slurry containing a mixture of particles, so that only hydrophobic ores are collected on the bubble surface and exit the stream. Owing to its simplicity, the process is widely used for separating a great variety of solid particles. However, a number of complex chemical and physical interaction aspects is involved in the flotation process. An extensive work is reported in the literature on the study of this process, which has been studied from different angles. Of these, kinetic approach has been highly instrumental in better understanding leading to reasonably accurate predictions. The quantification of kinetic parameters is of increasing importance in industrial flotation to shed light on the speed of the process. Numerous researchers have studied the kinetic aspects of froth flotation paying special attention to particle size, bubbles and their complex interactions (Trahar and Warren Arbiter and Harris In a recent review of flotation kinetics (Mehrotra and Padmanabhan This paper aims to determine the flotation rate of celestite and calcite with sodium dodecylsulphate (SDS), using the kinetic models based on chemical analogy. Likewise, this study supplements a previous work (Hernáinz and Calero Celestite, SrSO The celestite was taken from the Cerro de Montevives mine, located in Las Gabias, 12 km southwest of the city of Granada (Spain). The mineral, fragmented and selected again by hand to collect only the purest samples, thus guaranteeing a concentration of 97%, as shown by acid leach analysis. The calcite was taken from a deposit near Torredonjimeno (province of Jaen, Spain), with a concentration in CaCO Sodium dodecylsulphate supplied by Merck with a 99% purity. The solutions were dissolved in water. The solute was then weighed on a METTLER AJ150 precision balance, and the desired solution obtained by successive dilutions as the agent concentrations used were very small. Daksa M-1 pine oil was used with a constant concentration of 0.01407 g/l, sufficient to stabilise the foam. HCl and NaOH (Fluka, puriss. p.a.) were used as pH modifiers in the cell, and control was effected by means of a digital pH meter. The mineral, previously ground to the appropriate size, was added to stainless steel tank, fitted with an agitator and a reducer, which provided gyration at 60 rpm. The density of the pulp was then adjusted in the proportion ore:water=80:1250 g, and the collector, pH modifier and foaming agent were added, almost at the same time. This mixture was agitated for a 10-min conditioning period before being subjected to flotation in a mechanical cell for another 5-min period. In the flotation experiments, a DENVER-D12 mechanical cell with a 1.25-l stainless steel tank was used. The speed of impeller was adjusted to 1000 rpm suction caused by the impeller provided the aeration required for the formation of foam. The froths were manually skimmed to the overspill with an aluminium blade and collected by a collector in glass tanks where the mineral was decanted. The temperature in the bath was maintained between 291 and 293 K. The floated mineral was vacuum filtered through a ceramic funnel lined with appropriate filter paper. The sample was dried by a heating stone at 383 K to a constant weight. The percentage of recovery was obtained easily since pure mineral was used. First of all, the influence of SDS concentration on two different average particle sizes of celestite were determined, namely 74 and 137 μm, which are the usual limits in flotation operations. Experiments were performed at pH 3, as this pH has proved to be the most appropriate for SDS as a flotation agent on celestite and calcite according to previous papers (Cabrerizo The recovery percentage of celestite was plotted against SDS concentration in M (mol/l) in For the mineral size 137 μm, however, recovery gradually rises as SDS concentration is increased. At concentrations approaching 4.4×10  Low recovery rates, between 15 and 17%, are obtained from calcite flotation for a size of 137 μm and throughout the SDS concentration ranges studied. These results suggest that size is clearly one of the factors influencing recovery of this mineral, what coincides with that indicated by Trahar From a comparative study between celestite and calcite recovery ( The two concentrations, namely 1.33×10 Flotation kinetics studies the variation of floated mineral mass according to flotation time. If all operational variables are kept constant, the algebraic relationship between the parameters mentioned above is a flotation rate equation. The ways, in which rate equations may be evaluated can be based on assumptions or on facts established about the mechanism of the process, or, more commonly, determined empirically or by analogy with similar rate processes (Arbiter and Harris By analogy with chemical kinetics, the equation representing flotation kinetics may be expressed thus, From the kinetics point of view, concentration Therefore, if we assume that the volume is not altered during operation, the value for the flotation rate constant may be obtained. This constant is complex since it includes operational parameters such as inducement time, aeration, reagent concentration, particle size, prior treatment, design of the flotation cell, etc. Three approaches may be used to calculate this constant, namely, first-order equation ( second-order equation ( non-integral-order equation. The integration for obtaining the constant of flotation rate in the three approaches is described in a previous work (Hernáinz and Calero  The flotation rate is very fast for all sizes studied, with the greatest part of the mineral having floated within 3 min. These experiments also reveal that a decrease in size increases mineral recovery as pointed out by Trahar  The values obtained for the three assumptions under consideration are shown in The correlation coefficient, For order 2, the correlation coefficients give acceptable values in some cases, mainly with the smaller sizes used. However, it is in the non-integer order that the correlation coefficient gives the best results, and, therefore, Recovery percentages for calcite are shown in It may be seen that relatively high recovery rates are achieved for size of 74 μm. It is also clear that as size increases, in all cases, recovery percentage decreases.  In this case, the correlation coefficients indicate that the representative kinetics of the process also correspond to a non-integral order. The flotation rate of fines particles is low relative to that of other sizes, primarily as a result of the decreased probability of collision between particles and air bubbles as the particle size is reduced (Trahar  The results shown in The correlation coefficient,  The flotation rate is very fast for both minerals and for all sizes studied, with the greater part of the mineral having floated within 3 min. The results obtained on flotation of celestite and calcite indicate that the representative kinetics of the process correspond to a non-integral order although the correlation coefficient gives the best results ( Likewise, the correlation coefficient, 