Bioglass, known as 45S5 (45% SiO2, 6% P2O5, 24.5% CaO and 24.5% Na2O all in weight percent), was plasma sprayed onto a titanium substrate with and without Amdry 6250 (60% Al2O3 40% TiO2) as bond coating layer. Mechanical properties were evaluated in accordance with the ASTM C633 method and scanning electron microscopy was used for the microstructural characterization. Results indicated that it is possible to coat bioglass on titanium substrate by utilizing similar conditions used for hydroxyapatite. Application of bond coat layer in the plasma spraying of (45S5) bioglass on titanium substrate has increased the bonding strength about three times. The adhesive bonding observed at the bioglass metal interface turned into cohesive bonding by application of the bond coating layer. It has been observed that there is a uniform coating layer with a thickness of 110 and 80 μm depending on coating type with a little amount of porosity.Bioglasses are silicate glasses containing sodium, calcium and phosphate as main components Bond coatings are already used widely in many industrial plasma spray applications. They have specific functions; because the substrate and the main coating have different coefficients of thermal expansion, bond coating layer should be used to provide a good thermal expansion match between these two different layer The purpose of this study was to find out the effect of bond coat application on mechanical properties and microstructural characteristics of bioglass plasma-sprayed coating on titanium. Bioglass, known as 45S5 (45% SiO Powders produced were subjected to grinding by blade milling to produce suitable particle size for plasma spray applications, the size distribution of particles, after milling are given in For producing bioglass coating without bond layer, powder fraction between −212 and 63 μm was plasma sprayed directly on sand blasted and cleaned titanium substrates. In the second stage, which is the coating of bioglass on bond layer; Al Microstructural characterization was carried out by Jeol JSM T330 scanning electron microscope. Secondary electron image was used to evaluate coating surface. Characteristic plasma coating microstructure was observed on both coating surfaces ( Surface roughness values of metal surface, bond coating and main coatings were determined by using surface roughness measurement unit perthometer. Average surface roughness values ( Bonding strengths of the Ti substrate–bioglass and Ti substrate-bond coating–bioglass interfaces were tested using adhesion test ASTM C-633. All tests were carried out by using an Instron universal testing machine under ambient conditions with a cross head speed of 1 mm/min. Bisphenol A-Epichlorhidrinharze was used as glue. Adhesive and cohesive failures surface at the bioglass–titanium and bioglass-bond coating–titanium interfaces were evaluated by scanning electron microscopy. The bonding type of coating was determined by the measurement of the separation percents of coating on surface using milimetric paper. The bonding strength values of the samples with respect to direct coating on titanium and bond coating application are listed in The results of this study revealed that hydroxyapatite-coating plasma spray parameters of Fazans ( It is known that in plasma spray process, bond-coating layers are used under the main coating so that the coating has better mechanical properties. The bond coatings are always thinner than the main coatings (20 μm in this study, In the literature, true bonding strength of plasma sprayed coatings is a manifestation of mixed cohesive (lamellar layer themselves) and adhesive (coating to substrate) strength. Therefore as the adhesive test ASTM C633 was employed, the results of bonding strength in situ were suggested to be governed by a number of factors; thickness of ceramic coating, the microstructure influencing the inter-lamellar cohesive strength of the coating, surface condition (roughness and cleanliness of the metal surface), glue type and coating characteristics. The bonding type of bioglass–titanium coating was determined as approximately 98.82% adhesive and 1.18% cohesive character, whereas bond coat containing samples showed 7.04% adhesive and 92.96% cohesive character. Microstructural characterization results by scanning electron microscopy were all in close agreement with the statistical results. Cohesive and adhesive failure of the coating were determined depending on the coating type. It was observed that failure occurred in the form of delamination on the main coating for bond coating samples ( ASTM C-633 testing results regarding to bonding strength of the coated samples are given in It is possible to coat bioglass on titanium substrate by utilizing present conditions which are being used for hydroxyapatite coating procedure. Application of Amdry 6250 (60 wt.% Al This work has been supported by State Planning Organisation of Turkey and ITU Research Fund. Appreciation is expressed to Turgut Halamoglu from Senkron Hard Metal Coating Inc., Prof. Selim Kusefoglu from Bosphorous University due to his help during glass grinding, Professor Nuri Akkas from METU for mechanical tests.