The uranium titanate mineral brannerite, UTi2O6 is the most common of the uranium minerals which is considered refractory. Ore containing brannerite mineralisation has been mined and processed in several locations around the world. Under typical uranium ore processing conditions, brannerite is often lost to tailings. In order to design an effective process for the leaching of high-brannerite uranium ores, it is first necessary to understand the mechanism of the chemical processes through which brannerite dissolves in the absence of interferences from the host rock. In the present study, a specimen of brannerite obtained as a single crystal was leached in sulphuric acid (10–200g/L) and ferric sulphate (2.8g/L Fe3+) solution at 25–96°C for 5h. The rate of titanium dissolution was monitored along with uranium. Comparisons between the rates at which these two elements dissolved and the morphological changes that were observed to take place during the dissolution process indicated two different sets of leaching reaction mechanisms. At low temperatures, uranium dissolved at a much higher rate than titanium initially, leaving titanium rich areas on the brannerite particles similar to observations reported in earlier investigations which suggest incongruent dissolution. The calculated activation energies for uranium and titanium dissolution were 36 and 48kJ/mol respectively. At higher temperatures, uranium and titanium dissolved at similar rates in constant proportions suggesting congruent dissolution. The calculated activation energy for this reaction was 23kJ/mol. The transition between incongruent and congruent dissolution took place at lower temperatures when the acid concentration was higher. Titanium appeared to undergo hydrolysis after dissolution, forming anatase. This side reaction was most favourable at lower acid concentrations and high temperatures.Brannerite, ideally UTi Brannerite is reported to dissolve in ferric sulphate and sulphuric acid releasing uranium into the solution as uranyl sulphate complexes. Titanium dioxide subsequently forms as a secondary solid phase ( There have been a number of qualitative studies on the dissolution of brannerite grains in uranium ores from various locations, such as the work of In similar experiments,  Gogoleva concluded that brannerite dissolves in acidic ferric sulphate solutions via the following two reactions ( Uranium forms stable aqueous species over a much broader range of conditions than titanium ( While acid is not directly involved in the oxidative dissolution of uranium  If the rate determining step at higher temperatures is actually diffusion through a titanium oxide product layer formed through a process similar to In the first published description of brannerite, The sample originates from the Dieresis deposit, near Cordoba, Spain and was coated in a white-pale yellow/brown alteration layer similar to the description given by X-ray diffraction analyses on the sub-sample leached in this study show anatase. No crystalline uranium phases were identified. This was attributed to the metamict nature of the sample. SEM–EDX analyses showed that the mineral specimen consisted of two major phases: brannerite and anatase. This anatase contained minor amounts of uranium and appeared to be highly refractory compared to brannerite. The full details of the XRD and SEM–EDX analyses are reported in part 2 of this paper ( Each leaching test was run for 5 The concentration of Fe(III) in all tests was kept constant at 2.79 All samples were analysed at a certified commercial mineral processing laboratory NAGROM Pty Ltd by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) for uranium and by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) for titanium. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were conducted at Murdoch University to characterise the solid residue samples. Assay of the brannerite feed sample showed that while it was mostly uranium–titanium oxide, five other elements (Th, Pb, Ca, Fe and Si) exceeded 1% of the mass ( Some specific features of brannerite are worth noting. Stoichiometric brannerite, UTi The composition of brannerite has been reported to affect the extent of dissolution under similar conditions, with the replacement of uranium by cerium and other elements resulting in decreased uranium extraction ( Comparing rates and extent of leaching at different temperatures under the same chemical conditions, it was clear that temperature had a major effect on both the initial rate of uranium and titanium extraction and on the final extraction of these elements from brannerite ( At higher temperatures, uranium extractions of up to 99% were readily achieved. At 96 Two separate linear regions were observed on the Arrhenius plots for uranium and titanium ( Our results showed that the temperature at which the rate determining step appears to change varies with the acid concentration. The transition from high to low activation energy was observed to occur at a lower temperature when the acid concentration was higher (  Gogoleva estimated the activation energy for brannerite dissolution from rate constants extracted from the shrinking sphere and shrinking core kinetic models, whereas the rate constants in this study were determined from the extent of dissolution at the 15 Increasing the acid concentration increased the rate of uranium dissolution ( Another effect of acid concentration was that at lower acid concentrations (10–25 Another interesting observation is that there appeared to be an upper limit to how much titanium would dissolve from the feed. Comparing the dissolution data in The initial rate of uranium and titanium dissolution had a greater dependence on the acid concentration at 63 The greatest divergence between the initial uranium and titanium dissolution rates was observed at the lower temperatures. On the other hand, at the higher temperatures, where the low activation energy step controlled the rate of the dissolution process, the rates of uranium and titanium dissolution were close and of a consistent ratio. As discussed earlier, this suggests that two separate leaching reaction mechanisms apply to the brannerite leaching process. The difference between the initial rates of uranium and titanium extraction at higher temperatures can be explained by the presence of a second low-uranium titanium oxide phase identified by SEM–EDX analyses. This phase contained a greater fraction of titanium than uranium. The consistent ratio of dissolution rates at higher temperature suggests congruent dissolution of the main brannerite phase. Around 2.55–2.60 In most leaching experiments, the molar extraction ratio of titanium to uranium approached 2.58 ( The final uranium extraction was always slightly higher than the final titanium extraction, but not by much ( In all following reactions, aqueous metal species are assumed to be present as the most stable ion or complex as indicated by calculations performed with HSC chemistry v7.1.1 ( The dissolution of brannerite in acidic ferric sulphate media appears to take place via two separate reactions depending on the temperature and acid concentration. Increasing the acid concentration decreases the temperature at which the transition occurs between the low and high temperature reactions. The present research shows that at low temperatures, uranium initially dissolves at a much faster rate than titanium. The extent of titanium dissolution eventually approaches that of uranium however, suggesting a two step process. Electrochemical experiments by It is proposed that in the first step, uranium is oxidised and dissolved, leaving a titanium rich layer. In the second step, this titanium oxide material is attacked by acid: This second step has a higher activation energy than the first step, and a greater dependence on the sulphuric acid concentration. The uranium dissolution step has an order of 0.43 with respect to H At higher temperatures, uranium and titanium dissolve in a consistent ratio, suggesting that the titanium oxide material formed in The molar ratios of titanium to uranium in the solution during this reaction suggest that the congruent dissolution of a U At higher temperatures (> The likely explanation for these observations is that after initially dissolving rapidly, the titanium concentration exceeded saturation and precipitated via the following reaction. Thermodynamic calculations performed with HSC Chemistry v7.1.1 ( A specimen of brannerite was leached at different temperatures (25–96 The average activation energy for uranium dissolution at lower temperatures was calculated to be 36 The temperature at which the transition between the high activation energy incongruent dissolution reaction and the low activation energy congruent dissolution reaction occurred varied with the acid concentration. Increasing the acid concentration shifted this transition to a lower temperature. Based on these experimental results, new reactions for uranium and titanium leaching at low temperatures and at high temperatures have been proposed.