There are insufficient high-grade iron ores currently being mined to meet world demand for steel production. In order to meet raw material demand in India, lower grade ores with high alumina contents are being crushed and beneficiated, mainly by gravity techniques requiring water. However, the scarcity of water in the mining areas warrants the development of some dry gradation techniques for iron ores so that the inferior ore specimens can be rejected in order to improve the grade of the concentrate. The present gradation of ores by mineralogical/chemical methods is time-consuming and cumbersome. This paper presents an Infrared (IR) thermography-based non-invasive technique for the faster gradation of iron ores, taking into account the variation in thermal absorptivity of the ore constituents. Iron ore samples from the Joda, Noamundi and Barsua mines, with Fe contents ranging from 52 to 67wt.%, were selected and crushed to around 10mm particle size. The crushed iron ores were uniformly heated using a microwave oven, for a time period sufficient to create a difference between the ore particles in the extent of their respective infrared emissions. The thermal images of the heated particles were captured by IR thermography and the peak temperature of each ore particle was obtained from the thermal profile. A computer program was developed for ore gradation based on the peak temperature of each ore particle which corresponds to its iron content. A threshold was selected through chemical verification of the ores and accordingly the ores were categorized as high-, medium- and low-grade.The quality of ores is an important facet for blast furnaces in iron and steel industries, which use iron ore as one of their key raw materials. The overall productivity and in turn the profitability of the steel plants in part depends on the quality of iron ore fed to the blast furnace. For efficient blast furnace operation, the alumina/silica ratio in the feed ore should be less than 1 and alumina present in the ore should be less than 2% ( Generally, Indian iron ores contain more than 2% alumina ( In mineral processing industries, ore-gradation plays a crucial role at different stages of the extraction process, ranging from the design of the mine to mineral grading and plant control ( In recent years, some initiatives have been taken for the development of automatic systems for the measurement of mineral composition and texture. The early attempts used image analysis for obtaining quantitative mineralogical information from optical microscope images. The identification of and discrimination between the different mineral constituents of iron ores was based on their differing light reflectance in polished section. Although the technique was found to be relatively cheap and fast, the optical properties of many minerals overlapped, thus making discrimination between them impossible by grey level thresholding alone ( Most of the sensing systems available for ore gradation take into consideration the color, mineralogy, texture and optical properties of the ore particles. This paper presents an Infrared (IR) thermography based non-invasive technique for faster gradation of iron ores, taking into account the variation in thermal absorptivity of the ore constituents. Implementation of this technique in the beneficiation process in the mines would lead to more systematic and improved decision making for effective blend planning and impurity reduction. Additionally, real time analysis of feed grade would help plant operators with effective plant operation in order to achieve their targeted output in terms of alumina percentage and yield. The infrared thermal imaging technique converts the invisible radiation pattern of an object into visible images for feature extraction and analysis. The system consists of an infrared camera with detectors, a signal processing unit and an image acquisition system. The thermal imaging technique is being widely used in various fields such as predictive maintenance, non-destructive evaluation, military reconnaissance and medical imaging. ( All objects that have surface temperatures above absolute zero emit electromagnetic radiation. When radiation is incident on an object, some portion of it is transmitted, some portion absorbed, and some reflected. For thermal equilibrium the total flux (measured in watts) must be constant and is defined as, For real surfaces, during thermal equilibrium the transmissivity of solid surfaces is equal to zero, therefore (1) can be rewritten as In the case of ores and minerals in unpolished condition, the amount of heat reflected is very low; hence most of the heat incident on the ores is absorbed by them. The heat radiated by the uniformly heated ores is captured and displayed as a thermal image through IR thermography. Ore particles with lower thermal absorptivity can be identified from the thermal images of the ore specimens ( In this investigation, iron ores with Fe content in the range of 52 to 67 Iron ore samples of approximately 10 A software program for image classification was developed in LabVIEW 8.5 which is capable of determining the number of ore specimens with a temperature profile above that of the predefined threshold value. It can be observed from the thermal profile given in To estimate the grade of the iron ores from the Joda, Noamundi and Barsua mines ( The thermal profile data for the mines were extracted from the IR image and based on the same threshold temperature (50 It can be observed from Analyzing the thermal image in To determine the alumina and silica content of the particles in the accepted and rejected groups, ores of each series were ground separately and chemically analyzed, the results of which are given in The thermal images of the microwave-heated ore specimens from Joda, Noamundi and Barsua mines, along with their thermal profiles are also shown in The thermal images of heated ore particles from the three mines were analyzed separately and peak temperature of ore particles plotted as given in The chemical analysis results displayed in A fast, low cost, non-cumbersome and non-invasive technique for gradation of iron ore based on IR thermography of microwave heated ores has been developed. This technique can be considered as a substitute for the more prevalent chemical analysis method which is time-consuming and labor intensive. The implementation of this technique in the beneficiation process in operating mines would lead to more systematic and improved decision making inputs to effective blend planning and impurity reduction. Additionally, real time analysis of feed grade to the plant operators would help in effective plant operation to achieve the alumina percentage and yield targets. Further development of this technique in combination with processes for detecting and rejecting particles with low Fe grades and/or high alumina and/or silica impurity levels, would help to achieve an efficiently operating mine-scale ore sorting system. The authors thank the Director, CSIR – National Metallurgical Laboratory, for his constant support and encouragement in this work and for providing infrastructural support to carry out this investigation.