An analysis of clean coal technologies for the recovery of energy from Nigerian coals was carried out. The coal mines studied are Onyeama, Ogwashi, Ezimo, Inyi, Amasiodo, Okaba, Lafia-Obi, Owukpa Owukpa, Ogboyoga and Okpara. The estimated reserves of the ten coal deposit amount to 2.1 Gt, which is about 84% of the total coal reserves of the country 2.5 Gt of coal Nigeria. The key clean coal technologies studied are Ultra-Supercritical Combustion (USC), Supercritical-Fluidised Bed Combustion (FBC), Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) and Coal bed Methane (CBM) and the results were compared with conventional subcritical pulverised fuel combustion (PF). The total potential energy recovery from these technologies are: PF 5800 TWh, FBC 7250 TWh, IGCC 7618 TWh, and USC 8519 TWh. This indicates an increase of about 31% in the total electricity generation if USC technology is used instead of the conventional sub-critical PF technology. About 39% of the total electricity generation of 8519 TWh from USC could come from Amasiodo coal deposit, making it the highest contributor to the total power generation. Inyi coal had a contribution of ∼1.5% making it the lowest contributor. The lowest CO2 emission factor was from Onyeama coal and was reduced from 1.0 kg CO2/kWh in PF to 0.68 kg CO2/kWh in USC. Oghwashi coal had the lowest energy and highest emission factor. There will be a need for the coal upgrading/beneficiation for optimal energy recovery.Nigeria has estimated coal reserves of 2.5 Gt [ Previously, coal was mainly used to power trains and also for electricity generation [ The replacement of coal with diesel in the powering of the trains and with gas and hydro for electricity generation led to a drastic drop in coal production and utilisation. This led to the closure of the two coal power stations in Nigeria, namely the Oji coal power station in Enugu and Ijora power station in Lagos [ The present electricity generation in Nigeria fluctuates between 2687 MW and 4200 MW while the estimated peak demand is 12800 MW [ The technology to be applied in the proposed power plants has not been finalised. There is a need to use technologies that promote high efficiency. According to a report by the World Coal Associaion (WCA) on accelerating coal power efficiency, a 1% increase in coal-fired plant efficiency can lead to 2-3% decrease in emissions [ Higher efficiency and low emission (HELE) coal plants are key components of clean coal technologies (CCT) [ The evaluation of the use of advanced clean coal technologies such as USC, FBC, IGGC and CBM on the recovery of energy and emissions reduction from Nigerian coal reserves has not been carried out in detail. Sambo [ Amoo [ Adeyinka [ This study aims to evaluate the coal consumption rate, emission factor and total energy recovery for USC, FBC, IGGC and CBM technologies and compare them with those from a conventional low efficiency subcritical pulverised fuel (PF) for several coals from ten different coal mines in Nigeria, namely Onyeama, Ogwashi, Ezimo, Inyi, Amasiodo, Okaba, Lafia-Obi, Owukpa Owukpa, Ogboyoga and Okpara. The estimated reserves of these coal mines are 2.1Gt, i.e. about 84% of the total estimated reserves of the 2.5 Gt of coal. The coal mines are open cast (surface mining) and underground [ The potential energy recovery, emission factors and overall efficiency for PF, USC, FBC, IGGC, were evaluated as follows: The overall efficiency is a function of the technology, thus: PF is 28–32%, USC is 45–47%, FBC 35-40% and IGCC is between 35 and 42% [ Combustion efficiency for the different coals was derived from their fuel ratios. A lower fuel ratio would result in a higher combustion efficiency [ For the CBM technology, the total energy recovery is derived by multiplying the volume of methane in the coal mines and the energy density by the volume of Methane. The energy density by volume of Methane is 9.8 kWh/m The volume of the methane gas in the coal mines was evaluated by Kim correlation [ V C FC, VM, fixed carbon and volatile matter respectively of the coal. The CO The coal consumption rate for PF, USC, FBC and IGCC for the different coal mines is presented in The emission factors for PF, USC, FBC and IGCC for the different coal mines are presented in The total energy recovery for PF, USC, FBC and IGCC for the different coal mines is presented in In terms of the coal samples, the highest energy recovery was from Amasiodo coal mines. About 39% of the total electricity generation of 8519TWh from USC, would come from Amasiodo coal mines because it has the highest coal reserve and which is 1Gt. The lowest fraction (1.4%) of the total energy recovery would be from Inyi coal mine and it has the lowest coal reserve of out of the ten coal mines and it is 50 Mt. Although Onyeama coal mine has a lower coal reserve of 150 Mt than Ogwashi coal mine which has 250Mt, it has a higher energy recovery than Ogwashi coal mine. This is obvious as the total energy recovery is a function of the electricity generation rate and the amount of coal reserves. The contribution of each of the coal mines to the total energy recovery from USC is presented in The recovery of methane from coal mines is a key step in the generation of energy in coalbed methane technology. The methane recovered can be used in gas turbines for electricity generation. The methane generation rates for the different coal mines are in the range of 1–8 cm The potential energy from Coal Bed Methane (CBM) was evaluated by multiplying the methane generation rate of each coal seam with the coal reserves and the product was multiplied with the methane energy density of 9.8 kWh/m The total potential energy recovery from CBM for all the coals is about 142TWh. The results showed that energy recovery from CBM is lower than PF (5800 TWh), FBC (7250 TWh), IGCC (7618 TWh) and USC (8519 TWh). The proportion of the potential total energy recovery from CBM for the different coal mines is presented The emission factor for CBM would be lower than those of PF, USC, FBC and IGCC. According to the Intergovernmental panel of Climate Change (IPCC), from the lifecycle assessment of greenhouse gas emissions from electricity, the emission factor for natural gas is 469g CO There is further opportunity for CO According to the Nigerian government power growth plan, coal is projected to contribute ∼6% of the 40 GW (2.4GW) target in 2020 [ The average emission factor for CBM (469g CO An analysis of the effect of clean coal technology on energy recovery and emission reduction was investigated for selected coal mines in Nigeria, namely these are Onyeama, Ogwashi, Ezimo, Inyi, Amasiodo, Okaba, Lafia-Obi, Owukpa Owukpa, Ogboyoga and Okpara. The estimated total reserves of the ten mines amount to 2.1 Gt which is ∼84% of Nigeria's total reserves of the 2.5Gt. The key clean coal technologies studied are Ultra-supercritical Pulverised Fuel Combustion (USC), Supercitical Fluidised Bed Combustion (FBC), Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGGC) and Coal bed Methane (CBM) and the results were compared with that of conventional subcritical pulverised fuel (PF). The total potential energy recoveries are PF 5800 TWh, FBC 7250 TWh, IGCC 7618 TWh, USC 8519 TWh. This indicates an increase of ∼31% in the total energy recovery if USC technology is used instead of the conventional PF. About 39% of the total electricity generation of 8178 TWh from USC would come from Amasiodo coal mine making it the highest source of the energy generation and Inyi coal had the lowest source of energy generation (1.5%). The lowest emission factor was for Onyeama coal and was reduced from 1.0 kg CO The total energy generation potential from CBM is 142 TWh and is lower than the total energy generation potential ofconventional PF technology of 5565 TWh. Amaisodo coal also accounted for the highest share of total potential electricity generation in CBM although it now accounts for 56% as against 39% in PF, FBC, IGCC and USC. Inyi coal had the lowest contribution to the total potential electricity generation in PF, USC, FBC and IGCC and CBM. It was 1.4% in PF, USC, FBC, IGCC and 1.3% in. Amasiodo coal had the higest contribution to the total potential energy generation in PF, USC, FBC and IGCC and CBM. It was 39% in PF, USC, FBC, IGCC and 58% CBM. Another interesting finding is that Onyeama coal would have a higher contribution to the total energy generation than Okaba in CBM and this was not the case in PF, USC, FBC and IGCC. This indicates that the fraction of contribution of each coal to the total potential energy recovery would be different. It could either be higher in The emission factor for CBM is lower than those of PF, USC, FBC and IGCC. CBM to power generation is 469g CO The authors would like to thank the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at