Soil organic P (Po) mineralization plays an important role in soil P cycling. Quantitative information on the release of available inorganic P (Pi) by this process is difficult to obtain because any mineralized Pi gets rapidly sorbed. We applied a new approach to quantify basal soil Po mineralization, based on 33PO4 isotopic dilution during 10 days of incubation, in soils differing in microbiological activity. The soils originated from a 20 years old field experiment, including a conventional system receiving exclusively mineral fertilizers (MIN), a bio-organic (ORG) and bio-dynamic (DYN) system. Indicators of soil microbiological activity, such as size and activity of the soil microbial biomass and phosphatase activity, were highest in DYN and lowest in MIN. In order to assess Po hydrolysis driven by phosphatase in sterile soils, a set of soil samples was γ-irradiated. Basal Po mineralization rates in non-irradiated samples were between 1.4 and 2.5mgPkg−1
                     day−1 and decreased in the order DYN>ORG≥MIN. This is an amount lower, approximately equivalent to, or higher than water soluble Pi of MIN, ORG and DYN soils, respectively, but in every soil was less than 10% of the amount of P isotopically exchangeable during one day. This shows that physico-chemical processes are more important than basal mineralization in releasing plant available Pi. Organic P mineralization rates were higher, and differences between soils were more pronounced in γ-irradiated than in non-irradiated soils, with mineralization rates ranging from 2.2 to 4.6mgPkg−1
                     day−1. These rates of hydrolysis, however, cannot be compared to those in non-sterile soils as they are affected by the release of cellular compounds, e.g. easily mineralizable Po, derived from microbial cells killed by γ-irradiation.Organic phosphorus (P All three P mineralization processes include biological and biochemical processes, as proposed by Recently, Here, we applied this technique to quantify basal P The soil samples were taken from a long-term field experiment in Therwil, near Basel (Switzerland). In this field trial, organic and conventional farming systems have been compared since 1978 on a loamy-silt Haplic Luvisol developed on loess. The concept and experimental design of the field trial, including the detailed description of the management practices, were presented by After sampling, soils were kept at 4 °C until the beginning of the laboratory experiments, when they were mixed and sieved (3 mm). Sub-samples were air-dried and sieved at 2 mm prior to chemical analyzes. Field-moist soil was incubated at 20 °C, 80–85% atmospheric humidity and 50% water holding capacity in order to create optimum conditions for labelling and biological activity. Soil respiration was measured every second day during the first 10 days, and thereafter twice a week until day 41. Microbially bound C and N were measured on days 0, 17 and 34 and microbial P on days 0, 15 and 32 of the experiment. Phosphatase activity in non-irradiated and γ-irradiated soils was determined directly after γ-irradiation of one set of samples on day 13. Phosphorus mineralization in γ-irradiated and non-irradiated soils was determined over 10 days after 28 days of pre-incubation and the γ-irradiation of one set of samples on day 28. Isotopic exchange kinetics parameters in γ-irradiated and non-irradiated soils used for the baseline were assessed on the day of labelling (day 28). The P Soil respiration was measured in 500 Microbially bound C and N released by chloroform fumigation (C Basal P The method is based on the principle of isotopic dilution. First, the specific activity (SA) as affected by physico-chemical processes, is extrapolated from an isotopic exchange kinetics batch experiment lasting 60 min ( The following isotopic exchange kinetics parameters obtained from the batch experiment characterize the availability of soil P One set of samples was γ-irradiated (20 With the exception of P In spite of similar average annual P inputs and P input–output balances ( Soil microbial biomass C, N and P, phosphatase activity, soil respiration and, in turn, C mineralization, were higher in DYN than in ORG, and lowest in MIN soil ( The recording of the time course of soil respiration during incubation is an important prerequisite for the measurement of basal P Provided the temperature and moisture are controlled during the incubation experiment, basal respiration is a function of: (1) abiotic factors such as pH and clay content that affect microbial biomass and community structure ( In conclusion, 20 years of organic farming affected the size, structure and diversity of the soil microbial community, the amount and quality of substrates available for basal mineralization, and, through changes in soil structure, the habitat of microorganisms and the related access to substrates. Provided there is a strong linkage between C and P As well as constant basal respiration, which was attained after two weeks of pre-incubation, constant isotopic exchange parameters are a prerequisite for the determination of basal P We found basal P Organic P mineralization decreased in the order DYN>ORG≥MIN ( Differences between basal P Phosphorus mineralization in γ-irradiated sterile soils showed the existence of biochemical mineralization of P Various C:P ratios obtained on non-irradiated soils give additional hints about processes underlying basal P Basal P We thank H.J. Zehnder for conducting the γ-irradiation at the Swiss Federal Research Station for Fruit-Growing, Viticulture and Horticulture in Wädenswil (FAW), and F. Mascher from Plant Pathology group of ETH, Zürich, for doing the sterilization tests of the soils. The study was financed by the Research Grant Division of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zurich.