In the past, the pretreatment and indium extracting were conducted in independent disposal system to recycle indium from waste liquid crystal display (LCD), which make the recycling process inefficient and costly. In this study, an efficient and environmental friendly indium recycling process was proposed by an in-situ reaction process. The carbon residue generated in the pretreatment stage (organic removing stage) was used as the reductant to extract indium in the same reaction system. Comparison results indicated that the reaction effects of pyrolytic carbon were much better than coke since the structure of pyrolytic carbon is porous which would make the reactants contact better, and promote the reaction efficiency. Futhermore, results showed that the pyrolytic carbon was sufficient for the indium reduction without adding extra reductant, and indium conversion rate can reach 99.08% under the condition of 935 °C, 5 Pa, 2.5 wt%, 30 min, <0.3 mm. In this study, the organic pollutants were removed, while the indium also could be recycled in a closed-loop system. To sum up, this study could simplify the process route of waste LCD recycling, and provide fundamental basis as well as practical experience for recycling waste LCD environmentally and efficiently.Liquid crystal display (LCD) panels have gradually displaced the traditionalcathode-ray tube(CRT) display( LCD panels mainly consist of polarizing film, liquid crystal material and ITO (indium tin oxide) glasses ( As shown in In the pretreatment stage, physical methods such as thermal shock ( As for the indium recycling stage, studies have reported that sigle acid leaching technology ( The pretreatment and indium extracting were regarded as two process, and each stage was conducted in mutually independent disposal system. Such processing mode has a quite poor efficiency, not only that, the independent disposal would make the treatment cost and supplies consumed rate much higher. To solve the above problem, an efficient and environmental friendly indium recycling process from waste LCD panel was proposed. The general recycling flow chart of LCD panels was shown in In this study, the waste LCD panel was dismantled from 14 in. Lenovo laptops. Pyrolytic carbon was the pyrolysis product of LCD polarizing film, and coke powder was used to contrast the reduction effect with pyrolytic carbon. Besides, the In In our previous study, pyrolysis experiments of waste LCD panels was conducted in a tube furnace with a cooling system, about 14 wt% pyrolytic carbon could be generated from the organic matters (mainly polarizing film) when the reaction temperature is set as 570 °C, the particle size is 0.5 mm, and N The indium recycling experiments were carried out in a self-assemble pyrolysis-vacuum furnace ( In a typical run, the sample (about 0.5 g) was well mixed with pyrolytic carbon powder by a ball grinding mill. The mixture was placed in a quartz boat, and then the quartz boat was put in the heating area of the quartz tube. The system was evacuated to a certain pressure by the vacuum pump group, and was heat up to experimental temperature. The samples were cooled to room temperature after the experiments is completed. The conversion rate of In and Sn was calculated as follows: The quantitative analysis of indium and tin was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma spectrometry (ICP, Thermo fisher Corporation, U.S.). The LCD glass was digested by microwave digestion system, and the digestion process is listed as follows: take about 0.5 g (accurate to 0.0001 g) glass to the digestion tank, and then, add 9 mL HNO The single factor experiments were conducted for a more detailed understanding of the indium recycling and to determine the experimental scope. Moreover, to analyze and expound the interaction of the related factors and optimize indium recovery rate, Box-Behnken Design (BBD), a standard response surface methodology (RSM) design from Design-Expert software was conducted. The temperature, pressure and pyrolytic carbon loading were identified as factors on the response of indium recovery rate with the setting range at two levels. The levels and ranges of independent variables are shown in  As can be seen from the thermodynamics calculation, both In  In the present study, the single factor experiments were proceeded to determine the experimental scope. The effects of pressure, temperature and pyrolytic carbon loading on indium recovery rate are list as follows:     In the statistical analysis, reaction time is set to 30 min since it is obvious that when longer than 30 min, reaction time has little effect on indium conversion rate in the single factor experiments. The equation of regression was calculated and showed as follows: The optimum condition for the pyrolysis process was determined by means of BBD under RSM to get a higher In conversion rate. Meanwhile, temperature, pyrolytic carbon loading and system pressure were expected in a logicalscope. By analysing the characteristic of the response surface changes, the optimized solution was determined to the temperature of 935.15 °C, system pressure of 5.31 Pa, pyrolytic carbon loading of 37.58 wt%, and indium conversion rate of 97.54%. According to the above results, 935 °C, 5 Pa, 38 wt% were determined to be the optimal parameters and the confirmatory experiments were performed under the optimal conditions. The experiments indicate that indium conversion rate can reach 97.89%, which is similar to the predictions. Several results can be concluded from the single factor experiments and the RSM analysis: (i) the increasing of temperature, system vacuum degree and pyrolytic carbon loading are to the benefit of indium conversion rate; (ii) pyrolytic carbon loading has a more noticeable influence on indium conversion rate than pressure and temperature, especially when the pyrolytic carbon loading is lower than 30 wt%; (iii) the optimum condition for the pyrolysis process was determined, and the confirmatory experimentsresults is quite similar to the predictions.   The SEM photographs of coke powder in magnification of 5000, 10,000 and 20,000 were shown in The elemental analysis results are shown in Besides, the calculations show that the pyrolytic carbon formed in nitrogen pyrolysis process take accounts for about 2.5 wt% of glass substrate, and this content is much higher than the required amount of carbon to extract indium from glass substrate. However, the indium content and distribution in glass substrate is quite different from pure In In this study, the pyrolytic carbon residue of organic matters from waste LCD panels was used as the reductant to recycle indium from waste LCD panels in an in-situ reaction system. The thermodynamics calculation showed that In In the present study, “waste residue” can be transformed into “reaction raw material (reductant)”, and organic pollutants removing were integrated with indium recycling. To sum up, this study can simplify the process route of waste LCD recycling, and provide fundamental basis as well as practical experience for recycling waste LCD environmentally and efficiently. This work was supported by the