A proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell, an alternative to combustion processes that consume fossil resources, is used to convert energy stored in the form of hydrogen into electricity. The membrane-electrode assembly (MEA), the core of this system, contains platinum, a noble metal, which is a limited resource. This paper presents an environmental assessment of a recycling process for the platinum catalyst contained in the MEA of a PEM fuel cell. During this study, four hydrometallurgical platinum recovery processes from Pt/C particles have been developed at the laboratory scale. The considered process alternatives are composed of the four following steps: leaching, separation, precipitation and filtration. Approximately 76% of the platinum can be recovered as [NH4]2PtCl6 salt using the most efficient process alternatives. In this case, platinum leaching is carried out with a mixture of H2O2 and HCl, followed by liquid/liquid platinum extraction and a precipitation step.
                  The environmental assessment was performed using the SimaPro 8 tool coupled with the EcoInvent 3.1 database. The environmental impacts were estimated for a 25 cm2 active area MEA considering the production and end-of-life stages of the MEA life-cycle using the CML-IA baseline V3.02 method. The results show that more than half of the main impacts of the MEA life-cycle can be avoided for four relevant impact categories if platinum is recovered in the end-of-life of the product.Energy Emissions Catalyst coated backing Catalyst coated membrane Institute of Environmental Sciences of the Faculty of Science of Leiden University Fresh water ecotoxicity Gas diffusion layer Global warming potential Internal combustion engine life-cycle assessment Marine aquatic ecotoxicity Membrane-electrode assembly Ozone layer depletion Proton exchange membrane Proton exchange membrane fuel cell Polyethylene terephthalate Platinum Polytetrafluoroethylene Raw material Terrestrial ecotoxicity Tetrafluoroethylene Trioctylphosphine oxide The current growth in energy demand and increase in resource depletion due to energy consumption have led to the development of new systems for energy production. To meet this demand and reduce the environmental impact resulting from energy production, renewable energy sources based on wind or solar energy have been increasingly used; nevertheless, they cannot guarantee stability in the amount of produced energy, partly because of unstable weather conditions. Electrochemical energy storage, in the form of hydrogen, is a good option to overcome the fluctuations of weather. Proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells could be an alternative energy conversion process, whereby electricity is produced by a reaction between oxygen and hydrogen; the only by-products are heat and water. The redox reactions involved are catalysed by platinum nanoparticles present on the electrodes. The core of a PEM fuel cell is a membrane Currently, the global demand for platinum is constant (approximately 200 t per year ( Until now, several studies have been performed on assessing the environmental impact of the PEM fuel cell life-cycle. A LCA, taking into account the production and use stages, was carried out by In this context, the objectives of the current study are: (i) to assess the environmental impact of the whole life-cycle of a MEA and (ii) to help decision making for choosing a Pt recycling process from these MEAs based on an assessment of the environmental impact via the life-cycle assessment methodology. Thus, a production scenario that only uses primary platinum (i.e., directly from the extraction plant, including transport for consumption in Europe) is compared to four recycling scenarios, including platinum recovered from MEAs via a hydrometallurgical process ( A MEA is a stack cell comprising two GDLs, two electrodes (an anode and a cathode) and an ion conducting membrane that is occasionally supported by a polymeric gasket (see MEAs are placed between two bipolar plates and have multiple roles: (i) to supply fuel and oxidant to the reactive sites, (ii) to remove reaction products, (iii) to collect the produced current, (iv) to provide mechanical support for the cells in the stack and (v) to evacuate reaction heat. A stack of several MEAs and bipolar plates placed successively between current collectors and packed with two end-plates, nuts and bolts is called the PEM fuel cell. Additionally, gaskets are used to provide the system with gas-tightness and to adjust the compression of the bipolar plates. The number of MEAs in a stack can vary relative to the desired power. The current study was carried out at the MEA scale and not at the whole fuel cell scale. As mentioned in the section above, the MEA is composed of one membrane, two electrodes and two GDLs. The sulfonated fluoropolymer membrane (usually Nafion The platinised carbon can be manufactured either by reducing a platinum salt on a carbon powder support by various methods, such as an impregnation reduction method in the liquid or gaseous phase ( Nafion GDLs are made of carbon paper ( A multi-step process had to be carried-out to recycle the platinum from the used fuel cells. The simplest procedures with a negligible environmental impact are mechanical steps, such as the disassembly of a stack into its separate components, i.e., the MEAs, gaskets, bipolar plates, current collectors, and all of the mechanical components (nuts, bolts, etc.). Nevertheless, more complex processes have to be considered to delaminate the different layers constituting the MEA to recover the membrane separately from the catalyst coating, i.e., platinum. Depending on the manufacturing process (see details in Several processes have been developed for platinum recovery from different substrates, such as: (i) pyrometallurgy (metal melting) ( LCA is a tool that is used to “assess environmental impacts and potential environmental impacts throughout a product's life-cycle” from cradle to grave (i.e., from raw material extraction, to disposal and recycling of the final product after use). The Modelling and simulation of the impacts was performed using the SimaPro 8 tool coupled with the EcoInvent 3.1 database. The environmental impacts were assessed using the CML-IA baseline V3.02 method. This method was used previously by The first objective of the current LCA study is to note the main environmental burdens associated with MEA production. The second goal is to identify which of the four platinum recovery process alternatives has the lowest environmental impact and to integrate the chosen alternative in the LCA of a MEA. Thus The impact is assessed at the MEA scale for technical reasons explained in section §2.3. Thus, the functional unit was defined as: The main stages of the MEA life-cycle are: (i) production stage (i.e., assembly of the membrane, electrodes and gas diffusion layers), (ii) transport to the use facility, (iii) use stage (within a vehicle, in the case of a transport application, for example) and (iv) end Actually, depending on the production process of H Concerning the transport phase, data for the inventory depend on the chosen scenario, i.e., production and use in Europe, or other continents, and so on. Data for this phase are very scarce and not of interest for the studied case. Indeed, the main interest of this study is to compare the environmental impact of the use of primary platinum for PEM fuel cell production, with the use of secondary platinum from a hydrometallurgical recycling process. In the future, integration in the LCA at the PEM fuel cell scale could be envisioned easily. Data concerning the inventory were mainly taken from the EcoInvent 3.1 database. Nevertheless, several processes and materials had to be defined to build a reliable model (see Four main compounds are included in the model to simulate the production stage of a MEA: (i) the membrane, made of a sulfonated fluoropolymer; (ii) the GDL, made of PTFE waterproofed carbon black and carbon paper; (iii) the gasket for the membrane, made of polymer whose composition is close to PET; and (iv) the catalyst layers, made of Nafion Data on energy consumption and raw material consumption for the production stage were obtained from the LITEN department of the CEA, which manufactures MEAs for research applications using the screen printing method. However, for reasons of confidentially, some information cannot be provided by the manufacturer. The missing data were replaced with data found in the literature (see details in As shown in Nafion carbon supported platinum (Pt/C) found in the catalyst layers. Material amounts were calculated according to the composition of new materials. In this case, energy consumption and material losses were considered negligible and 100% synthesis yields were considered. For example, PTFE and sulfuric acid contents, respectively, The EcoInvent database includes several “default” processes, some of them being very precise and specific. All processes are characterised from cradle to grave, including energy and raw material consumption and emissions. Nevertheless, a couple of new processes have been redefined and modelled with SimaPro for the current study: Evaporation processes of various solvents used during the production stage (e.g., glycerol, propanol and water evaporation), considering chemical emissions to the air Energy consumption of the MEA assembly process. The end-of-life of the gasket and catalyst layers was modelled with SimaPro using the “Hazardous waste, for incineration” process from EcoInvent database, designed for special waste with an unknown composition. The impact of hydrogen fluoride emissions due to the incineration of products containing high fluorine amounts was modelled by creating new waste treatment processes using the EcoInvent “Waste polyvinylfluoride” incineration process. The burden of the polyvinylfluoride (PVF) incineration process was calculated using Eq. In the case of GDL or membrane recycling, the first step in the recycling process is MEA delamination. Nafion The end-of-life processes of the four components of the MEA were modelled by incineration or recycling, depending on the available data, as follows: (i) the membrane and the GDL are treated by the waste incinerators defined in Data included in the LCA inventory, i.e., electricity consumption (measured with consumption meters), raw material consumption and emissions (to water, air, and waste), are taken from laboratory tests performed in batch mode on Pt recovery from CCMs. The efficiencies of the four recycling processes are given in The Cyanex The waste-resins used in the recycling processes (C and D) are entered in the “Spent anion exchange resin from potable water production” disposal process, which is available in the EcoInvent database; the organic solvents are treated in the “Spent solvent mixture” specific treatment process available in the EcoInvent database for organic products. Nafion After the recovery of [NH The incineration scenario and the recycling scenario, including process B modelled with SimaPro, are described in The impacts are assessed using the CML-IA baseline V3.02 method and the associated impact indicators. Thus, the environmental impact indicators (along with characteristic units) shown in Within the two considered scenarios, as described in section The impact was assessed for each process and product of scenario (1), using the CML-IA baseline V3.02 method – the most impacting stage burdens are shown in Platinum extraction and purification have a large environmental impact mainly because of trace metal (beryllium, mercury, nickel, selenium, etc.) emissions to water and nitrogen oxide, hydrogen fluoride and sulphur dioxide emission to air during pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical purification steps (EcoInvent inventory). The results were calculated for CCMs manufactured by Paxitech with a platinum loading of 1 mg cm The four life-cycle scenarios considering platinum recycling were compared. The results for all of the impact categories were weighted according to the CML-IA baseline V3.02 method to convert the impact units into points; the weighting of each category in the final score is presented in Integrated in the whole life-cycle of the MEA, the impact ratio mostly depends on the recovery efficiency of platinum ( The best process, in terms of potential impact, for the recovery of platinum from used MEAs, i.e., he B process (H Despite the fact that the results are in favour of platinum recovery, several aspects need to be considered. Scale-up from the laboratory scale to the industrial scales can radically change these results. Indeed, experiments concerning the current study were performed at the laboratory scale, which implies that energy used for material transport was not evaluated. Moreover, process energy consumption was considered for small sized equipment units, but would differ at the industrial scale. In addition, the MEA disassembly process has not been taken into account in the LCA. Furthermore, tetrafluoroethylene production is the second burden of MEA life-cycle, and its importance in the PEM fuel cell life-cycle is increased, so Nafion This study performed the first complete LCA study at the MEA scale. Laboratory data combined with literature data based on valid hypotheses were used to simulate the environmental impacts of the production and end-of-life stages of a 25 cm LCA simulations performed with SimaPro show that the B process alternative (H The LCA model is based on various simplifying hypotheses and could be improved with a more detailed study. MEA catalyst recycling could be scaled-up at the pilot scale to include a continuous mode (the current study has been performed in batch mode) and the recycling of various solvents (e.g., recirculation of acid, oxidant, etc.). Moreover, a deeper study on the optimisation of the parameters of the recovery process would increase the platinum recovery efficiency and reduce the overall impact. Concerning the environmental impact assessment, the inventory could eventually be completed by using data on MEA disassembly and membrane and gas diffusion layer recovery. No attempt was made in this direction in this study; however, some ideas to be considered were explored (see details in Assuming that the suggested process alternatives for the recycling of MEA would be implemented at the industrial scale, the transport phase to recovery and eventually to the production site should be included in the LCA. On the other hand, the use stage is fully connected to H The authors would like to thank the Rhône-Alpes region for financing this project on PEM fuel cell catalyst recycling. Rémi Vincent from the LITEN department of the CEA is highly acknowledged for involvement in this project.