Liquid–liquid extraction experiments have been carried out in two different types of microchannels using water (Zn) D2EHPA+dodecane system, a standard reactive extraction system recommended for evaluation of liquid–liquid extraction equipment. The microchannels used in the experiments are a t-junction serpentine microchannel and a split and recombine microchannel. Effects of O/A ratio and residence time on overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient have been studied and an attempt has been made to explain the experimental trends with the help of liquid–liquid flow patterns observed by using a high speed image acquisition system. Correlations relating overall volumetric mass transfer coefficients to O/A ratio and velocity are reported for both the microchannels.Due to several inherent advantages such as high surface to volume ratio ensuring intensified heat transfer rates, low inventories ensuring possibility of carrying out reactions involving toxic and hazardous chemicals, compact setups allowing for distributed and in-situ production, modular and hence confident scale up, microchannels find numerous potential applications in the field of chemical processing. Interest in chemical processing in microchannels can be gauged by a large number of studies reporting use of microchannels for reactions ( Liquid–liquid extraction is one of the potential applications of microchannels. Some of the advantages specific to liquid–liquid extraction in microchannels are higher overall volumetric mass transfer coefficients compared to conventional extractors (  Many of the reported studies on liquid–liquid extraction in microchannels either aim to compare the performance of different kinds of microchannels or compare performance of a microchannel with that of conventional liquid–liquid extraction contactors. The performance of a microchannel or any other contactor used for liquid–liquid extraction depends, among other things, also on the physical properties of the two phases involved as the densities, viscosities and interfacial tension affect the quality of dispersion and film coefficients for mass transfer. In view of the important role played by the physical properties, comparison of liquid–liquid extraction equipment should ideally be done using the same phase system. The phase systems recommended by the European Federation of Chemical Engineering (EFCE), for which physical properties and data relevant to liquid–liquid extraction are well documented, can be used for this purpose. While there are several studies on liquid–liquid extraction in microchannels with standard physical extraction systems recommended by EFCE ( A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Two different microchannels etched in glass chips have been used in the experiments. These are a 250 The split and recombine microchannel, its mixing unit and mixing principle are shown in The phase system used in the experiments is a reactive extraction system. Several studies on mechanism of extraction in this reactive extraction system are reported in literature ( Overall volumetric mass transfer coefficients are calculated based on the concentration of zinc in the organic phase. The driving force for mass transfer, in general, will vary from the entrance to the exit of the microchannel and hence, in an analogy with log mean temperature difference (LMTD) in a heat exchanger, a log mean concentration difference (LMCD) can be defined as Using LMCD, the mean value of mass transfer flux can be written as The mean value of mass transfer flux will also be equal to Combining Eqs. With the inlet and the outlet concentrations, equilibrium data, volume of the microchannels and flow rates known, Eqs. Reynolds number is calculated as To calculate  To confirm that dispersion indeed becomes finer on reducing residence time, few imaging experiments, in which flow patterns inside the microchannels were observed using a high speed image acquisition system, were performed. The flow patterns observed in the serpentine microchannel and split and recombine microchannel for O/A    Variation of On changing the O/A ratio, flow pattern may also change as shown in There are several studies on liquid–liquid extraction in microchannels in which experimental data have been used to obtain correlations for overall volumetric mass transfer coefficients. The correlations reported in these studies are usually not dimensionless. Here we use average velocity and O/A ratio as the independent variable and overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient as the dependent variable to obtain correlations for both the microchannels. Selection of average velocity is based on the fact that it is directly related to the overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient through its effect on the specific interfacial area and film mass transfer coefficients. Velocity has been used as an independent variable in the correlations reported in a recent study which compares different types of microchannels ( The average deviations of Though there are several studies on liquid–liquid extraction in microchannels, most of them have been carried out using phase systems involving physical extraction. None of these studies uses Zinc–D2EHPA system. The quality of dispersion generated at the microfluidic junction of the microchannel and hence specific interfacial area for mass transfer depends significantly on the physical properties. Also whether the system involves physical or reactive extraction makes a difference as evident by the finding of an earlier study in which height of a liquid–liquid extraction column for desired separation was calculated to be more when both mass transfer and reactions were considered compared to when only mass transfer was considered ( Liquid–liquid extraction experiments have been performed in a t-junction serpentine microchannel and a split and recombine microchannel using Zinc–D2EHPA system. The following are the conclusions emanating from this experimental study: When compared on the basis of residence time, the t-junction serpentine microchannel shows higher For both microchannels, While dependence of  This study thus highlights the possibility of intensification of liquid–liquid extraction processes by using microchannel contactors. However, there are a couple of technological challenges that need to be addressed before liquid–liquid extraction in microchannels can become a potential candidate for industrial deployment. These are realizing a multistage counter-current cascade using microchannels but without or minimum inter-stage pumps and uniform distribution of feed and solvent in a large number of parallel microchannels using a very compact header.  Specific interfacial area (m Inlet concentration of the organic phase (mol Concentration of the organic phase in equilibrium with the inlet concentration of the aqueous phase (mol Outlet concentration of the organic phase (mol Concentration of the organic phase in equilibrium with the outlet concentration of aqueous phase (mol Equivalent diameter (m) Overall mass transfer coefficient (m Overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient (s Molar flux (mol Volumetric flow rate of the aqueous phase (m Volumetric flow rate of the organic phase (m Reynolds number (−) Average velocity in microchannel (m Volume of the microchannel contactor (m Log mean concentration difference (mol Viscosity of the aqueous phase (kg Viscosity of the mixed phase (kg Viscosity of the organic phase (kg Density of the aqueous phase (kg Density of the mixed phase (kg Density of the organic phase (kg The authors acknowledge the analytical support received from LSS, ChED, BARC.