Objectives
                  The purpose of this study was to examine the screw trajectory of ten commercially available distal tibia plates and compare them to common fracture patterns seen in OTA C type pilon fractures to determine their ability to stabilize the three most common fracture fragments while buttressing anterolateral zones of comminution.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  We hypothesized that a single plate for the distal tibia would fail to adequately stabilize all three main fracture fragments and zones of comminution in complex pilon fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Ten synthetic distal tibia sawbones models were used in conjunction with ten different locking distal tibia plate designs from three manufacturers (Depuy Synthes, J&J Co, Paoli, PA; Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN; and Stryker, Mawa, NJ). Both medial and anterolateral plates from each company were utilized and separately applied to an individual sawbone model. Three implants allowing variable angle screw placement were used. The location of the locking screws and buttress effect 1cm above the articular surface was noted for each implant using axial computed tomography (CT). The images were then compared to a recently published “pilon fracture map” using an overlay technique to establish the relationship between screw location and known common fracture lines and areas of comminution. Each of the three main fragments was considered “captured” by a screw if it was purchased by at least two screws thereby controlling rotational forces on each fragment.
               
                  Results
                  Three of four anterolateral plates lacked stable fixation in the medial fragment. Of the 4 anterolateral plates used, only the variable angle anterolateral plate by Depuy Synthes captured the medial fragment with two screws. All four anterolateral plates buttressed the area of highest comminution and had an average of 1.25 screws in the medial fragment and an average of 3 screws in the posterolateral fragment. All five direct medial plates had variable fixation within anterolateral and posterolateral fragments with an average of 1.8 screws in the anterolateral fragment and an average of 1.3 screws in the posterolateral fragment. The Depuy Synthes variable angle anterolateral plate allowed for fixation of the medial fragment with two screws while simultaneously buttressing the zone of highest comminution and capturing both the anterolateral and posterolateral fragments with five and three screws respectively. The variable angle anteromedial plate by Depuy Synthes captured all three main fracture fragments but it did not buttress the anterolateral zone of comminution.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In OTA 43C type pilon fractures, 8 out of 10 studied commercially available implants precontoured for the distal tibia, do not adequately stabilize the three primary fracture fragments typically seen in these injuries. Anterolateral plates were superior in addressing the coronal primary fracture line across the apex of the plafond, and buttressing the zone of comminution. None of the available plates can substitute for an understanding of the fracture planes and fragments typically seen in complex intra-articular tibia fractures and the addition of a second plate is necessary for adequate stability.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV.Tibial pilon fractures are a relatively rare orthopaedic injury but may involve 1–10% of fractures of the lower extremity Numerous attempts have been made to map pilon fracture patterns The purpose of this study was to determine the ability of ten different distal tibia locking plates to stabilize the main fracture fragments described by Cole et al. We hypothesized that a single plate for the distal tibia would fail to adequately stabilize all main fracture fragments and zones of comminution in complex pilon fractures. Ten synthetic distal tibia sawbones models were used in conjunction with ten different locking distal tibia plate designs from three manufacturers (Depuy Synthes, Paoli, PA; Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN; and Stryker, Mawa, NJ). Both medial and anterolateral plates from each company were utilized and separately applied to an individual sawbone model. Three implants allowing variable angle screw placement were used. All fixed angled screws were placed at the nominal angle whereas locking screws were placed by intentionally aiming to capture the described main fracture fragments. A total of ten plates were utilized (one Smith & Nephew anterolateral, one Smith & Nephew direct medial, one Styker anteolateral, one Stryker medial, one Depuy Synthes anterolateral, one Depuy Synthes medial with an extended tab, one Depuy Synthes medial without an extended tab, one Depuy Synthes variable angle anterolateral, one Depuy Synthes variable angle anteromedial and one Depuy Synthes variable angle medial). All ten plates were placed in position on a separate sawbone model according to the manufacturer’s technique guide. The location of the locking screws and buttress effect was noted for each implant using axial computed tomography (CT). The images were then compared to a recently published “pilon fracture map” using an overlay technique to establish the relationship between screw location and known common fracture lines and areas of comminution. This Pilon Fracture Map (Cole et al.), described three main primary fragments and two main zones of comminution. Each of the three main fragments was considered “captured” if it was purchased by at least two screws thereby controlling rotational forces on each fragment. Three of four anterolateral plates lacked stable fixation in the medial fragment ( Treatment of fractures of the distal tibia articular surface should be guided by important principles including anatomic articular reduction, restoration of anatomic alignment, and preservation of viability to the soft tissue envelope. A thorough understanding of the anatomy of the distal tibia and a keen understanding of the fracture pattern allows for determination of the optimal approaches that should be used for fixation. Tornetta et al. has advocated that the main fracture lines should be used to direct the operative approach Precontoured distal tibia plates have been developed to fit the 50th percentile of Caucasian/Western populations Areas of comminution are commonly found in the central corridor of the plafond apex and the anterolateral quarter of the articular surface Our study has some limitations. The saw bone model of the distal tibia may not account for anatomic variation found within the general population, nor did our model implement the actual fractures to the specimens. However, we did superimpose a well described image of a fracture map on the model to ascertain screw capture. Another limitation of the study is the context in which the plates were placed on the distal tibia. Plates in this study were placed on non-fractured distal tibias whereas placement intraoperatively in the face of fracture displacement and comminution is a more complex endeavor. This latter point may further emphasize our findings because we were able to place the implants in the exact optimal location on the bone which is likely more challenging in the operative setting. Based on our findings, use of a single plate will usually not adequately address all fracture fragments and areas of comminution typically seen in C type pilon fractures unless a variable angle anterolateral plate is used and placed in the perfect position to capture the medial fragment with at least two screws. More than one plate will typically be required to stabilize these severe injuries. There is no substitution to a clear understanding of the fracture patterns and anatomy, as well as a thoughtful preoperative plan which must include the condition of the soft tissues to minimize complications. Dr. Swords, Dr. Cole and Dr. Heisler are consultants for Depuy Synthes. For the remaining authors none were declared.