A novel phosphorodiamidate extractant has been designed and synthesized for the extraction and separation of thorium from rare earths. By introducing nitrogen element into the phosphate, the electron density of the PO group in this novel extractant was increased, which would exhibit stronger affinity for the metals. The extraction of thorium in different mediums such as nitric acid, hydrochloric acid and sulfuric acid was investigated and the extraction of thorium with different extractants such as Cyanex923, TBP and DEHEHP was also compared. Thorium extraction in nitrate medium was more efficient, which indicates the novel extractant can be used to selectively extract and separate thorium from rare earths in nitrate medium. The stoichiometry of the extracted species of thorium was determined to be Th(NO3)4·2L and the thermodynamic functions ΔH, ΔG and ΔS were calculated. Furthermore, the extraction capacity of this new extractant toward thorium and the stripping of loaded thorium from the organic phase were studied.Thorium is a potential nuclear fuel because However, theses extractants have some disadvantage such as high price of Cyanex923, complex chelates for primary amine, and high stripping acidity for HEHEHP ( All chemical reagents except The metals were analyzed using an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optimal 8000). FT-IR spectra (KBr pellets) were obtained on a Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer. 2-ethylhexyl-N, N′-di (2-ethylhexyl) phosphordiamidate ( Solvent extraction experiments were carried out in a temperature-controlled shaker bath for 0.5 “o”, “ini” and “a” represent organic, initial and aqueous, respectively. After extraction, most of thorium was transferred into the organic phase at proper condition. The organic phase loaded with thorium was equilibrated with different stripping agents at various concentrations. The mixtures were shaken at 298 In order to reach higher extraction efficiency, the thorium extraction was studied with the acid concentration ranging from 0.01 The extraction of thorium and trivalent rare earths (with La, Gd and Yb standing for the light, medium and heavy rare earths, respectively) from nitrate medium was investigated and compared ( Further experiments were performed at 298 where “a”, “o” and “M” denote the aqueous, organic phases, and metal ions, respectively. The equilibrium constant, Besides, the definition of distribution ratio, The logarithmic expression of equilibrium (3) is: Fixed Th log FT-IR transmittance spectra was performed to characterize the extractant The influence of temperature on the thorium extraction with The plot gives a slope of 0.59. Δ The change of Gibbs free energy, Δ Δ The stripping of Th (IV) from the loaded organic phase by different inorganic acids was investigated. As indicated by the results of extraction experiments ( Extraction capacity is an important index to evaluate the extractants. An ideal extractant would not only exhibit good separation efficiency between the target component and the impurities but also have high extraction capacity toward the target component. To investigate the extraction capacity of To evaluate the extraction ability of the new extractant, the extraction of thorium by In order to test the extraction selectivity of with the extractant 2-ethylhexyl-N, N′-di (2-ethylhexyl) phosphorodiamidate was synthesized and employed for the separation of tetravalent thorium from trivalent rare earths in nitrate medium. The extracted complex of thorium was determined to be Th(NO This work was supported by