Objective
                  Masticatory performance is influenced by a number of variables such as age, gender, bite force, and occlusal units. Tooth wear may also play a role due to changes in occlusal area and in vertical dimension of occlusion. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of tooth wear on masticatory performance, using a communition test.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  Patients with different degrees of tooth wear, referred by their general dental practitioners, and included in the Radboud Tooth Wear Project, were approached for this study and included after informed consent. The amount of post canine wear was scored with the Tooth Wear Index (TWI). The number of occluding posterior units was quantified and the bite force was measured using a transducer. Masticatory performance was measured with a communition test, with the median particle size (X50) after 20 chewing cycles as outcome measure. A multiple regression model was used to assess the relation between TWI, age, gender, bite force, occlusal units and X50.
               
                  Results
                  52 participants (40 male, 12 female, mean age: 40 ± 8.2y) were included in the study. The post canine TWI-score was between 1.0-3.3. The average number of occlusal units per participant was 11.9 ± 1.4 and the mean bite force 369 ± 172 N. The mean X50 was 4.2 ± 1.1. The results showed no significant relation between post canine TWI-score, age, gender, bite force, and occlusal units upon the X50 (p > 0.13).
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study showed that the degree of tooth wear could not be observed to have an effect on masticatory performance.
               
                  Clinical significance
                  On individual level an effect could be present but looking at a larger group of patients, the degree of tooth wear did not have a relation with masticatory performance as measured with a communition test.Efficient chewing refers to the breakdown of food with minimum labour and a maximum rate of particle size reduction [ The factor tooth wear might also be of influence on masticatory performance. Tooth wear is often referred to as ‘erosion‘, indicating that it is the main or only responsible factor. A more suitable term would be ‘erosive tooth wear’ or just ‘tooth wear’, as the wear process is known to be complex, and besides the chemical factor of erosion also mechanical factors like attrition and abrasion are important contributors to tooth wear. Especially in cases of severe and pathological wear the etiology will be multifactorial in most cases [ Tooth wear causes alterations of the morphology of teeth due to loss of tooth substance. This may influence the height of vertical dimension of occlusion (VDO) and may affect patients’ function, comfort, esthetics and quality of life [ Looking at all observed and assumed mechanisms listed above, it is clear that tooth wear may influence masticatory performance in different ways. A resulting loss of VDO, together with or through reduced bite force, may lead to an impaired masticatory performance. Whereas the effect may be absent in cases of dentoalveolar compensation, and even positive due to an increased occlusal area of worn teeth. It was the aim of this study to evaluate the overall clinical effect of tooth wear on masticatory performance. To avoid a major confounding influence of reduced numbers of functional units, only (almost) fully dentate patients were selected. Participants with different degrees of tooth wear were referred by their general dental practitioners to the Department of Dentistry, Radboud university medical center (Nijmegen, The Netherlands). This study is a sub-study of a larger clinical trial, called the Radboud Tooth Wear Project (ethical approval was obtained, ABR code: NL31371.091.10). Participants who agreed to participate were asked to sign an informed consent document before entering the study. The following inclusion criteria were used for selection of the participants: 1) ≥18 years and mentally competent; 2) mild to severe tooth wear (Tooth Wear Index-score ≥1 [ The following exclusion criteria were used: 1) active maximum mouth opening <3.5 cm; 2) signs of craniomandibular disfunction with pain or restricted jaw movement; 3) periodontitis (DPSI-score ≥3). Between September 2013 and June 2015 all participants in the Radboud Tooth Wear project were approached for this sub-study, and included after informed consent. The Tooth Wear Index of Smith & Knight was used [ The dental state of each participant was quantified by expressing the number of occluding posterior teeth in occlusal units. An occluding molar pair was counted as two occlusal units, whereas a bicuspid was counted as one occlusal unit. A bite force transducer was used to measure maximum voluntary bite force [ The masticatory performance of all participants was determined by a masticatory efficiency test consisting of comminution of artificial test food. The test food was made of a polysiloxane impression material; Optosil Comfort Putty (Bayer Dental, Leverkusen, Germany) and the participants chewed on a portion of 17 cubes with an edge size of 5.6 mm (3 cm The median particle size (X50) is the size of a theoretical sieve through which 50% of the weight can pass [ Reliability for the TWI-scores was calculated using a weighted Cohen’s kappa. Paired Student’s t-tests were used to calculate reproducibility of X50. Reliability coefficient was calculated as Pearson´s Correlation coefficient between the three rounds, the duplicate measurement error (DME) was calculated as the standard deviation of the differences between round 1, 2 and 3, divided by √3. To analyze a possible non-random difference between repeated measurements, the mean difference (95% CI, p-value) was calculated. The results of the three rounds were pooled for further analysis. For measuring the relation of the independent variables, TWI post canine, age, gender, bite force and occlusal units upon the dependent variable X50 a multiple regression model was used. In order to make the intercept of the regression analysis interpretable, all numerical variables in the regression model are centered. All statistical analyses were performed with the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS 22) and at a significance level of 0.05. In total 52 participants (40 men, 12 women, mean age: 40 ± 8.2y) were included in this study. The mean post canine TWI-score was 2.2 ± 0.6, this score was calculated by one of the authors (BS) with a weighted Cohen’s kappa score of 0.603. The average number of occlusal units per participant was 11.9 ± 1.4 and the mean bite force 369 ± 172 N, see The masticatory performance, defined as the median particle size (X50) after 20 chewing strokes, for the whole group was 4.2 ± 1.1. Comparing the resulting X50 scores within patients, a small but statistical significant decrease between successive X50 scores was found. Comparing the first and third value, this decrease was on average 0.26. The DME (random variation) was 0.34. Since the mean X50 was used in analyses, this implies a DME of 0.34/√3 = 0.20 in the mean X50 score. The reliability of the mean X50 score, as calculated by the Pearson correlation coefficient, was 0.966. In The aim of this study was to evaluate in fully dentate subjects whether tooth wear is of influence upon the masticatory efficiency, measured using communition of artificial test food. To our knowledge this is the first study to address this subject. In our study, no significant relation was found between the degree of tooth wear of posterior teeth and the median particle size (X50). The decision to use the mean post canine TWI-score for analysis was made for the reason that the premolars and molars are used for the breakdown of food, in particular the artificial test food. While tooth wear in the front area could influence biting off food, it is not likely to have a significant impact upon communition after food pieces reach the (pre)molar area. The study group is a specific group of participants because all the participants were referred to the Department of Dentistry of the Radboud university medical center by their general practitioner due to the presence of tooth wear in all degrees from mild to severe ( The lack of a statistically significant relation between tooth wear severity and masticatory performance, implies the need for a thorough look at the precision of this study. The precision is best summarized in the 95% CI for the effect that a change in post canine TWI is estimated to have on the X50 score. The interval, as shown in A wide variety of methods have been used to identify the masticatory performance but in the majority of the studies on masticatory performance, the degree of breakdown of (artificial) food had been determined by sieving comminuted food [ Self-assessed masticatory function using questionnaires or interviews has also been described. It was decided in this study to focus upon objective masticatory testing and not to include a questionnaire because it has been stated that maintaining 20 or more natural teeth and at least eight functional occlusal units reduces the likelihood of self-assessed chewing difficulties [ Apart from the main variable tooth wear, other variables, functional occlusal units, bite force, age and gender were included to eliminate them as confounders. Although none of these variables were of statistically significant influence on the masticatory performance in our study sample, this does not mean they are not needed for an unbiased evaluation of the main variable. Apart from gender, occlusal functional units may be one of the more important variables. Van der Bilt et al. showed that the presence 4.8 ± 3.2 occlusal units instead of 12 occlusal units had a negative significant influence on masticatory performance [ The effect of bite force on masticatory performance in this study was harder to predict due to contradictory results in literature. A previous study also reported no relationship between maximum bite force and masticatory efficiency as determined by using Ecaps [ In conclusion, this study did not show an effect of the degree of tooth wear on masticatory performance. None.