This paper reports the bioleaching of zinc sulfide concentrates by mesophilic chemolithotrophic bacteria. The leaching studies were carried out in 160 l 4-stage bioreactor in optimized conditions based on 40 l batch scale studies. Extraction of zinc up to 83.4% could be obtained in continuous operation. For an effective bioleaching process, an efficient mass transfer of oxygen and carbon dioxide including thorough mixing of the solid substrate, nutritive elements and bacteria are the most important factors. These are the prerequisites for application of bioreactor technology to the commercial scale ( Zinc sulfide concentrate of Sikkim Mining Corporation contained 33.7% Zn, 16.5% Fe, 1.6% Pb, 25.6% S and minor amounts of Co, Cu and Ni. A mixed consortia of acidophilic microorganisms isolated from zinc tailing pond of Rampura Agucha, mines were used for leaching purpose. The culture was grown and maintained in 9K medium ( The 4-stage continuous bioreactor plant consisted of bacterial generation tank, slurry tank, four bioreactors with hemispherical bottom with effective capacities of 40 l connected in series in cascading fashion, storage tank and a filtration unit. An electronic control panel serves for monitoring and measuring temperature, pH and Eh; air flow rate is controlled by an air flow meter and agitation speed by a tachometer. Batch and continuous runs were made by slurry containing 9K For continuous operation, the slurry tank was charged with 170 l slurry and reactors with 40-l each. The slurry flow rate was maintained at 1 l/h. Regular analyses of ferrous iron, ferric iron, zinc, free acid and bacterial concentrations were carried out. Iron analysis was done by titrimetric method ( Batch tests were carried out in the 4-stage continuous biooxidation plant to evaluate the effect of certain process parameters during the scale up operations. The reactors were fed with 40 l slurry containing 20% (w/v) solids of particle size 75 μm and 20% (v/v) inoculum. The pH of the slurry was adjusted to 1.5 with agitation speed at 200 rpm, airflow rate at 6 l/min and temperature at 33 The poor leaching kinetics may be due to the insufficient oxygen supply into the system. With an enhanced airflow rate (10 l/min), 52% extraction was achieved in 240 h compared to 31–34% extraction as obtained previously. To further improve the zinc recovery the aeration rate was doubled and the recovery was found to be 60.23%. The leaching continued beyond 240 h to achieve further extraction, however a little decline in cell population was observed after 240 h. To maintain a steady bacterial concentration various mineral salts were added in the reactors at the end of 336 h, resulting in increase in cell concentrations in the leach suspension. Due to increase in bacterial population the percentage of zinc recovery observed to be 90.5% at the end of 408 h. The residue analysis for material balance showed a good match between zinc in leach liquor and residue. Continuous bioleaching studies were carried out in 160 l 4-stage bioreactor under optimized conditions obtained previously. The continuous flow of slurry was started when the bacterial population reached the exponential phase in each of the reactors ( Bacterial leaching of metal values from the substrate is a complex process and is affected by multiple factors. The efficiency of the batch system was improved by removal of oxygen limiting conditions in the reactors and as by nutrient replenishment into the system. The increase of ferric concentration and decrease of pH along the reactors indicated greater bacterial activity in the continuous system. Continuous bioreactor leaching kept the bacteria in highly active log phase resulting in 83.40% zinc dissolution from the concentrate. The authors are grateful to the Ministry of Mines and Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, New Delhi for providing financial assistance.