Objective
                  The objectives of the study were: a) to identify osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures in a large consecutive series of patients; b) to identify radiographic fracture patterns among osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures; and c) to calculate intra- and inter-observer reliability of assessment of osteoporosis and of radiographic fracture patterns.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a prospective observational study of patients admitted to the emergency department affected by a proximal humerus fracture between June 2014 and June 2016. Three researchers evaluated demographic data and comorbidities, x-rays and CT-scans. A new evaluation method for assessment of osteoporosis was proposed; 7 radiographic fracture patterns were studied. Reliabilities between intra- and inter-tester evaluations, and correlations between the presence of osteoporosis and the 7 radiologic fracture patterns were calculated.
               
                  Results
                  Two hundred twenty-five patients with a humeral fracture were recruited. Their mean (26–95, 32) age was 58. Of those, 163 (72.4%) were identified as osteoporotic. Among the three raters, the intra- and inter-observer agreement using the proposed methods were high or excellent. Significant correlations with diagnosis of osteoporosis were found with Codman-Lego type 12(p = 0.041), metaphyseal comminution(p < 0.001), impaction of fragments(p = 0.023), comminution of tuberosities(p = 0.037), inferior subluxation(p = 0.029). Intra- and inter-tester reliability of evaluation of these osteoporotic fracture patterns were high.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Osteoporosis of the proximal humerus was identified in 72% of patients during a two year period; most of these patients were elderly females sustaining low energy trauma. These fractures showed to have specific radiographic patterns, as comminution of metaphysis and tuberosities, impaction of fragments, and inferior subluxation of the humeral head. These patterns can be assessed with the simple observation of a 2-plan view of a radiograph, without the use of specific software.Osteoporosis is an underestimated aspect of fractures of the proximal humerus, although it is known that these fractures occur in osteoporotic bone and the incidence is on rise [ Moreover, because of the aging of general population, these fractures have a very high clinical and economic impact on the health system. In fact, while in the 90’s these fractures were reported to be less frequent than in the hip and wrist [ The hypothesis of this study was that osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures have different radiographic patterns in comparison to the non-osteoporotic fractures, and that assessment of some proposed osteoporotic characteristics may be reliable and reproducible between physicians. Thus, the objectives were: a) to identify osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures in a large consecutive series of patients attending the emergency department with a diagnosis of proximal humerus fracture; b) to study radiographic fracture patterns among osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures; and c) to calculate among the three raters the intra- and inter-observer reliability of assessment of osteoporosis and of patterns of osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures. This is a prospective observational study of patients who were admitted to the emergency department with a diagnosis of proximal humerus fracture between June 2014 and June 2016. All subjects signed informed consent, and were extensively informed about the purpose of the study. All rights of the enrolled subjects in the present study were protected. The study was carried out in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. The local ethic committee gave the approval to the study (Ospedale San Camillo de Lellis, Rieti, Italy n. 2014/19). In the emergency department, patients with clinical signs of shoulder girdle fracture underwent to standard x-ray examination with a true perpendicular anteroposterior, transthoracic, Y (scapular plane) and axillary (when possible) radiographs of the involved shoulder. If a fracture of the proximal humerus was noted or suspected in any the radiographs, a CT exam of both shoulders with three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction was requested. As previously stated in the literature, scanning the contralateral uninjured side increases neither the radiation dose nor the time for the CT scan [ X-rays and CT scans were examined on diagnostic quality liquid crystal display monitors using Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine compliant grading software (IMPAX Web 1000; Agfa, Mortsel, Belgium). Measurements were done electronically with the length-measuring tool provided by IMPAX™. The two-plane radiographs were initially evaluated by one radiologist and one orthopedic surgeon in the emergency department; if a fracture of the proximal humerus was noted, a CT-scan was obtained. Two copies of each patient’s folder were given to three orthopedic surgeons differently skilled in shoulder trauma surgery (the first assessor was the chief of traumatology department, the second and third were assistant to shoulder and elbow trauma; each of them had a three year fellowship in shoulder and elbow surgery). Using the first copy of the folder within four weeks after the patient’s fracture, the three researchers assessed osteoporosis of the proximal humerus using one radiologic, one CT and two patient’s dichotomous parameters. These measurements were blinded. The radiologic parameter (measured on a true perpendicular anteroposterior radiograph with 1.2-m distance of X-ray source from the shoulder with a beam magnification of 10%) was Average Cortical Bone Thickness (CBTAVG) lower than 6 mm [ The second step consisted of an evaluation of radiographic fracture patterns, with the second copy of the folder; this was done twice (one week of intermission) by each of the three researchers, after completing the assessment of osteoporosis (first phase). To avoid any bias or confounding factor, the results of the first phase were blinded to the raters. The evaluation was done on radiographs and/or CT images, depending on the surgeon’s preference. The researchers considered: Binary fracture description based on Codman-Lego system; [ Length of the postero-medial metaphyseal head extension (< or >8 mm); [ Integrity of the medial hinge (Disrupted Yes/No); [ Comminution of metaphysis (Is there any comminution of proximal humerus metaphysis? Yes/No) ( Impaction of fracture segments (Is any part of the head or metaphysis impacted into the shaft? Yes/No) ( Comminution of tuberosities (Is there any comminution of greater or lesser tuberosity? Yes/No) ( Humeral head inferior subluxation (Is there an inferior displacement of the head respect to the glenoid inferior edge greater than 1 cm? Yes/No) ( The first three characteristics were considered because they have previously been reported in a study on osteoporotis of the proximal humerus [ An independent investigator collected the data, and the statistical analysis was then performed using SPSS software, version 16.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). The intra- and interobserver reliabilities of the radiologic (CBTAVG) and CT scan BMD measurements were estimated with intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) (ICC Model 2 for intraobserver and ICC Model 2k for interobserver variability). For categorical variables, the intra- and inter-observer agreements were determined using the κ statistic, with the level of significance set a priori at Correlations of the 7 radiologic characteristics in the osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic group were calculated with multivariate linear regression model, as well as between patient’s characteristics and osteoporosis. Correlation of humeral head inferior subluxation with BMI was studied with the same method. Correlations for metric scaled data were quantified using the Pearson coefficient. Categorical data were reported as percentages and numbers of observations of total. P-values <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant. During the recruitment phase, 256 patients were admitted to the emergency room and received proximal humerus fracture as main diagnose. Of these, 20 were not considered for study purposes because some demographic data were missing, 5 because they were affected by a bilateral fracture and a further 6 patients were excluded because their CT scans were missing. 225 patients who were affected by unilateral proximal humerus fracture were available. Using the three-level evaluation method, 163/225 (72.4%) fractures were identified as osteoporotic, leaving 62/225 (27.5%) as non-osteoporotic. The intraobserver reliability was high and not different between the CBTAVG (ICC = 0.77 and 0.83) and BMD (ICC = 0.81 and 0.82). However, the interobserver reliability was higher for the CBTAVG (ICC = 0.94; 95% CI, 0.93–0.96) than for the BMD (ICC = 0.83; 95% CI, 0.70–0.90). The intra-observer agreements of the categorical variables ranged between 0.77 and 0.84 (mean 0.83, excellent); the inter-observer agreements between 0.73 and 0.88 (mean 0.82, excellent).   Diagnosis of osteoporosis was associated with older age (p = 0.012) and female sex (p = 0.02); previous diagnosis of osteoporosis (p = 0.034); low energy trauma (p = 0.04). Significant correlations between diagnosis of osteoporosis were found with: Codman-Lego type 12 (p = 0.041), metaphyseal comminution (p < 0.001), impaction of fragments (p = 0.023), comminution of tuberosities (p = 0.037), inferior subluxation (p = 0.029). The primary purposes of this study were to characterize osteoporotic fractures in a large consecutive series of patients affected by a proximal humerus fracture and to describe radiographic patterns of osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures. The secondary purposes were to calculate intra- and inter-observer reliabilities of assessments of the local osteoporosis and of the radiographic fracture patterns. Following the reported methods, three surgeons found an osteoporotic proximal humerus fracture in 72.4% of a two-year survey population. The osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures showed to have specific radiographic patterns as metaphyseal comminution, impaction of fragments, comminution of tuberosities and inferior subluxation. Further, we found an high intra- and inter-observer reliability of assessments; consequently, diagnosis of osteoporosis and identification of radiographic patterns with the proposed methods appeared reliable and reproducible. With a simple but systematic observation method of x-rays or CT-exams, the surgeon can be able to identify an osteoporotic fracture both by the bone quality (CBTAVG and BMD) and by some particular patterns of the fracture lines. We can consider a fracture of the proximal humerus as osteoporotic if the osteoporotic characteristics (metaphyseal comminution, impaction of fragments, comminution of tuberosities and inferior subluxation) are assessed. Until today, in clinical practice, we have accepted the general concept that fractures in elderly with probable osteoporosis are more prone to displacement and comminution, but there are no published articles and no specific analysis of fractures characteristics. In 2 previous studies [ Our results are in line with previous reports affirming that simple-to-measure radiographic parameters of the proximal humerus are more useful in predicting ultimate fracture load than sophisticated exams and evaluations such as DEXA density [ As for the proximal femur, osteoporosis importantly affects the outcome of fixation. In recent years, in front of alarming percentage of complications as humeral head articular surface perforation by screws with percentage up to 73% of cases [ A simple model proposed to describe a proximal humerus fracture is an empty egg-shell [ This study has some limitations. Because the main purpose was to help the surgeon to identify osteoporotic proximal humerus fractures, the treatment was not considered; so, we can only argue that the treatment method for these fractures should be different from the non-osteoporotic, and it remains an important and unresolved point of discussion. Fixation should be planned considering 5–7 mm impaction of fragments. Another possible limitation is that fracture images were studied by surgeons with different skill in shoulder trauma, and so the results may not be reproducible in the general orthopedic and radiologist community. At the same time, assessments of average cortical bone thickness (CBTAVG) on x-rays and local bone mineral densisty (BMD) using CT data may not be easy to perform, especially in the emergency department and/or in absence of software such as IMPAX™. Thus, we propose the simple observation of specific radiographic fracture patterns on an antero-posterior radiograph to overcome this problem. Osteoporosis of the proximal humerus was identified in 72% of a two-year survey population group using a simple and reliable method; fracture were seen among elderly sustaining low energy trauma. These fractures have specific radiographic patterns, as comminution of metaphysis and of tuberosities, impaction of fragments, and inferior subluxation of the humeral head. These characteristics can be assessed with the simple observation of a 2-plane radiograph, without any specific software. No support and disclaimer to declare. IRB: In light of the Italian law, the authors are not required to have this type of study approved. However, each author certifies that his institution approved the human protocol for this investigation and that all investigations were conducted in conformity with ethical principles of research. None.