High power impulse magnetron sputtering (HIPIMS) is the new PVD technique that has been widely used to deposit hard coatings. In this work, titanium-aluminum nitride (TiAlN) coatings were synthesized through using the HIPIMS technique with various bias voltages from −50 to −200 V. The influence of bias voltage on the microstructure, mechanical, and tribological properties of the TiAlN coatings were investigated. The results indicate that the Al content in TiAlN coatings decreased due to the selective re-sputtering. The preferred orientation altered from (111) to (200) and the peak shifted to lower 2θ values which occurred as the bias voltage increased. The coatings with the best mechanical and tribological properties were obtained at the bias voltage of −150 and −100 V respectively. The influence of coating texture, surface roughness, and residual stress on the properties of the coatings was discussed.TiAlN coatings have been widely used in various industrial applications such as cutting and forming tools due to their high hardness, good thermal stability, and significant wear resistance Recently, a novel physical vapor deposition (PVD) technique named high power impulse magnetron sputtering (HIPIMS) has attracted considerable attention due to its high potential for industrial applications Also, in plasma assisted PVD techniques, the substrate current density is a critical deposition parameter that can significantly affect the microstructures and properties of the coatings. While the substrate bias voltage have dominant influence on the substrate current density because the substrate bias voltage gives attractive force to the metallic ions from the targets and determines the kinetic energies of the ions arriving on the substrates. It has been reported that the substrate current density significantly increased as the bias voltage increased Therefore, in this work, nanostructured TiAlN coatings were synthesized through using HIPIMS technique with various substrate bias voltages. The effect of the bias voltage on the surface characteristics was studied. In this study, the chemical composition, crystallinity, microstructure, mechanical, and tribological properties of the TiAlN coatings were investigated. Prior to the deposition, the Si (1 0 0) wafers and AISI 304 stainless steel substrates were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone and ethanol for 20 min, respectively, and the glow discharge was cleaned in vacuum chamber using a DC bias voltage of −500 V in the Ar atmosphere for 3 min. Then, the ion bombardment of Ti ions was applied for 3 min. In order to enhance the adhesion between the TiAlN coating and the substrate, a Ti interlayer (∼0.2 μm) was first deposited using a DC magnetron sputtering power. The nanostructured TiAlN coatings were deposited on the samples through using HIPIMS technique (HIPIMS The chemical compositions of the coatings were measured through using electron probe micro analysis (EPMA, CAMECA SX100). Also, the phase structure of the TiAlN coatings was analyzed with an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D8-Discovery Brucker, Cu Kα, 40 kV, 40 mA). The thickness and microstructure of the TiAlN coatings were investigated by using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S4800, Hitach) and the hardness and Young’s modulus of the coatings were evaluated by using nano-indentation tester (Hysitron,TI950 TriboIndentor). Residual stress was estimated through the stress tester machine (J&L Advanced Plasma Technology™) that apply laser and calculate with Stoney equation. Additionally, the topography and roughness of the coatings were measured with atomic force microscopy (AFM) and finally the wear behavior of the coatings was evaluated with the profile-meter and pin-on-disc tester using Al  In this work, the deposition rates of the TiAlN coatings were 0.12, 0.14, 0.11, and 0.1 nm/s at bias voltages of −50, −100, −150, and −200 V, respectively. The maximum deposition rate was obtained at bias voltage of −100 V. By increasing the bias voltage, the deposition rate of the coatings initially increased, which should be attributed to more sputtered ions were effectively attracted to the substrates. While the re-sputtering effect occurred at relatively high bias voltages, leading to the decrease of deposition rate of the coatings as the bias voltage further increased     Hall-Petch equation (Eq. In  Texture coefficient ( It is believed that high residual stress in the coating leads to high hardness Furthermore, the plastic deformation index (H    (i) In terms of surface roughness, it is expected that the wear resistance is improved when the surface roughness is reduced. Thus, the wear resistance of the coating at a lower bias voltage is more favorable. (ii) Another factor that can affect the volume of the wear track is the hardness value of the coating  In HIPIMS process, the bias voltage possesses a main effect on the intensity of the ion bombardment of the surface substrate which can lead to the re-sputtering phenomenon and significantly affect the composition, microstructures, and properties of the TiAlN coatings. Al content in TiAlN coatings reduces by increasing the bias voltage due to the selective re-sputtering effect. The preferred orientation of the coatings altered from (111) to (200) and peak shifting to lower 2θ values occurred as the bias voltage increased from −50 V to −200 V. The increase in the bias voltage leads to grain refinement and granular structure growth in the coatings which is due to the enhanced ion bombardment. The TiAlN coating with the best mechanical and tribological properties was obtained at the bias voltage of −150 V and −100 V, respectively. The influence of the grain size, surface roughness, coating texture, and residual stress on the properties of the coatings was discussed. This work was supported by the