Background
                  Risk factors for deep infection in secondary intramedullary nailing (IMN) after external fixation (EF) for open tibial fractures were investigated by multivariate analysis following univariate analyses.
               
                  Methods
                  Forty-two open tibial fractures were treated with secondary IMN after EF. The open tibial fractures were classified according to the criteria proposed by Gustilo et al.: type II, 11; type IIIA, 8; type IIIB, 22 and type IIIC, 1. Locked IMNs with limited reaming were performed in 27 patients, and locked IMNs without reaming in 15 patients. The following factors contributing to deep infection were selected for analysis: age, gender, Gustilo type (II or III), fracture grade by AO type (A or B+C), fracture site, existence of multiple trauma (Injury Severity Score, ISS<18 or ISS≥18), existence of floating knee injury, debridement time (≤6h or >6h), reamed (R) versus unreamed (UR) nailing, duration of external fixation (≤3 weeks or >3 weeks), interval between removal of EF and IMN (≤2 weeks or >2 weeks), skin closure time (≤1 week or >1 week), existence of superficial infection (+ or −) and existence of pin tract infection (+ or −). The relationship between deep infection and the above factors was evaluated by univariate analyses.
               
                  Results
                  Seven (16.7%) of the 42 open tibia fractures developed deep infections. All deep infections occurred in Gustilo type III (22.6%, 7/31). Only the skin closure time was a significant factor affecting the occurrence of deep infection on the present analysis (p
                     =0.006).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The present evaluation showed that early skin closure within 1 week is the most important factor in preventing deep infections when treating open tibial fractures with secondary IMN after EF.In managing severe open tibia fractures, many orthopaedic surgeons have been obliged to use an external fixator in order to gain initial bony and soft-tissue stability. However, external fixation itself has been associated with several problems, such as delayed unions, non-unions, malunions and ankle joint stiffness. Our aim in designing this retrospective study was to investigate risk factors for deep infection in secondary intramedullary nailing after external fixation for open tibial fractures. We treated 46 open tibial fractures with secondary intramedullary nailing (IMN) after external fixation (EF) at the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Trauma Center, Kitasato University Hospital, between 1986 January and 2002 February. We retrospectively reviewed 42 patients excluding 4 patients treated with IMN after pinless of EF. Some of these cases were reported previously. Thirty-five patients were male and seven patients were female. The mean patients’ age at the time of injury was 31.9 years (range 15–65 years). Thirty-eight patients were injured in motor vehicle accidents (22 were injured in motorcycle accidents, 9 were pedestrians struck by automobiles and 7 were passengers or drivers in cars), three patients were injured in falls from a height, and the remaining one patient sustained a farm injury. The mean Injury Severity Score (ISS) The 42 open tibial fractures were classified according to the criteria proposed by Gustilo et al. Patients were divided into two groups according to the criteria of Bone et al. All patients were treated with short-term broad-spectrum antibiotics (combined with an aminoglycoside for type-III fractures) and prophylaxis against tetanus. After the patient was resuscitated and all necessary emergency surgical procedures were completed, the open wound was irrigated and debrided. Debridement was repeated at 48 Conversion to an intramedullary nail was not a standard procedure at our institute, but it has been performed according to the surgeon's preference. The reasons external fixations were converted to IMN were due to a scheduled exchange to prevent non-union (group 1: Follow-up evaluations lasted from 2 to 12 years (mean, 36 months) after the original injury. Medical records and radiographs of all patients were reviewed in detail. The deep, superficial and pin site infection rates were assessed on the basis of clinical charts and radiographs. Superficial and deep infections were defined according to Dellinger et al. The following factors contributing to deep infection were selected for analysis: age (numerical data), gender (male or female), Gustilo type (II or III), fracture grade by AO type (A or B The relationship between the above respective factors and the deep infection rate was analysed by Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test, and the mean age in cases without infections was compared with the mean age in those with infections by unpaired Seven of the 42 open tibia fractures developed deep infections. Two of these infections were caused by Although all deep infections occurred in Gustilo type III (7/31), this was not statistically significant ( To our knowledge, Karlström and Olerud Various authors have published on the cause of deep infection in exchange nailing after EF, and trials of methods to prevent infection. Several authors Riemer and Butterfield Clasper et al. Although many articles about secondary IMN after external fixation have been reported, We selected several factors contributing to deep infections in the conversion method in the present study, based on the background described above. Among these predictors, the only significant contributing factor was the interval until skin closure. However, we cannot neglect non-significant factors other than interval until skin closure. A prospective randomized study is needed in order to establish a clear protocol for performing secondary IMN after EF for open tibial fractures.