Tibial eminence fractures are an uncommon but well-described avulsion of the anterior cruciate ligament. Treatment principles are based on the amount and pattern of fracture displacement. Management has evolved from closed reduction and immobilization to arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation followed by early rehabilitation. Various fixation methods have evolved, ranging from arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous screw fixation to arthroscopic suture repair. We present a technique for arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation using a cannulated drill bit and high-strength suture. This technique facilitates anatomic reduction with uncomplicated tunnel placement and suture passing in an effort to allow strong fixation and early rehabilitation.Fractures of the tibial intercondylar eminence were once thought to occur only in the pediatric population, but these avulsion fractures of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) occur in adults as well. Type I (nondisplaced) fractures are commonly treated by immobilization of the knee in full extension. The treatment of type II, III, and IV fracture patterns is certainly more variable. Though controversial, treatment of displaced fractures (type III), comminuted fractures (type IV), and patterns under which a closed reduction does not fully reduce the fragment is more amendable to arthroscopic evaluation and anatomic reduction with internal fixation. Historical open reduction and internal fixation techniques have dissipated with the evolution of arthroscopy. The ability to arthroscopically evaluate the fracture pattern and address concomitant intra-articular pathology has allowed arthroscopic-assisted reduction and fixation to become the gold standard for fixation. Multiple techniques for arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation (ARIF) have been developed in an effort to improve fracture reduction and stability. Arthroscopically assisted methods include both retrograde and antegrade techniques and incorporate metal, absorbable, and nonabsorbable materials. Arthroscopic suture fixation has also evolved over the years, including suture loop transporters, multiple drill tunnels, retrograde guides, and various tissue penetrators for suture passage. A traditional knee arthroscopy setup is adequate to assess and perform arthroscopic-assisted reduction and internal fixation of a displaced tibial eminence fracture ( Once reduction of the fracture is performed, a superior percutaneous 4.5-mm K-wire may be used to obtain provisional fixation ( The Adapteur ACL guide system (Arthrex) is used to drill 2 parallel tunnels within the tibia. The Adapteur drill guide C-ring is set at 60°, and the compression-fracture marking hook is positioned just medial to the ACL insertion on the fracture fragment, with care taken not to displace the reduction. The ACL drill guide is then used to localize an area on the anterior-medial aspect of the tibia, with care taken to avoid the pes anserine insertion. A 1-cm incision is made, and the anterior aspect of the tibia is exposed so that the drill guide sits flush on the cortex. The 4.0-mm cannulated drill bit (Arthrex) is then drilled until contacting the marking hook within the knee ( This sequence of steps is repeated as a second drill hole is placed just lateral to the ACL insertion on the fracture fragment and parallel to the initial drill hole by the same technique. When drilling the second tunnel, the surgeon should allow adequate distance between tunnels for a bony bridge. The other end of the No. 5 FiberWire is shuttled in the same manner out of the second drill hole. The reduction is confirmed, and the suture is then tied over a bony bridge on the anterior-medial cortex of the tibia ( Many different techniques have been described for arthroscopic-assisted reduction and internal fixation for tibial eminence fractures. Cannulated screw fixation has been shown to have good strength and fracture stabilization, but concerns exist when smaller or comminuted fracture fragments are present. The potential for hardware impingement with the subsequent loss of knee extension, coupled with the possibility of screw removal, has led to the development of more facile techniques for suture fixation. Arthroscopic reduction with suture fixation has advanced to become the preferred method of treatment for displaced or comminuted avulsion fractures of the tibial eminence. 