Lead-free glass and glass-ceramics in Na2O-BaO-Nb2O5-SiO2 (mol%) system were successfully synthesized. The tailoring effect of crystallization temperature on the structural, dielectric, and energy storage properties of the material system was investigated. Two types of nano-sized crystalline phases of Ba2NaNb5O15 and NaNbO3 were formed in succession in the crystallization temperature range from 700 °C to 1000 °C. The crystallinity and size of the crystallites were increased with the increasing crystallization temperature. The dielectric constant demonstrated good thermal and frequent stability. The loss tangent was well controlled below 0.035. At electric field of 10 kV/mm, the highest charged energy density and discharged energy density reached 0.19 J/cm3 and 0.17 J/cm3 respectively in the glass-ceramic crystallized at 1000 °C, indicating the excellent energy storage properties could be tailored by controlling the crystallization temperature.Glss-ceramic has been deemed as a large family of potential composite material. The particular structure associated with fine grains nucleated and grown in the glass matrix makes them to have great interest in tailoring the various physical properties. A variety of studies were conducted on the promising properties of the glass-ceramics such as the optical [ One of the significant applications of the glass-ceramics lies in the dielectric field. They have been developed in the power electronics, pulsed power system, high voltage capacitors, and so on [ In this work, the BaO-Na Starting materials consisting of analytical reagent powders of BaCO Differential thermal analysis was conducted using a thermal analyzer (DTA, WCT-2C, BOIF, Beijing, China). Approximately 0.3 g finely ground glass was tested in an alumina crucible to 1000 °C at the rate of 10 °C/min in air. Phase structure of the glass and glass-ceramics was determined by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, X'Pert-PRO, PANalytical, Almeto, the Netherlands). The microstructure was characterized by a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEM, 2010, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). The TEM sample was prepared using Ar ion milling operated at 4–5 kV and 5 mA with an inclination angle of 10°. The temperature and frequency dependence of both the dielectric constant and loss tangent were measured by a precision LCR meter (HP4284A, Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, CA). The polarization versus electric field ( In  Shown in    The loss tangent at 1 kHz as a function of temperature for the glass heat-treated at various temperatures is exhibited in  Energy storage properties are evaluated based on the The charged energy density, discharged energy density, energy efficiency are depicted in While the energy efficiency calculated by The Lead-free niobate glass and glass-ceramics were prepared by melt-quenching followed by controlled crystallization at particular temperature. The structural, dielectric, and energy storage properties were thoroughly investigated. The DTA and XRD results show that crystalline phase of Ba The authors would like to thank fundings from Doctoral Research Start-up Fund of