The effect of endogeic earthworms (Octolasion tyrtaeum (Savigny)) on the translocation of litter-derived carbon into the upper layer of a mineral soil by fungi was investigated in a microcosm experiment. Arable soil with and without O. tyrtaeum was incubated with 13C/15N-labelled rye leaves placed on plastic rings with gaze (64μm mesh size) to avoid incorporation of leaves by earthworms. The plastic rings were positioned either on or 3cm above the soil surface, to distinguish between biotic and chemical/physical translocation of nutrients by fungi and leaching.
                  Contact of leaves to the soil increased 13C translocation, whereas presence of O. tyrtaeum reduced the incorporation of 13C into the mineral soil in all treatments. Although biomass of O. tyrtaeum decreased during the experiment, more 13C and 15N was incorporated into earthworm tissue in treatments with contact of leaves to the soil. Contact of leaves to the soil and the presence of O. tyrtaeum increased cumulative 13CO2-C production by 18.2% and 14.1%, respectively.
                  The concentration of the fungal bio-indicator ergosterol in the soil tended to be increased and that of the fungal-specific phospholipid fatty acid 18:2ω6 was significantly increased in treatments with contact of leaves to the soil. Earthworms reduced the concentration of ergosterol and 18:2ω6 in the soil by 14.0% and 43.2%, respectively. Total bacterial PLFAs in soil were also reduced in presence of O. tyrtaeum, but did not respond to the addition of the rye leaves. In addition, the bacterial community in treatments with O. tyrtaeum differed from that without earthworms and shifted towards an increased dominance of Gram-negative bacteria.
                  The results indicate that litter-decomposing fungi translocate litter-derived carbon via their mycelial network in to the upper mineral soil. Endogeic earthworms decrease fungal biomass by grazing and disruption of fungal hyphae thereby counteracting the fungal-mediated translocation of carbon in soils.In most terrestrial ecosystems 80–90% of the aboveground net primary production enters the soil food web as dead plant litter with estimates of a worldwide litter input in the range of 50×10 Particularly the effect of wood-decaying fungi on decomposition processes and nutrient cycling has been investigated. They are known to translocate significant amounts of phosphorus and nitrogen in their mycelial network ( Fungal translocation processes between leaf litter and soil are less investigated. Translocation of nitrogen from the mineral soil into the litter layer has been documented ( Earthworms form the majority of the soil macrofauna and play an important role in organic matter processing and nutrient cycling in many temperate ecosystems. By fragmenting plant residues and mixing organic matter with mineral soil earthworms generally provide favourable habitats for microorganisms, thereby strongly affecting microbial activity and microbial community structure ( Endogeic earthworm species often dominate the earthworm community in soils. They live in non-permanent horizontal burrows in the upper soil layer where they consume large quantities of mineral soil and associated organic residues ( The objective of this study was to investigate: (1) the fungal translocation of litter-derived carbon into the upper layer of the mineral soil and (2) the modification of this processes by endogeic earthworms. Using Arable soil was taken in May 2004 from the upper 10 In June 2004 adult endogeic earthworms of the species Labelled rye leaves were obtained as described in In July 2004 the experiment was set up; 174 Treatments were replicated eight times. Four empty microcosms without the addition of soil, leaves and earthworms served as control for CO To investigate the translocation of litter-derived carbon in time half of the microcosms were sampled after 6 weeks, the other half after 12 weeks. During the experiment leaching water, a pooled sample of 1 week, was weighed and analysed for dissolved organic carbon and total dissolved nitrogen on a Dimatoc 100 TOC/DOC TN CO After 6 and 12 weeks the remaining rye leaves were removed from the microcosms, dried at 65 Microbial parameters were determined by measurement of ergosterol concentration in H1 and rye leaves, and PLFA contents in the soil. Ergosterol was measured in 1 Lipids were extracted from soil, fractionated and quantified as described in Data were analysed by two- or three-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the factors All except one Overall, the nitrogen concentration in earthworm tissue significantly increased during the experiment ( The biomass of rye leaves strongly decreased during the experiment, but mass loss significantly varied between treatments ( The water content of the soil significantly varied with the presence of Overall, the carbon concentration in the soil slightly decreased during the experiment from an initial of 1.70% to 1.68% at the end of the experiment, but was not significantly affected by the presence of The amount of The production of CO  The total amount of bacterial PLFAs in the soil ranged from 2.68 to 12.87 In addition, individual bacterial PLFAs significantly responded to the presence of The concentration of ergosterol in rye leaves ranged from 58 to 955 The concentration of ergosterol in the soil ranged from 0.31 to 0.64 The fungal PLFA 18:2 We hypothesized that litter-decomposing fungi translocate litter-derived carbon via their mycelial network into the upper mineral soil and thereby contribute to the incorporation and potential stabilization of carbon in soils. Contact of leaves to the soil significantly increased the decomposition of the rye leaves, but fungal biomass in the rye leaves did not differ between treatments with and without contact of leaves to the soil without The concentration of Overall, the decreased leaching of carbon, and the increased fungal biomass and higher content of litter-derived carbon in the mineral soil in treatments with as compared to those without contact of leaves to the soil suggest that litter-decomposing fungi actively contributed to the translocation of litter-derived carbon. Generally, earthworms favour microbial abundance and activity by comminution of litter, and mixing it with mineral soil as well as by excretion of mucus and urine, thereby increasing microbial access to litter carbon resources and nutrient availability ( Incorporation of leaves and direct feeding of Decreased accumulation of As indicated by the incorporation of  Endogeic earthworms reduce bacterial biomass in the soil while effectively competing with bacteria for labile carbon resources that enter the soil. Data on bacterial PLFA profiles indicate that endogeic earthworms significantly alter the composition of the bacterial community in soil primarily by favouring Gram-negative bacteria. Litter-decomposing fungi translocated litter-derived carbon via their mycelial network into the upper layer of the mineral soil, thereby increasing the incorporation of litter-derived carbon into the soil. However, the present study indicates that endogeic earthworms decrease fungal biomass by grazing and disruption of fungal hyphae thereby counteracting the fungal-mediated incorporation of carbon into the mineral soil. Financial support was provided by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within the scope of the priority program “Soils as source and sink for CO