Dear Sir, Some comments on: Shin et al. present an interesting study on the effects of humic substances on alumina trihydrate precipitation, and on removal of those humic substances by polyDADMAC. They write that “A process to remove humate from Bayer spent liquor using … (polyDADMAC) has been developed”. This statement suggests some novelty in those findings and it would appear that the authors are not familiar with the body of patent literature pertaining to this subject. A brief summary of the literature follows: In 1981, Lever (US 4,275,042) describes how quaternary nitrogen compounds can be used to remove humic substances from Bayer liquors. In 1984, Keeney (US 4,472,280) considered polyDADMAC as one of a number of potential cationic surfactants for removal of organic impurities from trona-based process liquors and again in 1990 (US 4,902,425) the same author lodged the first patent that specifically prescribed use of polyDADMAC for humate removal from conventional Bayer liquors. In this patent, Keeney provided the first process flowsheet to describe how polyDADMAC could be used in the Bayer process and notes the decreased colour of the liquors. It is well known in the industry that lighter coloured liquors produce whiter hydrate precipitates. In their reference list, Shin et al. attribute US 4,578,255 “Purification of Bayer process liquors” (1986) to William et al. No doubt this is an error introduced by automated abstracting software, and intended to refer to (William) Roe and Malito. The patent referred to describes a process where polyDADMAC is adsorbed onto the surface of a dispersed solid with the aim of extracting humates onto the solid surface. The authors do not credit Roe and Malito with having used DADMAC polymers, but only refer to this patent to substantiate their assertion that there are different levels of humate in different liquors. Spitzer and Strydom (1992, US 5,133,874) built on Roe and Malito’s work by disclosing a method for precipitating the unsettled particles resulting from the process. Strominger and Malito (1994, US 5,284,634) then disclose an improvement to the process where the DADMAC-containing polymer has a high intrinsic viscosity. PolyDADMAC also appears in the non-patent literature as a reagent capable of removing Bayer liquor humic materials.    In conclusion, removal of Bayer liquor humates using polyDADMAC has been experimented with since at least 1984. A number of patents cover its use and at least two alumina refineries have already trialed the process.