The kinetics of stripping or backward extraction of VO2+ from VOA2 complex existing in di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid–toluene phase to the aqueous phase by acidic solutions containing 0.50 M sulphate and 0.25 M acetate has been measured by Lewis and Hahn cell techniques using the pseudo mass transfer coefficient (q) and the flux (F) methods, respectively. In the case of the Lewis cell technique, the stripping mass transfer coefficient (k
                     b) obtained from the (q) method of data treatment has been converted to the (k
                     b) values obtainable from the (F) method of data treatment, and this value has been justified experimentally. In addition, for the Hahn cell, the reverse conversion has been done and justified. The (k
                     b) value obtained from the Lewis cell measurements is about 50 times higher than the Hahn cell (k
                     b) value. The reason for this variation has been discussed. The low activation energy suggests that the diffusion of the species VOA+ to the aqueous film of the interface is the rate controlling. For both cells, the ratio of (k
                     f) to (k
                     b) equals to (K
                     ex) of 10−1.9 obtained from the distribution study.Although the kinetics of forward extraction of VO In the 1970s and 1980s, metal extraction kinetics data were treated by the pseudorate constant (  The theory of (rate/area) or ( On defining ( Defining the average mass flux (  This paper aims to evaluate the exponents and the mass transfer coefficient of the rate equations for the stripping system: VOA D2EHPA (BDH, 98%) was purified by the method of A WPA S104 spectrophotometer (WPA Linton Cambridge, UK) was used to estimate the V(IV) content in the aqueous phase by the HNO Aliquots of 25 mL of both phases were taken in a stoppered bottle and mechanically agitated at 303 K for 10 min for equilibration, settled and disengaged. The aqueous phases were analysed for their pH values and vanadium contents. Organic phase vanadium concentrations were determined by the method of difference. The extraction ratio ( The stock solution of V(IV)-loaded organic phase was prepared by shaking 100 mL 1 M D2EHPA with the same volume of the aqueous phase containing 8.37 g/L V(IV) at pH 2.85 until equilibrium was reached. The loaded organic phase was found to contain 8.21 g/L V(IV) with 0.84 M free D2EHPA. A calculated amount of this solution was properly diluted with toluene after adding calculated amount of free D2EHPA to constitute the organic phase for stripping experiments. A certain volume of the aqueous solution containing 0.5 M H The construction and working procedure of Lewis (stirred) cell are given elsewhere The construction and working procedure of a Hahn (nonstirred) cell are given elsewhere The log( The extracted species is VOA The result of a particular experiment in H. C is shown in The log(  Other tests using the L. C technique established that the log(q  The temperature dependence data have also been treated by the Activated Complex theory From the intercepts of the lines in In the previous two papers on extraction kinetics As phase volume taken in L. C is 100 mL, the ( Now According to Because the ( In case of L. C experiments At a constant temperature of 303 K and phase stirring rate of 2.5 Hz in the Lewis cell, the rate of stripping for 0.50 M SO For the monomeric model of D2EHPA extraction, the following relationship can be obtained For the Hahn cell, the rate of stripping at 303 K can be represented by the following relationship [with the help of In A comparison of some rate parameters for stripping of VO The following conclusions have been drawn: Both cells and both data treatment methods give the same exponents of [VOA Both cells yield The mass transfer coefficient obtained from a Hahn cell is about 50 times smaller than that obtained from a Lewis cell provided identical data treatment method is used in calculating ( The thickness of the layer ( interfacial area through which mass transfer occurs; m constant concentrations of H diffusion coefficient; m mass transfer coefficient; m/s extraction ratio activation energy; kJ/mol function of reactants=[VOA mass flux of vanadium(IV) transfer; kmol/m Planck's constant=6.6252×10 Boltzman constant=1.38×10 enthalpy of activation; kJ/mol backward extraction or stripping mass transfer coefficient forward extraction rate constant dimerization constant of HA=[H acid dissociation constant of HA in bulk aqueous phase=[A kmol/m partition coefficient of HA between organic and aqueous phase=[HA] pseudo unity exponent mass transfer coefficient; s entropy of activation; J/mol K phase contact time; s absolute temperature; K organic phase initial backward forward M.G.K. Mondal acknowledges the Ministry of Education, Bangladesh for deputation (study leave) and the UGC (Dhaka) for granting a junior Ph.D. Fellowship.