This work focuses on the effect of a pre-heating stage on the microstructure evolution during continuous heating of 50% and 75% cold-rolled low carbon steel under conventional and ultrafast heating rates. Peak annealing experiments under two heating rates (10°C/s and 400°C/s) are applied to the samples after a pre-heating stage of 10s. The selected pre-heating temperatures (300°C and 400°C) show an influence on the phase fraction of austenite formed after a short holding time in the intercritical (α+γ) phase field, and an effect on the intensity of recrystallized ferrite texture components. A refinement of ferritic average grain diameter is observed after increasing the heating rate from 10°C/s to 400°C/s. It is concluded that a pre-heating stage has a negligible impact on the microstructure and texture of cold-rolled low carbon steel. Therefore, a suitable technological window for the application of ultrafast heating rates in steel processing is enabled.The application of ultrafast heating rates for processing of low carbon steels has been subject of a number of novel studies In the recent studies The goal of the present study is to investigate the effect of a pre-heating stage on the microstructure and textures of a cold-rolled low carbon steel which after that is heated to the soaking temperatures with moderate (10 The experimental design, microstructural characterization, and data analysis are analogous to the description in a previous work  The microstructure was investigated using Optical Microscopy (OM), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques. EBSD characterization was performed with a FEI Quanta™ 450-FEG-SEM operated at 20 The microstructure after the pre-heating stage, i.e. heated to 300  The constituents formed on quenching will be referred to as ‘martensite’ just for simplicity. However, it must be pointed out that the microstructure is much more complex, consisting of a mixture of martensite, bainite, retained austenite, partially dissolved cementite, and ferrite of different morphologies. These morphologies have been described in detail in a previous study The variation of the average ferritic grain size versus the heating rate is shown in   The orientations of ferrite after the full thermal cycles are displayed in  The orientations observed in martensite correspond to {111}〈uvw〉 ND and {hkl}〈110〉 RD fiber components. The highest intensities are found in the 75% CR sample pre-heated at 300 As stated in the previous section, the samples heated at 10 There are two effects contributing to the grain refinement of the ferritic structure after heating rates of 400  The Goss {110}〈001〉 component observed with a maximum intensity of ~ The texture of the samples heated at 400 The pre-heating temperature produces a decrease of ~ In contrast, the significant amount of strain accumulated by pearlite in the 75% CR samples might draw carbon into solution in ferrite The fraction of austenite increases with the heating rate, as shown in The pre-heating temperature displays a marked influence on the textures of martensite only in samples heated at 10 Another possible effect that contributes to the weaker texture components after UFH is the nucleation of martensite at the γ/γ interface. One might expect that the nucleation of martensite at these interfaces will introduce randomness in martensite crystallographic components. The limited number of austenite grains formed under conventional heating rates will, therefore, decrease the area of γ/γ interface, thus decreasing its effect on martensite texture. The data shown in The effect of a pre-heating temperature (300 The heating rate shows a marked impact on the average ferritic grain size and martensite phase fraction. Both parameters are influenced by the accelerated nucleation which is a consequence of increased heating rate. Restricted nucleation in an oriented ferrite matrix, consequence of conventional heating rate, has a strong impact on the texture inheritance of martensite. The UFH rate accelerates nucleation and thus might weaken the intensity of martensite texture considerably. On the other hand, it might give rise to 〈111〉//ND grains in martensite. F.M. Castro Cerda acknowledges the support of