The extraction and separation of Mn(II) and Co(II) from sulphate solutions have been carried out using sodium salts of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC 88A) and bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) in kerosene. The percentage extraction for the metal ions was increased with increasing equilibrium pH in the case of all the extractants. Manganese was preferentially extracted over cobalt with the extractants and NaD2EHPA was found to be the most suitable extractant for separation, the separation factor being maximum with 0.05 M NaD2EHPA at equilibrium pH 4.45. Manganese and cobalt extractions were carried out at O:A ratio of 9:8 and 1:1, respectively, followed by their strippings at O:A ratio of 2:1 and 4:3 using 0.02 M H2SO4.In the hydrometallurgical processing of manganiferous shales Dhadke and Ajgaonkar This paper reports the extraction and separation of manganese and cobalt from sulphate solutions using organophosphorus acids. The effects of pH and extractant concentration on the extraction systems were studied in addition to the use of McCabe–Thiele plots for extraction and stripping. Effect of sulphuric acid concentration on manganese and cobalt stripping in addition to the counter-current simulation studies was also investigated. Stock sulphate solutions of 0.5 M Mn(II) and 0.5 M Co(II) were prepared from AR/BDH samples in distilled water with small quantities of sulphuric acid to prevent hydrolysis of metal ions on storage. The solutions were volumetrically analysed by the EDTA titration method using Eriochrome Black T (for manganese) and Xylenol orange (for cobalt) indicators D2EHPA, 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC 88A) and bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) were obtained from Mobil, Daihachi and American Cyanamid, respectively, and were used as received after being converted to sodium salts by adding the calculated quantity of a concentrated and standard NaOH solution. The two phases were intimately mixed to form a single phase. The neutralisation reaction is exothermic so the mixture was cooled during the preparation. Distilled kerosene (165–220°C) was used as the diluent and 5 vol.% tri- The aqueous phase (10 ml) containing 0.01 M each of manganese and cobalt, and 0.1 M Na All the extraction and stripping experiments were carried out at ambient temperature (30±1°C). The phase ratio in the experiments was kept at unity except for all McCabe–Thiele constructions for extraction and stripping studies where the O:A ratios were varied in the range from 1:5 to 5:1. The pH measurements were made with the Systronics Model 324 pH meter and analysis of the metal ions was done with the Perkin-Elmer Model 3100 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer. The stripping studies for manganese and cobalt were carried out with H Extraction of Mn(II) and Co(II) ions by the acidic form of the extractants, D2EHPA, PC 88A and Cyanex 223 was low The separation factor for two metal ions Mn and Co is the ratio of their distribution coefficients ( Out of 0.03, 0.05 and 0.06 M NaD2EHPA, NaPC 88A and NaCyanex 272, 0.05 M NaD2EHPA was chosen for separation of manganese and cobalt from solution containing 0.01 M metal ions and 0.1 M Na The loaded organic was stripped with different H Extraction of cobalt was carried out from a synthetic solution containing 0.01 M cobalt and 0.1 M Na A suitable aliquot (10 ml) of cobalt-loaded organic was stripped with equal volumes of varying concentrations of sulphuric acid (0.001–0.12 M). The plot of percentage stripping vs. [H It is possible to separate manganese and cobalt from an equimolar (0.01 M) sulphate solution effectively by controlling the aqueous phase pH (2.7). The 0.05 M NaD2EHPA was chosen to be the best extractant among the three different concentrations of NaD2EHPA, NaPC 88A and NaCyanex 272. Manganese and cobalt pH isotherms with respect to all concentrations of the three extractants indicated preferential extraction of manganese over cobalt. The percentage extraction increased with equilibrium pH of the solution. The separation factor for both metal ions was the highest with 0.05 M NaD2EHPA. The order of manganese extraction with the three extractants was NaD2EHPA>NaPC 88A>NaCyanex 272, but for cobalt the extraction order was the reverse. The use of 0.02 M sulphuric acid could strip 0.9 kg/m  The authors are thankful to Dr. R.P. Das, Head of Hydro and Electrometallurgy Division for his encouragement and Prof. H.S. Ray, Director, for giving permission to publish the paper. One of the authors, N.B. Devi, is thankful to Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, for a Senior Research Fellowship.