The shear sensitivity of fragile, low-density aggregates formed in particle suspensions by polymer-bridging flocculation makes characterisation methods needing sampling or dilution problematic. Focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) probes can readily monitor such structures in real-time, but interpretation of resulting chord length data can be superficial, often missing detail within the distributions. However, the potential for deeper insights can’t be realised if flocculating with poor control of applied shear conditions (intensity and duration). In this study, continuous flocculation was achieved in a Couette mixing device with a vertical flow-through arrangement, acquiring operator-independent settling rate and FBRM chord data. The performance of a series of anionic flocculants (same charge density but different molecular weights) was investigated when applied to kaolin suspensions, with the introduction of 10 or 20% bentonite used to induce ‘bad’ flocculation responses. Size-density relationships in selected samples were determined separately by image analysis of free-settling aggregates.
                  Following well controlled flocculation, distinct relationships between settling rate and mean volume-weighted chord length were attributed to variations in both substrate mineralogy and applied mixing intensity impacting on aggregate density. No such distinctions could be drawn from variations in flocculant molecular weight. Unweighted chord length distributions offered sensitivity to inefficiencies in fines capture and aggregate breakage under higher shear, which were both impacted by flocculant molecular weight. The unweighted chord counts <10 µm for the unflocculated clay slurries better anticipated dosage demand than conventional (volume-based) particle sizing, showing the potential of FBRM feed monitoring for flocculation control.Particle aggregation by charge-based coagulation or polymer-bridging flocculation normally results in fragile structures of low effective density that are sensitive to any post-formation handling or treatment. Their reliable characterisation can therefore be challenging, especially when large (>400 μm) aggregates favoured in sedimentation applications are inherently prone to shear-induced breakage. Such concerns are further heightened when considering mineral processing tailings containing high proportions of clays, given the platelet shape of clay particles and the lower proportion of the total surface available for flocculant adsorption under typical process conditions, leading to even lower effective aggregate density ( There are well-defined measures to characterise size and size distributions of non-spherical particles, but appropriate measures for sizing highly fractal, very low density aggregates are less obvious. Often the measures generated by commercial sizing instruments are just those used for particles, with simplifying assumptions made to provide an equivalent size. In reality, most users readily accept such approaches, assuming relative changes in dimension are detected and adequately reflect responses in their system. Unfortunately, the measurement itself can impact upon results. For example, upper limits for aggregate sizes from laser light scattering can be a consequence of mixing within a measurement cell, rather than of the actual aggregation process. Techniques to characterise aggregate size have been reviewed (e.g. Focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM, Mettler-Toledo) instruments were available in the early 1990’s, offering practical real-time monitoring of particle and aggregate properties in suspensions across a wide concentration range. As this avoids the need for sampling and dilution, a number of groups recognised FBRM could provide Many are satisfied just using FBRM for qualitative comparisons of aggregate sizes; these can be fairly trivial, but in some instances result in confusing or misleading interpretation. This is often due to difficulties in preparing fragile aggregates under controlled and meaningful conditions. Aggregation kinetics or strength information derived from FBRM trends over time is questionable when applying ill-defined mixing ( While capturing real-time trends is an undoubted strength of FBRM, there is also a danger they can be misinterpreted when the measurement response to aggregate size is not known. For example, observing a maximum aggregate size may reflect the applied mixing conditions, but is its magnitude also influenced by how the scanning laser views fractal, low density structures? In FBRM, a rotating lens provides a highly focused laser beam at a sapphire window’s external surface, scanning a circular path at a fixed velocity (  The option usually exists to vary how the FBRM signal is interpreted – for current instruments, measured raw data is processed in ‘primary’ mode or with a slower response in ‘macro’ mode. Given aggregate sizing is usually the priority, the slower response mode is predominantly used in flocculation testwork. While this may enable porous aggregates to be more reliably measured, it raises the likelihood fine particles within a slurry are over-sized or not seen at all. Such fines make almost a negligible contribution when volume-weightings are applied to the chord lengths, but we will frequently also examine unweighted chord length distributions in primary mode as a guide to fines capture efficiency from flocculation ( The presence of even minor fractions of clays within mineral processing tailings slurries often determines flocculation and gravity thickening performance ( The matrix of conditions considered not only offers insights into the impact of flocculant molecular weight, but produces an unprecedented body of settling rate and corresponding FBRM data under well-controlled flocculation conditions. This provides the opportunity to examine the relationship between the settling and FBRM responses and isolate the contributions of variables such as the applied mixing, while also gaining an understanding of how results are affected by the different FBRM signal interpretation modes. The potential to use such results as a quick guide to the relative density of the aggregates formed can also be assessed, drawing upon the more quantitative determination of size-density relationships from image analysis of free-settling aggregates. Kaolin was the main solid phase for flocculation studies, being representative of clays that are readily flocculated to give a good settling response. To give a more problematic flocculation response, it was blended with minor amounts of bentonite. The two clays are known to differ in shape ( The kaolin used was Prestige NY (Unimin, Australia) and has the composition 46.1 wt% SiO Slurries of 100% kaolin (designated K100) and kaolin blends with 10% and 20% bentonite were examined (KB10 and KB20, respectively). Slurries (50 ± 0.5 g L The properties of six anionic polyacrylamide-based (PAM) flocculants used in this study are summarised in Stock flocculant solutions were prepared by adding absolute ethanol (2 g) to powdered flocculant (0.750 g) in a glass jar, which was gently shaken by hand for 30 s, and then left to stand for 2 min. DI water was added to give a 0.50% stock solution, with vigorous shaking for 2 min to properly disperse the powder, followed by gentle agitating on a tabletop shaker at 150 rpm for 16 h. Working solutions (0.005%) were prepared immediately prior to testing by diluting the stock solution with DI water. The Shear Vessel ( Slurry enters the annulus through an inlet high on one side of the outer cylinder. Flocculant inlets are positioned on the opposite side, allowing variation of the mixing time, although only port 2 was used in this study (mixing time 16.5 s). Aggregated suspension flows directly into a glass settling column (I.D. 22 mm) that is isolated by closing two connected ball valves for settling rate and (when required) turbidity measurements, with simultaneous redirection of flow by a three-way valve. Slurry was delivered from the feed tank using a peristaltic pump (Masterflex An FBRM probe (G400 with PI-14/206 probe, Mettler-Toledo) inserted below the settling column at an angle of 70° to the flow ensures material is suitably presented to the probe window but prevents any solid build-up. Real-time monitoring of FBRM chord length statistics provides confirmation of achieving a stable flocculation state, with more detailed interpretation then made on full distributions (1–4000 µm, 200 channels distributed logarithmically). Such spacings can be adjusted in post-processing and therefore do not affect data collection. The distributions are usually presented as line graphs for ease of comparison, but in reality should be column graphs. A volume-weighting is achieved by applying a square-weighting to the chord length distribution. Hindered settling rates for solids isolated in the analysis column were derived from the initial period where the mudline falls at a linear rate. The repeatability in settling rate measurements for duplicate tests was ±2.5%. The Floc Density Analyser (FDA) developed by The aggregate size was determined by assuming an overall ellipsoidal geometry, defined by maximum horizontal and vertical dimensions (relative to the direction of settling), with the ellipsoid’s third dimension assumed to be on average the same as the horizontal dimension. Standardised particles of known size were used to determine the error in the size measurement (<3%). An effective aggregate density was calculated using a terminal settling rate equation (with an estimated spherical diameter) based on Stokes Law, from knowledge of the size and settling rate, as well as the fluid’s viscosity and density. Detailed discussion of the FDA procedures and analysis can be found in The issues with excessive mixing during measurements that make laser diffraction/scattering highly questionable for sizing fragile aggregates ( The advantages for FBRM in characterising fragile aggregates have been discussed, but continuous feed characterisation is also possible. It can nominally detect to just below 1 µm, and the unweighted chord length measurements are particle number sensitive, although not a true number count. In studying the shear sensitivity of clay-quartz mixtures,  Even with the qualifications made above, When contrasting FBRM and conventional light scattering/diffraction sizings, it is important to recognise that the distinctions go beyond just the measurement principles. Distributions with the former are acquired at higher solids concentrations and either under the mixing conditions of interest or almost immediately after, and this can favour particle associations. That said, the tendency of FBRM to oversize solids in the 1–10 µm range is known and has been attributed to the addition of the laser beam’s width to reflected chord lengths ( As expected, Unweighted chord length distributions for the K100 slurry flocculated at different dosages are presented in Distributions at the intermediate dosages suggest PAM[9.1] was actually more effective in reducing the observed counts than the higher molecular weight PAM[18.5]. It is generally assumed that a higher polymer molecular weight or [η] will enhance flocculation, and while this has been supported in some studies of clay flocculation ( The distributions in  The introduction of just 10% bentonite into the clay slurry was sufficient to more than double the required flocculant dosages to achieve settling rates that may be considered acceptable in conventional gravity thickening (e.g. > 5 m h The shifts in the dosage responses shown in  The corresponding mean square-weighted chord lengths from FBRM signals processed in primary and macro modes are shown in This greater sensitivity for FBRM to the onset of flocculation extends to the KB10 and KB20 slurries, and in fact is even heightened, given the higher dosages required in the presence of bentonite to achieve appreciable settling rates. The comparative advantages of PAM[9.1] over PAM[18.5] with KB20 hinted at in the settling rate data is readily apparent from the FBRM statistics. While mean sizes in both measurement modes give good dynamic ranges in response to dosage, at the highest dosages (and therefore highest settling rates) with K100 and KB10, the primary outputs lose some sensitivity to increases in size that are still detected in macro mode. It is at such sizes that the primary mode struggles to detect highly porous, fractal structures as a single body, as illustrated in While real-time monitoring of aggregate size by FBRM is highly desirable and often very useful, any potential for providing further information about the actual structure of such aggregates would represent a major enhancement in capability. By definition, a chord length distribution is sensitive to changes in object shape or morphology, which offers some practical opportunities in crystallisation studies (e.g.  Settling rates from flocculating the three different clay slurries were plotted against the corresponding mean square-weighted chord length in both primary and macro modes (  The macro mode detects larger aggregate sizes, in part because the porosity effect only becomes a factor at larger chord lengths ( Examination of Aggregate density measurements for samples acquired under selected conditions were performed using the FDA technique. Samples of flocculated slurry were collected for PAM[9.1], PAM[12.2] and PAM[18.5], with the dosages adjusted to give mean square-weighted chord lengths in the range 300–500 µm. The consistently higher density of aggregates formed with K100 across the size range is confirmed, and the FDA can also readily detect a further decline in density with increasing bentonite concentration on going from KB10 to KB20 as the substrate. In contrast to the hindered settling rate vs. FBRM size results in The mixing conditions experienced by a suspension during polymer-bridging flocculation is a critical factor, the response to which may be dependent on both substrate and flocculant ( The effect of Shear Vessel rotation rate on the settling rate response to PAM[9.1] and PAM[18.5] dosage for KB10 at 50 g L While both PAM[9.1] and PAM[18.5] required similar dosages to give a settling rate of 10 m h The corresponding mean square-weighted and mean unweighted chord length responses to dosage ( The mean square-weighted chord length response to dosage largely mirrors that of the settling rate, and again shows enhanced sensitivity to the onset of aggregation. There was evidence of reduced sensitivity at the highest dosages, in particular for the primary mode at 150 and 250 rpm. In relation to this, it is useful to examine the equivalent responses for the mean unweighted chord length ( The interpretation of such trends would be that at the lowest rotation rate studied during flocculation, while large, fast settling aggregates are readily formed at moderate dosages, there is concurrent breakage or erosion from these aggregates that only influences the mean unweighted chord length. Higher dosages are required at 250 rpm, and combined with the higher molecular weight of PAM[18.5], this imparts a degree of strength to the aggregates formed; in contrast, PAM[9.1] is less able to form multiple bridges with larger aggregates, leading to a limit in the size attained. Some support for this can be gained by examining the unweighted chord length distributions in primary mode that were obtained at dosages corresponding to settling rates in While progressively higher mixing intensities increase the PAM[18.5] dosages required to maintain the target settling rate,  As was the case for The first response is to assume this trend is indicative of a higher aggregate density being formed under the more intense mixing conditions during flocculation, consistent with the higher applied dosages. However, the length square-weighting applied to the chord lengths to give the data a volumetric weighting will inevitably over-emphasise the contribution of longer chords that may result from elongated, higher aspect ratio aggregates or those that are highly branched. As a consequence, the trend observed in To gain further insights on this behaviour, the FDA was used to measure the density of aggregates within samples of KB10 slurry flocculated by PAM[9.1], PAM[12.2] and PAM[18.5] at the three different Shear Vessel rotation rates. Both plots confirm that across the measurement range, raising the mixing intensity during flocculation from 150 to 250 rpm consistently gave higher settling rates and thereby a greater aggregate density. The same trend was also observed on going from 250 to 400 rpm. It can therefore be concluded that the shifts in response to changes in mixing intensity for plots of bulk hindered settling rate vs. mean square-weighted chord length ( That a lower aggregate density was observed with PAM[18.5] than the two lower molecular weight products for flocculation at 150 rpm has already been discussed in relation to The great attractions of FBRM are its ease of use and broad applicability, in that in most instances, it can be relied upon to give information on particle systems that are properly presented to the probe window and contain some fraction of particles within the instrument’s measurement range. The advantages for aggregation studies are even more pronounced, given the ability to rapidly update measured chord length distributions in real time. A consequence of its convenience is that FBRM can be too easily applied under inappropriate conditions without establishing actual sensitivity to the targeted performance measure or even optimising the chord length statistics being used. Given the increasing number of applications of FBRM to aggregation studies, it also is somewhat surprising there have been few attempts to validate the chord length outputs for aggregates. Particles of known size have been used to give some level of calibration of the chord length statistics ( The above discussion raises questions as to what is an appropriate measure of an aggregate’s size, and ultimately the most important practical validation that can be attained is to show a chosen chord length statistic agrees well with a performance measure known to be highly responsive to the extent of aggregation. In this respect, hindered settling rate can be ideal, provided there is tight control over the applied conditions and the solids concentration, as then settling rate should normally be proportional to the size squared ( As shown in The advantages of FBRM are most evident in the ability to capture the onset of aggregation well in advance of any significant elevation in settling rate. When the way in which the FBRM response relates to the elevation in settling rate is known, then FBRM monitoring becomes a viable option to control the flocculation process and thereby more effectively optimise flocculant dosage requirements. While emphasis is given to the ability of FBRM for real-time monitoring of fragile aggregates, from a control perspective, greater attention needs to be given to FBRM for feed monitoring, given aggregation responses to reagents are determined to a much greater degree by particle number. A relatively minor fines peak in a particle size distribution can outnumber the coarse phases by many orders of magnitude, and hence broad distributions can be difficult to correlate with flocculation performance, even leading to predictions that run counter to observations ( The responses for settling rate vs. mean square-weighted chord length after flocculation could be used to successfully identify differences in the mineralogy of clays within each feed slurry and changes in aggregate density due to the mixing intensity during flocculation. This approach could not detect any difference in aggregate density as a consequence of variations in flocculant molecular weight, although such differences were seen from the comparison of free-settling aggregates within the FDA. However, the examination of varying ionic strength on clay flocculation has shown distinct settling rate vs. mean square-weighted chord length responses that do reflect molecular weight effects; this will be presented in a separate publication. The dimensions of fragile aggregates formed by polymer-bridging flocculation are readily monitored by FBRM and can be related to hindered settling rates, although the latter are also influenced by particle mineralogy and the density of the highly porous structures formed. When flocculation is performed under well-controlled conditions, relationships between settling rate and the mean volume-weighted chord length identified distinctions that could be attributed to variations in aggregate density as a consequence of substrate mineralogy and the applied mixing intensity. Aggregate density was found to be affected by variations in molecular weight, and while such differences could not be distinguished from the settling rate and mean volume-weighted chord length responses with the clay-based slurries studied here, it may be possible for other systems. The volume-weighted chord length distributions should not be viewed in isolation from the unweighted distributions, which offer sensitivity to inefficiencies in the flocculation process and the products from aggregate breakage under higher shear, both impacted by variations in the flocculant molecular weight. The unweighted chord counts <10 µm (as an indicator sensitive to particle number) were also found to correctly anticipate dosage demand for the different unflocculated clay slurries, showing FBRM has potential for monitoring feed properties as a means towards controlling flocculation processes. We thank Stephen Adkins and Danielle Meyrick (both formerly of BASF) for their assistance in arranging access to the flocculants, and Fiona Benn (CSIRO) for experimental assistance. One of us (YK) wishes to acknowledge Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: