In this study, TiB2 particulate reinforced Al matrix composites were fabricated with the incorporation of both micron- and submicron-scale TiB2 particles by a combined method of mechanical alloying, cold pressing and pressureless sintering. Commercial TiB2 powders with an average particle size of 40μm were milled to 320nm for 12h in a high-energy ball mill. The effects of TiB2 particle size (40μm and 320nm), TiB2 content (5, 10 and 15wt.%) and mechanical alloying duration (2, 4 and 8h) on the microstructural and properties of the Al matrix composites were investigated. The composites reinforced with submicron TiB2 particles exhibited higher hardness (in the vicinity of 2GPa for 15wt.% reinforcement) and lower relative wear resistance values compared to those reinforced with micron-scale TiB2 particles. Furthermore, hardness and relative wear resistance values of the composites increased with increasing TiB2 contents. Density and hardness values of the sintered samples has uncertain tendency in regard of different mechanical alloying durations. Microstructures of the micron- and submicron-scale TiB2 reinforced Al matrix composites contain homogeneously dispersed fine- and ultrafine-grained TiB2 particles and an amount of Al3Ti flakes.Aluminum-based metal matrix composites (MMCs) have received considerable attraction as structural materials in aerospace, automotive and transportation industries due to their high specific modulus and strength, superior wear, fatigue and creep resistances Different reinforcement particles such as aluminides (Al Currently, there exists a limited amount of investigation regarding the effects of MA duration and particle size of TiB In the present study, Al matrix composites reinforced with micron- and submicron-scale TiB Elemental Al powders (Alfa Aesar™, 99.5% purity, 12 X-ray diffraction (XRD) investigations of the MA’d powders and sintered samples were carried out using a Bruker™ D8 Advanced Series Powder Diffractometer with Cu Kα ( To identify crystalline phases in the MA’d powders, XRD investigations were conducted on all compositions of the Al–TiB  Density values of the sintered Al– Microhardness measurements of the sintered Al–    Micron- and submicron-scale TiB XRD investigations of the mechanically alloyed Al– A small amount of the Al Increases in the reinforcement amounts and in the mechanically alloying durations had positive contributions on the relative density values of both Al–10TiB The hardness values of the samples increased with increasing amount of TiB SEM investigations revealed that the Al The Al–15TiB We would like to thank Prof. Dr. Hüseyin Çimenoğlu for his valuable advices in sliding wear tests. Further, we would like to express our gratitude to State Planning Organization (DPT) for funding the projects with project numbers 2001K120750 and 90189 out of which the main infrastructure of the Particulate Materials Laboratories was founded.