Production of the intermetallic MnCo0.8Fe0.2Ge phase, interesting as magnetocaloric material, is obtained by using an almost fully amorphous mechanically alloyed precursor. Thermal treatment to develop the intermetallic phase has been reduced in time (from several hours or even days to few minutes), and temperature (from 1123 K to 723 K). Thermomagnetic measurements allow us to analyze the magnetocaloric effect and to compare the results with those obtained from conventional annealing treatments. Close relationship between magnetocaloric properties and crystal size provides further optimization of the system preserving the advantages of the production method proposed.Energy consumption is a delicate issue in society, consequently, if energy efficiency of cooling systems is improved, it would mean a decrease in the average consumption of each household. Magnetic refrigeration close to room temperature is an useful technology for replacing conventional cooling systems Another magnitude for evaluating the performance of a magnetocaloric material is the amount of heat that can be transferred between its cold and hot reservoirs, which is called refrigerant capacity, Magnetocaloric materials can be classified in terms of the character of the phase transition: a first order magnetostructural/magnetoelastic phase transition (FOPT) or a second order magnetic phase transition (SOPT). On the one hand, materials with a FOPT are characterized by a larger MCE response with respect to SOPT but the sharp character of Intermetallic compounds with stoichiometry MM’X (where M and M’ are transition metals and X is a metalloid), are potential magnetic phase-transition functional materials which present a prominent MCE response. In particular, MnCoGe compounds can exhibit a martensitic transformation from orthorhombic TiNiSi-type structure ( Mechanical alloying (MA) technique is widely used to produce supersaturated solid solutions and other metastable systems, including amorphous alloys In this work, MnCo Five grams of high purity (>99%) elements were used in a mixture of nominal composition MnCo The microstructure was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a powder diffractometer D8 Advance A25 at room temperature and the radiation employed was Cu-K In order to check the compositional changes during milling due to interaction of the powder with the milling media, composition was checked by X-ray microfluorescence in samples milled 100 h. There are some deviations with respect to the nominal composition as shown in   Once the thermal stability of the system was determined as a function of milling time, several samples were treated to promote intermetallic phase formation. On the one hand, a conventional annealing taken from literature as appropriate for this type of alloy system    Both conventional and low temperature annealed samples present a single phase system. Samples submitted to short annealing times are candidates to develop enhanced inhomogeneities with respect to long time annealed ones. Recently, Manchón-Gordón et al. proposed a quantitative method to estimate such inhomogeneities from the evolution of magnetocaloric response and approach to saturation behavior during the transition Application of Eqs. The only significant difference detected is the crystal size (14 and ~ 70 nm for the low temperature and the conventionally annealed samples, respectively). The large temperature span between both treatments allows us to control this parameter. The XRD patterns of samples obtained from the 50 h milled precursor and heated up to the different temperatures, from 723 to 973 K, at 20 K/min (see In conclusion, mechanical alloying is shown to be a successful technique reducing time and temperature of the thermal treatment to develop a Mn(Co,Fe)Ge alloy with interesting magnetocaloric response. Heating temperature is reduced from 1123 K (generally used in the literature in a conventional treatment) to 723 K and annealing time is reduced from 72 h in an isothermal to roughly 20 min, which is the time needed for a ramp at 20 K/min. Moreover, further optimization could be achieved as there is a clear correlation between magnetocaloric properties and crystal size of Mn(Co,Fe)Ge phase.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was funded by AEI/FEDER-UE (Project MAT 2016-77265-R and Project US-1260179) and the PAI of the Regional Government of Andalucía. A. Vidal-Crespo acknowledges a PEJUS contract from University of Sevilla.  The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.