In recent years, lignocellulosic biomass has been increasingly used in various applications. While for many of them the plant materials require coarse milling, some new applications for green chemistry, bio-energy and bio-packaging necessitate comminution to obtain very finely calibrated particles (below 200μm in size). This milling step is not inconsequential for lignocellulosic materials and can influence the physical and chemical characteristics of the powder. However, these different effects are still poorly understood. In this work, we study the impact of ultra-fine milling on the physico-chemical properties of plant fibres. Flax was chosen for this study because of its well-described structure and biochemical composition, making it a model material. Our main results evidence a strong impact of ball milling on flax fibre aspect ratio but also on cell wall ultrastructure and composition. Cellulose content and crystallinity significantly decrease with milling time, leading to higher water sorption and lower thermal stability.In material processing, the aim of a grinder is to generate a fracture path which will propagate though the material and lead to its rupture. Depending on the technology selected, as well as the process parameters and the mechanical properties of the raw materials, the energy consumption of the operation can significantly differ and the ground product can exhibit various properties, including shape, specific surface area, and flow behaviour. This has been demonstrated in numerous studies on inorganic powders [ Lignocellulosic biomass is mainly composed of three macromolecules – cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin – alongside organic extractable compounds, which are generally mixtures of low molecular weight molecules, soluble proteins, non-cellulosic saccharides and phenolic components, as well as mineral inclusions, such as silica deposits in e.g. rice husks [ Much research regarding the milling of plant materials is related to coarse milling with a focus on the shape of the ground powder and on energy consumption during processing [ Thus, due to its complex and heterogeneous structure at different scales, the behaviour of the plant materials during milling is difficult to predict and the properties of the ground powder are not generalizable. Further exploratory work is needed on model plant materials to improve our knowledge of the impact of grinding, and especially the ultra-fine grinding stage on the properties of the ground powder while unravelling the effects of grinding from those due to biomass variability. Among the great diversity of plant materials, flax fibres can be viewed as model cellulosic materials [ In this work, we explored the effects of the milling step on the physical and chemical characteristics of flax fibres. Flax was selected as a model plant material due to its hierarchical structure, its high cellulose content and also relatively little scatter in properties. Initially, different grinding technologies were explored on mm-scale flax fibres in order to select an appropriate grinding process allowing efficient conversion of the raw materials into ultrafine particles. Then, for the most promising grinding technique, a range of grinding time periods were studied. The morphology of the flax particles obtained was then explored by morphological analysis and electron microscopy. In addition, we report and discuss the impact of grinding time on flax biochemical composition, water hygroscopic capacity, crystallinity and thermal behaviour. Flax ( In order to produce fine flax powders, several grinding technologies generating different mechanical stresses were explored. First an impact mill (UPZ 100, Howokawa Alpine®) equipped with a screen of 0.3 The evolution of particle size distribution of the ground flax particles was monitored using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer Hydro 2000S (Malvern Instruments Ltd., United Kingdom), with liquid ethanol (ethylic alcohol: 96% v/v) as carrier. From the diffraction image, the particle sizes were determined using the Mie method with a refraction index of 1.53 [ For ground powders FLAX 1–4, SEM observations were performed with a scanning electron microscope Phenom Pro-X (Phenom, France) using a charge reduction sample holder under a voltage of 10 The lengths (L) and diameters (D) of the ground particles were obtained with a MorFi Compact® fibre analyzer (Techpap SAS, Grenoble, France). The analysis was performed in dynamic mode via the measurement of flax suspension (of approximatively 50mg/L) in distilled water flowing through the recording cell. A camera with a resolution of 1280 * 960 pixels and an accuracy of approximately 10μm/pixel [ Experiments were performed using a Setaram TM92 apparatus. The heating rate was 10 The monosaccharide content of raw flax fibre and the ground flax powders at different strategic milling time were determined by chemical analysis. The size of the raw flax requires a first step of homogenization. This was done by cryogrinding approximately 3 The cellulose crystallinity was determined by wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXRD) measurements performed under ambient conditions on a Siemens D500 diffractometer CuKα radiation. Samples were loaded on a silicon wafer and scans were collected from 2θ The water vapour sorption measurements were carried out at 25 To evaluate the goodness of the mathematical fit of this model, the mean relative deviation modulus, noted MRD (expressed in %), was calculated by using the root sum square method between the fit and the experimental data: First, we compare the different milling routes used to produce fine ground powder. Continuous milling processes that generate impact (impact mill) and shear (centrifugal mill) mechanical stresses have been investigated. The resulting ground powders are named FLAX 1–4 (  In The length of the RAW FLAX decreases slowly with each subsequent milling step, and in comparison to RAW FLAX, the length of FLAX 4 is shorter by a factor of 2.7 (=707/262). This could be related to the fact that grinders have sieves with holes greater than the diameter of the fibre. Thus, particles can pass through the sieve holes in the longitudinal direction without being cut. As a result, the residence time is weak. Thus, even if energy is transmitted during impact between the particles and the rotor and the sieve play an important role (due to high rotation speed), the total milling energy (function of the impact energy and the residence time) is not sufficient to effectively reduce the particle size. Note that the sieve employed in the second milling step (100 In addition, RAW FLAX is mainly composed of cellulose, an assembly of linear polymers of beta-1-4-linked- In order to increase the energy applied onto the material, the multiplication of milling passes could be considered. However, in view of the scale-up of the process for industrial applications, it may not be an option because of the increase in production costs and the difficulty in practically implementing this. As the technologies used in this first part do not produce fine flax particles, a vibratory ball mill applying compression and attrition as the principal mechanical stresses was then employed. This device is a batch mill and the evolution of the comminution process was followed by withdrawing samples at different milling times (  This phenomenon have been previously described in literature especially for ball milling and is often attributed to cushioning effects due to the production of fine particles during the milling process which surround the coarser particles and amortize the transmission of the stress [  The monosaccharide (also known as sugar or carbohydrate) content of the BM samples were analyzed by a conventional biochemical procedure. The total monosaccharide content is close to 80% of the fibre elements dry matter (DM), with an average 69% of the DM represented by glucose monosaccharide. Assuming that all this glucose belongs to cellulose, then both the non-glucosidic monosaccharide (galacturonic acid, and neutral monosaccharides mannose, xylose, galactose, rhamnose, arabinose and fucose) and the cellulosic compartment quantified are in the range of the reported values in the literature [ The diffraction pattern of cellulose I (  Peak II exhibits a significant rise of around 6 Finally, the third peak is generally associated to thermo-resistant polymers, like lignin, and longer cellulose chains of high degree of polymerisation. Those α-cellulose are thermodynamically more stable, and could be part of peak III. We hypothesise that ball milling progressively depolymerises the more stable cellulose, evidenced by a progressive decrease in the weight loss. Consequently, the maximum temperature of peak III would decrease, which is what we find. This hypothesis is strongly supported by biochemical data, and also by the decrease in crystallinity of cellulose with increasing ball milling time (see Water vapour sorption measurements were performed on RAW FLAX fibre and the various FLAX BM samples to measure and analyse their differing sorption kinetics. The water vapour isotherm curves, as plotted in Within the range of water activities applied, and particularly for water activities over 0.3, the increase in k The A In this work we studied a large number of morphological, structural and process related parameters. This relationship between the hygroscopic behaviour of the flax cell walls and crystallinity continues in the second phase of milling, between 10 and 23 An interesting correlation can be noted with the three water indicators considered. The most pronounced correlation is obtained between the crystallinity of the flax walls and the water content at the water activity equal to 0.6. As discussed earlier, the crystallinity of the fibre samples decreases with increasing duration of ball milling. This is a key factor in understanding the change in sorption capacity because the sorption of molecules occurs in the amorphous phase of a substrate, the crystalline phase being assumed to be an almost impermeable area to permeants [ Other than the clear influence on cellulose crystallinity, the ball milling process has a complex, unclear influence on cell wall polysaccharides. On the one hand, the non-glucosidic monosaccharides remained at a fairly constant fraction of the dry mass ( In general, these different evolutions, induced by high shear during milling, are strongly linked to morphological changes which, by increasing water absorption, facilitate and accelerate structural damage to plant walls. In addition, the morphometry of the particles follows a non-monotonic evolution. Indeed, after substantial length reduction up to 10 In view of the different modifications highlighted in this work, an important question remains: are these modifications desirable? It is not easy to answer this question as the properties targeted for the ground powder can vary significantly according to the end-use application. Generally speaking, intense milling significantly increases the reactivity of the powder by increasing the specific surface area. In addition, the modification of other properties can be an asset to increase the potential of the powder for several applications. For example, in the case of bioethanol production, the reduction in cellulose crystallinity leads to a higher efficiency in enzymatic hydrolysis reaction [ The objective of this work was to study the impact of milling on the properties of flax fibres, which are considered as a model biomass due to their high crystalline cellulose content and their hierarchical multilayer structure. After a comparative work between different various grinding techniques, ball milling was selected because of its efficiency and ability to provide a wide range of particle size distributions. Morphological measurements carried out for milling times up to 23 In terms of structure and composition of the flax cell walls, major modifications have been highlighted; it appears that mainly cellulose is impacted by the process. A steady decrease in glucose level and also in the crystallinity of cellulose has been observed with ball milling duration. This modification of cellulose is favoured by thermomechanical alteration highlighted by SEM imaging and corroborated by the sorption behaviour of the cell walls. Increasing accessibility of water has been shown by DVS and ATG, caused by the increase in amorphous regions. Thus, the milling of biomass, for example for composite reinforcement applications, has a significant impact on its structural and morphological properties. Consequences are also to be expected in terms of mechanical performance and reinforcement, in particular due to the loss of fibre integrity and the drastic evolution of their morphology. Jacqueline Vigouroux (INRA, Nantes) and Cécile Sotto from the plant transformation platform of the JRU IATE are gratefully acknowledged for their helpful advice and assistance in carbohydrate analysis and grinding experiments respectively. The authors also thank the French national research Network ‘GDR 3710