Extracting accurate strength properties from small punch test (SPT) results is still a challenge. Previous studies on determining the strength of materials via SPT employed empirical correlations, but these correlations are not generally accurate enough. Here we developed a database method to efficiently evaluate the yield strength and ultimate tensile strength. First, a database containing force-deflection curves of SPT and corresponding strengths of materials is created using finite element simulations coupled with a large amount of hypothetical materials. The database is then used to process the force-deflection curve of an investigated material for estimating strength values. A series of hypothetical materials that are not in the database were adopted to explore the accuracy in determining strengths by this method. The results show the theoretical accuracy values of the yield strength and ultimate tensile strength achieve 92.0% and 99.0%, respectively. The proposed method was also applied to estimate the strengths of Cr-Mo steels. It is found that the obtained strengths agree well with those acquired by uniaxial tensile testing. Using a database to evaluate strength properties is a novel and simple approach that could be widely spread in the study of SPT.The small punch test (SPT) has been recognized as a supportive technique for estimating mechanical properties in cases where conventional tests are impractical or difficult. The advantage of such a test is to monitor the degradation of in-service structural components in mechanical properties with very small amounts of material, and another advantage is to reduce the cost of testing. To date, SPT has been widely employed to estimate mechanical properties such as tensile properties The yield strength and ultimate tensile strength are fundamental parameters of materials. They represent the stress carrying capacities of materials. It is true to state that no universal approach for determining strength properties by SPT has been reached. The main reason is that the determined strengths are not accurate enough. At present, empirical correlations are the most common methods used for extracting the strength of materials from the force-deflection curve of SPT. A yield load and the maximum force are correlated with the yield strength and ultimate tensile strength, respectively. Mao and Takahashi proposed the first correlation formula In this study, we aim to propose a database method to estimate the yield and ultimate tensile strengths of steels. The proposed method is simple and convenient, whilst it could be spread widely. This article is organized as follows. Firstly, a database including force-deflection curves of SPT and the corresponding strengths of materials is built using finite element simulations and hypothetical materials. Then, a systemic study with a series of hypothetical materials is carried out to explore the theoretical accuracy of strengths determined using the database method. Finally, this method is used to evaluate the strengths of 5 different Cr-Mo steels to reinforce confidence in our approach. Finite element simulations have been widely employed in the studies of SPT The yield and ultimate tensile strengths of 30,000 hypothetical materials were calculated by using their true stress-plastic strain curves. Strengths obtained this way have been reported in previous papers  6 different kinds of hypothetical materials were used to verify the reliability of the proposed method. These materials are not included in the database. Finite element simulations of SPT were carried out using the material parameters listed in As a result, force-deflection curves were generated (see For an experimental validation of the database method, 5 different Cr-Mo steels were collected from industries. The materials considered in our research were produced by forging. Thus, they can be recognized as materials with isotropic mechanical properties in macro-scale. Their strength values obtained by uniaxial tensile tests are given in The use of the database method is based on the assumption that true stress-plastic strain curves are microstructure-independent for the SPT specimen and uniaxial tensile test specimen. Many findings in literatures support this Another interesting result in   A database method is proposed to efficiently determine the yield strength and ultimate tensile strengths via small punch test (SPT). It is not recommended for very low ductile materials and brittle materials. The main conclusions are drawn below: A database containing force-deflection curves of SPT and the corresponding strengths of materials is created using finite element simulations and hypothetical materials. The application of the database method is based on the assumption that true stress-plastic strain curves are microstructure-independent for the SPT specimen and uniaxial tensile test specimen. The strengths of an investigated material are obtained by calculating the differences ( The validation using hypothetical materials reveals the theoretical accuracy values in predicting strengths by the database method are 92.0% for yield strengths and 99.0% for ultimate tensile strengths. The use of the database method in determining the strengths of Cr-Mo steels confirms that strengths derived from SPT results agree well with those obtained by uniaxial tensile testing. Using a database to evaluate the strength of materials is simple and effective. The accuracy in predicting strengths using a database has been improved as compared with using empirical correlations. This method is a possibility that could be developed as a unified approach for SPT to determine the strength of ductile materials. To have an in-depth understanding of the misestimation of ultimate tensile strengths, more work has to be done in future. The authors are grateful to the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFC0808800) for providing financial support.