Solid particles have significant effect on flotation froth. In this research, the effects of coal particles of different size and hydrophobicity on froth stability and flotation performance were studied. The froth stability was measured in both the froth formation and froth decay processes by maximum froth height, froth half-life time and water recovery. The results show that fine particles of moderate hydrophobicity contributed most to maximum froth height in the froth formation process and were most favorable for flotation. Fine hydrophilic particles stabilized the froth in the froth formation process but the froth half-life time was very short due to the high water solid ratio. High hydrophobic particles of both fine and coarse size fractions greatly increased the froth half-life time in the froth decay process. But the froths were very rigid and the maximum froth heights were very low. The presence of fine hydrophobic particles was very unfavorable for the recovery of coarse particles.In froth flotation, mineral particles are agitated in the pulp with flotation reagents and bubbles. Hydrophobic particles can attach to bubbles and then report to the froth. It has been discovered that the froth is also selective ( Froth recovery is mainly affected by bubble coalescence and water drainage. Bubble coalescence causes bubble vibration, which leads to the detachment of particles ( Froth is very complex and is affected by multiple factors. In respects with particles, main factors that affect froth stability are solid concentration and particle shape, size and hydrophobicity ( To date, there is little research focused on the effect of particle hydrophobicity of coal on froth stability and no practical application of the particles with the critical contact angle in flotation improvement was proposed. In this research, a bituminous coal sample was divided into different size and density fractions. Flotation experiments and froth stability measurements under the same conditions were conducted to figure out how different coal particles affect froth stability and flotation performance. There are various methods to measure froth stability. They can be divided into dynamic and static measurements ( In this research, the froth stability was combinedly measured by maximum froth height, froth half-life time and water recovery so as to get relatively overall information of the froth, including the extents of bubble coalescence and water drainage under different conditions. A parameter named “water solid ratio” was used to indicate the extent of drainage in the froth decay process. A high non-overflow flotation cell was used to measure the maximum froth height and the froth half-life time. The conditioning and aeration conditions were kept absolutely the same as those in the flotation experiments. A run-of-mine bituminous coal sample was acquired from a coal preparation plant in Zaozhuang, China. The measurements of particle size and contact angle of the <74 All flotation experiments were conducted in a 0.5 A high non-overflow flotation cell was designed to record the froth height. This device was modified from that of  In the froth decay process, the curve for the 500–250   For the froth of the 1.5–1.8 The half-life time of the froth of the >1.8 It is worth noting that the flotation performance (concentrate yield) coincided with the froth half-life time and the water solid ratio, but not with the maximum froth height and the water recovery. But if the froth of the <1.5 The <74 The results are shown in The froth of the 1.5–1.8 The change of the froth of the >1.8 It is known that the recovery of coarse particles is highly related to the froth stability. From a practical perspective, the froth with fine particles of the 1.5–1.8 Extensive research has been conducted on the first two kinds of froth. However, little attention was paid to the froth with fine particles of high hydrophobicity. When the mixture of coarse particles and the fine particles of the <1.5 In this research, flotation experiments of the mixture of the 500–250  The results of this study show that different coal particles have significant and different effects on froth stability in flotation. Fine hydrophilic particles could stabilize the froth in the froth formation process but had little effect in maintaining the froth in the froth decay process. Fine moderate hydrophobic particles greatly increased the froth stability in the froth formation process. But the speed of froth decay was also fast. This might be caused by the high water solid ratio in the froth, which made the froth very mobile. For fine particles with high hydrophobicity, they had the least effect in stabilizing the froth in the froth formation process due to the lowest water solid ratio. But in the froth decay process, they could greatly prevent the froth from collapse for a very long time. Coarse particles with high hydrophobicity also had little effect in stabilizing the froth in the froth formation process. But they could accelerate the froth collapse when the proportion in concentrate was low and could prevent the froth collapse when the proportion was high. The froth stability measured by maximum froth height, froth half-life time and water recovery were not consistent in this research. It did not coincide well with the flotation performance, too. The inconsistency was mainly caused by the coal particles of high hydrophobicity. Without the high hydrophobic coal particles, the consistency between froth stability and flotation performance could be found. Hence, consideration of the particularity of high hydrophobic coal particles should be taken to better characterize the flotation froth. The water solid ratio could describe the mobility of the forth and the extent of drainage in the froth decay process. It is a bridge connecting flotation experiments and froth stability measurements. This work was supported by