This paper describes the application of a shortcut computational method to analyse and compare alternative flotation circuits developed to treat high-arsenic copper ores. The methodology uses a superstructure that considers the many different available elements of the flotation circuits and compares the results. The circuits were evaluated using radial/spider graphs, and were evaluated based on the metric indices of efficiency, capacity, quality, economics and environmental impact.
                  The simulations were performed for a superstructure that considered 27 flotation circuits for an Australian sulphide ore containing chalcopyrite, tennantite, quartz and pyrite. The starting circuit corresponded to the flotation circuit described in previous work on this ore (Haque et al., 2010; Bruckard et al., 2010), and was used as the basis for comparison of the alternative flotation circuits.
                  The key result of the analysis is that the base condition is one of the best circuits with respect to the copper grade in the concentrates, CO2 emission, and fresh water usage. However, the base condition is one of the most inefficient circuits with respect to the percentage of arsenic in the products, profit, and copper recovery. This study shows that there are more suitable flotation circuits available than the stated base condition for a specific goal and/or multiple goals.CSIRO Process Science and Engineering (Australia) has been developing new flotation flowsheets, based on pulp potential control, aimed at separating copper-bearing minerals and arsenic-bearing minerals in base metal circuits ( The data from the flotation results on an Australian ore containing chalcopyrite, tennantite, quartz and pyrite has now been evaluated and modelled using a novel methodology developed by CICITEM (Chile); this method analyses a set of circuits based on multiple objectives ( The overall aim of the work was to determine better circuit configuration for the processing of copper-bearing minerals and arsenic-bearing using multi-objectives. The methodology used in this study consisted of the following steps: (1) Development of a superstructure, which included all possible flotation circuits to be assessed, (2) simulation of each circuit, (3) definition and determination of the metric indicators to evaluate each of the circuits, and (4) normalisation of the metric indication data and production of spider graphs to display the results and allow for interpretation. The first step was to define the alternative flowsheets to be analysed and represent them with a superstructure, which was constructed by defining the separation stages and allowing for all the possible interconnections among them. Mass balances were generated for each specific circuit to determine the values of the total and specific mass flows for each component stream (chalcopyrite, tennantite, water, gangue), based on the known recoveries of each species ( In the present work, the recovery of each stage will be assumed constant for the purpose of selection of a set of flotation circuits. Because the recoveries in each stage depend on the flotation circuit, the real values must be determined experimentally, but this is not done in this work. This assumption will be validated and discussed later. On the other hand, since the aim in this work is to determine the conceptual design of the process (or obtain a set of alternatives for further study) it is clear that the equipment design (e.g. volume and number of cells) and/or operation conditions (e.g. residence time) should be adjusted to achieve the assumed recoveries or other suitable values. To evaluate each circuit, metric indicators were set up for flotation efficiency, product quality, environmental impact, and process economics. These are defined as follows: (1) The energy consumption (kW The results are presented by goal (specific or multiple) for each metric indicator and the data are displayed using spider/radial graphs for the normalised values. The values were normalised such that the best value for each indicator has a normalised value of 1, and the worst value has a normalised value of 0. Thus the highest copper recovery and the lowest arsenic content in the product have normalised values of 1. There are two products to consider with respect to the copper recovery, one with high arsenic and one with low arsenic, therefore there are three indicators: the global copper recovery, the copper recovery in product 1 (high As/low Cu) and the copper recovery in product 2 (low As/high Cu).  There are two products with respect to the copper concentrate grade; therefore, the two indicators are the copper concentrate grade in product 1 (high As/low Cu) and the copper concentrate grade in product 2 (low As/high Cu). The circuits with the best values for the normalised concentrate grade are generally the circuits that have fewer flow streams to the cleaner stage, including the base circuit, which has no recirculation. Stream recirculation tends to decreases the feed grade to the cleaner stage. The best circuit is SSSR ( A high grade of arsenic is desirable in product 1 while a low arsenic grade is desirable in product 2. In this work, the arsenic in product 2 was considered because this arsenic is ultimately in the final product. In general, circuits with scavenger stage that sent the cleaner, re-cleaner and product two tails to the rougher stage and scavenger concentrate to the cleaner produced lower values of arsenic concentration (    From the analysis completed for each individual indicator, there is not one unique circuit among those examined that is best for all indicators. Although this may not be surprising, it confirms the necessity to have a procedure that allows for decision-making based on the evaluation of multiple goals. Although industrial practice includes the evaluation of various aspects, it is not usual in the scientific literature to include multi-objective evaluation for conceptual design of flotation circuits ( All of the circuits (see  In this work it was assumed that stage recoveries are independent of the circuit, this means that they are assumed constant. However, recoveries clearly change from one circuit to another, but the aim of this study is to determine a set of circuits that shows the best results. Thus the premise of this work may be defined as: the selection of circuit structure is insensitive to moderate variations in stage recoveries. To validate this assumption the normalised indicators were calculated for several values of stage recoveries for each mineral, three levels were selected with ±5, ±10 and ±20%, which can be considered as moderate, intermediate and high variations. As the number of variables is very large (27 circuit structures, three mineralogical species and six flotation stages) it is not possible to analyse all combinations. For this reason a random sample of the case studies was selected to reduce the sampling error. The size of the sample was estimated in 28 combinations, which gives a 0.95 confidence level.  The low standard deviations observed for the cases studied, especially for indicators close to 1, confirms that the assumption of constant stage recovery is suitable for the selection of circuits. Therefore the selection of the five top circuits based on stage recovery constant values have a good probability of selecting the best circuits once the actual values of stage recovery are determined. This further confirms that the methodology developed can be used as a first step in the selection of a set of circuits based on a given performance criterion. Examples of indicators that show higher deviations are copper grade and profit. The aim of this work was to obtain better circuit alternatives for the previously developed based circuit. That’s why the most important analysis is on selected circuits. Finally, it is important to note that the normalisation of the values depend on the maximum and minimum values of each indicator. This issue should be taken into consideration in implementing sumbranches, so as not to overrate some indicators. It is also important to analyse the effect some circuits can have in distorting the visual analysis. For example, the TCC circuit introduces visual artifacts in The analysis technique described in this work includes the development of superstructures and the consideration of multiple objectives providing a methodology that facilitates the evaluation of the different circuits that have been analysed. The method provides information on the relationship between the circuit structures with indicators of efficiency, quality, and economic and environmental impact, allowing the best flotation circuit to be selected based on multiple goals. In the arsenic rejection process considered in this paper, the results indicate that flotation cells should be installed in the scavenger stage for the treatment of the tails, or the circuit should be changed such that the cleaner and re-cleaner tails and scavenger concentrates are re-circulated to other stages in the process. This tool allows a larger number of circuits to be evaluated and compared to each other by using normalised metrics indicators, providing greater flexibility than other simulators. Using Sumbranches with spider/radial graphs shows the different comparisons for either an individual indicator or all indicators, by showing the footprint for each specific circuit. This allows fast and informative decisions to be made based on critical parameters such as the operational efficiency, process economics, and environmental impact. This study shows that the recoveries of each flotation stage can be considered constant with the objective of selecting the best circuits. However, after selecting the circuit, the stage recovery values should be determined based on experimentation. This includes a degree of uncertainty and it is possible that some of the selected circuits are not a good choice, but if it is mixed with the experience of the designer and the experimental validation, this methodology can be helpful when looking for retrofit or new flotation circuits. Mr. Montenegro thanks Mr. W. Bruckard and his other CSIRO colleagues for fruitful discussions and suggestions during the development and execution of this project. The authors are grateful to CONICYT (FONDECYT 1090406), CICITEM (Project R07F1001), University of Antofagasta, and to CSIRO for the support of this research.