Recovery of fine coal particles by flotation has always been difficult due to the low collision efficiency between air bubbles and fine coal particles. One method to improve the flotation recovery of fine coal particles is the aggregation of these particles prior to the flotation process. This paper introduces a new method for the aggregation of fine coal particles by utilizing an ultrasonic standing-wave treatment. Under a 200 kHz ultrasonic standing-wave, cavitation bubbles formed on the hydrophobic coal particle surfaces. The bubble-laden coal particles moved to the nodes of the ultrasonic standing wave by the acoustic radiation force if the size of the cavitation bubbles were larger than the resonance radius, resulting in rapid aggregation of the fine coal particles. Micro-flotation results indicated that the flotation rate significantly increased after the ultrasonic standing-wave treatment. This study demonstrated an efficient ultrasonic standing-wave method for improving the flotation rate of fine coal particles without addition of chemicals or collectors.Flotation is an effective method for the recovery of fine coal particles. However, ultrafine particles are usually difficult to float because of the low collision efficiency between bubbles and particles A simple ultrasonic wave is usually considered as a sinusoidal wave and its transmission depends on the vibrational behavior of the surrounding medium Conventional ultrasonic equipment can be divided into two types: horn type ( In this paper, we studied the mechanism of aggregation of fine coal particles by the ultrasonic standing wave through in-situ observation with a CCD camera and ex-situ optical microscopy of the resulting flocs. This is the first study to observe aggregation of fine coal particles under standing-wave ultrasonic treatment. Additionally, the effect of standing-wave ultrasonic treatment on coal flotation kinetics was investigated through micro-flotation tests. The results of this study suggest ultrasonic standing-wave treatment could be a promising technology for improving kinetics of flotation of hydrophobic minerals. The coal samples were collected from Tangkou Coal Preparation Plant in the Shandong province of China. The ash content of the original sample was around 5%. The size fractions of <74 μm, and 74 μm to 125 μm of coal samples for the ultrasonic tests and micro-flotation tests were obtained by screening using Tyler standard sieves. The coal powders were pressed at the pressure of 40 MPa on a boric acid substrate to form a thin pellet. The contact angle of a water droplet on the coal pellet was measured by a contact angle analyzer (Attension Theta, Biolin Scientific). The advancing contact angle of coal was obtained, and the reported results are the average value of five repeated tests. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) (TESCAN, MIRA3) was used to characterize the surface morphology of the coal. Prior to imaging, the surface of the coal sample was cleaned by ethanol, allowed to dry at room temperature, and coated with a layer of gold. SEM operating conditions were as follows: High voltage (HV) was 25 kV, working distance (WD) was 10.2 mm, the detector was an Everhart-Thornley Detector (ETD), and magnification was 800X. The ultrasonic standing wave device used in this study is illustrated in The slurry was agitated with a magnetic stir bar at 500 rpm during all the ultrasonic treatment tests. After 30 s of mixing, the ultrasonic generator was turned on for 30 s at which point the ultrasonic treatment was stopped and the suspension monitored for another 30 s. A CCD camera (Basler, acA2000) was used to record the aggregation phenomenon. Images were analyzed using ImageJ and Matlab softwares. To investigate the nature of coal aggregation by the standing-wave ultrasonic treatment, an optical microscope (A Xiovert 200 M) was used to observe the flocs. An aliquot of the 74 μm to 125 μm size fraction of coal was prepared and treated ultrasonically as described previously at an amplitude of 1 Vpp. The coal particles were observed by the optical microscope with 10 × lens (ZEISS) before and after ultrasonic standing wave treatment. A hydrophone (Onda HHR-0500) was used to measure the liquid pressure during ultrasonic treatment. To prevent the damage on the probe by cavitation, the amplitude was set at 0.5 Vpp for these measurements. The liquid pressure was measured every 0.25 mm between the sensors to verify the existence of the standing wave. Micro flotation tests were conducted with a Hallimond tube with the volume of 100 ml, and 1 g of coal sample was used for each experiment. The coal suspension was agitated for 10 min at 600 rpm with a magnetic stirrer, and then an ultrasonic bath was used to treat the pulp for 1 min to further disperse the coal particles. The dispersion was subjected to an ultrasonic standing-wave treatment for 1 min. The suspension was then transferred to the Hallimond tube and agitated with a magnetic stir bar at a rate of 300 rpm during the micro flotation tests. The flow rate of N      The results of micro flotation tests directly reflect the probability of collision, adhesion, and detachment between particles and bubbles, since a single bubble interacts with the suspension at any given time The first-order equation was used to analyze the flotation rate with and without ultrasonic treatment. The flotation rate constant,  The liquid pressure variation of an acoustic standing wave causes the bubbles to oscillate. . The Rayleigh-Plesset equation is used to express the temporal change in the bubble size under the changing liquid pressure Due to the existence of acoustic pressure gradient, the ultrasound could couple with the bubble oscillations. Then the bubbles would move because of the pressure gradients In addition, the frequency of the ultrasonic wave was also vital for the formation of flocs. Experiments in this study were attempted at ultrasonic frequencies less than 100 kHz, and aggregates were hardly observed. The approximate relationship between frequency and resonant bubble size was deduced by Leighton from Eq.  When the frequency is 1 MHz, the resonant bubble radius is 3 μm. A bubble radius larger than 3 μm would aggregates at the node and not feel a significant buoyant force, so generation of particle-bubble aggregates would be more likely at 1 MHz than at 22 kHz. Additionally, when the frequency is 1 MHz, the wavelength is equal to 1450 μm (sound speed is approximately 1450 m/s in water at room temperature). The spacing between the node and antinode is one-quarter wavelength (360 μm), which is too small for coarse coal particles (−125 μm) to aggregate and stay together. The aggregates that form from coarse particles would be broken due to the cavitation effect at the antinode when the frequency is more than 1 MHz. However, this megahertz standing-wave ultrasonic treatment could be used for the collection of ultrafine objects, such as the biological cell This study investigated fine coal particle aggregation using a standing wave with a frequency of 200 kHz, which is an intermediate frequency to the previously-discussed 22 kHz and 1 MHz. The resonant radius of bubbles at 200 kHz is 14 μm. Additionally, when bubbles oscillate in the acoustic field, the radiation pressure generated by other cavitation bubbles causes the mutual attraction between bubbles The ultrasonic standing wave treatment is an efficient method for aggregation of fine coal particles. When the frequency of the ultrasonic wave is 200 kHz, the <74 μm and 74 μm to 125 μm coal samples can aggregate together quickly. Longer ultrasonic treatment time and higher intensity are both lead to larger aggregates, which is beneficial for flotation. Optical microscopy of aggregates indicated cavitation bubbles act as a bridge between coal particles. The formation of aggregates is the result of the particles moving towards the nodes by cavitation bubbles. Finally, the micro-flotation results showed that the flotation rate was improved after ultrasonic standing-wave treatment. This research study demonstrated an alternative approach for the selective flotation of fine coal particles. This work was supported by “the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: