The gasification characteristics of chicken manure in supercritical water (SCW) were investigated in a fluidized-bed reactor. Effects of reaction parameters such as reaction temperatures, manure concentrations and catalytic effect of activated carbon on the gasification were studied. The results showed that the temperature play a key role in the formation of gaseous products. Chicken manure was almost completely gasified at 620°C without addition of catalyst and the carbon gasification efficiency can reach up to 99.2%. The liquid and solid products were characterized by COD, SPE-GC/MS, SEM, EDX and FTIR. The main compositions of liquid products were phenol and substituted phenols, N-heterocyclics, benzene and substituted benzenes, carbocyclics. The types of organic compounds in liquid products decreased quickly with the increase of temperature. The FTIR spectra of solid products showed a lower content of carbohydrates and higher content of aromatic structures compared to the initial chicken manure. N-heterocyclic compounds had been detected in both solid and liquid products. Activated carbon as a catalyst could improve the hydrogen yield significantly and promote carbon gasification efficiency at a lower temperature. The maximum hydrogen production of 25.2 mol/kg was achieved at 600°C with activated carbon loading of 6 wt%. Besides, activated carbon showed a good removal ability of inorganic species, specifically the metal cations in chicken manure.Chicken manure (CM) is a waste of chicken breeding that contains various organic and inorganic matters and needs to be disposed of responsibly. Nowadays, disposal of this waste meets more challenges due to the raising consumption of chicken and eggs around the world. Chicken manure, containing >70 wt% water, is unattractive feedstock for further utilization due to the high transport cost, energy consumptive thermal separation prior to further processing (combustion), and also environmental considerations. Moreover the malodorous chicken manure always contains heavy metal element such as Cu, Hg and As, and large numbers of pathogens including bacteria, viruses and parasites In this work, supercritical water gasification (SCWG) of chicken manure was assessed as an alternative method for manure disposal and hydrogen production. The supercritical water is the water beyond the critical point (374°C, 22.1 MPa) has special physical and has chemical properties such as low viscosity, high diffusivity and low dielectric constant. These properties make SCW an excellent solvent for the both organic substances and gases, providing a homogenous condition for gasification of organics with short residence time and high-efficiency Adding catalysts is an efficient way to enhance the gasification in SCWG process. Activated carbons produced from different sources are found to be catalytically effective for SCWG reactions. Xu et al. A wide range of biomass wastes has been treated by the SCWG process, including tannery waste The chicken manure was obtained from the Luoman chicken farm in Shannxi province. The sample contains the excrements of the birds, together with urines, undigested food, feathers, egg shell and even sand. Sample was pretreated by passing a strainer to remove those feathers, shells and sand that may cause plugging in reactor system. In addition, the pyrolysis of chicken manure under steam atmosphere was investigated by a thermogravimetric analyzer. The experiments were carried out in a continuous SCWG system equipped with a fluidized-bed reactor. The reactor was made of 316 stainless steel and designed for the temperature up to 700°C and pressure up to 30 MPa. Five K-type thermocouples were inserted equidistantly into the center of reactor to monitor the temperature of the fluid. The temperatures mentioned in this study refer to this fluid temperature in the reactor. A back pressure regulator was equipped at the end of system to control the system pressure. A PID control system was used to control the temperature. For every experimental run, the manure was diluted to desired concentration by deionized water and stored in the feedstock tank. The flow rate of chicken manure and preheated water was 20 and 60 g/min. Water in the tank was pumped into the system and preheated by the heat exchanger and preheater. When the temperature and pressure reached the desired condition, the manure was fed into the reactor through a bypath above the distributor and mixed with the preheated water to realize fast heating of the feedstock. The rapid heating rate can suppress the formation of macromolecular compounds at lower temperatures during the heating process. After reaction, the products mixture flowed out from the top of reactor and then was cooled to ambient temperature by passing through a heat exchanger and a cooler. Then the products mixture was expanded to ambient pressure through a back-pressure regulator. Subsequently, phase separation of gaseous and liquid products occurred in a separator. Liquid samples were collected for consequent analysis. The gas volume was measured by a wet-type gasometer, and composition of the gaseous samples was analyzed by a gas chromatograph. Liquid samples were collected and analyzed. A more detailed description of this SCWG system can be found in the references The uncertainty of the experimental data was calculated and it showed that the uncertainty of gas yield was less than 2.27% and the uncertainty of gas fraction was less than 1.90% for single detection; the uncertainty of pressure and temperature were less than 2.00% and 1.84% respectively The composition of gas products was analyzed by an Agilent 7890A gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and capillary column C-2000 purchased from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics in China. High purity of Argon was used as the carrier gas. The qualitative analysis of organic compounds in the liquid effluent was carried out by SPE-GC/MS (GC6890/MSD973). Before the analysis, the aqueous samples were treated with a solid-phase extraction technique (SPE). Then, the treated liquid samples were analyzed by GC–MS (HP 6890 series GC system and 5973 mass selective detector). Helium was used as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) mass spectroscopy library software was used to identify the compounds. The chemical oxygen demand (COD) was detected by a spectrophotometer (Multi-Direct, Loviband). The morphological structures of the fresh and used activated carbon were determined on a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) of JSM-7800F (Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 3 kV. The energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrum was carried by Oxford INCA instrument mounted on SEM. The FTIR spectra (Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer) were used to characterize the solid residue. In this study, three parameters were introduced to characterize the manure gasification which including carbon gasification efficiency (CE), hydrogen gasification efficiency (HE) and gasification efficiency (GE). Carbon gasification efficiency (CE), hydrogen gasification efficiency (HE) and gasification efficiency (GE) are calculated as follows:  Chemical oxygen demand (COD) is a crucial indicator of the presence and concentration of the organic pollutants. The COD removal rate is defined as the percentage of the COD removed from the liquid products accounting for the COD of chicken manure that was mixed with the preheated water at a ratio of 1:3 in the reactor. As shown in Generally, reaction temperature is the most important parameter that influences the SCWG The CE, HE and GE also increased quickly as temperature increased, especially with an HE of 222.4% at 620°C. This result indicated that water was involved in hydrogen production reactions as a reactant. The CE reached up to 99.2% at 620°C, which indicated that nearly complete gasification was achieved under these reaction conditions. High hydrogen gasification efficiency and nearly complete carbon conversion efficiency implied a very high utilization efficiency of chicken manure in SCWG. Importantly, SCWG is easy for scale-up thus the SCWG of chicken manure to produce H  The results indicate that the increase of concentration has a negative effect on the gasification. In principle, the compounds in manure and its intermediate products dissolve in the supercritical water, and the collision frequency of different molecules determines the gasification The effect of the of catalyst amount on chicken manure gasification was investigated by adding different amounts of (3, 6 and 9 wt%) activated carbon into 9 wt% manure slurry at 540°C. As shown in Moreover, the effect of activated carbon as catalyst in SCWG of chicken manure at different temperatures was studied with the optimum catalyst loading of 6 wt%. As shown in Compared the results obtained with and without catalyst, the addition of AC catalyst not only improved the hydrogen yield significantly but also had a positive effect on CE. It indicated that activated carbon has a positive effect on SCWG of chicken manure. Although activated carbon was widely used as catalysts in petrochemicals industry, and researchers thought that activated carbon provided active site for reaction due to the abundant free radicals and oxygen functional groups on its porous surface SEM images of the surface morphologies of fresh and used AC catalyst at different temperatures are demonstrated in The liquid products were analyzed by GC–MS. Semi-quantitative method was employed to obtain the relative concentration of each identified compound. It was based on the proportion its gas chromatographic peak area of the total peak areas. The total ion chromatogram (TIC) area fraction of each detected compound in the total peak area was used for comparing the relative content of the compounds as suggested by other researchers As shown in As the increase of temperature, the species of N-heterocyclics significantly decreased. Only indole had been detected under 620°C. As to the origin of the identified N-heterocyclics compounds, most of them could have been formed by the hydrolysis of proteinaceous materials The abundant compounds in liquid products mean that chicken manure with complex chemical compositions (lignocelluloses, fats, protein, inorganic) that has different activities in supercritical water and enables production of versatile chemicals. Among them, some products such as indole, pyrimidine, aniline can be used as platform chemicals for pharmacy, photographic materials of polymer materials and so on Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra of the chicken manure and solid residues produced at four different temperatures are shown in The major banding at 3439 cm Compared to the initial chicken manure, the spectra of solid products at different temperatures was lower in carbohydrates and higher in aromatic structures. The peak at 3439 cm From the above analysis, we concluded that the main components such as carbohydrate, lipids, protein and its constituents were almost dissolved and hydrolyzed below 500°C, and new C In this work, gasification of chicken manure in supercritical water was studied in a fluidized-bed reactor. The formation of gaseous products was significantly affected by temperature and concentration. Chicken manure with 9 wt% concentration could be almost completely gasified at 620°C without catalyst. Activated carbon was proved to be an effective catalyst for SCWG of chicken manure. The addition of activated carbon can not only improve the hydrogen yield significantly but also has a positive effect on carbon gasification efficiency. The maximum hydrogen yield of 25.2 mol/kg was achieved at 600°C with the activated carbon loading of 6 wt%. Besides, activated carbon showed a good adsorption ability of inorganic species which could remove ultrophication element and heavy metal pollutant in manure effluent. This could improve the effluent quality and achieve a better disposal of chicken manure. N-heterocyclic compounds were detected in both liquid and solid products, and the main components such as carbohydrate, lipids, protein and its constituents in chicken manure were almost dissolved and hydrolyzed below 500°C. This work was financially supported by the