The incidence of periprosthetic fractures is rising significantly as more replacement arthroplasties are performed. They are a potentially devastating complication associated with high morbidity and mortality. Their management is a sub-specialty in itself. This article outlines the principles of the management of periprosthetic fractures of the lower limb.An aging population with higher standards of living has led to a steady increase in replacement arthroplasties in developed countries as recorded by the Scandinavian, Australian, UK and Mayo Clinic Registers. The positive outcome of an otherwise successful procedure can be compromised by a periprosthetic fracture (PPF). It is a major problem, associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality. Periprosthetic fractures can be divided into those occurring intra-operatively and post-operatively. Intra-operative fractures are usually caused by the insertion of the stem in the femur or the tibia. The incidence varies with different fixation methods. In the femur, uncemented stems carry a higher risk; Berry et al. report a rate of 0.3% in cemented and 5.4% in uncemented. The rates are significantly higher in revision surgery. The post-operative incidence of periprosthetic fractures in primary total hip arthroplasties (THA) has been reported by the Mayo clinic registry as 1.1% of total hip replacements done between 1969 and 1999). According to the Swedish Hip registry, trauma accounts for 75% of all PPFs. The original diagnosis is relevant to the risk of periprosthetic fracture; rheumatoid arthritis has been shown to be a risk factor for PPF by both the Finnish and Swedish Registries. While classification is essential to aid communication and for research, it is of most use to assist management. Numerous classification systems have been devised. Most, like Parrish (Table 1), classify the fracture according to its location. While simple and straightforward it does not help in deciding the correct treatment.  Ninan et al. produced the Coventry classification for PPF. In Type 2, or ‘unhappy hips’ the fixation is compromised and the implant has to be revised as part of the treatment of the fracture. The Vancouver Classification can be used similarly, but is far more complex. Types A, B1 and C can be managed in the same way as the type 1(happy hips), whereas types B2 and B3 can be thought of as type 2 (unhappy) hips, which require revision (Table 2). Revision arthroplasty and the management of periprosthetic fractures is a sub-specialty in its own right. It is important that the management of these patients is at least discussed with and ideally managed by surgeons who have experience in the field. Assessment of a periprosthetic fracture should be standardised. The patient should be investigated biochemically and haematologically to assess their fitness for surgery. Radiologically, it is of paramount importance to obtain good quality radiographs which should be assessed carefully, comparing them with previous X-Rays. CT scanning may be useful, provided there is adequate suppression of artefact from the implant. If the patient is unfit for surgical treatment, closed reduction can be attempted; but the associated prolonged bed rest can lead to serious complications. Malunion is a major concern in this group as it can be detrimental to function, and can make future revision, if that becomes possible, extremely challenging. The surgical management of periprosthetic fractures depends on the site of the fracture, the bone quality and the stability of the components. When the stem is stable, fixation of the fracture should be performed, either open or closed. Special consideration should be given to transverse fractures at the tip of the stem. These are very difficult to treat conventionally and many surgeons advocate stem revision despite the prosthesis itself being stable. Historically Ogden in 1972 used a long plate designed to accommodate pre-existing intramedullary devices. It had slots to accommodate wires and bands. However, biomechanical analysis showed that these resulted in high tensile stress at the fracture site and stress shielding at the proximal lateral cortex, leading to fractures below the plate and component loosening. The Partridge system, introduced in 1982, consisted of a nylon plate and straps which were introduced around the fracture. Over time it proved to be unsuccessful, with poor results, especially in more distal fractures, largely due to band loosening. Another popular device was the Mennen Plate, a paraskeletal clamp-on plate device, but reports of its use were controversial. It gave semi-rigid stability and was first introduced for non weight-bearing bones, but Lam et al. advocated its suitability and use for femoral periprosthetic fractures. Current concepts for the treatment of any fracture should follow AO principles. If the prosthesis is satisfactory both clinically and radiologically the focus should be on treating the fracture on its own merits. Thus if the fracture is distal to the tip of the femoral stem, the use of conventional DCP, DCS or LCP plates should be considered ( A further development of locking plate osteosynthesis is the concept of Less Invasive Stabilization System (LISS system). This is a pre-shaped plate applied to the extra-medullary surface using locking screws. It combines a locking device conferring good angular stability with a minimally invasive approach to the fracture. The plate can be inserted antegrade or retrograde ( Combining screw fixation with cerclage wires with a locking system remains controversial. The combination is said to give better fixation of the plate and hence give a more stable construct, but critics suggest that the good hold provided by the locking system renders the use of cerclage wires unnecessary and they also regard them as dangerous as they can act as stress risers. For conventional plate fixation onto bone the consensus is that screws, cerclage wires or bands have proven to be inefficient when used on their own. A combination has been shown to give good results. Tsiridis et al. showed good results using the Dall-Miles plate, essentially a development of the Ogden plate, which uses a combination of cable and screw fixation proximally and conventional screw fixation distally. Special attention should be given to the proximal screw fixation. In this case the use of uni-cortical screws is recommended around the stem of the implant and bi-cortical screws below this level. The more proximal the periprosthetic fracture the more challenging the fixation is. The prosthesis and the cement mantle restrict the options for screw and plate placement and insertion of the screws can fracture the cement or act as stress risers, altering the biomechanical properties of the cement and leading to instability and interference with the prosthesis/bone interface with consequent loosening and long term osteolysis. In type 2, the unhappy fractures, where the prosthesis is affected or there is evidence of loosening, revision of the prosthesis should be undertaken. When revising a femoral stem in the presence of a periprosthetic fracture, most authors advocate the use of long stems. A long stem can give good results when bone loss is proximal to the isthmus. Larson at al state that cortical perforations and femoral fractures should be bypassed by at least 2 femoral diameters. Revision of a prosthesis is challenging and more so in the presence of a periprosthetic fracture. The removal of the old prosthesis and cement requires great care as it can lead to further bone loss, development of a new fracture or extension of the existing one. The surgeon is usually left with significant bone loss and poor remaining bone stock. There are various techniques to overcome these problems, such as the use of cortical onlay grafts. These are usually hemi-cylindrical diaphyseal or cortical fibular allografts, which are fixed to the host bone by circumferential wires. The aim is to provide structural support to the femur by replacing uncontained non-circumferential femoral defects, reducing stress risers and speeding up the healing process. Another technique is impaction grafting, which is usually reserved for severe osteolysis. Firstly, the proximal femur is re-constituted forming a cortical scaffold or containment created using wires, plates or meshes or a combination. Then bone graft is impacted into this tube. Once completed, the reconstructed bony tube can accommodate the femoral component. This technique can also be applied to acetabular defects when compressed graft is used to fill the defect followed by insertion of either a cemented or cementless acetabular component. If a patient is not fit for such a major procedure, there are a few more options available. If the patient is of average functional demand, or if definitive surgery may be possible in the future, in a happy hip external fixation can be considered. If the patient has low functional demand and a loose prosthesis, then a Girdlestone procedure can be considered. Finally, if the defect is very extensive, using a mega-prosthesis, such as are used after tumour resection, can be considered. The femur is osteotomised just below the level of abnormal bone stock and the prosthesis is fixed to the distal diaphysis. The abductor mechanism is then attached to the mega-prosthesis. Satisfactory results with an average Harris hip score of 71 have been reported by Klein et al. In PPFs around the hip most attention is focussed on the femoral component as periprosthetic fractures around the acetabulum are extremely rare, but they are potentially life threatening. Acetabular fractures most frequently occur intra-operatively, but they are also associated with loosening or severe osteolysis around the acetabular component. Obviously loose sockets should be revised. Various classifications have been proposed for periprosthetic fractures around the knee. Backstein The Rorabeck-Lewis classification is a good guide for management, again based on the condition of the prosthesis Type I Undisplaced, Intact Component Cast, protect WB ORIF if cannot tolerate cast/brace Type III Loose Implant Treat Fracture and address implant later If, which is quite rare, the fracture is undisplaced and the prosthesis is stable, non-surgical treatment is appropriate using a brace to restrict joint movement and protected weight-bearing. In most cases surgical treatment is necessary. Fractures more than 15 cm away from the femoral implant should not be considered as periprosthetic and should be managed conventionally. The commonest and most widely advocated method to manage them is by using a retrograde intramedullary nail. The two pre-requisites are a large enough distal fragment to allow fixation of the distal locking screws, and a femoral component that allows access to the medullary canal. Hence, closed box devices are absolute contraindications. If the fracture is too distal, or there is a closed box implant, locking plates are advocated and have been shown to do well ( Patellar fractures are the second commonest periprosthetic fracture of the knee, with a reported incidence of patello-femoral complications (fracture, loosening, radiolucency) from 0.15%–12%. Most occur with no evidence of injury within the first two years after surgery. Management of patellar periprosthetic fractures is determined by fracture displacement, the degree of component loosening and whether the extensor mechanism is intact. Type III fractures are the commonest according to Ortiguera and Berry. Tibial periprosthetic fractures are far less common. If the component is stable, the fracture can be treated using a buttress plate; peri-articular plates have also been advocated for complex metaphyseal fractures in the presence of a stable component. These plates are anatomically pre-contoured, so require minimal intra-operative bending. The use of locking screws may give a more stable fixation. If the prosthesis is loose and there is radiological evidence of osteolysis is a difficult problem. Removal of the prosthesis and cement and poor bone stock, can result in significant bony deficiency. This can be made up relatively easily by using a combination of thicker polyethylene implants and metal augments. Small defects can also be filled using cement (poly-methylmethacrylate) but as this has no biological properties, it may prevent fracture healing. In cases of severe bone loss, a custom made mega-prosthesis may have to be considered as this allows reconstruction of fractures with significant bone defects. The disadvantages however are the cost and the lack of intra-operative flexibility. In all cases where there is loss of bone with comminution and poor bone stock, bone grafting is extremely helpful. Autologous graft is best due to its osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties, but in the majority of patients sufficient volume is not available, limiting its usefulness. Another option is the use of a structural allograft/implant composite; Engh et al. reported good results using structural allograft in cases of severe tibial bone loss. Problems have also been reported with periprosthetic fractures after unicompartmental knee replacement, presenting with significant loosening of the components and tibial bone loss. They should be managed by conversion to a total knee replacement with allograft to cover the tibial bone defect which has been shown to have good results.