Prediction of the geoenvironmental characteristics of mine waste materials typically relies on the static and kinetic testing of individual waste units. In reality, waste rock piles are heterogeneous landforms containing potentially acid forming (PAF) units juxtaposed with non-acid forming (NAF) units. Despite this, predictive geoenvironmental test work programs rarely characterise blends of waste materials. Through undertaking laboratory-based blended static testing and mineralogical assessments, a first insight into the leachate chemistry of a waste landform can be ascertained. This was tested using three waste units (Type A – alkaline, B – neutral and D – PAF; n=31) obtained from the Savage River mine, Western Tasmania. Seven daughter blend types (1–7; n=42) were prepared using different ratios of the individual waste types, and characterised by acid base accounting and mineralogical techniques. Blend types were NAF when a maximum of 20% of Type D was used, with daughter blend 4 (90% Type A+10% Type D) the most inert when screened against ANZECC (2000) aquatic protection trigger values. This study demonstrates that through first-pass static blended testing, opportunities exist to improve waste-rock handling practices and design NAF waste piles once field trials, involving a range of particle sizes, have been conducted.Hard weather resistant & durable e.g., fresh dolomite and magnesite (estimated as 80% of total). Soft liable to break down by weathering or compaction, e.g. weathered magnesite or dolomite (estimated as 20% of total) Hard weather resistant & durable, e.g., intrusives such as gabbro, dolerite and amphibolite. Soft liable to breakdown by weathering or compaction, e.g., eastern schist, low sulphide serpentinite and clay The critical importance of accurately forecasting leachate quality produced by mined and processed waste materials (i.e., waste rock, tailings) at the earliest stages of mine development cannot be underestimated in order to cost-effectively plan for economic operation and mine closure. Leachate quality is significantly influenced by the oxidation of sulphide minerals (e.g., pyrite, pyrrhotite) contained within these materials which may generate low pH (<4.5) fluids in which dissolved metals (typically cationic species) can be readily transported e.g., Cd, Co, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn ( The Savage River iron ore mine (operated by Solid waste materials (i.e., waste rock) at the Savage River mine are designated into one of four types (A to D) based on their geochemical and mineralogical characteristics ( In this study, 31 waste rock samples representing Types A (n = 7), B (n = 11) and D (n = 13) were collected by Grange Resources personnel from the North Pit operations. Each sample (∼2 To determine the mineralogy of both the parent waste rock and each daughter blend materials, all samples were subjected to XRD analysis using a Bruker D2 Phaser X-ray diffractometer instrument with a Co X-ray source. Prior to each daily sample run, a corundum standard was analysed to check the X-ray beam alignment. Each sample was ground in an agate pestle and mortar to approximately 10 Rapid and accurate measurements of sulphur (wt.%; for calculation of maximum potential acidity- MPA) and carbon (wt.%; to indicate presence of carbonates and calculate the neutralising potential) were performed on all daughter blends using an Eltra C-S 2000 instrument (UTas Laboratories). Analysis requires the use of two accelerants (tungsten and iron) which were carefully weighed into a crucible, with a measure (c.200 The acid neutralising capacity (ANC) is a quantitative measure of a solid phase sample’s capacity to neutralise aqueous acidity, therefore each parent and daughter sample was analysed using the Sobek ANC method at ALS Global, Brisbane (Method Code: EA013). First this test involves the performance of a fizz test (ranked from no fizz-0 to strong fizz-5) which dictates the concentration and strength of reagents to use in the next parts of the experiment. Second, 2 Both paste and net acid generation (NAG) testing were performed on daughter samples only (n An established ARD geochemical classification practice is the calculation of the net acid producing potential (NAPP; expressed in kg H Waste Type A (n = 7) was consistently classified as non-acid forming (NAF; Similarly, Waste Type B (n = 11) classified dominantly as NAF ( Waste Type D (n = 13) was the most acid forming and demonstrated the most geochemical diversity of the tested types with nine samples classified as PAF, three as uncertain and one as NAF ( The geochemical characteristics of all blended types (BT) are given in Blend Type 1 (BT1) comprised the lowest quantity of Type A (60%) and highest of Type D (40%) and therefore contained the highest total sulphur (0.33 to 2.04 Blend Type 2 (BT2) consisted of 70% Type A and 30% Type D, with 0.7–1.6 Blend Type 3 consisted of 80% Type A, and 20% Type D, with a slightly higher range of total-sulphur than BT2 (0.8–2.1 Blend Type 4 (BT4) contained the highest content of neutralising Type A (90% Type A and 10% Type D) of all blends. Total sulphur values of this group were the lowest of all dual-blends, (0.5–1.1 BT5 was the first tri-blend to be characterised marking the introduction of Type B parent materials into these experiments. Type B are classified as neutral, but are noted to have a geochemically variable behaviour ( Blend Type 6 (BT6) consisted of 50% Type B, 30% Type A and 20% Type D with total sulphur below 2 Blend Type 7 (BT7) contained the highest proportion of Type B (60%) relative to other tri-blends, and was combined with equal proportions (i.e., 20%) of Types A and D. Lower total sulphur values were measured in comparison to BT5 and BT6 (range: 0.2–1.1 For successful ARD prevention, appropriate control measures must be integrated into each stage of technical planning and design during the early- and operations-stage of mine life. If ARD and metal leaching issues are effectively managed then operating, closure and long-term liability costs will be reduced, with opportunities to potentially exploit additional resources, uncompromised by poor management legacies, at a later date. Accurate geochemical classification in the laboratory is critical to assist in achieving best practice, results from which are the foundation of a waste placement strategy. At Savage River, the tested parent waste Types A, B and D contain variable pyrite and carbonate contents. Type B contained the greatest proportion of dolomite, which stoichiometrically offers the highest neutralising potential ( Static testing of blended samples is demonstrated here to be an effective first-step approach to determine the response of different waste blends for long-term ARD control. It is important to reiterate that during static testing the material used is pulverised (<75 Based on the outcomes of a laboratory kinetic program, instrumented test piles in the field using the best performing blends (here, BT4 and BT7) should be constructed and regularly monitored (i.e., to characterise flow pathways and assess degree of saturation) with particle size characterisation of each blend type used performed. At the Grasberg porphyry Cu-Au Mine, Indonesia, blended piles have been successfully tested and constructed due to the abundance of carbonate in the deposit host rocks. In 2003, it was reported that waste rock piles were PAF with a short lag period and ARD treated using a collection and treatment strategy ( Static testing procedures allow for the geochemical behaviour of individual waste rock units to be determined. However, waste piles are heterogeneous landforms, therefore blended static testing programmes (i.e., paste pH, NAG pH, Sobek ANC and XRD) could be used to assist in predicting future leachate quality therefore, enhancing their design. Further, if the deposit is carbonate bearing, directly blending waste materials (crushed to a designated particle size) as a management option may enhance long-term ARD control. At the Savage River iron ore-mine, Tasmania, four waste types (A to D) are recognised, all with differing geochemical properties. This study explored the possibility of using blended static testing as a first step towards engineering a NAF pile. Materials from each tested waste type contained both sulphide and carbonate minerals therefore, none were exclusively PAF or with just an ANC. Overall, Type D was the most acid forming, with the tested materials containing up to 6.2 This research was conducted by the