An exact analytical model based on a higher-order beam theory (HBT) is developed for an accurate prediction of the flexural response of two layered composite beams with partial shear interactions. This is achieved by taking a third order variation of the longitudinal displacement over the beam depth for the two layers separately. The deformable shear connectors joining the two different material layers are modelled as distributed shear springs along the beam length at their interface. The principle of virtual work is used to derive the governing equations which are solved analytically using a Navier type solution technique. To assess the performance of the proposed model, numerical examples of composite beams are solved using the model. The results predicted by the model are compared with published results and the numerical results produced by a one dimensional finite element model based on HBT as well as a detailed two-dimensional finite element modelling of composite beams.Composite structures are widely used in many structural engineering activities for their superior mechanical properties and structural performance. A two layered composite beam such as timber-timber, timber-steel, timber-concrete and steel-concrete are typically used in the construction industry. In these structural configurations, the two material layers are properly utilised (e.g., in steel-concrete composite beams, the concrete layer is primarily used to carry the compressive stress whereas the steel layer carries the tensile stress) to enhance the performance of the overall structural system. Composite action of these beams is achieved by connecting the two different material layers with shear connectors such as bolts, nails or steel shear studs. Theoretically, if the connections are rigid with infinite stiffness, full composite action can be achieved. In such scenarios, the benefits of composite action can be fully achieved where no shear slip develops at the interface, which is defined as full shear interaction. However, these rigid and non-deformable connectors can hardly be realized in practise. In reality, shear connections are having deformability with a finite stiffness, which results in the development of interfacial shear slip between the two layers. That is defined as partial shear interaction Newmark et al. Thus there has been a growing interest in recent years to incorporate the effect of shear deformation and the Timoshenko’s beam theory (TBT) is typically used for this purpose. Ranzi and Zona In order to address the abovementioned issue, a higher-order beam theory (HBT) has recently been developed by Sheikh and his co-workers In order to ensure that the present formulation is consistent, a number of numerical examples are solved. The results predicted by the proposed analytical model are checked or validated with published results as well as numerical results produced by the 1D finite element model based on HBT developed by us in an earlier study  The partial shear interaction between the two layers is modelled by a distributed spring layer along the interface between these layers where the shear slip can be defined in the form of longitudinal displacement jump at their interface as Using the shear stress free condition at the exterior surfaces ( The governing equation can be derived using the principle of virtual work and it can be expressed as After substitution of the above strain components and the expression of shear slip as in Eq. In order to develop the proposed model analytically without major complications, the present study is restricted to beams with simply supported ends. Therefore, Eq. In the above equation, the terms associated with For any non-zero values of the displacement components, the above equation will be satisfied if the individual coefficients are zero Now the stresses at any point of the two material layers can be expressed in terms of their strains as follows: For a Navier type solution of the present problem, the 1D displacement components are expressed in the form of Fourier series as follows: Similarly, the transverse load acting on the beam can be expressed as Eqs. In order to satisfy Eq. Similarly, the other six governing equations are derived and the entire system of equations for any value of The above equation can easily be solved to get The proposed analytical model based on HBT is used to solve numerical examples of composite beams to show the performance and range of applicability of the model. For the validation of the proposed analytical model, the 1D finite element model based on this beam theory developed by Sheikh and his co-workers in an earlier study In this section, a simply supported two-layered composite beam subjected to a point load P (=100 kN) at the mid-span (see An example of a 5 m long simply supported timber-timber composite beam under a uniformly distributed load of 50 kN/m studied by Schnabl et al. This example is also used for the convergence study of the proposed analytical model with respect to the number of terms ( A 4 m long simply supported timber-concrete composite beam subjected to a point load of 10 kN at its mid-span is considered in this section to assess the prediction capability of the proposed analytical model specifically for the evaluation of stresses. As there is no results available in literature for the validation of stresses, numerical results are generated by analysing the beam with a well-regarded finite element software ABAQUS where a detailed 2D model of the beam is used to produce realistic stress results. The elements used for the detailed 2D finite element model using ABAQUS are four node plane stress quadrilateral elements (CPS4R) which are placed along the vertical plane passing through the beam axes (i.e.  The mid-span deflection, interfacial shear slip at the left end and bending stress at the bottom fibre of the mid-span section predicted by the proposed analytical and FE models are presented in In this paper, an analytical model based on a higher-order (3rd order) beam theory is developed for flexural response of two layered composite beams having deformable shear connectors. The partial shear interaction caused by the longitudinal separation or shear slip between the two layers at their interface due to the deformability of shear connectors is considered and modelled as distributed shear springs along the entire length of the beam. The HBT provides a true parabolic variation of shear stress over the beam depth, and therefore, the use of a potentially arbitrary shear correction factor is not required for the correct prediction of the global response such as deflection. Moreover, HBT has helped to predict the local responses such as distribution of stresses satisfactorily in addition to the global responses such as deflection. The principle of virtual work is applied to derive the governing equations which are solved analytically by using a Navier type solution technique. The expressions of individual terms/parameters necessary for solving a problem are provided explicitly which will help to use this model for solving a new problem easily. The relative performances of three beam theories (HBT, TBT and EBT) implemented within the proposed analytical model are investigated. It is observed that variations between the results predicted by HBT and EBT are very high as expected. On the other hand, TBT is found to predict the deflection well with the help of the shear correction factor but its performance is deteriorated in the case of interfacial slip and it is significantly affected for predicting the local responses (i.e. stresses). The proposed analytical model is used to solve numerical examples of composite beams having different dimensions, cross sectional configurations, loading types and degrees of shear interaction. The ability of the proposed model in accurately predicting the stress distribution, deflection and interfacial shear slip of composite beams is tested by comparing the results produced by the model with published results and numerical results produced by a 1D finite element model based on HBT as well as a detailed two-dimensional finite element modelling of composite beams. In this process, a large number new results are produced analytically which can be used as benchmarking solution for future research studies in the area of composite structures. The financial support provide by the University of Adelaide in the form of an Adelaide Graduate Research Scholarship (AGRS) award to the first author for her doctoral studies is gratefully acknowledged. The explicit expressions of A, B, C and D used in Eqs. The equations corresponding to The final expressions of the stress resultants in terms of the 1D displacement components The expression of The expressions of individual terms for the stiffness matrix in Eq.