Nanostructured Cu98Cr2/W composite powder was synthesized at various milling time through high-energy planetary ball milling cryogenically and consolidated at various temperatures (1073 K (800 °C) and 573 K (300 °C) respectively) by spark plasma sintering (SPS). Further, the detailed characterisation is being investigated through X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). XRD and TEM analysis shows complete solid solubility of Cr however, W does not form any solid solution at any of the processed parameters. The presence of the W stabilizes the grain at nano level in the powdered as well as sintered sample which is due to Orowan strengthening. Thereby, increasing the hardness of the as processed composite processed at 300 °C.Copper is extensively used for electrical and thermal conductors due to its unique combination of high electrical and thermal conductivity, good corrosion resistance at ambient temperature, abundant availability, excellent malleability/ draw ability. However, the same lacks in required strength in its conventional coarse-grained state Highly pure (>99% purity, 50–100 μm particle size) elemental powders of Cu, Cr and W obtained from Alfa Aesar. These powders were mixed together in determined quantity to get a nominal composition of Cu-2 at. % Cr-1wt. %W and loaded into the tungsten carbide vial. Milling media was 10 mm dia. tungsten carbide balls. Mechanical milling was carried out in a Fritsch pulverisette-5 mill with ball to powder weight ratio 10:1. MM was carried out cryogenically for 5–30 hrs in an interval of 5 hrs. During milling powders were collected in regular interval for phase analysis. Phase and structure of as-milled powder was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, X'Pert PRO by PANalytical) with CuK For detailed microstructural investigation and elemental analysis, the as-milled Cu Average hardness of the pellets were evaluated with the help of Vickers microhardness tester (LECO LM700) by using 30 g load and 10 s dwell time. The XRD pattern of the as-synthesized composite powder having composition (Cu Since, the crystallite size calculated from the XRD peak broadening is an estimate, TEM investigation was carried out to obtain the particle size and its distribution of the as synthesized composite powder. Thereafter characterisation of the cryo milled powder the DTA analysis was being conducted for the Cu  Thus to inherit properties of nano-crystallinity, the SPS was again conducted at 300 °C. The XRD patterns of spark plasma sintered Cu, Cu The measured hardness of the consolidate samples is shown in In the present study, effect of milling time and spark plasma temperature is studied for nanostructured (Cu The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.