It is known that surface roughness enhances the anchorage of implants to bone and opens up the possibilities of the incorporation and release of antibiotics around titanium implants. In this study, titanium oxide was formed by the micro-arc oxidation (MAO) method. Commercially available pure titanium disks with diameter of 10mm and 2mm in thickness were used as substrates. MAO of the specimen was carried out in an aqueous electrolyte by applying a pulsed DC wave to the specimen. The surface characteristics of the MAO implants, including surface morphology and surface roughness, were analyzed by SEM and surface profilometer, respectively. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effect produced by MAO of the titanium surface on cell cultures by cell proliferation assay, cell morphology and alkaline phosphatase activity. The results showed the formation of an oxide layer with micropores and roughness by MAO. No significant difference in the proliferation and spreading morphology of machined, blasted and MAO surfaces was observed. However, the ALP activity of osteoblast cells on MAO surface was higher than on machined and blasted surfaces in 4 day and 7 day cultures, respectively. From this study, it was concluded that the MAO-treated titanium exhibited an effect on early osteoblast differentiation.The biocompatibility of titanium is attributed to surface oxides spontaneously formed in air or physiological fluids. The titanium surface is covered with a native oxide layer 1.5–10 Micro-arc oxidation (MAO) is a surface modification technique that can be used on implant surfaces. It is a plasma-assisted electrochemical method, which produces rough, thick and porous oxide films on metal surfaces. Micro-arc oxidized films are hard and well-adhered onto metal substrate. Recently, studies on MAO have been increased, since it can provide beneficial surface morphology for bone–tissue response. Also, various surface chemistries of micro-arc oxidized film can be induced The biological response of cells and tissues to implants depends on surface properties, such as surface topography, roughness and chemical composition. The method used in the present experiment for preparing the porous oxide surface is the MAO method. By means of MAO, a rough and porous oxide layer can be formed. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect produced by MAO of the titanium surface on cell cultures by cell proliferation assay, cell morphology and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity. The surface characteristics of the MAO implants, including surface morphology and surface roughness, were analyzed by SEM and surface profilometer, respectively. The titanium disks used for the cell culture were prepared from commercially pure titanium (Grade 3). The disks were cut to 10 The surfaces of samples, including surface roughness and surface morphology, were analyzed. The surface roughness of the prepared specimens was quantified by using a profilometer (Handy Surf E-30A, Japan). The morphologies of the samples were observed with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; Hitachi, S-4200). Human osteosarcoma cells, Saos-2 (ATCC HTB-85), obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD), were used for evaluating biological responses to the sample surfaces. A seeding density of 1.0 The number of viable cells was quantified indirectly by using crystal violet (CV) uptake. After 1 Surfaces with attached cells were cultured for 1 day and 3 days. At specific time points, the cells were pre-fixed with 0.5% glutaraldehyde for 1 Triplicate samples from each group were used for measuring the ALP activity. Cells were incubated with 4 Differences in cell viability and ALP activity were statistically compared by using the ANOVA test. The results were reported as means The morphology of the prepared samples was analyzed by SEM. MAO is an electrochemical method to form thick and porous oxide films on Ti surfaces by spark discharging. It was demonstrated that increasing the oxide thickness through anodization resulted in an increase in corrosion resistance of Ti. The characteristics of the titanium surfaces were changed by inducing various surface chemistries of micro-arc oxidized film, such as calcium and phosphate The effects of surface modification on osteoblasts biological response were checked by CV assay, SEM and ALP activity. As shown in Scanning electron microscopy showed the morphology of cells on machined, blasted and MAO surfaces after 1 day and 3 days of incubation, as shown in Cell attachment, spreading and subsequent proliferation are closely related to the surface properties of the substrate, e.g. composition, roughness, wettability and morphology. Besides chemical composition, it is well known that surface roughness and morphology play an important role in biological responses of biomaterial surfaces ALP activity was used as biochemical marker for determining osteoblast phenotype and was considered as an important factor in determining bone differentiation and mineralization The anodic oxide films produced by the MAO method exhibited a rough surface and microporous structures with titanium oxide. No significant difference in the proliferation and spreading morphology of machined, blasted and MAO surfaces was observed. However, the ALP activity of osteoblast cells on the MAO surface was higher than on the machined and blasted surfaces in 4 day and 7 day cultures, respectively. From this study, it was concluded that the MAO-treated titanium exhibited an effect on early osteoblast differentiation. This work was supported by a grant (code #: 06K1501-01620) from the Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology under the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology, Korea.