Clay minerals are often associated with copper, gold and other valuable minerals and place a widespread problem in mineral flotation. This paper is one of a series addressing the problem caused by clay minerals in copper–gold flotation. This study seeks to understand the rheological behaviour of kaolinite and bentonite suspensions at natural pH and how the pH modifier, collector and frother normally used in copper–gold flotation affect the rheological properties. It was found that kaolinite and bentonite suspensions may follow Newtonian flows or non-Newtonian flows with pseudoplastic characteristics depending on the solid concentration. Bentonite has a stronger effect on the viscosity of suspensions than kaolinite. The pH modifier, collector and frother have a potential to alter the rheological behaviour of kaolinite and bentonite suspensions and the effect of the pH modifier is more pronounced.Continuous depletion of mineral resources has resulted in increased processing of low grade ores which require fine grinding to liberate minerals, and complex ores containing problematic gangue minerals (  It has been also found that elongated particles or particles with large aspect ratios produce an anisotropic behaviour as a preferred particle orientation results under the action of the shear field ( According to some researchers the narrow size distribution of particles in the suspension produces yield stress and steady shear viscosity values higher than those of particles with the broader size distribution at the same volume fraction ( Rheological challenges such as reduced flotation rates and complex tailings treatment and pumping during the processing of low grade and complex ores have been reported ( Clay minerals such as kaolinite, bentonite and smectite, which are often associated with copper, gold and other valuable minerals, place a widespread problem in mineral flotation. There have been numerous observations of these clay minerals having a deleterious effect on mineral flotation grade and recovery, with simultaneous observations of high flotation pulp viscosity. Rigorous explanations on how clay minerals affect flotation are not available. Currently, the only way to treat clay ores is dilution by either blending them at a small proportion with normal ores or processing them at low solid concentrations ( Clay minerals are anisotropic phyllosilicates with colloidal sizes and have a layer structure with one dimension in the nanometre range. They are comprised of one layer alumina octahedral (O) sheet and one or two silica tetrahedral (T) sheets. The thickness of the 1:1 (TO) layer is about 0.7 The EF contact (or the house of cards network) forms when the edges are positively charged, or in a slightly alkaline medium above the critical salt concentration due to the electrostatic attraction between edges and faces ( Aggregation of kaolinite suspensions can be also related to sedimentation behaviour. For dispersed particles the sediment thickness increases with time to a maximum, and during settling of flocculated particles the sediment thickness decreases with time. These responses depend on electrolyte concentrations and pH ( Clay minerals can interact with water, inorganic and organic compounds which in turn modify the rheology of the suspensions. Clay minerals with a 2:1 layer structure are more reactive than those with a 1:1 structure. Swelling clay minerals with a 2:1 layer structure, contain inorganic exchange cations such as Na The efficiency of copper–gold flotation may be restrained by the changed pulp rheology in the presence of clay minerals. During flotation, pH modifiers (NaOH, lime or sodium carbonate) are normally used to adjust flotation pH in the alkaline range, while introducing cations and anions. Meanwhile, surfactants, collectors and frothers are added to modify surface hydrophobicity, reduce bubble sizes and form appropriate froth. The pH modifiers, collectors and frothers may interact with clay minerals and further alter the pulp rheology. In this study, the rheological properties of kaolinite, a non-swelling clay mineral with a 1:1 structure, and bentonite, a swelling clay mineral with a 2:1 structure were investigated in the context of copper–gold flotation in the absence and presence of pH modifiers and collector and frother surfactants. Following this work, detailed fundamental studies will be carried out to investigate how these flotation reagents affect the rheological properties of clay suspensions. Kaolinite and sodium bentonite were purchased from Sibelco Group, Australia. Quantitative XRD analysis shows that this kaolinite sample contains 85 Three pH modifiers, sodium hydroxide (NaOH), lime (CaO) and sodium carbonate (Na The concentrations of bentonite suspensions tested in this study were 2, 5 and 10 Rheology measurements were conducted within an hour after preparation of the clay suspension. An Ares rheometer with a Couette geometry (bob and cup) from TA Instruments was used for the rheology measurements at the ambient temperature around 22 Some sedimentation experiments were conducted for 5 and 20 The rheological behaviour of kaolinite and bentonite in the presence of water was investigated first.   The natural pH of kaolinite suspensions was about 7.5. To examine the effect of pH modifiers on the rheology of kaolinite suspensions, NaOH, lime and Na  It is interesting to find that lime exacerbates the aggregation of kaolinite particles corresponding to the increased viscosity of kaolinite suspensions at high kaolinite concentrations. This is in line with Similarly, the pH of bentonite suspensions was adjusted to 10.0 by NaOH, lime and Na Unlike in kaolinite suspensions, Na In this study, tap water was used to minimise the effect of salts on the rheology of kaolinite and bentonite suspensions. However, the significant effect of pH modifiers releasing different ions suggests the importance of water quality in determining the rheology of clay suspensions. To further confirm the interaction of pH modifiers with kaolinite and bentonite suspensions, sedimentation tests were conducted. The settling behaviour of kaolinite suspensions corresponds to flocculated or aggregated particles ( In this study the sedimentation results for the first 6 Similar sedimentation tests were conducted on 5 In addition to pH modifiers, collectors and frothers are also essential in mineral flotation. In this study, PAX and Interfroth 6500 were selected to represent collectors and frothers normally used in copper–gold flotation and their effects on the rheological behaviour of kaolinite and bentonite suspensions were investigated at natural pH without the addition of any pH modifier.  The effect of PAX and Interfroth 6500 on the rheological behaviour of 8 In general, PAX and Interfroth 6500 did not modify the rheology of kaolinite and bentonite suspensions as much as the pH modifier. Kaolinite and bentonite suspensions follow Newtonian fluids at low solid concentrations (10 The pH modifier has little effect on the rheological properties of kaolinite and bentonite suspensions at low solid concentrations (10 Collector PAX and frother Interfroth 6500 have a similar effect on increasing the rheological properties of kaolinite and bentotine suspensions at high solid concentrations (20 The authors gratefully acknowledge the discussion of this study with technical experts from Newmont Mining Corporation and Newcrest Mining Limited supporting the succeeding research project together with the Australian Research Council. The first author also thanks the scholarship provided by the University of Queensland.