In feasibility studies and mine planning, accurate and effective tools and methods facilitating cost estimation play an important role. Load–Haul–Dump (LHD) machines are a key loading and haulage equipment in most of the underground metal mines and hard rock tunnels. In this paper, a cost estimation model of these vehicles has been presented in the form of single and multivariable functions. These functions have been provided on the basis of costs types (i.e. capital and operating costs) and motor types (diesel and electric). Independent variables, in the single regression analysis is bucket capacity and in Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) analysis include bucket capacity, overall width, overall machine height and horse power (HP). The MLR is conducted in three steps. First, with the help of Principal Component Analysis (PCA), correlation between independent variables is omitted. Thereafter, significant PCs are selected and used as independent variables in the MLR functions. Finally, the cost relationships are established as functions of initial LHD variables. The mean absolute error rates are 11.59% and 6.87% for the single and multiple linear regression functions, respectively.The feasibility studies require in-depth analysis that involves a review of different technical, economic and operational aspects of each project and the selection of the most appropriate alternative accordingly to the chosen criteria. Process determination, equipment selection and costs–revenues estimation are principal parts of these studies. Cost estimation with different purposes take place at different stages of a project. During the planning stage, cost estimates are used to determine project feasibility and compare alternate modes ( Loading and hauling are among the most crucial operation impacting production in surface and underground mines and have a substantial share of a total mine costs. Load–Haul–Dump (LHD) machines are the most common equipment used to, as their name implies, load and haul rock material in underground mines and hard rock tunnels. LHD vehicles are typically used to load ore at the draw points or in the stopes and haul it to dumping points ( Different tools can be used in order to develop the cost estimation models, hence; one can point out to the linear and non-linear regression models, techniques related to fuzzy logic and artificial intelligence like neural network ( So far, a number of cost models using the Single Regression Analysis (SRA), for the estimation of mineral industry costs, have been published. Hence; one can point to the estimation of mining and mineral processing equipment costs and capital expenditures ( Sixteen different sizes of LHDs (11 diesel-powered and 6 electric machines) were considered and a set of technical and economic data from USA equipment manufacturers, mining companies and projects has been gathered ( In this study, LHD overall width (OW) in meter, overall machine height (OH) in meter, horse power (HP) in horse power and bucket capacity (BC) in cubic meter are independent variables in MLR and bucket capacity in SVA. Descriptions of data related to each of these variables are shown on The data analyses show an intense correlation between independent variables (  The multivariable cost functions have been developed at three stages:    Multicollinearity phenomenon is considered to be one of the greatest challenges for multiple regressions in which predictor variables have a high correlation. Consequently, this phenomenon could lead to an unstable regression model, with very high variance and covariance of coefficients. In the principal component analysis, the To verify the applicability of principal component analysis of row data, Barttlet’s sphericity test ( where The correlation matrix of variables ( Using following equation, score value ( In this study, two methods have been applied, in the first, each function’s performance is measured by the Mean Absolute Error Rate (MAER) ( In the preliminary project evaluations that do not need high cost accuracy, a SRA can be used to estimate LHD costs. As observed, relationships between costs and bucket capacity are in exponential form, i.e. capital and operating costs are roughly proportional to the 0.586 and 0.638 power of diesel LHD bucket capacity, respectively. As seen, 95% and 97% of variation in capital and operating costs could be explained by bucket capacity in the case of diesel LHDs. When the cost of an LHD with a certain bucket capacity is known (  Performing PCA technique on these four LHD parameters to describe their interrelation pattern as well as onto the costs, the number of PCs will equal the number of independent original variables. This new variables are independent linear combinations of original variables and retain the maximum possible variance of the initial set.  The new variables from the PCA become ideal to use as independent variables in MLR, since they optimize spatial patterns and remove possible complications caused by multicollinearity phenomena.  To exclude non-significant PCs and identify the best estimation functions for LHD costs, MLR costs analyses on the PC scores were performed using stepwise variable selection procedures. As it can be seen in In this table, regression coefficients of independent variables are shown in bold in the  With multiplying Applying the above mentioned approach to electric LHDs concluded as follow: That in this relationship, independent variables have standardized. Using Eq. The derived functions for capital (US$) and operating costs (US$/h) are as follow: Likewise, With reference to the fact that the obtained functions are prepared on the basis of 2010 cost data, it is necessary to apply Eq. The results obtained from the SRA represent an average Linear relationships between the variables, in the equation, and a normal distribution of residuals are assumptions of the multiple linear regressions. The ultimate conclusion may not be correct if these assumptions are not respected. At the same time, the normal probability plot of residuals indicates whether or not there occurred gross disrespect of the assumptions. If the observed residuals are distributed normally, all values would fall onto a straight line in the plot. With respect to accuracy of the cost estimation of ±20% and ±10% which is needed for a preliminary and detailed feasibility study ( A number of single regression models (SRM) exist for the mining costs estimation. These models are sometimes obsolete and determination coefficient has been accepted as a criterion to evaluate the model performance. Despite having a high determination coefficient, a SRM may not be adequate to define the complexity of cost variations, because it doesn’t attend to other variables influencing on dependent variable. In this study, a more accurate model has been developed for LHD costs estimation. This model contains two different set of cost functions. The first one is an up-to-date SRM model as well as scaling components are presented for quick cost estimation at the early stages of project evaluation. The second, a Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) model is presented which is more detailed and can be useful for in depth evaluation. The MLR has been applied using principal component analysis (PCA) technique. PCA has been used for omitting the correlation between independent variables. The cost functions have been classified on the basis of the cost type (capital and operating costs along with operating cost items) and motor type (diesel and electric). These functions could be a useful tool for cost estimations in preliminary and detailed feasibility studies of mining projects. Applying the cost index, these functions could be updated and applied in future. Concerning the future research, the following work is suggested: Establish cost estimation models for other underground mining equipment. This would help estimators to get a more accurate estimation of overall costs. Estimate operating cost per ton of production. It would help managers to select the most appropriate size of equipment, regarding to “economy of scale” theory. Establish a model for selection of size and number of equipment, aimed at minimization of the hourly cost, while respecting production targets.