An investigation was conducted on the overall burst-instability of isolated coal pillars by means of the possibility index diagnosis method (PIDM). First, the abutment pressure calculation model of the gob in side direction was established to derive the abutment pressure distribution curve of the isolated coal pillar. Second, the overall burst-instability ratio of the isolated coal pillars was defined. Finally, the PIDM was utilized to judge the possibility of overall burst-instability and recoverability of isolated coal pillars. The results show that an overall burst-instability may occur due to a large gob width or a small pillar width. If the width of the isolated coal pillar is not large enough, the shallow coal seam will be damaged at first, and then the high abutment pressure will be transferred to the deep coal seam, which may cause an overall burst-instability accident. This approach can be adopted to design widths of gobs and isolated coal pillars and to evaluate whether an existing isolated coal pillar is recoverable in skip-mining mines.With the increase of mining depth and intensity, rockburst has become a common safety problem for underground coal mines, especially in China ( Various researchers have proposed quantities of hypotheses on rockburst mechanism. At present, many high-quality coal resources in China cannot be extracted due to rockburst hazards. Besides, rockbursts frequently occur because of unreasonable widths of gobs and isolated coal pillars. Gucheng coal mine in Shandong Province, China is a typical skip-mining mine facing rockburst hazards. Therefore, this paper took Gucheng coal mine as engineering background and proposed width design methods of gobs and isolated coal pillars based on rockburst prevention. A gob abutment pressure calculation model in side direction was established to obtain the influence scope of the high abutment pressure and then the overall burst-instability ratio was evaluated for the design of isolated coal pillars. Coal mine microseismic system and rockburst online monitoring system were utilized to monitor the mining activities in longwall mining. The Gucheng coal mine, owned and operated by Linyi Coal Group Company, is located in Shandong Province, China. Currently, the mining activity at the Gucheng coal mine advances to the Mining Area #31, as shown in Calculation of gob abutment pressure is the basis of the width design for isolated coal pillars. Calculation results derived by theory of elasticity and numerical simulation are not practical and the parameters are difficult to be obtained. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate a calculation model available for engineering application. This paper calculated the influence scope of gob abutment pressure in side direction using a mechanical model to obtain the maximum and minimum pillar widths ( Half of the weight of the Δ The gravity stress Poland ARAMISM/E system was installed in Gucheng coal mine. The system utilizes SPI-70 seismometers in SN/DTSS transmission stations to locate seismic events and determine burst energy. There are 16 component channels with one SP/DTSS cassette in the system. The system enables transmission of 1-, 2- or 3-axial velocity movements ( The distribution of overlying strata of the Mining Area #31 is shown in For Gucheng coal mine, the width of LW3106 is 100 m, equal to that of LW3105. By superposition of the abutment pressures of LW3106 and LW3105, the distribution of abutment pressure in the isolated coal pillar can be derived, as shown in The overall burst-instability ratio is defined as Based on fuzzy mathematics and engineering experience, the possibility index diagnosis method (PIDM) was put forward by Jiang ( The membership of overall burst-instability ratio The membership of elastic strain energy index The possibility index of rockburst occurrence According to possibility index of rockburst occurrence From According to Zhaolou coal mine, belonging to Yanzhou Group Company, is located in Shandong Province, China. Currently, the mining activity at the Zhaolou coal mine advances to LW1305, as shown in Rockburst online monitoring system KJ550 was installed to monitor the stress change of LW1305 ( Influenced by the unreasonable width of the isolated coal pillar, an overall burst-instability accident occurred on July 29, 2015. Totally, 38 hydraulic supports were damaged in the head entry and the height of the entry reduced from 3.8 m to 3.1 m. In the working face, the shearer was damaged and a large amount of coal was burst out. Besides, in the head entry, the floor heave reached 0.5–1 m. The relative stress change in the coal may forecast rockburst occurrence. A sudden decrease of the shallow-hole stress curve demonstrates the failure of the entry and a sudden increase of the deep-hole stress curve illustrates that the stress is transferred to the deep coal seam, which may develop into an overall burst-instability accident. Hence, a study of the stress curve is of vital importance for revealing the overall burst-instability mechanism. From Using Eqs.  A gob abutment pressure calculation model in side direction was put forward based on strata movement theory and key strata theory. The abutment pressure distribution curve of the isolated coal pillar was plotted by the calculation model. Microseismic monitoring results show that this calculation model and distribution curve were suitable for abutment pressure calculation. The overall burst-instability ratio was defined and the PIDM was utilized to evaluate the possibility of an overall burst-instability accident and recoverability of an isolated coal pillar. By using the PIDM, rational widths of isolated coal pillars and gobs without overall burst-instability hazards can be designed and recovering an existing isolated coal pillar can be evaluated. An analytic solution for an overall burst-instability accident has been obtained by using PIDM and rockburst online monitoring system. Results showed that the relative stress change in the coal may forecast rockburst occurrence. Before an overall burst-instability accident occurs, the shallow coal seam will be destroyed first and then the high abutment pressure will be transferred to the deep coal seam, which can be reflected in the curve, which is helpful for overall burst-instability determination. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work was financially supported by the