Heat and mass transfer during the cooking of beef patties by long wavelength, far-infrared radiation was studied. A one-dimensional model based on an infinite slab is described, the model was solved using the finite difference technique. The results obtained from the model were compared to experimental results over a range of fat contents from 0% to 30% fat. Heat transfer results for the 0% fat content, using a conduction model showed very good agreement with the experimental data (r
                     2=0.99), however, when the same model was used for the higher fat contents, model prediction was poor. By including a term to account for internal fat and moisture convection in the beef patties during cooking, the heat transfer process could be predicted for fat contents ranging from 10% to 30% fat, with good agreement obtained with the experimental data (r
                     2=0.99). In the prediction of the evaporative mass losses, prediction of the diffusion coefficient based on temperature and moisture content, allowed for excellent agreement with the experimental data (r
                     2=0.99). Thus it was concluded that the model described the cooking of beef patties using far-infrared radiation over a range of fat contents. The effects of internal fat and convective mass transfer during cooking were accounted for during development of the model.moisture content (kg moisture/kg solid) mass diffusivity (m constant in constant in constant in constant in constant in thermal conductivity (W constant in constant in constant in mass transfer coefficient (m constant in constant in constant in time (s) temperature (K) infinite temperature (K) thickness of beef patty (m) latent heat of vaporisation (kJ density (kg Stefan Boltzmann constant (W dry product final surface infinite temperature Beef patties are an important food item, prepared both in the restaurant and home. If these products are not heat treated adequately, there is a risk of food poisoning by a number of different organisms, for example There is a tendency to view heat transfer into solid food materials purely as a conduction process, for example the deep fat frying of French fries ( Thus mass transfer within the beef patties will result in mass loss in two forms, as vapour and as drip from the product. Vapour loss can be thought as being analogous to the constant drying period, and as such can be clearly defined, however drip loss is a more complex process, and is outside the scope of this current investigation. Only the vaporised losses are considered at this time.  The objectives of this study are (1) to develop a model to describe heat and mass transfer in a lean meat beef patty and (2) to develop a model to describe heat and mass transfer at varying fat contents during cooking by far-infrared radiation. The finite difference technique will be used. Only moisture lost by evaporation will be considered in this study. Beef patties were prepared from lean minced meat purchased from a local butcher, which was bowl chopped to give a homogeneous mixture. The composition of the lean meat used in the study is given in The beef patties (50 mm diameter, 20 mm depth) were placed in a pre-prepared aluminum sample holder of the same internal dimensions. Samples were heated using a far-infrared radiation gas catalytic plaque heater, radiation temperature 767 K. Temperature was recorded using type T thermocouples inserted radially at 4, 8 and 12 mm depths below the surface, at the center of the patty. The thermocouple at 12 mm was considered to be the core of the beef patty. Fine wire thermocouples were used and temperature was recorded using a multi-channel data logger. Evaporative mass loss was measured by placing the sample holder and stand in a vertical orientation on an electronic balance and continually recording the weight at 20 s intervals during the cooking process. Any cook losses by drip were collected in a graduated flask also placed on the balance. The test rig apparatus and method are described more completely in The protein and fat content of the uncooked beef patties were determined by using the methods of The beef patty was assumed to be homogeneous and isotropic as a result of the fine comminution and mixing during preparation. As heating was from a single side only, with all other sides shielded, the beef patty was assumed to be an infinite slab, due to the sample geometry, thus heat and mass transfer could be considered in one dimension only. It was assumed in this model that moisture is being lost by evaporation only, and that the effect of drip losses did not affect moisture loss by evaporation. Unsteady state one-dimensional heat transfer in a slab can be described by For prediction of the evaporative mass loss, unsteady state one-dimensional mass transfer in a slab can be described by The equations were solved in a discretised finite difference domain, using the differential equation solver, DESIRE The temperatures at the center and subsurface of the beef patty at 0% fat content during heating are shown in The temperature profiles of these subsurface nodes derived by the model are similar to those found by The results for the change in moisture content based on evaporative cooking losses obtained using the model, were compared to those determined experimentally are shown in The mass transfer Biot number was calculated to be 114. This shows that the process is driven by mass diffusion, as the value is greater than 100, as opposed to mass transfer at the surface of the beef patty ( As the fat content increases, both the heat and mass transfer processes are changed dramatically. In the low fat beef patty heat transfer is predominately by conduction, however preliminary analysis of the heat transfer data, and results obtained by the model indicated that there were other mechanisms occurring. When the previous model was run at higher fat contents, the temperature rise was consistently underestimated. The mean deviation, as shown in  Results for mass transfer are given in A model to predict heat and mass transfer during cooking of low fat beef patties by far-infrared radiation was successfully developed. When applied to higher fat contents, there was a large variance between the experimental and predicted data. By including a convection term in the heat transfer calculation the model prediction was much improved for both heat and mass transfer over the range of fat contents. This result implies that heat transfer in beef patties is strongly influenced by internal movement of melted fat by convection during the cooking process.