The bubble surface area flux, SB
                     , defined as the ration between the superficial gas rate JG
                      and the Sauter mean bubble diameter D
                     32, has been widely used to describe the gas phase dispersion efficiency in flotation machines, and from this predict flotation performance, notable mineral recovery to forecast plant economics.
                  In this work, results of bubble size distribution (BSD) generated in a pilot column are analyzed. Using video and image analysis techniques, the impact of different sampling rates on the BSD was evaluated. Measurements were carried out for D
                     32
                     =1–2mm, JG
                     
                     =0.5–1.5cm/s and two frother concentration, with a maximum sampling rate of 100fps. In addition, the bubble rise velocity in the bubble swarm was measured, as a function of the individual bubble diameter, for different operational conditions.
                  The identification of the BSD depends on the proper selection of the visual field and sampling rate for acquisition and processing of bubble images. Distortion in the estimation occurs because a larger holdup of small bubbles is observed, relative to the overall data set, due to their lower velocity.
                  The actual BSD was obtained by correcting the observed population, considering the effect of bubble rise velocity. Thus, the actual bubble surface area flux, SB
                     , was calculated. The results were evaluated at a pilot scale (air–water system) as well as an industrial plant scale (air-pulp system).The bubble surface area flux (  Eq. In addition, A good accuracy in At present, reliable methods for measuring BSD and local gas rate in the collection zone of industrial flotation equipment are available. Several systems for measurement of BSD have been reported, e.g., the University of Cape Town (UCT) system based on optical sensors ( Software development for automatic image analysis: image analysis requires certain criteria, such as the form factor, for automatic identification. However, due to the presence of large bubbles (non-spherical) and clusters, these criteria lose their efficiency. Another problem is related to the adequate illumination of the visual field. The bubbles processing is based on border detection in a black and white thresholding; therefore, a poor or non-uniform illumination will make the threshold selection difficult, which can distort the results. The relation between the sampling rate and the size (window) of the visual field has not been discussed. The most common criteria consist of selecting the accuracy for identification of smaller rather than larger bubbles. However, considering that larger bubbles have higher velocities, the Nyquist–Shannon theorem must be taken into account in order to obtain a correct estimation of the larger bubbles population. At present, the estimation of the actual population (dynamic) is simply derived from a static observation of bubbles on the visual field. However, smaller bubbles have lower velocities and they appear in a proportion larger than the actual dynamic bubble size distribution, such that small bubbles are typically overestimated. In order to estimate the actual (dynamic) bubble size population a correction must be considered to account for the different bubble velocities in the visual field. In the present study, the above-mentioned problems have been addressed, and they were quantified at a laboratory scale for two gas rates and two frother dosages, as well as for two sets of industrial plant data. In addition, a sensitivity study was developed to identify the effect of using “dynamic” or “static” BSD on the bubble surface area flux estimation. Bubble size distribution (BSD) was estimated using the McGill Bubble Size Analyzer (MBSA). This device, based on the previous work by For image acquisition, a high-speed digital camera Prosilica CV640 was employed, which allows a maximal sampling rate of 100 The air flow was controlled by a variable area rotameter at constant pressure (30 The BSD was processed by means of a semi-automatic software USM-IMA ( Assuming an ellipsoidal shape for regular bubbles, isolate bubbles were processed by means of an automated least squared estimation (LSE) in order to obtain the bubble radii. This approach was only accepted if the correlation coefficient between the boundary and estimated ellipses was greater than a user-defined value. Then, the equivalent volume sphere diameter is estimated from the ellipsoidal parameters of the bubbles. In addition, a high percentage of non-overlapped clusters can be separated by the watershed transform for connectivity and automatically processed with LSE. Overlapped clusters and badly separated bubbles of non-overlapped clusters are then manually processed by tracing a cross and estimating the diameter of an equivalent sphere based on the number of pixels in each line (  An increase in Based on results reported by The rise velocity of bubbles in the MBSA was estimated for bubbles of different sizes by means of the high-speed digital camera, Prosilica CV640 (  Data sets were grouped based on the The greater scatter in the data for greater bubble diameter and larger  A comparison of the empirical models adjusted for Based on the previous results, the effect of the velocities observed in the measurement device must be taken into account in order to obtain the actual (dynamic) BSD. To illustrate the effect of the visual field size and the sampling rate, a set of measurements was carried out based on the experimental procedure described in the previous section. For image acquisition, a sampling rate of 30 The visual field was chosen in order to obtain a bubble diameter resolution better than 0.1  Note that a smaller field of view generates a greater variability in the results. In fact, a smaller bubbles population, as expected in a smaller visual field, causes randomization. Based on the results presented in A visual field of 43 The methodology employed to estimate the Sauter diameter First, an adequate estimation of the static population must be carried out, which was achieved with an appropriated selection of the visual field size and sampling rate. A visual field of 43 A shift of the histogram was observed which is consistent with the results reported by  Although the absolute error in estimation of Based on the  From the maximum relative error of 13.3% in An overestimation of small bubbles in comparison with larger bubbles was observed in the visual field (static population) due to the lower rise velocity of the smaller bubbles. Therefore, the actual bubble size distribution (dynamic population) was evaluated from the static observation by considering the different bubble rise velocities. Velocity of bubbles rising in a swarm in the visual field of the Bubble Size Analyzer was estimated by means of a high velocity digital camera. The bubble rise velocity data were fitted by a first-order model showing a good agreement for It was observed that the selection of the visual field size and image sampling rate is critical for estimating the larger bubble populations, following the Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem. Thus, the best compromise between visual field size and sampling rate must be selected for the maximal bubble rise velocity. Results showed that the bubble diameter, The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division CODELCO-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by CONICYT, project Fondecyt 1070106, NEIM, ICM-Mideplan, and Santa Maria University, project 270522.