Podiform chromitites in the Hegenshan ophiolitic complex from the Inner Mongolia of China display massive, semi-massive, and disseminated textures. The extent of Fe2+–Mg redistribution between high-Al chromite and olivine during sub-solidus cooling is affected by the modal abundances of chromite. High-Al chromite in semi-massive and disseminated chromitites becomes richer in Fe2+ than its primary composition, while the Fe2+ and Mg contents in high-Al chromite in massive chromitite are almost unchanged. After the cation redistribution process, these chromitites undergo hydrothermal alteration, forming partly altered chromite and porous chromite with following assemblages: uvarovite–chlorite, type-1 high-Cr chromite (Chr-1)–brucite–chlorite–metal alloys (awaruite, native copper), and type-2 high-Cr chromite (Chr-2)–brucite–chlorite–apatite–calcite–sulfides. Fe and Mn are added into chromite to form the Chr-1 and Chr-2, while Al, Mg, and Ni are transported out of the Chr-1 and Chr-2 during hydrothermal alteration. Ti is released into fluid from the Chr-1 and enters the Chr-2. Ni, mainly from olivine in podiform chromitites, participates in the formation of the observed metal alloys and sulfides. Thermodynamic calculations suggest that heazlewoodite–chalcocite assemblage in massive chromitite crystallizes under conditions with higher fO2 and fS2 values compared with awaruite–native copper assemblage. Increases in HS− activities and fO2 values and a decrease in pH values facilitate the transformation from metal alloys into sulfides during hydrothermal alteration of podiform chromitites.Chromian spinel and chromite are more resistant to modification compared with primary silicates during post-magmatic processes, which makes them valid petrogenetic indicators in chromitites and peridotites ( Replacement of pre-existing magmatic sulfides or direct precipitation from fluid during metamorphism or hydrothermal alteration can form secondary base-metal alloys and sulfides in chromitites ( The Xing'an–Mongolian accretionary collision zone, southeastern CAOB, between the Mongolian arcs and the North China Craton is divided into four tectonic units including the southern Mongolian arcs, the Hegenshan ophiolite belt, the northern orogenic belt, and the southern orogenic belt ( Five dominant blocks including the eastern Erenhot, Chaokeshan, Hegenshan, Chonggenshan, and Wusinihei ophiolitic complexes are distributed along the Hegenshan ophiolite belt from west to east ( The well-layered cumulate sequence, consisting mainly of dunite, troctolite, and gabbro, is up to 400 m thick ( Some sections of the Hegenshan cumulate rocks are in fault contact with limestone, chert, and greywackes of middle to late Devonian ages. The present-day positions of these Devonian strata are presumed to be a result of thrust fault activities ( Numerous chromite deposits have been discovered in the Hegenshan ophiolitic complex. The No. 41 and D2 deposits consist of chromitites as thin layers or bands associated with cumulate dunite, whereas most chromite deposits including the No. 3756, Jidong, B265, 620, and 820 deposits are composed of podiform bodies surrounded by dunite lenses within harzburgite ( The massive, semi-massive, disseminated chromitite samples were collected from the pit in the Hegenshan chromite deposit ( The whole-rock samples were washed by distilled water, smashed, and ground into approximately 75 μm in grain sizes in an agate mill. We weighed out 25.0 mg of powder for each sample. This powder was digested with concentrated nitric acid (68 wt% HNO Thermodynamic properties of metal alloys and sulfides were from The weakly deformed Hegenshan chromitites vary in chromite/silicate ratios, involving massive (70–90 modal % chromite), semi-massive (30–45 modal % chromite), and disseminated textures (20–25 modal % chromite) ( Secondary phases in massive chromitite include high-Cr chromite, chlorite, and subordinate uvarovite, brucite, calcite, metal alloys, and sulfides. High-Al chromite is converted to uvarovite and high-Cr chromite. High-Al chromite grains in fractures crosscutting massive chromitite could be fragmented by shearing. The high-Al chromite grains in fractures are smaller and more extensively transformed into high-Cr chromite than other high-Al chromite grains in massive chromitite ( Awaruite and heazlewoodite with irregular outlines predominantly occur in the interstitial space of high-Al chromite coexisting with chlorite ( Secondary phases in semi-massive chromitite mainly include type-2 high-Cr chromite, chlorite, brucite, and minor amounts of serpentine, calcite, dolomite, magnesite, apatite, metal alloys, and sulfides. Porous chromite occurs at rims or along fractures of high-Al chromite ( Metal alloy–sulfide assemblages in porous chromite, chlorite veinlets, and matrix are variable in semi-massive chromitite. Tiny awaruite grains coexist with chlorite ( Disseminated chromitite consists mainly of type-2 high-Cr chromite, chlorite, with trace amounts of serpentine and awaruite, which are secondary phases. Disseminated chromitite is characterized by porous chromite without a high-Al chromite core. Chlorite is the only silicate phase in porous chromite. Microzonations in porous chromite can be discriminated via BSE brightness and different reflectivity under reflected light. The microzonation (I) with low reflectivity and high BSE brightness is characterized by finer grain sizes and lower chlorite abundances compared with the microzonation (II) with high reflectivity and low BSE brightness ( The chromite ore bodies with dunite envelopes are concordant with foliation in the Hegenshan harzburgite. Olivine, orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, pargasite, and aspidolite are enclosed in high-Al chromite from massive chromitite ( Hydrothermal alteration and base-metal mineralization happened in several stages in chromitites ( Contents of Cr, Al, Fe The elemental distribution maps of high-Al chromite surrounded by porous chromite in semi-massive chromitite are shown in The compositions of high-Al chromite, the Chr-1, and Chr-2 in massive and semi-massive chromitites are basically located on the Al–Cr joint in the Cr–Al–Fe The Chr-1 in massive chromitite is characterized by lower Mg# values (0.42–0.55), Fe The composition of olivine in massive chromitite varies from Fo Uvarovite in massive chromitite contains 32.01–37.43 wt% CaO with subordinate FeO Chlorite in massive chromitite with Fe Awaruite in massive chromitite contains 73.36 wt% to 77.05 wt% Ni with a formula of Ni Primitive mantle-normalized transition element patterns for the chromitite samples from the Hegenshan podiform chromitites show enrichments in Cr, V, Zn, and depletion in Sc ( Since the Chr-1, Chr-2, and high-Al chromite are the only minerals in the Hegenshan chromitites accommodating substantial amounts of Cr, the whole-rock concentrations of Cr can estimate the total chromite abundance (including high-Al chromite, Chr-1, Chr-2). The concentrations of Ti, V, and Ga in chromitites might be correlated to modal abundances of chromite due to their exclusive accommodation in chromite rather than in silicates or sulfides. The concentrations of Cr thus show positive correlations with Ti, V, and Ga ( Sub-solidus Fe Effective sub-solidus Fe After the cation redistribution between high-Al chromite and olivine, uvarovite forms as a secondary phase of high-Al chromite (stage I) in massive chromitite ( High-Al chromite dominantly supplies Cr in uvarovite due to its high concentrations in high-Al chromite ( High-Al chromite in the Hegenshan chromitites undergoes a sequence of hydrothermal alteration, defined by an initial increase in Cr and decreases in Al and Fe Chlorite is the dominant secondary silicate crystallizing during hydrothermal alteration in the Hegenshan chromitites. The tetrahedral Al contents in chlorite systematically increase with temperatures. Numerous empirical thermometers based on chlorite composition ( Fluid from surrounding dunite, harzburgite, and cumulate rocks can promote the replacement of high-Al chromite by high-Cr chromite in equilibrium with chlorite in chromitites ( The Chr-1 and Chr-2 have higher FeO The MnO contents gradually increase from 0.14 to 0.30 wt% in high-Al chromite to 0.29–0.39 wt% in the Chr-1 and 0.33–0.55 wt% in the Chr-2 ( The Chr-1 has lower TiO Chromitites with different chromite/silicate ratios show various extents of replacement by diverse secondary assemblages. Most high-Al chromite crystals remain unmodified in massive chromitite ( The fact that base-metal minerals coexist with chlorite and brucite ( Thermal stability fields for nickel sulfides and copper sulfides can be estimated based on S mole fraction of sulfide assemblages ( Brucite and chlorite usually buffer physicochemical conditions of fluid in serpentinized ultramafic rocks ( To constrain The Awaruite and native copper in massive chromitite crystallize when log The transformation from awaruite into heazlewoodite highlights the transition from stage II to stage III hydrothermal alteration of chromite in the Hegenshan chromitites. Heazlewoodite could replace awaruite via the following reaction ( The equilibrium is controlled by HS Hydrothermal alteration of chromite and base-metal mineralization processes in the Hegenshan podiform chromitites are shown in Podiform chromitites in the Hegenshan ophiolitic complex mainly display massive, semi-massive, and disseminated ore textures. Olivine, orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, pargasite, and aspidolite are included in primary high-Al chromite in massive chromitite. Vermicular chromite related to melt–rock interaction occurs in semi-massive and disseminated chromitites. The chromitites successively undergo sub-solidus cooling and hydrothermal alteration after crystallization. The Fe The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Critical comments and suggestions by Prof. Shoji Arai (Kanazawa University, Japan), Sisir K. Mondal (Jadavpur University, India), and an anonymous reviewer helped us to improve this paper significantly. We thank Dr. Bo Zhang for suggestions on elemental mapping with EDS, Xiaoli Li for assistance with EMPA, Libing Gu, and Fang Ma for their help in sample preparation and whole-rock element analysis with ICP-MS. The National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2017YFC0601302) financially supports this research.