This study focuses on the fabrication of a novel, flexible and disposable textile based biosensing platform by the use of an absorbent microfibrous nonwoven substrate as the base material. This platform was fabricated via photolithography technique. Physical barriers were designed using a hydrophobic photo-resist polymer which defined the liquid penetration pathways on the fabric surface. A good hydrophilic/hydrophobic contrast of the fabricated patterns on the fabric and a well-controlled liquid capillary penetration was achieved in the patterns. The potential of the system was tested by constructing an enzyme biosensor based on colorimetric detection of hydrogen peroxide. To obtain a more enhanced and reproducible signal, the reservoirs were modified with gelatin and a linear working range of 0.1–0.6μM H2O2 was obtained. The system could work on temperatures as high as 50°C without any loss in the signal and in a pH range of 3.0–7.0. This bio-sensing platform may later be combined by H2O2 producing oxidases such as glucose oxidase, lactate oxidase, etc. and used for the rapid detection of various kinds of important analytes.Microfluidic analytical devices have been successfully used in the area of health related diagnosis especially in developing countries. They possess advantages of being inexpensive, easy to use, lightweight and low cost Whitesides and co-workers were the first to propose patterned paper as a paper-based microfluidic diagnostic platform The fabric-based fluid handling platforms, being more flexible and wearable alternatives to paper-based devices, were studied as potential biosensors to perform on-body bio-chemical analysis Coyle et al. developed a fabric-based fluid handling system having advantages of no power requirement for the liquid transport, compact structure and easy fabrication. For that, a fabric channel system was made from a moisture wicking fabric and a superabsorbent material was embedded at the end of the channel to control the flow of fluid through the channel. In addition to this, a lateral flow valve was used to control the transmission of liquid sample to the channel system Unlike the sensors using glass and silicone as substrates, fabric based sensors do not require pumps or power sources to movie fluids through the microfluidic device due to their ability to wick fluids by capillary action In the current study, a novel, flexible, wearable, easy-to-use and disposable textile-based micro fluidic platform was designed and developed. For this purpose, a highly absorbant nonwoven textile fabric was used which allowed the collection and delivery of fluids through the micro channels to the reservoir zones without any need to an additional pumping system. Baysal and Önder et al. reported that the nonwoven fabric provided a wearable microfluidic platform and also it was superior to paper in collecting and delivering the sample fluid to the detection zone, which is necessary for the rapid detection of analytes The traditionally used microfabrication materials like glass and silicon are rigid and expensive therefore plastics such as PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) and PMMA (polymethylmethacrylate) have been utilized for the fabrication of microfluidic devices. However, their hydrophobic structure does not allow simple capillary flow, therefore sophisticated and expensive readers to give a read-out and separate pumping systems that can direct fluid flow are required The potential of the developed microfluidic system was tested by constructing a hydrogen peroxide (H Freudenberg's Evolon Evolon SU-8 3050, an epoxy based negative photoresist, was purchased from MicroChem Corporation (Newton, MA). A developer (1-methoxy-2-propanol acetate solution) was also purchased from MicroChemCorperation (Newton, MA). Iso-propyl alcohol 2-propanol was supplied from Zag Chemical Industry Research, Development and Calibration Laboratory. Horseradish peroxidase (POX) enzyme and hydrogen peroxide were supplied by Sigma–Aldrich and Merck, respectively. 2,20-Azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt (A1888 Sigma) (ABTS) was used as analyte for POX. Photolithography technique was used to fabricate the designed patterns on the nonwoven substrate comprising reservoirs and channels to transfer the fluid to the reservoirs. An epoxy-based SU-8 negative photoresist was used to form defined areas of hydrophilic channels and reservoirs separated by hydrophobic barriers on the fabric surface. The fabrication parameters yielding the best hydrophilic/hydrophobic contrast of the pattern were determined. A 130 Subsequently, the back side of the fabric was coated as a single layer with SU-8. After soft bake of the coated fabric at similar conditions, again the fabric was kept on a cold surface for 1–2  A basic pattern design ( After fabrication steps in photolithography, characterization of the obtained patterns on the fabric sample was performed using a Zeiss EVO MA10 scanning electron microscope. SEM analysis was conducted to analyze the hydrophilic/hydrophobic contrast of the patterns fabricated on the fabric sample and the penetration behavior of photoresist polymer within the textile material. Horseradish peroxidase (POX) enzyme (Sigma–Aldrich, P8375) stock solution was prepared (5 2,2′-Azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt (ABTS), a dye which is oxidized by POX in the presence of H In order to determine the effect of pH change on color formation, H In order to determine the effect of temperature on color formation, analyte solutions were brought to different temperatures (25–50 Enzyme containing textile-based platforms were prepared and after the determination of the color formation at The initial fabrication studies were carried out using a 130  As seen in Channel depths were determined using cross sectional SEM images of the fabricated samples of different basis weights. The measured channel depths were approximately 144, 283 and 393 Purple color formation upon H Visual observation of the color formation was not possible in H Determination of H A fixed analyte concentration (0.62 Although gelatin presence led to an increased dependence of color intensity to pH, it could be noticed that better correlation was obtained ( Color formation was also affected from the changes in temperature. In our previous study, determination of analytes at The change in color intensity after 0, 1, 2 and 3 weeks of storage at 4 When the analyte solutions were first introduced, a green color was observed and within a minute the characteristic purple color appeared and no change was observed afterwards. When gelatin in the system was left to dry, however, the shade of the formed color has changed. For this reason, the measurements were always taken at When the measurement-to-measurement and sensor-to-sensor reproducibilities were compared, it was seen that for all cases, standard deviation values below 5% was obtained. Reproducibility results in the range of 3–6% were generally reported This study showed the design and development of a novel nonwoven fabric based biosensing platform. The highly absorbant structure of nonwoven fabric allowed the delivery of deposited fluid through the fabricated micro channels to the reservoir zones without the need of any power system like pumping. Boundaries of hydrophilic zones were defined by a hydrophobic polymer in order to create well-defined hydrophilic channels and reservoirs on the nonwoven fabric surface. A good hydrophilic/hydrophobic contrast of the fabricated patterns and a well-controlled liquid capillary penetration was achieved in the patterned channels. It was also found that the fabric areal density not only affected the channel depth of the fabricated pattern, but also the effectiveness of liquid transport to the detection reservoirs. An enzyme biosensor based on colorimetric detection of hydrogen peroxide was constructed to test the potential of the system as a rapid and easy detection platform. To obtain a more enhanced and reproducible signal, the reservoirs were modified with gelatin and a linear working range of 0.1–0.6 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the