In this work, life cycle and thermomechanical behaviour for quaternary CuAlNiMn alloy, developed through thermal evaporation technique on flexible Kapton polyimide substrate were investigated. Scanning electron microscopic images displayed grains less than 150nm without any porosity and crack. The thickness of the film was found to be around 6.6μm, and the XRD profile revealed the presence of β′ (128) martensite peak. The austenite transformation temperature was As: 221°C and Af: 226°C as obtained from differential scanning calorimetry plots. Further, thermal images were recorded to analyse the heat transfer profile of the film during actuation at various points on the bimorph. The thermomechanical behaviour was studied by actuating the composite film through Joule heating under different loads of 30mg, 45mg and 60mg. Parameters such as voltage and frequency were varied to analyse the actuation properties. The composite bimorph required less than 2V to displace 4mm under 60mg load. The life of eight samples was recorded for more than 20,000cycles, and the reliability of the film was investigated. The bimorph was further actuated by batteries to replicate the actuation and their suitability towards developing flappers for aerial robots.Microactuators have been of interest in the past decade due to its improved properties at a low surface to volume ratio. There are several different smart materials and techniques such as piezoelectric, hydraulic, electromagnetic, and pneumatic principles utilised in developing these actuators [ Thin film shape memory alloys developed on flexible substrates having exceptional thermomechanical properties is exercised to overcome the problems with training [ CuAlNi and CuZnAl are excellent actuators with exceptional properties of shape memory effect at lower manufacturing cost [ The thermomechanical behaviour of these alloys plays an essential role in employing them in applications [ In this work, CuAlNiMn shape memory alloy is developed on flexible Kapton polyimide substrate, and investigations are performed to understand the thermomechanical behaviour in detail. Further, the material properties and their effect on the life of the alloy is extensively studied. Initial work with the application of the developed bimorphs as micro-flapper is explored and the results are summarised below. Kapton polyimide sheets of 75 Bimorph of 2 A battery-operated circuit was developed for the micro aerial robot with Arduino Uno and On/Off controller was implemented for controlling the bimorphs. The morphology of the developed bimorph was observed to have a smooth and uniform surface without any pores or cracks. The average grain size was calculated to be less than 150 The EDS analysis of CuAlNiMn was performed at five different locations, and the average composition results are summarised in The XRD diffraction pattern displayed the presence of crystalline β′ Differential scanning calorimetry measured phase transformation temperature of CuAlNiMn samples. Sample weight of 15 Further to probe the heat transfer profile, thermal images of the samples were recorded using FLIR thermal camera, during actuation for 100 The thermomechanical behaviour of the developed bimorph was studied in three different parts (i) Maximum displacement of the bimorphs were recorded under varying loads of 30 The bimorphs were tested with significant heating and cooling cycle of 16 The samples exhibited faster heating and cooling rate as compared to ternary copper-based alloy and thereby actuating for extended periods. The cooling curve showed the bimorphs returned to its original position in most of the actuation conditions with an exceptionally minor loss in displacement. It can be observed from the graphs that load carrying capacity of CuAlNiMn film is less as load increases to 60  In order to verify the life cycle of the bimorphs, an actuation condition of 2 The microscopic images displayed a uniform morphology without any cracks indicating the compatibility of the substrate, which is further supported by the adhesion and composition analysis. The diffraction results displayed the presence of β martensite, which is appropriate for the phase transformation. The thermal analysis exhibited high austenite transition temperature which might be due to the high percentage of aluminium in the alloy. Further, the thermal images showed the actuation is fundamentally due to residual stress at the curved portion of the flexible substrate, which recovers on the application of heat. The free end of the bimorph was not contributing to the displacement. The actuation with plate heater exhibited larger displacement which might be due to direct thermal contact and more conduction. However, Joule heating exposed the load-bearing capacity of the alloy, which was excellent with 30 The bimorph was experimented with on/off controller at different set points, and the control behaviour is recorded as shown in The investigations on the thermomechanical behaviour of CuAlNiMn/polyimide composite films exhibited excellent characters to be utilised in microactuators. The morphological, structural and thermal properties are studied, and actuation through Joule heating displayed resolute characteristics. The results can be summarised as The microscopic images revealed the presence of smooth and uniform surface morphology with minor variation in composition. The β′ (128) martensite is responsible largely for the shape memory effect along the pre-straining. The maximum displacement of the samples under different loading conditions exhibited the thermomechanical properties of with a maximum displacement of 4.3 The frequency actuation exhibited the inability of the quaternary alloy to work with high loads at high frequency. The life cycle analysis displayed the ability of the bimorphs to work for more than 24,000 The preliminary results with the micro flapper are promising as a maximum of 20 We thank The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.