Application of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) to cells epigenetically alters their chromatin structure and induces transcriptional and cellular reparative events. This study investigated the application of two HDACi, valproic acid (VPA) and trichostatin A (TSA) on the induction of repair-associated responses in primary dental pulp cell (DPC) cultures. Flow cytometry demonstrated that TSA (100nM, 400nM) significantly increased cell viability. Neither HDACi was cytotoxic, although cell growth analysis revealed significant anti-proliferative effects at higher concentrations for VPA (>0.5mM) and TSA (>50nM). While high-content-analysis demonstrated that HDACi did not significantly induce caspase-3 or p21 activity, p53-expression was increased by VPA (3mM, 5mM) at 48h. HDACi-exposure induced mineralization per cell dose-dependently to a plateau level (VPA-0.125mM and TSA-25nM) with accompanying increases in mineralization/dentinogenic-associated gene expression at 5 days (DMP-1, BMP-2/-4, Nestin) and 10 days (DSPP, BMP-2/-4). Both HDACis, at a range of concentrations, significantly stimulated osteopontin and BMP-2 protein expression at 10 and 14 days further supporting the ability of HDACi to promote differentiation. HDACi exert different effects on primary compared with transformed DPCs and promote mineralization and differentiation events without cytotoxic effects. These novel data now highlight the potential in restorative dentistry for applying low concentrations of HDACi in vital pulp treatment.Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) regulate the acetylation of DNA-associated proteins and subsequently alter chromatin architecture, resulting in changes to transcriptional activity Recent studies A host of HDACi has been identified with a subgroup, of mainly pan-inhibitors, now engaged in clinical trials Based on previous studies, we hypothesize that the two HDACis investigated, VPA and TSA, induce reparative responses in primary DPCs at concentration levels which do not stimulate significant anti-proliferative, apoptotic or necrotic effects. The primary dental pulp cells (DPCs) used in this study were isolated from the pulpal tissue of freshly extracted rodent incisor teeth using enzymatic disaggregation A 1 DPCs were seeded at a density of 1×10 FC detection (BD FACSCanto II, BD Biosciences) of annexin V (AV) binding and propidium iodide (PI) staining (Annexin V-FITC Kit, BD Bioscience) was performed to assess viability, necrosis and secondary apoptosis. Cells were seeded at a density of 1×10 To determine the influence of VPA and TSA concentration on the DPC cycle, proliferation and apoptotic marker expression at 24 and 48 Cells were seeded at a density of 6×10 Mineralization was normalized by cell number. In a parallel study, DPCs were cultured using an identical protocol to the aforementioned mineralization assay for 14 days. After 14 days, the cells were not fixed, but detached with trypsin/EDTA and stained with 0.4% trypan blue, prior to cell counting using a standard hemocytometer. Mineral production per cell data for all concentrations of VPA and TSA were subsequently calculated based on quantification of alizarin red S stain extracted from each experimental well and corresponding cell counts. Three independent experiments ( Cells were seeded at a density of 6×10 Sq-RT-PCR analysis was performed for rat genes using specific primers (Invitrogen). The primer sequences and the product sizes are listed in Cells were seeded at a density of 6×10 One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey's post-hoc tests were used for all experiments to determine the influence of HDACi concentration ( Cell viability (Trypan blue exclusion) was not significantly reduced at any concentration of VPA ( Apoptosis was investigated by both FC and HCA of active caspase-3. FC data demonstrated no significant increase in apoptosis following VPA ( At 14 days, significant increases in mineralization per cell were evident for all VPA ( As a dose-dependent HDACi-induced mineralization response in DPCs was observed, further analysis of differentiation was assessed by gene ( This study highlights the potential for HDACi in promoting reparative events in the dental pulp and supports the original hypothesis that the two HDACi investigated did not induce significant anti-proliferative, apoptotic or necrotic effects, but did stimulate The current study is the first to use primary rat DPCs to investigate the effect of HDACi on cell differentiation and behavior. A range of experimental cell models have previously been used to analyze In addition to the induction of differentiation, other cellular processes have been reported to be modulated by HDACi including proliferation and these processes have been successfully targeted for cancer treatment However, no significant increases in p21 levels were observed with either HDACi applied. This may reflect variable kinetics of anti-proliferative pathways, or that p21 is only stimulated in the pulp cell line Notably, no observed change in apoptosis, caspase-3 expression or viability occurred at any HDACi concentration supporting a resistance to this toxicity in the primary cells used here, which contrasts with the toxicity previously reported using transformed cell-lines No loss of vitality was observed at any HDACi concentration applied and a significant increase in the viability of DPCs was observed following application of all concentrations of TSA compared with control cultures ( This study demonstrated that short-term application of two HDACi to primary DPCs dose-dependently promotes epigenetically-related mineralization and differentiation events at concentrations 10-fold lower those previously described for transformed cells. In contrast to transformed cells, mineralization is stimulated without a significant loss of cell viability and increase in apoptosis is suggestive of DPC resistance to HDACi-mediated toxicity. Notably, for future translational studies the promotion of tissue-repair processes was evident after a single-dose of topical HDACi, thereby supporting the potential benefits of short duration, low concentration HDACi application for vital pulp treatment. We acknowledge Grant support from the