The Jiguanzui Cu–Au deposit is an important skarn deposit in the Edong ore district of the Middle–Lower Yangtze River Valley metallogenic belt (MLYRB, Eastern China). The mineralization occurred dominantly in the Lower-Middle Triassic Jialingjiang Formation marble, either along interlayer fracture zones or along the intrusive contact with the Early Cretaceous quartz diorite. Based on the mineral assemblages and textural relationships, the Jiguanzui alteration/mineralization can be divided into five stages, namely (I) prograde skarn alteration (garnet-pyroxene), (II) retrograde alteration (hornblende-epidote-actinolite), (III) hematite mineralization, (IV) quartz-sericite-pyrite-chalcopyrite mineralization (main Cu-Au mineralization stage) and (V) calcite-sulfide mineralization (pyrite-chalcopyrite-molybdenite-galena-sphalerite).
                  Systematic short wavelength infrared (SWIR) spectral analyses show that alteration minerals at Jiguanzui include mainly sericite group minerals (montmorillonite, illite and muscovite), kaolinite, and carbonate minerals (calcite, ankerite and dolomite), with minor chlorite, halloysite and dickite. Spectral features of Stage IV sericite group minerals indicate that the Al-OH absorption feature wavelength positions (Pos2200) have shifted toward longer wavelengths (>2209 nm) in the ore proximal area, which may be caused by the substitution of Fe and Mg in the octahedral Al site. The vertical distance of mineralization indication can reach up to ca. 450 m, but can be affected by the wall-rock lithology and the Jiguanshan fault zone. The Fe-OH absorption feature wavelength positions (Pos2250) of chlorite in the Middle Triassic Puqi Formation hornfels have also shifted toward longer wavelengths in the ore proximal area, which may be caused by the relative Mg-rich nature of the chlorite. We conclude that the high Pos2200 (>2209 nm) of sericite group minerals and the high Pos2250 of chlorite can be used as prospecting tools for the Jiguanzui Cu–Au skarn mineralization.Short wavelength infrared (SWIR) spectra (wavelength = 1300–2500 nm) are between the near-infrared and mid-infrared light electromagnetic waves. Based on reflectance and absorption, molecular bonds of H The Jiguanzui Cu–Au skarn deposit, with a proven ore reserve of 5.6 Mt at 4.87 g/t Au and 181 Mt at 1.03% Cu ( In this study, we conducted systematic SWIR spectral analyses on the alteration minerals from Jiguanzui to determine the mineral contents and features, based on fine mineralization paragenetic classification. We discussed the correlation between the skarn mineralization and the SWIR absorption feature of ore-related alteration minerals at Jiguanzui. This correlation may provide help for the mineral prospecting at Jiguanzui, and it may also be important for guiding to the exploration of similar skarn deposits. The Middle–Lower Yangtze River Valley metallogenic belt (MLYRB), located on the northern margin of the South China block, is a key porphyry-skarn Cu–Fe–Au–Mo polymetallic ore belt in China ( The Edong ore district, in the westernmost section of the MLYRB, is situated in southeastern Hubei province ( There are six granitic batholiths in the Edong district, namely (from north to south) Echeng, Tieshan, Jinshandian, Lingxiang, Yinzu and Yangxin ( The Jiguanzui Cu–Au skarn deposit is located in the central Edong. The sedimentary rocks that crop out at Jiguanzui are the Lingxiang (Cretaceous volcanic rocks), Majiashan (Cretaceous volcanic breccia), Puqi (Middle Triassic clastic rocks) and Jialingjiang (Middle to Early Triassic dolomitic marble) formations, among which Jialingjiang Formation is the main ore-hosting strata. Major structures at Jiguanzui are the NE-trending Jiguanshan thrust fault and NW-trending anticlines and synclines. The magmatic rocks in the mining area are part of the Tonglvshan complex, mainly consisting of diorite and quartz diorite with local andesitic porphyry ( The Jiguanzui deposit has 7 major orebodies (I# to VII#) ( Based on the detailed field research, systematic microscopic identification and SWIR spectral analyses (TerraSpec, Analytical Spectral Devices, Inc (ASD)), five alteration/mineralization stages were identified at Jiguanzui, namely (I) prograde skarn (garnet-pyroxene) alteration, (II) retrograde (hornblende-epidote-actinolite) alteration, (III) hematite mineralization, (IV) main-stage (quartz-sericite-pyrite-chalcopyrite) mineralization and (V) calcite-sulfide (pyrite-chalcopyrite-molybdenite-galena-sphalerite) mineralization ( Stage I alteration is dominated by garnet with minor pyroxene ( Stage II alteration is characterized by abundant hornblende, epidote and actinolite with minor biotite and magnetite ( Stage III mineralization is characterized by hematite and K-feldspar with minor biotite and magnetite ( Stage IV mineralization is composed of abundant pyrite, chalcopyrite, sericite (montmorillonite, muscovite and illite) and quartz with minor digenite, chalcocite, molybdenite, chlorite and trace epidote, calcite, native gold and K-feldspar ( Stage V alteration/mineralization is characterized by abundant calcite, pyrite and chalcopyrite, with minor ankerite, native gold, bornite, digenite, chalcocite, galena, sphalerite and molybdenite ( A total of 15 drill holes were selected from 5 exploration lines, i.e., 24# (drill holes KZK09 and KZK30), 26# (drill holes KZK11, KZK23, ZK02619 and ZK02620), 28# (drill holes KZK13, KZK25, ZK0287, ZK02810 and ZK02812), 30# (drill holes ZK0307 and ZK03010), 32# (drill holes ZK0326 and ZK0327) exploration lines ( Sample preparation for SWIR spectral analyses requires the drill core sample surface to be clean and dry. Three analysis spots were chosen on each sample (to ensure data reliability) and marked. A total of 4, 962 SWIR spectra were obtained from 1, 654 samples (225 samples were discarded due to the presence of large amounts of sulfides) with a TerraSpec device (ASD TerraSpec 4 Hi-Res Mineral Spectrometer). After the instrument was connected, set the parameters in the TerraSpec signal collection software, then instrument optimization and white balance were performed for every 20 min. Detailed instrument parameter settings for the TerraSpec are outlined in The spectral data was automatically processed using The Spectral Geologist (TSG) V.3 software. Mineral identification and its abundance estimation were based on the intensity, wavelength and shape of the main absorption features in each spectrum. The SWIR numerical parameters, including wavelength position and absorption depth of sericite group (montmorillonite, illite and muscovite) Al-OH, and chlorite and carbonate (calcite, ankerite and dolomite) Fe-OH, were extracted using the Scalar function of TSG. Setting for the acquisition parameters were as outlined in Molecular bonds of H Out of the 5637 SWIR spectra obtained from Jiguanzui, 675 spectra were discarded due to their low signal-to-noise ratios. The average of the three values obtained from each sample represents the spectral eigenvalue. The results suggest the presence of sericite group minerals (montmorillonite, illite and muscovite), kaolinite, halloysite, dickite, chlorite and carbonate minerals (calcite, ankerite and dolomite). A total of 2893 spectra show only a single mineral, e.g., montmorillonite, illite, muscovite, kaolinite, halloysite, calcite and dolomite, whilst the rest show two or more minerals, e.g., montmorillonite + halloysite, montmorillonite + kaolinite, montmorillonite + calcite, illite + calcite. The results show that the Al-OH absorption feature is mainly associated with sericite group minerals, whilst the Fe-OH absorption feature is associated with chlorite and carbonate minerals. Sericite group minerals are the most common alteration minerals in most alteration zones at Jiguanzui (except for the main mineralization zone). Muscovite and illite have sharp, deep, single Al-OH absorption features of 2196–2215 nm and 2196–2223 nm, respectively, and weaker secondary Al-OH absorption features near 2344 and 2400 nm ( Chlorite spectra has Fe-OH and Mg-OH absorption features near 2255 nm (ranging 2240–2270 nm) and 2335 nm (ranging 2315–2355 nm), respectively ( At Jiguanzui, the Al-OH absorption feature of sericite group minerals were found in 3533 SWIR spectra (62.7% of the total). The wavelength covers a range from 2196 to 2219 nm, with most values clustering in 2206–2212 nm (mean = 2208, median = 2208 nm, n = 3533) ( The sericite Al-OH absorption feature wavelength position (Pos2200) does not change obviously in the 28# line (the wavelength range is 2204–2230 nm), and are clustered in four centers (with the Kriging method by using Surfer 12.2, Golden Software Corporation) ( In order to further verify the coupling of the Al-OH absorption features of the sericite group minerals with other orebodies in Jiguanzui, the Pos2200 of 26#, 30# and 32# lines are selected for comparison. There are four clear centers of Pos2200 in the 26# line which spatially coincide with the orebodies ( To better illustrate the relationship between Pos2200 and orebody location, we chose the mineralization centers intersected in each drill hole (red circles in In porphyry and VMS deposits, the Fe-OH absorption feature of chlorite has good indication for hydrothermal and mineralization center by chlorite Fe-OH absorption feature wavelength position (Pos2250) ( The Pos2250 of chlorite changes distinctly in the 26# line, which concentrated in four centers ( Sericite group minerals account for 62.7% of the total SWIR analyses, and are the most common alteration minerals at Jiguanzui. The majority of sericite group minerals occur in Stage IV, and this stage can therefore be used to verify the relationship with the Jiguanzui deposit orebody in spatial distribution by the SWIR spectral analyses. The wavelength positions of the sericite group mineral Al-OH absorption features display a wide and continuous range (2196–2219 nm). The wide wavelength range (2196–2219 nm) indicates that Al-OH absorption feature may point to the hydrothermal and mineralization center of the mine area ( There are two types of Al-OH absorption feature wavelength position variations in different deposits. The first type: in some porphyry and VMS deposits, the most ore-proximal place is characterized by relatively short Al-OH absorption feature wavelength positions, whilst in the ore-distal area the Al-OH wavelength positions shift to long wavelengths ( The Al-OH wavelength position values correlate positively with the Fe-Mg contents in sericite group minerals, whereas they correlate negatively with the proportions of octahedral Al and temperature ( The occurrence of Center No. 1 of Al-OH wavelength positions in the 0-meter elevation in ZK0287 ( As for chlorite, previous SWIR analyses of chlorite suggested good indicative capacity for mineralization center in porphyry and VMS deposits by Pos2250 ( In some porphyry and VMS deposits (e.g., Myra Falls and Izok Lake in Canada; Tongshankou in China), the Fe-OH absorption feature wavelengths of chlorite decrease from ore-proximal to ore-distal area ( As mentioned above, the long Al-OH absorption feature wavelengths of sericite group minerals at Jiguanzui have potential to indicate skarn mineralization. This is similar to the Hellyer VHMS deposit in Australia (  The Jiguanzui alteration/mineralization can be divided into five stages, namely (I) prograde skarn alteration, (II) retrograde alteration, (III) hematite mineralization, (IV) main-stage mineralization and (V) calcite-sulfides mineralization. The high Pos2200 area at Jiguanzui often spatially coincides with the orebody location. In local area, the chlorite Fe-OH absorption feature (2241–2263 nm) wavelengths become shorter from ore-proximal to ore-distal area at Jiguanzui. The minimum Al-OH absorption feature wavelength position that could indicate the orebody at Jiguanzui is about 2209 nm, which can be used as a useful vectoring tool at Jiguanzui. Therefore, SWIR spectral analyses may be effective and rapid in identifying alteration minerals and locating hydrothermal centers for skarn deposits. This research was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  