Posterior dislocation or fracture-dislocation of the shoulder is a rare entity, and is often missed in the Emergency Department. The causes include a tonic-clonic seizure, electrocution, and major trauma. The clinical presentations are often misleading and thus the correct diagnosis may be delayed. Proper imaging of the shoulder in suspected cases is important in making the correct diagnosis. We report a rare case of bilateral posterior fracture-dislocation of the shoulders, which presented in the Emergency Department with clinical features suggestive of a dissecting aneurysm of the thoracic aorta. A review of the relevant literature is also presented.Posterior dislocation or fracture-dislocation of the shoulder is a rare entity and is often missed in the Emergency Department (ED) ( We report a rare case of bilateral posterior fracture-dislocation of the shoulders, which presented in the ED with clinical features suggestive of a dissecting aneurysm of the thoracic aorta. A review of the relevant literature is also presented. A 66-year-old man was found unresponsive by his wife, who called an ambulance. According to the wife, he had awakened from sleep screaming and violently shaking his limbs. This event lasted for a few minutes after which he became unresponsive. He had subsequently regained consciousness after 10 min. The ambulance crew recorded a pulse rate of 112 beats/min, blood pressure of 130/68 mm Hg, and a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 12. He had a past medical history of ischemic heart disease, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and hypercholesterolemia. There was no history of epilepsy or diabetes mellitus. He was on anti-anginal, anti-hypertensive, anti-dysrhythmic, and statin-lowering therapy, in addition to warfarin. In view of the past medical history, he was given sublingual nitrate and commenced on oxygen therapy and intravenous fluids. He was then brought to the ED of our hospital. On arrival in the ED, the patient had a GCS score of 15 and was alert and orientated. The pupils were bilaterally equal in size, and normally reactive to light. Cranial nerve examination was normal, and there were no motor or sensory deficits. The chief complaint was bilateral shoulder and arm pain. Initial physical examination by the emergency physician revealed: a temperature of 35.7°C, pulse rate of 122 beats/min, and respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min. Blood pressures in both arms differed, right being 122/60 mm Hg and left being 131/77 mm Hg. Physical examinations of the chest and abdomen were unremarkable. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (EKG) showed no acute abnormality. An international normalized ratio (INR) check revealed a value of 2.9. A clinical diagnosis of dissecting thoracic aortic aneurysm was made. After initial management, a supine chest radiograph was performed ( Radiographs of both shoulders were then taken, and the patient was referred for an orthopedic assessment. The radiographs revealed bilateral posterior fracture-dislocation of the shoulders ( The patient was subsequently taken to the operating room, and closed reduction of both dislocated shoulders was attempted under general anesthesia and radiological imaging. The left shoulder was easily reduced, and the joint was found to be stable after reduction. The right shoulder could not be reduced, and the procedure was abandoned after two attempts. It was felt that the fracture configuration precluded a satisfactory outcome in the long term, and a prosthetic replacement of the humeral head was a more favorable choice. Based on the history of the episode given by the patient's wife—where the patient had violently shaken his limbs for a few minutes, became unresponsive, and subsequently regained consciousness after 10 min—a provisional diagnosis of a tonic-clonic seizure was made. Once the patient's medical condition improved, he was investigated for the cause of his seizure with a CT scan of the head and an electroencephalogram, both of which were normal. Nine days later he underwent right shoulder hemiarthroplasty after optimization of the medical condition and INR. The post-operative recovery was uneventful. A review at 6 months revealed full pain-free movement of both shoulders. He had been started on anti-seizure medication before discharge from hospital, and had no further seizures at the 6-month review. Bilateral posterior fracture-dislocation of the shoulders is one of the least common injuries to the shoulder ( The mechanism of this injury was first clearly described by Shaw ( Proper imaging of the shoulder is very important in suspected cases to make a correct diagnosis ( In our case, different blood pressure readings were noted in the right and left upper limbs. This clinical finding prompted the emergency physician to make a provisional diagnosis of dissecting aneurysm of the thoracic aorta. This was probably caused by vasospasm or direct arterial injury or compression, which have been reported as complications of shoulder dislocation. A supine chest radiograph is not sufficient to exclude the provisional diagnosis of a dissecting aneurysm of the thoracic aorta, and in our case a contrast-enhanced CT scan was obtained. Bilateral posterior fracture-dislocation is a rare injury, and is most commonly caused by an epileptic seizure. Its clinical presentation may be misleading, resulting in the diagnosis being delayed. Good radiological imaging, which should include an axillary view, is imperative to ascertain the correct diagnosis. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment lead to a favorable outcome, as seen in our case.