Tumbling mills play an essential role in modern mineral processing. Because of the nature of the mill, the internal forces make instrumentation of the mill interior difficult. One solution to this problem is the use of an instrumented ball. An instrumented ball, equipped with an accelerometer, rotation rate sensors and a temperature sensor has been built. The instrumented ball and a camera system are used to measure the state of the charge within a laboratory mill. In parallel, a discrete element model (DEM) of the laboratory mill is developed. Using the distributions and moments of the energy terms of the charge, the simulation and experimental results are analyzed and compared. The moments are used to tune the DEM, such that the simulation results are in agreement with the experimental results. The comparison also identifies which aspects require further improvement.discreet element model(ing) micro-electro-mechanical system potential energy (J) translational kinetic energy (J) rotational kinetic energy (J) mass of the instrumented ball (kg) gravitational constant (m/s velocity of the instrumented ball (m/s) vertical position of the instrumented ball (m) moment of inertia of the instrumented ball (kg rotation rate to the instrumented ball (rad/s) specific power required to keep the charge in a given configuration (W/kg) mean vertical position of the charge (m) speed of the mill (rad/s) probability cumulative distribution function the the moment generating function of mean value of a distribution standard deviation of a distribution Tumbling mills have a long history in the mineral processing industry, taking their modern form as early as in the late 19th century ( The instrumented ball is able to measure physical quantities that can be simulated using a DEM ( The instrumented ball is equipped with a MEMs rotations rate sensor (3-axis) and a temperature sensor ( From this data, the velocity of the instrumented ball is calculated. The kinematic quantities allow the determination of the instantaneous energy of the instrumented ball. The energy consists of three parts, the rotational kinetic energy, the translational kinetic energy and the potential energy. In parallel, CORSIM, a DEM representation of the mill, is constructed ( Therefore, there are no inherent geometric difficulties in the simulation of the mill. The main difficulty lies in the contact model and its parameters. The contact model has a strong effect on the accuracy and the speed of the simulation ( The cumulative distribution function can be used to find the moments ( The analysis of the simulated and experimental energies and power is centered about the moments of these values. Experimentally and In The comparison process is undertaken over the following set of DEM model parameters, as given in After analysis, only one simulation is found to be in full agreement, within error, with the experimental values. Through the measurands obtained with the use of the instrumented ball and the camera system, it is possible to identify the simulation (and its parameters) that best reflects the operation of the mill. The parameters of this simulation are given in The best simulation parameters differ from the initial values obtained experimentally and from the literature ( Based on the comparison of moments, the DEM model capable of reproducing the dynamics of the mill has been identified. Though this model is considered accurate, some problems remain—the accuracy to simulate the rotational kinetic energy is weak. There are two possible explanations for this. Firstly, the contact model may not be an appropriate model for the mill. The translational and kinetic energies are accurately reproduced. Therefore the contact model, which determines the evolution of the position and velocity by integrating Newton’s second law, is accurate. The rotational kinetic energy, which is implicitly governed by the torque model, is not. But the torque model is the moment of the tangential contact force, which is accurate. Therefore, the torque model requires some modification, but the force contact model does not. Secondly, only the first two moments were considered. Including higher moments may force better agreement with the measured rotational kinetic energy distribution, as explained in Section The importance of taking different measurements is illustrated in Finally, an interesting extension of the distribution analysis of the charge is possible. State probabilities and distributions play an important role in statistical physics. The Gibbs entropy The analysis of the mill is open to other methods. For instance, the use of large deviation theory, applicable to non-equilibrium systems, may provide another avenue to finding the entropy and thermodynamic potentials in tumbling mills ( The measurands (moments or equivalently, the distributions) are quantities that can be obtained experimentally and The authors thank Benoit Picard of COREM for his invaluable experimental assistance.