Low-speed comminution machines (circumferential velocity <5 m/s) with shearing, cutting and tearing stresses have proven to be suitable for the comminution of scrap metal and waste of non-brittle behaviour. Although this type of equipment has found a widespread application, the processes taking place during the comminution are known only to a limited extent. Their clarification was the objective of systematic basic research. Thereby, it was necessary to indicate the influence of essential parameters (position and shape of the stator, axial clearance) regarding the comminution process.Comminution plays an important role in the recycling of wastes and scrap metals, which almost exclusively exhibit non-brittle behaviour. In the context of coarse and intermediate size reduction cutting, shearing, tearing and bending stresses are suitable ( The Based on the knowledge of the effects of the stressing modes, the very variously designed comminution machines for the coarse and intermediate size reduction can be systematised ( The subject matter of this paper is the rotary shear. In the case of the multi-rotor machines the circumferential velocity is mostly <0.5 m/s and of the single-rotor machines it ranges up to 5 m/s. Rotary shears have found a widespread application for the coarse- and medium-size reduction of light steel and non-ferrous scrap, domestic and bulky refuse, waste wood, used tires as well as waste paper and files. Depending on the feed material and the purpose of comminution, several types of rotary shears have been emerged. The attempt of classifying them corresponding to the mode and the location of the major stressing taking place is shown in The comminution process in In order to comminute bulky and voluminous wastes or to raise the throughput feeding devices, such as pushers, swivel arms, feed rollers ( The group of the axial-gap rotary shears comprises small machines with an installed drive power of <10 kW used for the destruction of papers or to reduce the volume of small amounts of commercial waste as well as comminution machines with an installed drive power of up to 800 kW, which have a rotor width of up to 2700 mm. Axial-gap rotary shears are powered mostly by electro-mechanical drives in the range of drive power <100 kW and by electro-hydraulic drives if ranging between 100 and 800 kW ( The comminution process in As a result of the adverse feeding conditions of the single-rotor radial-gap rotary shears, feeding devices are required. In the majority of cases, hydraulically operated swivel arms (a) or pushers (b) are used. Because of the great number of rotor knives, the defined comminution geometry and the use of discharge grates the resulting comminution product consists of relatively small fragments in comparison to the multi-rotor axial-gap rotary shears. The For basic investigations two model apparatuses are available, which can be utilised both to research the shearing, cutting and tearing stresses under almost ideal circumstances and to investigate the extensive comminution processes in rotary shears, cutters and shredders. The objective of the use of the The platy test body is fixed pneumatically in front of the stator (4). The comminution of the test body takes place between the rotor knife (2) and a straight or U-shaped stator (4) in the bottom dead center, whereby the stressing velocity reaches up to 5.5 m/s. In order to measure the force strain gauges are applied to the rotor knife. Thus, force–time diagrams can be recorded. Furthermore, the stressing energy can be determined by means of an angle-measurement instrument, which quantifies the swing of the pendulum. For the analysis of the shearing, cutting and tearing stresses, various rotor knives with wedge angles of 58° and 90° are available. The model testing device bases on a small-scale comminution machine, which can be used as an axial-gap rotary shear and a low-speed rotary shredder ( In addition, the torque and the speed are measured in order to calculate the mechanical power. The mechanical and electrical power, speed and torque are recorded continuously by a central measuring and control unit. For the investigation of the basic stressing modes including the shearing, cutting and tearing stresses, the Izod pendulum in conjunction with the geometry A1 was applied ( At a low clearance of 0.2 mm and a wedge angle of 90°, the external compression forces applied cause a A linear force transmission along the knife-edge ( With increasing clearance, the deformation zone becomes more important. The part of the cutting zone decreases steadily until it no longer exists when the In order to analyse the comminution sequence of axial-gap rotary shears, the model testing device in conjunction with the stressing geometry B1 was used ( At first, the impact of the front rotor knife-edge on the metal sheet results in a local deformation in the area of the knife-edge. If the deformability is exhausted, cracks are initiated in this area. Further motion of the rotor knife (b) leads to crack propagation, which takes place along the lateral knife-edges due to a shearing stress. Simultaneously, crack propagation starts at the bottom end of the test body caused by a shearing stress between the lateral edges of the rotor disc and the stator. Both cracks propagate until they meet each other, resulting in the fracture finally (c). Therefore, the determining comminution process in axial-gap rotary shears is the shearing stress in the axial gap between stator and rotor knife (single-rotor axial-gap rotary shears) and between the overlapping rotor discs, respectively (multi-rotor axial-gap rotary shears). The comminution process is also characterised by intensive deformation and friction processes particularly below the rotor knife, whereby fragments are rolled up. Especially, in the case of the comminution of polypropylene plates under similar geometrical conditions elastic deformations could be observed ( The characterisation of the energy consumed by the crack initiation and propagation of the comminution mechanism specified above was carried out under comparable conditions by means of the Izod pendulum ( In the case of the AlMg3 test body (a), it becomes obvious that, at first, the impact of the rotor knife requires a certain amount of energy for elastic and plastic deformation of the material (deformation area). This preliminary stressing of the material takes place along the whole width of the rotor knife. The first cracks formed adjacent to the front knife-edge have only short dimensions. Thus, the specific energy per unit increase in surface area is very high. The plateau of the stressing energy Similar processes arise at the comminution of polypropylene. In The position of the stator and the axial clearance have proven to be essential parameters of the comminution process. In the following, these parameters are discussed more detailed. The comminution and deformation process described above is substantially influenced by the position of the stator towards the rotor. At a low knife-contact angle of <30°, the deformation processes are less significant. This results in lower specific energies per unit increase in surface area, which are, however, associated with adverse feeding conditions ( By increasing the axial clearance, the comminution process taking place in the axial gap changes. The transition of a low axial clearance ( In the case of the polypropylene (b), the higher axial clearances lead to an intensive deformation of the polypropylene adjacent to the fracture area. Thus, the specific energy per unit increase in surface area rises significantly both at a low and a high knife-contact angle. As a result of the low deformation and friction processes, the energy consumption of the comminution by means of an “ideal” shearing and cutting is obviously lower than the one required for the comminution using stressing geometries according to the axial-gap rotary shears ( The comminution in rotary shears results from shearing, cutting and tearing stresses depending on the shape and configuration of the comminution tools and chambers. Whereby, the shearing stress in the axial or radial gap prevails according to the type of rotary shear. The comminution process is superposed by deformation and friction processes. Thus, the specific energies per unit increase in surface area are significantly higher than those consumed by the basic stresses shearing and cutting. Particularly, the deformation and friction processes occurring below the rotor knives considerably affect the energy consumption required for the comminution. As important parameters of the comminution process, the position of the stator and the axial clearance could be determined. The authors would like to thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for financial support.