Crosswind is a significant concern for the design and operation of a natural draft cooling tower. The negative effects of crosswind on the thermal performance of natural draft cooling towers have been shown in many cases, for a variety of tower types. This paper presents a comprehensive review to synthesize the current research status in this field. At first, three common cooling tower research methods used to quantify the crosswind effect: full-scale/field measurements, lab-scale tests and CFD modelling, are reviewed and discussed. Then, based on the existing literature, the crosswind effect and its working mechanism on different types of natural draft cooling towers are summarized and discussed. Finally, the most current findings and solutions to address the crosswind issue are reported. The main advantages and disadvantages of each solution are presented and discussed. The information collected in this review paper could be a useful guidance for the design and optimization of natural draft cooling tower. Compared the heat exchanger arrangement and windbreak wall  Detail air temperature and hot water temperature distribution are presented. The heat rejection rate decreased by 40% when crosswind speed is 5 m/s. Discussed the reason of the reversed trend. Cooling performance decreased by 30% when crosswind speed is 5 m/s. Proposed that the heat can be rejected by the horizontal wind.  Investigated the windbreak wall The water outlet temperature increased by 16 °C when crosswind speed is 16 m/s. Presented the detail temperature and pressure profile inside the cooling tower. The cooling performance dropped by 30% when crosswind speed is about 6 m/s. Presented the detailed thermal performance on each heat exchanger. Mean temperature inside the tower increased by more than 25% when crosswind is 6 m/s Analysed the mechanism Present the heat exchanger performance in different location Presented the velocity profiles inside the cooling tower. Discussed the effect of the wind break wall Discussed the wind effect coefficient Proposed that the performance of the reached the minimum when Water outlet temperature increased by 6 °C when crosswind speed is 12 m/s. Considered the two water passes in the cooling delta. Water outlet temperature increased by 12 °C when crosswind speed is 12 m/s. Present the dimensional characteristics of flow and heat transfer of cooling deltas and sectors.  Considered the influence of the wind profile Simulated both the constant water temperature model and constant heat flux model. Cooling tower temperature increased by 6 °C when crosswind speed is 7.5 m/s. Discussed the influence of the vortex inside the cooling tower and the crosswind effect at the top-exit of the cooling tower. Heat rejection rate decreased by 25% when crosswind speed is 10 m/s Proposed several mitigation methods ITD increased 12 °C when crosswind speed is 20 m/s Proposed the enclosure to improve the performance Air velocity inside the tower decreased by 30% when crosswind speed is 5 m/s Investigated the influence of the surrounding structures Maximum Δ Demonstrated and discussed the air vortex inside cooling tower Maximum Δ Proposed several equations to predict the cooling tower performance Cooling efficiency decreased by 0.5% when crosswind speed is 0.4 m/s Correlated the experimental data Cooling tower efficiency decreased by 9% at a crosswind speed of 6 m/s Investigated the windbreak wall and deflector Maximum Δ Investigated the heat transfer performance of different zones under crosswind condition Investigated the additional resistance at the outlet of the cooling tower Change the direction of the crosswind and force it through the heat exchanger/fill The mitigation effect is the most significant Extra flow resistance High initial cost Not a cost effective choice. Rely too heavily on the wind direction Better match the cold air and hot water Low initial cost area (m correlation coefficient specific heat (J kg diameter (m) force (N) Froude number friction factor Grashof number heat transfer coefficient (kW/m enthalpy (kJ/kg) height, elevation (m) flow resistance length (m) Lewis factor mass flow rate (kg/s) number Nusselt number pressure (Pa) Prandtl number heat transfer rate (kW) heat flux (kW m Reynolds number Richardson number momentum sink temperature (°C) overall heat transfer coefficient (kW/m velocity (m s density, mean density (kg m permeability property difference effectiveness viscosity (Pa s) air side, water side bottom measurement level droplet effective inside or inlet, outside or outlet tube tower radiator Waste heat is generated during the industrial production processes and our daily life, such as thermal power plants, metallurgical and chemical plants, automobile engines, air conditioners and refrigerators Cooling tower is a common heat rejection device in thermal power plants A natural draft cooling tower can be a dry cooling tower, a wet cooling tower or a hybrid cooling tower depending on its heat transfer mechanism. In a natural draft wet cooling tower (NDWCT), hot water is cooled by the combination of heat and mass transfer. As shown in While wet cooling towers are efficient, they consume large quantities of water. This is a problem where fresh water resources are scarce and expensive. Due to the increased interest in renewable thermal power generation such as the geothermal and solar thermal power plants, where the prospective locations usually lack water, dry cooling technology has received extra attention in recent years For natural draft cooling towers, there are two big challenges: hot ambient temperature and the crosswind. Both have negative effects on the thermal performance of the cooling tower While crosswind also has a significant impact on the structural design, the focus of this paper is on the crosswind effect on the thermal performance. In this review, the existing cooling tower design theories and the current cooling tower research methodologies are summarized first. Then, the research related to crosswind effects on both NDDCT and NDWCT are reviewed. The mechanisms of crosswind effect on different types of cooling towers are discussed. Finally, the mitigation methods are classified and compared. The information collected in the present study gives reference for future design and operation of the natural draft cooling tower. The methodologies used in quantifying the effect of crosswind on the performance of natural draft cooling towers can be catalogued into three groups: full-scale/field measurements, lab-scale measurements and the numerical simulation. The most direct way is obviously by full-scale measurements on an operating power plant. The inlet and outlet water temperatures of the cooling tower are measured to evaluate the tower thermal performance. Air side properties are usually characterised by temperature and humidity measurements at entry and inside the cooling tower. The wind speeds and direction can be obtained from a nearby weather station or by installing the anemometers on the cooling tower. The disadvantage of this approach is the difficulty of performing controlled experiments. The performance can be affected by the changes in different kinds of ambient conditions. Changes in air temperature, air humidity, crosswind, rain, snow, hail and the solar radiation all affect the performance of a natural draft cooling tower An alternative measurement approach to investigate the crosswind effect is wind tunnel tests using small-scale models. Compared with the full-scale measurements, the lab-scale modelling tests usually have better instrumentation system and better control on the experimental conditions, for example, the turbulence from ambient can be avoided. The resulting experimental data is more consistent and stable. However, lab-scale results cannot be directly used to predict the behaviour of real towers unless the conditions of the geometric and dynamic similarity between the two are satisfied. This is not always straightforward. It is usually impossible to satisfy both Reynolds and Froude number similarity with one small-scale model. Thus, approximations and compromises have to be made in the lab-scale experiments. Most of the previous lab-scale tests can be divided into two types: the isothermal tests and non-isothermal tests. In the non-isothermal tests In the isothermal tests Since similarity conditions are not fully satisfied in most of the lab-scale cooling tower tests, these results may be considered as qualitative and direct extrapolation to real towers may lead to error. One-dimensional simulations assume unidirectional and steady flow of air through the tower. The air enters radially and flows vertically. Air velocity is the spatially averaged profile. While the one-dimensional approach cannot represent crosswind effects, it is a powerful tool to predict the tower performance under steady-state conditions. The performance of a natural draft cooling tower can be predicted solving two groups of equations: airflow draft equation and energy balance equations. The airflow draft equation for both dry cooling tower and wet cooling tower is the same, as demonstrated in Eq. As simultaneous heat, mass and momentum transfer processes as well as two phase flow occurring throughout the wet cooling towers are excessively complex, simplifying assumptions and empirical or experimental data are used in multi-dimensional numerical codes. Merkel method is a widespread approach to simplify the analysis of the evaporative cooling process. In this method, the change in water flow rate due to evaporation is negligible and the Lewis factor is equal to one, which means the temperature and concentration profiles through the wet cooling tower coincide. In the integrated form, the Merkel method is presented as The left side of Eq. The integration in the right side of Eq. In dry cooling towers, all heat transfer is through the air-cooled heat exchanger and the energy balance equation is given by The overall heat transfer coefficient of the air-cooled heat exchanger can be calculated by Eq. Above equations can demonstrate the fundamental processes of the natural draft cooling tower and are widely applied in designing and rating cooling tower. Two- and three-dimensional cooling tower representations with and without crosswind effects can be rigorously and comprehensively analysed using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). With the development of the computer power, both the accuracy and the computation speed have improved dramatically. CFD is now the most efficient method to study the crosswind effect on natural draft cooling towers. However, some validation is still needed to build confidence in the CFD results. The following section summarized the common approaches used in the cooling tower CFD modelling As shown in For cooling tower operating with constant crosswind speed, the flow around the tower can be assumed to be steady. Thus, the airflow is usually modelled as a steady, incompressible, turbulent and continuous flow. The Boussinesq approximation is adopted to represent the buoyancy effect. As one of the most common models used in CFD to simulate mean flow characteristics for turbulent flow conditions The physical properties of the air can be calculated using the in-compressible ideal-gas model. The pressure-based segregated algorithms: semi-implicit method for pressure linked equations (SIMPLE) and SIMPLE-Constant (SIMPLEIC) are widely applied to discretise the governing equations. In CFD simulation of a wet cooling tower, considering different flow states of the cooling water, the inside domain of a tower is usually divided into three different parts: spray, fill and rain zones The impact of droplets on the air flow could be considered by introducing source terms of mass, energy and momentum into the air phase governing equations. These source terms are computed from the Lagrangian framework by an alternate process through volume averaging method The motion of any particular droplet through the air depends on the droplet-to-air interaction mechanism which is affected by simultaneous heat, mass, and momentum transfers between the droplet and the surrounding air. The droplet is tracked by the following energy, mass and momentum balance equations As shown in In dry cooling tower simulation, the radiator boundary condition is the most common heat exchanger model The pressure drop of the heat exchanger is assumed to be proportional to the dynamic head of air. For laminar flow in the radiator regime, Wang et al. Both the heat transfer coefficient and the loss coefficient are normally defined as a function of the air velocity normal to the radiator face. In some simulations, the porous media model is selected to model the pressure drop of the heat exchanger In wet cooling towers, the water boundary condition is divided into two parts: the fill zone, and the spray and rain zone. The heat and mass transfer performance of a particular fill is obtained through experiment The heat transfer coefficient ( The pressure loss through the wet cooling tower is modelled using source terms in the momentum equation. This momentum sink is give as The main pressure loss coefficients across the wet cooling tower are shell supports, fill, water distribution pipes and drift eliminators Across water droplet flow trajectories in the spray and rain zone, the ‘reflected’ boundary condition is imposed at the tower shell walls to represent the effect of the shell walls on the impinging water droplets The pressure loss due to the shell supports, water distribution and drift eliminators is modelled in a manner similar to the fill As shown in Previous research has demonstrated that the crosswinds have negative effect on both of the two kinds of NDDCT. However, the mechanisms of the crosswind effects on these two kinds of cooling tower are different.  Air pressure and the airflow distribution of the heat exchanger is changed with the appearance of the crosswind. The flow of wind-driven air around the tower affects the pressure distribution and this causes non-uniform pressure distributions at the heat exchanger level as shown in With increasing crosswind speed, air vortices are generated inside the cooling tower because of the pressure gradient caused by the crosswind With the influence of the crosswind, the air mass flow rate distribution for each heat exchanger bundle is not uniform. The air mass flow rate through the windward heat exchanger panels is much smaller than those in the leeward area. In addition, with the increase of the crosswind speed, air vortices and hot air recirculation are formed at the windward part of the cooling tower. Thus, the performance of the windward heat exchangers is significantly reduced by crosswind. The effect of the crosswind on the overall performance of cooling tower can be evaluated using two different methods. The first one is based on the change between the approach in no crosswind condition and crosswind condition. A lower approach represents better cooling tower performance. Another way to evaluate the crosswind effect is using the ratio of the heat rejection rate of the cooling tower with and without the crosswind: In practical operation, the NDDCT heat rejection rate is almost constant and tower underperformance manifests itself in higher water temperature Du Preez and Kroger The authors have been developing short NDDCT technology for small-scale (1–30 MW) concentrating solar thermal (CST) power generation. This reversal observed by Yang et al. is more pronounced in short cooling towers The reversal of the crosswind effect can be explained as follows In summary, For the NDDCTV, the thermal performance is believed to be more susceptible to the crosswind than those with horizontal arranged heat exchanger  It is obvious that for those heat exchanger bundles located at windward sections, crosswind can cause extra air flow though the heat exchangers. According to Yang and Zhao’s simulation A number of researchers investigated detailed performance of the heat exchangers located in different part of the NDDCTV  As noted in the previous sections, the crosswind effects on reported on different sizes of the NDDCTs were different. Based on the cooling tower exit mass flow rate, Hooman For a given cooling tower, the draft speed can be calculated using the method described in Section Based on Hooman’s theory, Ma et al. In past studies of natural convection, the Grashof number has been proposed to represent the natural convection effects in the momentum balance equation. It is a measure of the relative magnitudes of the buoyancy force and the opposing viscous force acting on the fluid. For a NDDCT, the characteristic length can be defined as the base diameter of the cooling tower and the Grashof number can be expressed by the following equation: When a NDDCT is subjected to crosswind, the air flow through the heat exchanger is controlled by both natural and forced convection. The relative importance of natural convection and forced convection can be determined by the ratio of Grashof number to the square of the Reynold’s number ( According to the previous research on mixed convective flow  Depending on the fill arrangement and the air and water flow directions. There are two NDWCT configurations: counter flow and crossflow. These two configurations are shown in Like the performance of the NDDCT, at windless conditions, the airflow at inlet of the NDWCT is uniform, axisymmetric and stable, as shown in Crosswind changes the distributions of the pressure and the velocity near the inlet and outlet of the cooling tower and destroys the uniform and axisymmetric distribution of flow inside the tower. At low crosswind velocities, because of the pressure drop of the rain zone, the crosswind effect on NDWCT is not significant and the circumferential inflow air velocities are almost unchanged As the crosswind velocities further increase, the heat and mass transfer in the rain zone is enhanced by the increased turbulence. The hot air spots start shifting toward the windward side of the tower in the rain zone For a wet cooling tower, the heat transfer due to evaporation is the dominant process comprising up to 65–85% of total heat transfer.  The main findings and concerns regarding the crosswind effects on both NDDCT and NDWCT are summarised as following: Crosswind has been proved to be a negative effect on the performance of natural draft cooling towers. In general, the influence degree can be ranged as: NDDCTV > NDDCTH > Counter flow NDWCT. The crosswind effect on the crossflow NDWCT is rarely reported in the open literature. The crosswind effect on NDDCTH and counter flow NDWCT is similar. The high wind velocity causes a low-pressure zone below the horizontally arranged fill/heat exchanger. This low-pressure zone is located at the windward part of the cooling tower. The driving force of the air is significantly reduced and the thermal performance in this area is deteriorated. Because of the existence of the rain zone, the wind effect on the NDWCT is less significant. For a NDDCTV, under crosswind condition, the performance of the heat exchanger located in the windward section is enhanced while the heat exchangers located in the side section and leeward section is deteriorated. The high tangential velocity at the side section forms two low-pressure zones, which prevent the air flowing through the heat exchanger. In the leeward section, the performance deterioration is caused by the cross ventilation effect, which leads the hot air from the windward section penetrating the leeward section. In high crosswind condition, air vortices are observed in both NDDCT and NDWCT. These vortices could further deteriorate the thermal performance of the cooling tower by preventing the air through the heat exchanger/fill and forming an extra flow resistance for the air to exit the cooling tower. For all kinds of natural draft cooling tower, there is a critical crosswind speed, where the performance of the natural draft cooling tower reaches the minimum. When crosswind speed is higher than the critical crosswind speed, the thermal performance of the cooling tower starts to recover with increasing crosswind speed. For dry cooling towers, this trend can be explained by considering the relative significance of the natural convection and forced convection. Numerous mitigation technologies have been proposed to deal with the crosswind issue. In general, the mitigation technologies can be divided into two categories: the air side optimization and the water side optimization. Airside optimization targets to enhance the performance of the cooling tower by improving the airflow into the cooling tower or improving the air outflow from the cooling tower. On the other hand, waterside optimization uses the water mass flow redistribution to optimize the performance of the cooling tower. Windbreak wall and wind deflectors are found to be the most effective way to mitigate the crosswind effect and have been widely investigated by many researchers. The windbreak wall can be installed inside of the cooling tower, outside the cooling tower or at both the interior and the exterior of the cooling tower. The internal windbreak wall can be either “+” like More details of the wall geometry and the porosity have been investigated by a number of researchers. Al-waked and Kroger simulated the performance of the cooling tower under crosswind condition and with different wall porosity The windbreak wall can also be located outside the cooling tower, as shown in Since the working mechanisms of interior and exterior windbreak walls are different, a number of researchers proposed windbreak wall installation of both, as shown in It is noted that no matter which kind of windbreak wall, the wind direction has a significant effect on the performance of these windbreakers Goodarzi The main findings and concerns about the windbreak wall technology are summarized as following: For dry cooling towers, the internal windbreak wall is preferred by the NDDCTH, while the external windbreak is preferred by the NDDCTV. On the other hand, both internal and external windbreak walls have been applied in the wet cooling tower. The mitigation effect of the combination of the internal and external windbreak wall is found to be better than any one of them in isolation. This kind of windbreak wall can be applied in any type of the natural draft cooling tower at an additional cost. The height and the length of the windbreak wall can be optimized to reduce the initial cost. The porosity of the windbreak wall should be considered, especially for wet cooling tower where the heat transfer in the rain zone could be hindered by the solid windbreak wall. The wind direction has a significant effect on the performance of the windbreak wall. The heat exchanger can be used to act as the windbreak wall. Extra flow resistance is produced by installing the windbreak walls, which should be considered in the design process. Most of the research of the windbreak wall is based on the CFD modelling or Lab-scale tests. Full-scale application of the windbreak wall is rarely reported in the open literature. The geometry of the cooling tower, e.g. the tower base and exit diameter, height, throat diameter and throat height, is believed to play an important role to affect the performance of a natural draft cooling tower Since the crosswind can deflect the plume exiting and throttles the air passage in the tower stack, Goodarzi As discussed in However, the improvement from such new geometry suggestions is strongly dependent on the wind direction and wind speed. For example, in For the NDDCTH, Kroger In large thermal power plants, several cooling towers are often built close together because of the limited place. The interference among the towers are also investigated by number of researchers In cold winter, the freezing risk for air-cooled heat exchangers may be more serious under the crosswind condition. The methods for anti-freezing of heat exchangers under windy conditions is concerned by some researchers A natural draft cooling tower is normally designed and operated with the heat exchanger bundles (or areas of the fill in wet cooling tower) all receiving the same water flow. This is suitable in windless condition with uniform airflow inside the cooling tower. With crosswind, the uniform air mass flow rate across the heat exchanger/fill is destroyed. This means some heat exchanger panels would have increased heat rejection capacity while others would not be able to achieve their design heat rejection capacity. In order to address the above issue, controlled water distribution was proposed to enhance the performance of the cooling tower in windy conditions Compared with the airside optimization method, this method does not require any structural operation or costly equipment. It can be utilized in both new or existing cooling towers In this section, we categorized and reviewed the previously proposed mitigation technologies for crosswind issue. The main features and concerns are summarized in This paper reviews more than 120 articles to summarize the current status of crosswind issue on the natural draft cooling towers regarding the research methodologies, the working mechanism of crosswind on different types of cooling tower, and the most current findings and solutions to mitigate the crosswind effect. Full-scale/field measurements, lab-scale tests and CFD modellings are the common research methods to investigate the crosswind issue. Each method has its own advantage and disadvantage. For full-scale measurements, the crosswind effect can be directly measured but the instrumentation systems are expensive and data are more scattered due to the uncontrollable ambient conditions. Lab-scale tests can provide better instrumentation system and controllable wind speed but the similarity parameters of both Froude and Reynolds number cannot be satisfied at the same time and therefore the results are difficult to scale up to real towers. CFD modelling is the most popular, versatile and cost-effective approach for studying the effect of crosswind on cooling tower performance but the numerically computed results need to be validated. Crosswind has negative effect on the thermal performance of any kind of natural draft cooling tower. For different kind of natural draft cooling tower, the deterioration degree and working mechanism is different. In general, the deterioration degree can be ranked as: NDDCTV > NDDCTH > Counter flow NDWCT. The crosswind effect on NDDCTH and counter flow NDWCT is similar. The main reason is the low-pressure zone at the windward part of the cooling tower. For NDDCTV, crosswind deteriorates the thermal performance by preventing the air through the heat exchanger on the sides (on the parts at 90° to the wind direction) and making the hot air penetrating to the heat exchanger in the leeward part. Previous studies on the crosswind effect are mainly based on the steady state study. However, the ambient crosswind speeds and directions are rarely constant and there are always gusts and transients. Instead of just focusing on the steady state performance, further experimental and numerical studies are expected to provide some guidance for the dynamic performance of the natural draft cooling tower under the ambient crosswind condition. More significantly, it is a worthwhile topic to study the dynamic feedback effect of the cooling tower on the thermal power plant. Numerous mitigation methods are proposed to deal with crosswind issue. They can be divided into air side enhancement and water side enhancement, according to the optimization objective. Windbreak wall is the most feasible and effective air side enhancement measure to mitigate the negative effect of the crosswind. On the other hand, the crosswind effect can also be relieved by optimizing the hot water distribution in the cooling tower. However, most of mitigation methods are based on the computer simulations or Lab-scale tests. Very few full-scale tests of these methods are reported. The experimental data of these methods on full-scale cooling tower is worthy. This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI), a project supported by Australian Government, through the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: