The pediatric floating elbow involves fractures of the humerus and forearm. Majority of these injuries include supracondylar humerus fractures with ipsilateral forearm fractures. These fractures should be managed with great caution as they often result from higher energy injuries and have increased risks of nerve palsies, open fractures, loss of forearm fracture reduction, and compartment syndrome. Previous literature has advocated for operative fixation of ipsilateral forearm fractures in addition to stabilization of the supracondylar humerus fracture, to allow for noncircumferential immobilization to decrease the risk of compartment syndrome. However, recent studies have questioned the universal need for forearm fixation in patients with these injuries. This paper will discuss the pediatric floating elbow, review the available literature, and describe our technique for managing these injuries.Pediatric elbow fractures are commonplace and represent approximately 12% of all fractures in children. Of these fractures, the majority are supracondylar humerus fractures, which are the most common pediatric fracture to require surgical intervention. These fractures most often occur from a fall onto an outstretched hand. In isolation, the treatment of supracondylar humerus fractures is not typically urgent or emergent except in the setting of neurovascular compromise, significant swelling, puckering or ecchymosis of the antecubital fossa, or open fractures. Distal forearm fractures represent 23.3% of all fractures in children and are the most common fracture seen. Majority of isolated forearm fractures in children can be managed with closed reduction and casting without surgical stabilization. As with isolated supracondylar humerus fractures, isolated fractures of the forearm often do not require urgent or emergent surgical intervention. The combination, however, of forearm fractures and humerus fractures, most commonly supracondylar humerus fractures, requires great caution by the treating provider. These injuries are referred to as a “floating elbow” and are associated in up to 5% of supracondylar humerus fractures. Of these complications, compartment syndrome is potentially the most devastating. A recent review of the National Trauma Data Bank examining the incidence of compartment syndrome in the presence of a supracondylar humerus fracture found that in the presence of a concomitant forearm fracture there is a 0.8% incidence of compartment syndrome and an odds ratio (OR) of 3.2. Compartment syndrome is one of the true orthopaedic emergencies regardless of age. The combination of trauma and increasing soft tissue swelling within a closed osteofascial compartment can lead to devastating neurovascular compromise as well as skeletal muscle ischemia due to decreasing perfusion pressure. Irreversible nerve functional loss occurs after 12-24 hours of continued ischemia while reversible functional loss occurring as early as 2 hours, highlighting the importance of prevention and diagnosis. The purpose of this paper will be to review the literature on the pediatric floating elbow, discuss current treatment algorithms, and describe our institutional techniques for managing these injuries. Early reports on the treatment of pediatric floating elbows recommended either olecranon traction or percutaneous pin fixation of the supracondylar humerus fracture as a means of avoiding neurovascular complications, including compartment syndrome. Ring et al retrospectively reviewed their patients with extension type supracondylar humerus fractures with ipsilateral displaced distal forearm fractures over a 9-year period at a tertiary children's hospital. Despite these fractures being associated with higher energy injuries, all 14 patients were a result from a fall, majority from playground equipment. Of the 14 patients, 1 had an open fracture of the distal forearm and 3 had preoperative nerve injuries. A total of 10 patients underwent closed reduction of the distal forearm fracture with percutaneous pinning of the supracondylar humerus fracture and application of circumferential casting. Of those 10 patients, 2 went on to develop compartment syndrome, 4 had impending compartment syndrome requiring splitting of the cast, which resulted in loss of forearm reduction in 3 of the 4 patients. The 6 patients who underwent percutaneous pinning of both the distal forearm fracture and supracondylar fracture with application of noncircumferential splinting did not develop compartment syndrome or loss of reduction. Blakemore et al retrospectively reviewed 978 upper extremity fractures over a 13-year period and found 4.4% of those fractures involved ipsilateral fractures of the humerus and forearm, with only 9 patients (0.9%) involving displaced forearm fractures with extension type supracondylar humerus fractures. Of those 9 patients, 3 required fasciotomies for compartment syndrome (33% or 0.3% of all upper extremity fractures). Recent literature has questioned the notion that all forearm fractures in the setting of a floating elbow need to be managed with operative fixation. Muchow et al compared 150 patients with floating elbow injuries to 1228 isolated supracondylar humerus fractures requiring surgical stabilization. Of the 150 patients with a floating elbow, 95 patients required forearm fracture reduction. Thirty-nine of the 95 displaced fractures underwent closed reduction and immobilization without surgical fixation. They found that 18/95 (18.9%) had nerve palsies compared to only 7.3% of floating elbows with forearm fractures not requiring reduction and 7.8% for isolated supracondylar fractures. Their study found no significant difference in vascular compromise in floating elbows and no cases of compartment syndrome. Blumberg et al retrospectively reviewed 47 cases of floating elbows requiring operative fixation of a type 2 or 3 supracondylar humerus fracture over a 7-year period. Of the 47 floating elbows, 21 had displaced forearm fractures. Of those 21 displaced forearm fractures, 17 underwent closed reduction and noncircumferential splinting or fiberglass casting. In their series they had no cases of compartment syndrome and none of the forearm fractures lost reduction or required further surgical intervention. To date, there are no prospective studies evaluating the treatment of floating elbow fractures in the pediatric population. Pediatric patients who are suspected of having floating elbow injuries are assessed in the emergency room with a thorough history and physical examination as well as orthogonal views of the humerus and forearm. Regardless of the potential forearm fracture, supracondylar humerus fractures that involve preoperative median nerve palsies, vascular compromise, open fractures, antecubital fossa puckering, or concern for significant soft tissue swelling are taken to the operating room in an urgent or emergent fashion. Patients with isolated anterior interosseous nerve palsies are not consider urgent or emergent. Patients with operative supracondylar humerus fractures with nondisplaced forearm fractures or buckle fractures of the distal third of the forearm can be observed and taken to the operating room in a nonurgent fashion if the supracondylar humerus fracture allows. Our typical construct for supracondylar humerus fractures are 2 lateral pins for type 2 fractures and 3 lateral pins for type 3 fractures. Depending on fracture pattern a medial pin is used if needed for construct stability. If the forearm fracture is inherently stable and does not need a reduction the patient can be placed in a long arm cast. At our institution, we use sterile foam padding in the antecubital fossa underneath the fiberglass cast to allow for postoperative swelling while maintaining the strength of a circumferential cast. Patients who have displaced fractures of the forearm and operative supracondylar humerus fractures are treated urgently with operative intervention (  We recognize that no surgical procedure is without potential risks and complications. Surgical stabilization of distal forearm fractures with percutaneous pinning can result in iatrogenic nerve injuries, such as injury to the superficial radial nerve and pin tract infections. Flexible intramedullary nails can result in prominent hardware and often result in a secondary procedure to have the nails removed. In our experience these complications are uncommon and the potential devastating consequences of developing compartment syndrome far outweigh the risks of operative forearm fixation in the majority of cases. Regardless of fracture pattern and treatment, patients should be admitted to the hospital for monitoring of the soft tissues and regular neurovascular checks. We typically admit patients for 24 hours of monitoring. The traditional signs of compartment syndrome, the 5 P's (pain, paresthesias, paralysis, pallor, and pulselessness), are unreliable in the pediatric population. Although rare, it is possible to have nondisplaced fractures of the forearm and distal humerus. Although these fractures have been classically thought of as high-energy injuries, the vast majority of these injuries result from falls, and majority involve falls from playground equipment. Regardless of the treatment algorithm for the ipsilateral forearm fracture, patients who present with floating elbows should be managed and cared for with great caution. These patients have a higher rate of preoperative nerve palsies and are at greater risk of developing compartment syndrome. Patients should be monitored closely postoperatively for signs of compartment syndrome, specifically an increasing analgesia requirement.