Electrokinetic in situ leaching (EK-ISL) is a novel in situ mining technology that uses an electric field to induce the migration of lixiviants through the subsurface to extract target commodities. Based on previous experiments with fine-grained unconsolidated material, this study assesses the feasibility of EK-ISL of gold from consolidated, unfractured, low-permeability ore material. Under the initially tested laboratory conditions, substantial ionic transport through low-permeability rock was achieved by applying a constant voltage. Subsequently, synthetic gold ore was positioned in between two rock sections and gold was successfully mobilised from the synthetic ore, transported through the second rock piece and collected in the target reservoir, albeit at a fairly slow rate. EK-ISL was then applied to two different gold ore samples. Both ores consumed considerable amounts of lixiviant before gold breakthrough occurred. Within the experimental timeframe, only a trace of gold was leached from Ore Sample 1. Nevertheless, over 50% of gold was recovered from Ore Sample 2 within a month after initial breakthrough. These experiments show that EK-ISL of gold from intact rocks is feasible, and also highlight the importance of characterising the reactivity of the host rock with respect to the selected lixiviant system prior to attempting EK-ISL. It was also found that during EK-ISL the hydraulic permeability of the ore was increased as a result of the dissolution of gangue minerals, which enhanced electro-migration of ions over the investigation timeframe.Electrokinetic in situ leaching (EK-ISL) is a novel in situ mining technology that combines the benefits of electrokinetics (EK) and in situ leaching (ISL). If shown to be feasible at full-scale, it has the potential to initiate a paradigm shift towards more sustainable mining. EK-ISL applies an electric field to facilitate transport of lixiviants through unbroken rock to the element of interest, mobilises the target element and transports it towards an extraction well for recovery and lixiviant recycling. EK-ISL can potentially overcome many challenges that affect conventional mining operations. Current operations typically require the extraction of vast quantities of ore from often great depth, as well as the processing of these ores to retrieve the target element and disposing of the waste rock. This is further aggravated by declining (gold) ore grades (e.g., In electrokinetics, the generation of a current facilitates flow and transport of solutes through different processes ( A laboratory-scale experimental apparatus that generates a similar set of processes to a potential EK-ISL implementation was constructed. The experimental setup resembled the earlier experiments with unconsolidated porous media ( The cathode reservoir held the cathode and its electrolyte solution, which was separated from the adjacent solution by an anion exchange membrane (AEM). The source reservoir represented an injection well and was filled with the lixiviant. A mixture of iodide (I More details on this lixiviant system can be found in The middle section differed between the two types of experimental setups ( The target or receiving reservoir represented the extraction well. At the start of the experiment, this reservoir was filled with an electrolyte solution, which was separated from the adjacent solution by a cation exchange membrane (CEM). The anode reservoir contained the anode and its electrolyte solution. The anode and cathode were connected to a direct current (DC) power supply and a constant voltage was applied. In addition to the desired migration of ions, electrolysis of water occurred at the electrodes, producing hydrogen ions (H In experiment E1, a peristaltic pump was used to continuously circulate the electrolyte solutions between the two electrode reservoirs and to keep the pH close to neutral. A drop-wise mixing was applied to prevent short-circuiting via the mixing streams ( The use of an AEM between the cathode and source reservoirs prevented the cathodic reduction of the I An alternative experimental setup was designed to allow the laboratory tests to more closely resemble a future field-scale implementation (setup C, Five EK-ISL experiments, E1, E2, E3A, E3B and E4, were carried out in this study ( Experiment E1 was set up to study EK-induced migration of ionic species through low-permeability rocks, while experiment E2 built on these results while adding a ‘synthetic gold ore’ between those rocks. Experiments E1 and E2 used setup A, with the middle reservoir of the apparatus being enclosed by two low-permeability rocks. The rock pieces both had a diameter of 4.6 cm and a length of 2 cm. In experiment E1, the middle reservoir was filled with electrolyte solution, while in experiment E2, it was filled with a ‘synthetic gold ore’, i.e., a mixture of pure gold powder and non-reactive quartz powder. The gold powder had an average particle size of 3.0–5.5 μm and a purity of >99.96% and was purchased from BioScientific. The quartz powder was high purity (96–99.5%) milled silica powder (Unimin Australia Ltd.) of which 80% was <75 μm. It was mixed with a 0.1 M sodium chloride (NaCl) solution to obtain a dense slurry. The two rock pieces used in E1 were also used in E2. To pre-condition both rock pieces for E2, experiment E1 was run for an additional 40 days with a fresh lixiviant solution in the source reservoir and subsequently operated for 21 days in reverse mode, i.e., with the second rock sample positioned next to the source. Experiments E3A and E4 further increased the experimental complexity by using intact gold ore instead of synthetic ore. These experiments were operated using setup B ( These EK-ISL experiments were conducted under a constant voltage setting, which allowed the current to freely vary, unless the system reached a maximum current of 40 mA in which case a switch to a constant current setting was triggered automatically. This set, maximum current of 40 mA was only reached in experiment E4 ( Source, target and middle reservoirs (E1 and E2 only) were sampled at regular intervals. These samples were analysed for I Gold ore samples were sourced from two different gold mines. Ore Sample 1, which was subdivided into Ore Sample 1A and 1B, was obtained from a gold deposit which will be referred to as ‘Deposit 1’. The majority of gold at Deposit 1 is hosted in quartz‑carbonate bearing veins, often surrounded by alteration haloes that contain sericite, pyrite, dolomitic to ankeritic carbonate and quartz. The gold distribution in Deposit 1 can be described as typically coarse native gold, with some of the gold contained as “invisible gold” (nanoparticles and/or latticebound) within arsenopyrite and pyrite or as micrometer-scale inclusions in pyrite. Ore Sample 2 originates from a gold deposit which will be referred to as ‘Deposit 2’ and where gold typically occurs in thin lodes (typically <2 m) within an assemblage of quartz-amphibole-epidote-biotite-chlorite-pyrrhotite-arsenopyrite ± titanite ± calcite. The gold at this deposit is reasonably dispersed in these lodes. The concentrations of I The resulting tetrathionate (S X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) was used to determine the bulk mineralogy of the ore from Deposit 1 while mineralogical data was already available for all other rock samples. The XRD analysis was carried out using a PANalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα1 radiation equipped with a PIXcel detector. For all rock samples, porosity and permeability were determined using a helium porosimeter–permeameter (AP608 from Coretest Ltd.) under a confining pressure of ≈3.5 MPa. For the rocks used in experiment E1 and E2 and for Ore Sample 2, the measurements were carried out on a core adjacent to the ones used in the experiments themselves, while measurements were carried out on Ore Sample 1A itself, both before and after completion of experiment E3A. Ore Sample 1A was further analysed with automated X-ray fluorescence (XRF) surface mapping (Bruker Tornado) to obtain element maps of one of the surfaces, and with micro computed tomography (micro-CT, XRADIA XRM 500) to visualize fractures and pore spaces in 3D. Experiment E1 was designed to assess whether the application of a potential gradient can achieve substantial migration of ions through low-permeability, intact rocks. The applied constant voltage of 36 V resulted in a voltage drop of ≈16 V over each of the rock sections, creating a potential gradient of ≈8 V cm A mass balance calculation at the end of the experiment shows that ≈20% of the iodide in the source reservoir had migrated, with ≈5% moving through the first piece of rock into the middle reservoir while ≈15% moved through both pieces of rock into the target reservoir within 83 days. Having confirmed the feasibility of migrating ions through low-permeability rocks, experiment E2 was designed to assess if, and how effective an applied electric field could leach gold from a synthetic ore placed between such rocks. In E2, the middle reservoir was filled with a gold-silica mixture. The potential was increased to 50 V, thereby increasing the resulting current and reducing the required experimental time. The applied potential resulted in an initial current of ≈11 mA ( Under the described electrokinetic conditions, a dissolved gold concentration of 0.4 mg L Having confirmed that electro-migration can migrate gold through low-permeability rock, the next step was to assess the feasibility of liberating and transporting gold from its setting in low-permeability, intact ore. Intact ore samples from two gold mines were used, which had some interesting differences and similarities ( In the first intact ore experiment (experiment E3A), a 3.17 cm-long cylindrical piece of ore (Ore Sample 1A) was placed between the source and target reservoirs and a constant voltage of 50 V was applied to induce the migration of the lixiviant through the ore. The applied potential initially resulted in a fairly low current of about 1 mA, which then continuously increased and reached 14.5 mA by the end of the experiment ( The solution pH in the target reservoir increased regularly ( Given the higher abundance of carbonates in the sample compared to pyrite ( The gold breakthrough occurred after 30 days ( The ‘miniature-mine’ experiment (experiment E3B) was designed to make the process of EK-ISL more realistic by replacing the pipe laboratory setup with a setup where EK-ISL is applied directly in the ore material ( In the final experiment (E4), a different type of ore was tested, using the pipe laboratory setup with the four reservoirs (setup B, The feasibility of EK-ISL of gold from intact ore was assessed through a series of laboratory experiments. The results of this study showed that electro-migration can effectively transport substantial amounts of ions through intact, low-permeability rocks. The experiments also showed that gold could be successfully leached and recovered in all experiments, including those using intact ore samples, although at fairly slow rates and low recoveries in some cases. These results provide evidence that EK-ISL is, in principle, feasible. However, the experiments demonstrated that it would be important to properly characterise the mineralogical composition of the ore samples, to determine whether the gold is ‘free’ or encapsulated, and to carefully select the most appropriate lixiviant to maximise gold dissolution while minimising reactions with gangue material. For the iodide/tri-iodide lixiviant system studied here, two important processes were identified. Firstly, close pH control was found to be essential to maintain the gold complex in solution at the target side. Carbonate dissolution for example was likely responsible for the continuously increasing pH values for some of the studied ore samples (Ore Samples 1A and 1B). Secondly, lixiviant consumption by reduced minerals such as iron-bearing sulphides caused a substantial lag in gold leaching for the tested lixiviant and was most likely playing a role for all studied ore samples. However, despite the initial lag period, over 50% of the gold contained in Ore Sample 2 could be recovered, while the recovery from Ore Samples 1A and 1B was well below 5%. The large difference in recovery was attributed to gold being present as ‘free gold’ in Ore Sample 2 while potentially encapsulated by pyrite in Ore Samples 1A and B. In future work, a wider range of lixiviant systems and gold ore materials will need to be tested to get a deeper understanding of the rate-controlling processes for gold recovery rates and overall recoveries. From the present experiments it is clear that EK-ISL may not be directly applicable to every ore type, or at least not using the currently investigated lixiviant system. With additional data from a wider range of materials it will be feasible to perform an economic evaluation of EK-ISL to assess its overall viability. However, even if EK-ISL is only economically viable for a certain type of ore, it could have a profound influence on the current mining industry. At present, conventional ISL, where a hydraulic gradient is the driving force, is mainly used commercially for uranium hosted in porous aquifers ( EM was supported by a Director's Scholarship of the