Various empirical procedures have been developed to determine pillar sizing based on back analysis of failed and successful case histories and statistical analysis techniques. Artificial intelligence techniques are now being used as an alternate to statistical techniques. In this study, the fuzzy logic was applied to predict safe pillar sizing in room and pillar coal mines. The model predicts pillar length and width using depth of cover, mining height, panel width, roof strength rating and loading conditions. The predictive fuzzy model was implemented on fuzzy logic toolbox of MATLAB using the Mamdani algorithm and was developed based on a database including 399 datasets from US room and pillar coal mines. Eighty datasets of this database were used to assess the performance of this fuzzy model. The coefficient of determination (R
                     2), the variance account for (VAF) and the root mean square error (RMSE) were calculated to check the prediction performance of the model. The R
                     2, VAF and RMSE values were obtained as 89.3%, 89.27 and 1.39 for the pillar width, and 86.6%, 86.4 and 2.77 for the pillar length. These indices revealed that the developed model is suitable for practical use at mines. In addition, the strength of the relationship between the pillar sizing and the five input parameters were evaluated by the cosine amplitude method and the results showed that the most effective parameter on pillar sizing is loading conditions.Coal pillars can be defined as the in situ coal between two or more underground openings Many investigators have devoted a part of their studies to prevention of pillar squeezes, massive pillar collapses and pillar bumps The average pillar load, in regular layouts of pillars can be estimated by tributary-area theory. Based on this theory, each individual pillar is assumed to carry the weight of the overburden immediately above it. In the other words, a pillar uniformly supports the weight of rock overlying the pillar and one-half the width of rooms or entries on each side of the pillar To increase the recovery and productivity in most of the room and pillar mines, nowadays remnant pillars in panels are recovered in a later operation, known as retreat mining (also known as secondary mining or pillar recovery operation). Since the classic methods neglect the abutment loads due to retreat mining and creation of a mined out gob, they are not appropriate for pillar design in retreat mining. Abutment loads affect the pillars that are adjacent to pillar line and a load more than that estimated by tributary area theory applies on pillar To estimate the development loads, ARMPS starts with the tributary area theory. The abutment angle concept is used to estimate the loads transferred to the pillars during the various stages of the pillar extraction process. To calculate the strength of the pillars within the active mining zone (AMZ), ARMPS uses the Mark-Bieniawski formula In addition to statistical and analytical methods that were mentioned above, the probabilistic methods The details of fuzzy logic can be found in numerous literatures The real world input to the fuzzy system is applied to the fuzzifier. In fuzzy literature, this input is called crisp input since it contains precise information about the specific information about the parameter. The fuzzifier converts this precise quantity to fuzzy values or linguistic information with a degree of belongingness to it. Typically, the value ranges from 0 to 1. This is called fuzzification and is done by membership functions. The shape of the membership functions can be either linear (trapezoidal or triangular) or various forms of non-linear (Gaussian, bell-shaped, S-shaped, etc.). The main part of the fuzzy system is the knowledge base in which both rule base and data base are jointly referred. The database defines the membership functions of the fuzzy sets used in the fuzzy rules whereas the rule-base contains a number of fuzzy if–then rules. The if–then rules, also known as the fuzzy rules, provide a system for describing complex systems by relating input and output parameters using linguistic variables. Generally, the fuzzy rules are extracted from experts' judgments, engineering knowledge and experience. An if–then rule is generally made up of a premise (antecedent) and a consequent (conclusion) part. A fuzzy if–then rule assumes the form “if The fuzzy inference system (FIS), also known as the decision making unit, performs the inference operations on the rules. In fact, fuzzy inference is the process of formulating an input fuzzy set map to an output fuzzy set using fuzzy logic. The core section of a fuzzy logic system is the FIS part, which combines the facts obtained from the fuzzification with the rule base and conducts the fuzzy reasoning process. There are several FISs that have been employed in various applications and the most commonly used include: the Mamdani fuzzy model, the Takagi–Sugeno–Kang (TSK) fuzzy model, the Tsukamoto fuzzy model, and the Singleton fuzzy model. The differences between these FISs lie in the consequents of their rules, and thus aggregation and defuzzification procedures differ accordingly. For example, in the Takagi–Sugeno–Kang model the consequent of rules should be in the form of a linear mathematical relationship whereas in the Mamdani model they are linguistic terms such as high, medium, etc. The output generated by the inference block is always fuzzy in nature. A real world system will always require the output of the fuzzy system to the crisp or in the form of real world input. The job of the defuzzifier is to receive the fuzzy input and provide real world output. In operation, it works opposite to the input block. There are a number of defuzzification methods in the literature such as centroid of area (COA) or center of gravity, mean of maximum (MOM), smallest of maximum (SOM), largest of maximum (LOM) and bisector of area (BOA). The US is the second largest coal producer in the world Based on this database, the input parameters for developing the fuzzy model are depth of cover, mining height, panel width, roof strength rating and loading condition and the outputs are pillar width and pillar length. In most of the cases, the entry width is constant and equal to 6 Among input parameters, depth of cover, mining height and panel width are continuous variables while the roof strength rating and loading condition are discrete (categorical) variables. Considering the roof rock quality, the roof strength rating was categorized into five groups ( The basic descriptive statistical analysis was performed on original database and the results are given in In this section, a fuzzy model is introduced for prediction of pillar sizing. This fuzzy model was implemented on fuzzy logic toolbox of MATLAB ver. 7.11 In general, the main steps taken in designing the present fuzzy model are explained by the following algorithm: Step 1. Fuzzification or selection of the membership functions for input and output variables. Step 2. Design of an inference engine that assigns membership values to the rule consequences. Step 3. Design of the rule base, with rules that link up the input variables with the output variable. Step 4. Selection of an appropriate defuzzification process, with a view to obtaining a real number (i.e. a crisp number) and not a fuzzy function as the final result. Triangular membership functions were adopted for describing input and output variables because of their simplicity and computational efficiency. The triangular membership function as described in Eq. The Mamdani fuzzy inference system was chosen in this study. Because of its simplicity, the Mamdani algorithm has become one of the most common and widely used algorithms for solving many real world problems. The Mamdani FIS was proposed by Mamdani to control a steam engine and boiler combination by set of linguistic control rules obtained from experienced human operators where The next stage in designing the fuzzy model is the construction of the if–then rules, which are used to represent the fuzzy relationships between input and output fuzzy variables. In this study, for constructing the rule base of fuzzy model, a total of 544 rules was utilized. These rules were made based on training datasets and cover all possible manners. In the last stage, each result in the form of a fuzzy set is converted into a crisp (real output) value by the defuzzification process. In this model, the COA method, that is a commonly method of defuzzification, was employed for defuzzification process. A description of fuzzy inference functions and other parameters, used in this study is presented in In this section, performance of the constructed fuzzy model is evaluated using eighty case histories, which were not incorporated in the model. The actual and predicted values of the pillar length and pillar width are illustrated in The coefficient of determination ( Furthermore, variance account for (VAF) (Eq. In this section, to identify the relative influence of the each input parameter on the pillar length and pillar width, sensitivity analysis was performed. The cosine amplitude method was chosen to calculate the strength of the relations between the input and output parameters Each of the elements, Thus, each of the data pairs can be thought of as a point in Inspection of Eq. In this study, a multi-input/multi-output Mamdani fuzzy model was proposed to predict the pillar sizing in room and pillar coal mines. The pillar width and pillar length predictions in the present fuzzy model have been computed as a function of depth of cover, mining height, panel width, roof strength rating and loading condition as input parameters. The model was trained based on a database including 399 case histories from US room and pillar coal mines using fuzzy logic toolbox of MATLAB. Both inputs and outputs were fuzzied with triangular membership functions and defuzzification was carried out with the centroid method. 318 case histories out of this database were used for training and 80 data were used for testing and verifying the adequacy of the trained fuzzy model. Also, the model was constructed based on 544 if–then fuzzy rules. The results of the proposed fuzzy model were quite satisfactory in terms of To obtain the most relevant parameters with the pillar sizing, the sensitivity analysis using the cosine amplitude method was performed. According to the results, the loading condition was found as the most relevant parameter and depth of cover as the least effective parameter on pillar sizing. This study shows that fuzzy logic is a useful and powerful means in designing pillars of coal mines. Practical outcome of the proposed model can be considered as a preliminary estimation of safe pillar sizing based on which the pillar failure risk can be reduced. Finally, it should be noted that although this model is similar to ARMPS program in structure, the main difference of proposed model with ARMPS program is that pillar sizing is estimated using this model whereas the ARMPS program evaluates the stability of pillars in preliminary and secondary stages by input parameters such as pillar sizing, panel width, depth of cover etc. It means that in proposed model the pillar sizing is unknown parameter (i.e. pillar width and pillar length are main outputs in the model) whereas in the ARMPS program the pillar width and pillar length are inputs, so there is no need for calculation of pillar sizing. The authors are grateful to Dr. C. Mark and Mrs. I. Mahboobi for their kind help during the preparation of the manuscript and the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments and constructive suggestions.