Rare-earth metals are essential for high-technology industries, and demands for rare-earth metals are increasing annually. Their stable supply must be ensured because the production of rare earths is limited to a few countries. Industrial waste and spent products, so-called “urban mines,” have been highlighted as valuable secondary resources. To promote metal recycling, highly efficient separation and recovery techniques are required. We have developed a novel separation technique based on liquid–liquid extraction using unique solvent ionic liquids. A newly synthesized extractant, diglycolamic acid, was used in the ionic-liquid systems. The extraction performance of rare-earth metals and selectivity to common metals were improved significantly. In this chapter, we describe the current state of recycling of rare earths, and summarize ionic-liquid-based extraction focusing on the recovery of rare-earth metals from waste electric materials. A liquid-membrane technique that uses ionic liquids is also introduced. Liquid–liquid extraction, which is used extensively for the separation of rare-earth metals, is one of the most promising techniques for metal recycling, although the consumption of volatile organic solvents in large amounts as diluents is problematic In recent years, ionic liquids (ILs), which are composed only of ions, have attracted attention as an alternative to organic solvents because of their unique properties We have developed novel extraction systems using imidazolium-type ILs as the extraction solvent and we have applied these to the recycling of rare-earth metals from waste scraps that contain rare-earth metals As rare-earth resources, spent fluorescent lamps, CRTs, magnets for motors, and nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries in a variety of products are considered to be Used products that are collected for recycling are decomposed and parts that contain valuable metals are segregated for metal recycling before refining. The processing of spent fluorescent lamps by a Japanese company is as follows: after removing hazardous mercury, the glass caps of the tube ends are cut off, and fluorescent materials, that are termed phosphor, and which coat the inner glass-tube surface, are withdrawn by suction We have analyzed the metal components of phosphor powders of fluorescent lamps from the Japan Recycling Light Technology & System Co. (Kitakyushu, Japan), and of phosphor from scrapings from panel glass in a CRT tube (supplied by Nishinihon Kaden Recycle Corporation, Kitakyushu, Japan) by energy-dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) (EDX-800, Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) as shown in To recycle valuable metals, a target metal should be separated and recovered effectively in the refining step, where liquid–liquid extraction is useful for the separation of rare-earth metals. Separation is based on differences in metal-ion solubility between two immiscible liquid phases, usually aqueous and organic solutions. Metal ions, which are electrically charged and hydrated, are stable in the aqueous phase. To extract metal ions into an organic phase, extractants, which combine with a metal ion to form a neutral and hydrophobic complex by replacement with hydrated water molecules, are necessary in the organic phase. For the selective extraction of a target metal ion from feed aqueous solutions that contain a variety and/or large amount of nontargeted metal impurities, such as a leachate from scrap, extractant selection is an important key factor, because its separation efficiency is affected strongly by the extractant performance. Typical ILs that are used as an alternative to extraction solvents are 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium-based ILs as illustrated in Organophosphorus compounds, such as D2EHPA (bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid), PC-88A (2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester) and Cyanex 272 (bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid), neodecanoic acid Versatic 10, and the neutral CMPO (octyl(phenyl)- Conventional extractants are not always useful to recycle rare-earth metals from leachate that contains a variety of or large amounts of metal impurities, as described later. A novel extractant that shows a high affinity to rare-earth metals against common metals, and that is applicable in IL-based extraction, is required. We have developed a novel extractant that is applicable to IL-based extraction for the recycling of rare-earth metals. A novel tridentate neutral extractant, The release of IL cations to the aqueous phase promotes Ln Recently,  From the slope analysis, the extraction mechanism was expressed as: In polar-solvent ILs, organic acids, which form dimers in an organic solvent of low polarity, do not exist readily as dimers. It was confirmed that a rare-earth metal ion forms a complex with three extractant molecules as follows (HR:DODGAA) Extraction of metal ions to the ILs proceeds via proton exchange with a metal cation in the aqueous phase, as occurs for the conventional organic solvent, and therefore stripping from the metal-loaded IL phase is possible. According to the reverse reaction of The extraction behavior of a variety of metal ions, including Y and Eu, as representatives of the rare-earth metals, with DODGAA in [C Based on the XRF analysis results, waste phosphor powders of fluorescent lamps contain rare-earth elements such as Y, Eu, La, Ce, Pr, and Tb at ~30% of the total weight, and other elements are mainly Ca and Sr, and a variety of metals such as Al, Ti, V, Fe, and Zn as shown in In the second stage, leaching was repeated from the residue on the first leaching by using sulfuric or nitric acid in a similar way as in the first stage of leaching. For the phosphor powder in a CRT tube, the rare-earth metals, Y and Eu, could be leached quantitatively with 3–5 In The IL-based extraction systems, DODGAA in [C Stripping from the metal-loaded IL phase was relatively easy. As shown in To ensure a practical extraction system, the extraction phase should be reusable without a reduction in extraction performance. The reusability of the extraction [C  It was demonstrated that IL-based extraction is a potential technique for valuable-metal recycling. However, for the practical use of ILs as a separation media, a reduction of IL use is required because they are expensive. A potentially viable process includes a supported liquid membrane (SLM). Liquid membranes that consist of feed and receiving phases that are separated by an immiscible liquid, i.e., a membrane phase, are advanced and simplified extraction processes A liquid membrane was prepared by immersing a hydrophobic porous polyvinylidene fluoride film (PVDF, Merck KGaA, pore size 0.45 SLM treatment was examined for the feed solution that contained Y, Eu, and Zn, which are the main components of the phosphor powder in the CRT. The viscosity and hydrophobicity of the ionic liquids [C The diluent viscosity affects the diffusion rate of chemical species in the membrane phase. It took longer to recover the rare-earth metals through [C We also applied a [C In membrane transport, rare-earth metal ions are extracted according to the extraction reaction, which is expressed by A highly stable and efficient liquid membrane system could be constructed by choosing a suitable ionic liquid and an extractant such as DODGAA as a carrier. A liquid-membrane system that is based on the [C Due to resource scarcity, industrial waste and scrap are under serious consideration as valuable secondary resources of critical metals, however, the recycling of rare-earth metals has not progressed. The recycling of a small amount of the rare-earth metals in waste along with a large amount of or a variety of common metals involves a significant market-price cost. Hydrometallurgical processing, such as