The understanding of how blends of materials grind is of great relevance in both the minerals and the cement industries. If benefits and challenges associated to it are properly understood, then decisions can be made on blending prior to grinding or grinding additives in separate during cement production, as well as different ores fed to mills in a processing plant. The paper investigates the size reduction of blends of materials with different grindabilities in a Bond ball mill, as well as in a continuous pilot-scale mill. The accumulation of the harder (tougher) component in the mill charge as grinding progresses is analyzed and a simple empirical model that describes this phenomenon has been proposed. It is found that the accumulation of hard component in the mill increases with the decrease in the ratio of Bond work index values of the individual soft and hard components, and with the increase in the circulating load ratio. It is also concluded that the Bond work index of the mixtures is often higher than the weighed-average value of the individual components in the mixture. As such, an expression is proposed for calculating the value for blends based on this modeled accumulation effect and has been found to remove the bias from predictions made on the basis of the weighed-average values from the feed.The understanding of how blends of materials grind is of importance in different areas. In cement grinding, size reduction of clinker and additives can be done separately or together. The later, called intergrinding, is beneficial because mills allow not only the size reduction but also the mixture of the components, simplifying the plant flowsheet ( In the minerals industry, it is of relevance to understand how mills will respond to blends of ores with different grindabilities coming from different parts of the deposit. If blending does not prove to be beneficial from the standpoint of energy consumption, it may be possible to feed ores to parallel lines or different plants, whenever available. Further, it is relevant to understand how mineralogical components of different hardness (although ‘toughness‘ would be the most accurate term from a material science standpoint) respond to milling after their liberation has been reached, since their differential grinding response can lead to non-optimal particle sizes in the flotation feed and to increases in slimes generation ( A number of papers have addressed different aspects of the problem, often demonstrating that neither grindability nor the Bond work index obey the simple rule of mixtures (  In spite of the important developments in recent decades with improved characterization, modeling and simulation approaches applied to ball mills ( The present paper analyzes the Bond ball mill work index of binary ore mixtures, investigating the accumulation of the hard component in the mill, as well as the different size distributions of the components in the product. Samples of six rocks, four of which limestones, from deposits located in Brazil have been collected. They have been prepared for testing by stage crushing, followed by removal of the material finer than 300 The Bond ball mill work index of each sample was measured using the standard equipment and procedure ( The composition of the hold up and final product from the tests with blends involving mixtures with basalt and copper ore has been analyzed by partially dissolving the limestone phase, leaving an insoluble residue, from which the basalt and copper ore contents were estimated. Details on the experimental procedure used in the analyses, conducted in duplicate, can be found elsewhere ( Additional tests were conducted with a pilot scale mill working both in open circuit and in closed circuit with an air classifier, and a complete description of the testwork may be found elsewhere ( Upon conclusion of each Bond ball mill grindability test, products have been analyzed in respect to size distribution and composition. In order to investigate the accumulation of the hard component in the mill hold-up, its proportion in the passing product from each locked-cycle period was measured during standard Bond grindability tests of artificial blends and typical results are shown in Using data such as those from Aiming to describe quantitatively the accumulation of the hard phase under steady-state conditions in the mill during the Bond grindability test, results for selected blends were plotted in  A comparison between experimental data and fitting results is presented in  The Bond ball mill grindability test is conducted as to reach 250% circulating load ratio under steady-state conditions. However, when components with different grindabilities are fed to the mill, their circulating load ratios can differ. This is illustrated in It is possible to predict the circulating load ratios for the hard component in a blend in the Bond grindability test, considering 250% circulating load ratio, by A summary of results from grindability tests of the blends studied in the present work is presented in Results are shown in On the other hand, if it is considered that the Bond ball mill work index could be more appropriately described by not directly considering the weigh fractions of the components in the feed, but in the mill hold up, as proposed by Evidently, some of the scatter in the graphs is associated to the fact that neither one of the current approaches are able to predict a higher value of Bond work index for the mixture than the values measured for the individual components. This is the case for six of the mixtures depicted in  The size distribution of the product of the Bond grindability test changed with the proportion of hard component in the mixture. However, the size distribution in the product of individual components remained relatively unchanged, being only marginally finer for limestone #1 when ground in a mixture with basalt, the hard component. An accumulation of the hard component in the mill hold-up was observed and was directly related to the ratio of the The circulating load for the hard component was found to be higher than for the soft component and a model to predict that in the Bond test was proposed. The accumulation of the hard component increased with the circulating load ratio, as well as the milling operation is shifted from open to closed-circuit. Experimental results show that small additions of soft material to a predominantly hard feed to a ball mill do not usually result in an equivalent improvement in grindability, and even a deleterious effect can be observed on grindability as a result of it. An empirical model for calculating the Bond work index of binary blends has been proposed and is based on the predicted fraction of hard material contained in the mill hold up, rather than in the feed. It was able to eliminate the bias observed when the weighed-average values of the Bond work indices of the individual components in the feed are used. A significant scatter still exists in the predictions, which are, at least in part, explained by cases in which the Bond work index of blends was higher than the values obtained for the individual components. The authors would like to thank the financial support to this investigation from the Brazilian research agencies CNPq and CAPES, as well as from VALE and AMIRA, through the P9O and P9P project. The suggestions from Mr. Rodrigo M. de Carvalho during the course of this work and the assistance of Mr. Maloba Tshela from the University of Cape Town in conducting the continuous grinding tests were appreciated. The authors also acknowledge Dr. Simon Michaux for providing valuable unpublished data.