This paper is a report on the results of a feasibility study on the immobilisation of tannery sludge by producing a ceramic product. The main purpose of this work was to test the clays used in the manufacture of a ceramic that could incorporate tannery sludge. The raw materials, tannery sludge and clay, were mixed together in different proportions. The ceramic specimens were characterised with respect to water absorption, porosity, linear shrinkage and transverse rupture strength. Leaching tests, in accord with the Brazilian and German regulations, were done on ceramic bodies made with different additions of sludge. In order to evaluate the possibility of air contamination during the firing process, preliminary studies of air emissions were carried out The mechanical properties of the samples evaluated were similar to those specified for ceramic bricks. All the leaching tests have shown that the main sludge contaminant i.e. chromium, could be immobilised within a finished ceramic product. The studies of air emissions have shown that zinc and chlorine are mainly collected from gas emissions and hence are not immobilised by the ceramic system. The study shows that the properties of the ceramic materials produced are acceptable for applications such as bricks for the building industry.The major leather production centres in the world are found in Mexico, Brazil, Japan, South Korea, China, India and Pakistan. Korea, Japan and Italy import hides from countries which have a large meat production industry i.e. USA, Australia, and the European countries. Whereas the South American countries, for example Argentina and Brazil, process their own hides. The leather industry is prevalent in Brazil, especially in the South, in the Federal State Rio Grande do Sul, where more than 50% of Brazilian leather is produced. In the tanning industry raw skin is transformed into leather by means of a series of chemical and mechanical operations. The low efficiency of the chemical operations and the organic substances from the skin cause a significant pollution hazard. For example the chemical processes, performed in chemical reactors called tumblers consume a large amount of water and chemicals, most of which ends up as wastewater. Chromium salts (in particular chromium sulphate) are the most widely used tanning substances today. Hides that have been tanned with chromium salts have a good mechanical resistance, an extraordinary dyeing suitability and a better hydrothermic resistance in comparison with hides treated with vegetable substances. Chromium salts also have a high rate of penetration into the interfibrillar spaces of the skins. This results in a saving in terms of production time and a better control of the process. Unfortunately only a fraction of the chromium salts used in the tanning process react with the skins. The rest of the salts remain in the tanning exhaust bath and are subsequently sent to a depuration plant where the chromium salts end up in the sludge. A chemical precipitation technique is usually required to remove chromium and chemical oxygen demand from wastewater before it is allowed to go for biological treatment. This precipitation technique creates a sludge. The sludge from a tannery consists mostly of oil, grease and also magnesium, calcium and chromium hydroxides precipitates plus inert solids, and debris from hide. In the Federal State Rio Grande do Sul, in south Brazil it is estimated that each hide generates an average of 7.5 kg of sludge. The order of priority in waste management and treatment is (1) prevention, (2) reduction, (3) re-use, (4) recycling and recovery, (5) thermal treatment for certain types of waste and (6) landfill. The most common way to manage solid waste is by disposing of it on controlled land sites. Regulations about solid wastes are becoming more and more restrictive and the disposal of hazardous waste on land sites may cease to continue. Landfilling of wastes with high organic content and toxic substances is increasingly coming under pressure in European States. Council Directive 1999/31/EC on the landfill of waste, adopted in 1999, is expected to have a considerable impact on trends to re-use and to re-cycle rather than to landfill. It lays down that by July 2003 States from the European Community shall have established a national strategy for the reduction of biodegradable waste going to landfills. This strategy should include reduction measures such as recycling, composting, biogas production or materials/energy recovery. Studies to minimise the amount of tannery waste, plus the treatment and possible exploitation of waste products are very important. One problem observed by tanners during the recycling of chromium by dissolution from the sludge is the poor quality of the chromium due to the presence of organic lipolytic components, metals and other impurities. The thermal treatment of sludge involves incineration, gasification, and pyrolysis as a means of disposal, whilst also recovering energy from waste. Solidification is another process that has been considered as an alternative solution to the disposal of sludge containing heavy metals. In this process waste materials are mixed with various binding media to obtain a new product with improved physical properties. Recent papers have reported on the use of solidification, stabilisation and vitrification processes to re-cycle different wastes such as low-level debris, From these studies it can be seen that technologies involving the transformation of wastes into cementitious agglomerates, ceramics, glasses or glass-ceramics have acquired economical importance. Immobilisation within a cement-matrix does not require expensive thermal treatments to render hazardous waste inert and in a stable form. This paper reports the results of a feasibility study on the immobilisation of tannery sludge by transforming it into a ceramic product. The main purpose of this work was to test the use of clays in the formation of a ceramic body that could incorporate tannery sludge. The general criterion on the formulation of ceramic bricks and tiles is to mix a plastic component, usually a clay with a founder and a non-plastic material, that will form the basis of the final structure of the product. Tannery sludge can be incorporated into the ceramic mass as the non-plastic component. The incorporation of tannery sludge into ceramic products would help to disperse the waste in a useful and inert form. The manufacture of clay products in Brazil is as high as 60 million tons per year which could justify the process. Tannery sludge was supplied by a leather factory in Rio Grande do Sul which produces 27 m The composition of the base-clay material used in this work is shown in The raw materials, tannery sludge and clay, were mixed together in the ratios shown in The raw materials were dried mixed and ground in a ball mill for 24 h. The ceramic bodies were moulded into 8×20×60 mm The ceramic specimens were characterised with respect to water absorption, porosity, linear shrinkage and transverse rupture strength. Water absorption and porosity were measured using the Archimedes method in accord with standards ASTM C-373/94 (porosity) In order to comply with current regulations in Brazil, a low leachability of hazardous components from the ceramic matrix must be achieved. Gas emissions during the firing process should be monitored to evaluate the possibilities of atmospheric pollution particularly with respect to a new process. Leaching tests were performed on ceramic bodies produced at 1180 °C with different additions of sludge. There are no specific leaching tests for monolithic materials within the Brazilian regulations. The Brazilian tests used were the leaching and solubilisation tests (NBR10005 The batch-leaching test procedure according to NBR1 000531 is analogous to the American Extraction Procedure Toxicity Test. The solubilisation test (NBR10006 The characterisation of materials produced with wastes requires the composition of the solution obtained from a leachability test to be known. The ceramic products were tested with the German method (DIN 38414-S4) The German procedure uses a sample, which contains (at least) 100 g in a dry condition. The sample with a particle size smaller than 10 mm was introduced into a 2 l bottle and 1 l of deionised water was added. The bottle was dosed and placed in a rotatory agitator for 24 h. After this period the solid constituent was separated by filtration. In this work the element concentration in the lixiviate were compared to the values found in specification NBR10004, In order to evaluate the possibility of air contamination during the firing process, preliminary studies of air emissions were conducted. This investigation was done using 100 g of the sample to be fired. The sample was introduced into a quartz reactor inside a muffle furnace. The reactor had two holes: air was drawn over the sample via the first hole and heated air was collected from the second hole using vacuum apparatus. The collected air was washed in a conical flask with deionised water. The air was collected during heating from ambient to 1180 °C at a rate of 150 °C per hour and held at temperature for 2 h. The duration of the test was 10 h. After the experiment the water was analysed to estimate air emission. Water absorption as a function of firing temperatures is shown in Experiments done by Vieira et al. The results obtained from the determination of total porosity as a function of firing temperature ( The apparent densities as function of tannery sludge content and firing temperature are shown in The linear shrinkage of ceramic samples as function of tannery sludge content and firing temperature is shown in The results of the four-point bending testing of the ceramic samples as function of tannery sludge content and firing temperature are shown in There is a good correlation between all the properties tested. The mechanical strength is greatest after firing at a temperature in excess of 1100 °C. At these temperatures the contraction of the samples and linear shrinkage increase, also the porosity decreases. The sintering process is the main cause of this behaviour. The evaluated mechanical properties of the samples are similar to those specified for ceramic bricks.  First leaching of as received clay and of the ceramic product (with the addition of tannery sludge) was carried out. The results were compared with the maximum permissible concentrations of pollutants in the lixiviates. It can be seen from A solubilisation test was done with identical samples and The low chromium impacts, which proved to be less than the demands, have shown the success of the immobilisation of the waste. Filibeli et al. In order to evaluate the results with respect to a different regulation, a leaching test was carried out according to specification DIN 38414-S4 The results show that according to the German regulations cited in TA-Abfall, Comparing the three tests (NBR10005, NBR10006 and DIN 38414-S4) it can be seen that the highest lead concentrations were reached in the solution obtained after the NBR10006 test. Because this test is a 7-day test, this behaviour could be explained by the diffusion time necessary to dissolve the lead specimens. López Before the preliminary evaluation of the atmospheric emissions, the gas generated during the firing of sample batch S2 (containing 10% sludge) was washed. The washing solution was then analysed and the results presented in The results show that zinc and chloride are more likely to be collected from gas emissions than to be immobilised by the ceramic system. Because of the great increase in sulphate concentration, as recorded by the gas analysis during the firing of sample S5, it was assumed that CaSO Because hexavalent chromium is much more soluble than trivalent chromium, there is a risk that this form of chromium would be present on the lixiviate of the solution. The results presented here are just indicative of the gas emissions. Further studies will be carried out in order to evaluate these emissions and the possible treatment of them. The present study was conducted to develop and to characterise a clay product with the addition of tannery sludge as a raw material. The feasibility in the use of this material was demonstrated. The technological properties are compatible with those specified for ceramic bricks. The environmental characterisation of the product indicate that a material containing 10% tannery sludge can be used safely. The previous results of the environmental compatibility of the process show that there are emissions of sulphur compounds, as well as zinc and chloride compounds. The authors would like to thank the Brazilian foundations CNPq, CAPES and FAPERGS for financial support of this work. The authors would also like to acknowledge the financial support of WUS—World University Service, Germany.