Ultra high performance fibre reinforced concrete (UHPFRC) is a cement-based composite material mixing with reactive powder and steel fibres. It is characterized by its high strength, high ductility and high toughness and such characteristics enable its great potential in protective engineering against extreme loads such as impact or explosion. In the present study, a series of field tests were conducted to investigate the behaviour of UHPFRC columns subjected to blast loading. In total four 0.2m×0.2m×2.5m UHPFRC columns were tested under different designed explosions but all at a standoff distance of 1.5m. Blast tests were also performed on four high strength reinforced concrete (HSRC) columns with the same size and reinforcement as UHPFRC columns to evaluate their behaviour under the same loading conditions. The data collected from each specimen included reflected overpressures, column deflections at centre and near the supports. Three major damage modes, including flexural, shear and concrete spalling failure modes, were observed. The post blast crack patterns, permanent deflections and different levels of damage observations showed that UHPFRC columns performed superior in blast loading resistance as compared with HSRC columns.The analysis and design of civilian and military buildings and structures to withstand shock and blast loading has been a subject of extensive studies in the last decade due to the increase of terrorist attacks around the world. There are two main approaches to protect structures against man-made explosive hazards. One approach is to reduce damage by protecting the structures with external claddings (e.g., aluminium foam); the other is to strengthen the structures to better withstand explosion-induced loads such as by applying ultra-high performance fibre reinforced concrete (UHPFRC) UHPFRC members are investigated in the current study because of their outstanding safety, serviceability, durability and ductility In recent years there have been considerable numerical and experimental work conducted to understand UHPFRC material under both static and dynamic loading condition The study Several researchers have studied the blast vulnerability of RC columns with/without FRP-retrofitted composites using blast experiments, numerical prediction and drop-weight tests; and different failure modes have been observed The objective of this study is to experimentally investigate whether UHPFRC columns can effectively improve their resistance to blast loads at relatively close standoff distance. In total, 8 column specimens, including 4 specimens built with UHPFRC, and 4 specimens built with HSRC were tested under blast loads ranging from 1 In the current UHPFRC material composition, constant water to binder ratio 0.16 is adopted. Aggregates (river sand) at the same weight dosages (40% by weight) was used, a constant content of silica fume, silica flour was used to provide high pozzolanic effect that accelerated the hydration process and enhanced the material compressive strength. To further improve the performance of matrix, nanoscale CaCO Micro steel fibre (MF) was added into the mixtures and MF has 0.1 Static test results based on uniaxial compression and four-points bending tests indicated that the specified UHPFRC compressive strength and flexural tensile strength at 28 The test specimens consist of four UHPFRC columns (that is, U1A, U1B, U2A and U2B) with span length 2.5 The columns were divided into two groups, with specimens in each group being nominally identical. The columns in Group U were produced by using UHPFRC and Group H by HSRC. The charge weights, scaled distance, specimen geometry for the experimental program are provided in A schematic diagram of the test instrumentation is shown in Steel frame of dimension 2600 Cylinder emulsion explosive charge weights of 1.4–48 In order to record the column displacement, linear variable differential transducers (LVDT) were placed underneath the column specimens. For measuring the reflected pressures, pressure transducers were installed at the distance of 0 All specimens were tested under combined with/without static axial loading and blast loads; a clear distance between charge centre and centre of specimen is 1.5 The first step of the experiment was to place the specimen on top of the steel frame, connect all the LVDTs and check connections and functionality. The whole frame with specimens needed to be placed in a horizontal position and lowered into the testing frame, making sure that the top surface of the column at the same level as the ground surface. Then make sure the designed steel yokes performed well to let specimen free-standing at two lateral sides of the test position. The other support was connected with the pneumatic jack which located at the same level with the column to make sure that the axial load could be transferred from the pneumatic jack to the column. Afterwards, the pressure transducers needed to be properly installed and checked. Explosive was placed using the guided line 1.5 Finally the detonation was triggered and the test data was recorded. The data for UHPFRC columns against blast loading were recorded, including: (1) typical pressure–time histories for different charge weights; (2) displacement versus time histories measured by the LVDTs at mid-span and near supports. All data recorded was used to compare the performance of high strength reinforced concrete (HSRC) specimens with UHPFRC columns, so as to better understand the effect of UHPFRC in improving the blast resistant capability. The summaries of the test results for UHPFRC and HSRC columns are listed in The applied blast loads resulted from four charge weights which are 1 As expected, the greater charge weight tends to cause larger reflected pressure. In general, it can be observed that the average peak overpressure recorded has a dramatic increase from 1 To assess the effectiveness of UHPFRC columns in enhancing blast resistance, the maximum displacements and permanent deflections measured at the centre of specimens are given in As mentioned before, LVDTs were placed at three different positions for recording the displacements with the legend of DA1, DA2 and DA3 in The effect of axial load was investigated by applying two different axial loads, namely 0 The results in The effectiveness of steel fibres is also determined by comparing the post-blast crack patterns of UHPFRC specimens to those of HSRC columns. Detailed descriptions of typical crack profile together with classification of the failure modes are presented in this study. Generally speaking, four levels of damage have been characterized to describe the post-blast specimens, which are light, moderate, heavy and severe. For light damage, column is in good service condition with almost no lateral deflection, only hairline cracks can be observed. When moderate damage occurs, formation of cracks can be found at the distal face and the crack width cannot exceed 5 Generally, it is seen in The influence of axial loading on the damage of the specimens was also under investigation. The results on columns tested with axial loading ranging from 0 to 1000 The experimental results of 8 columns under explosions at different scaled distances are presented in the current study. Evaluation was based upon the capability of UHPFRC columns to resist blast loading; the values obtained from the tests on HSRC specimens were used as the basis of comparison. Based on the data presented herein, the following conclusions are delivered: Comparing the results of HSRC and UHPFRC specimens shows that UHPFRC specimens can effectively resist the overpressures and shock waves resulted from high explosives, reducing the maximum and residual displacements of columns when subjected to similar blast loads, and enhancing the blast resistant capacity substantially. Investigation into the effect of axial loading on columns subjected to blasts has been performed and the results show that the axially loaded specimens have smaller deflections for UHPRC members. The axial loading changes the column boundary condition and limits the end rotation, and the influence from boundary change outweighs the P delta effect which results in a reduced mid span deflection. The research presented in this paper jointly supported by