This book is about the formation of granular particles by the agglomeration of particles of smaller size. It is concerned principally with types of available equipment and the operation and application of equipment. The content is wide ranging. It focuses on mechanical mixer and pressure agglomeration processes. Granule coating, liquid suspension agglomeration and mechanofusion processes are also included. Ancillary parts of the process, involving material handling, drying/sintering, size classification, comminution and recycle are described. There are significant chapters on process selection and system design. As is appropriate given the aims of the book, lists of manufacturers and toll producers are included. The style of the description is practical rather than conceptual or theoretical in nature. The main strength of the book is that it gives reasonably detailed descriptions of the nature and performance of numerous types of equipment used for size enlargement processes, illustrated by a large number of diagrams and photographs. In this respect, the book provides a major advance on all other available sources including the 1991 book (Size Enlargement by Agglomeration) by the same author. Some of the diagrams showing the construction and operation of equipment are a little difficult to follow and in these cases it might have been better had the author produced his own figures instead of utilising reproductions from previous publications and trade literature. The processes of mixer and pressure agglomeration differ in several important fundamental respects. Separate treatises have been written on these technologies. However, by including the two types of process in a single treatise the author develops a useful discussion on process selection. As the author comments, selection in practice tends to be based on industry trends and experience as opposed to objective assessment of all possibilities. This part of the book is therefore likely to stimulate even experienced technologists to reconsider process possibilities. The extensive experience, knowledge and enthusiasm of the author are very evident. The style is quite discursive, reminiscent even, and occasionally a little repetitive. The book contains few typographical errors and the indexing appears to be thorough. It will be a useful source of reference to technologists working in the wide range of industries that utilise agglomeration processes. It is likely to be particularly useful to process engineers concerned with specification and design of agglomeration equipment and processes. It will also be of interest to those involved in formulation engineering and in research on agglomeration processes, and it certainly deserves inclusion in a powder technology library.