The chlorination of natural wolframites (Mn
                        x
                     Fe1−x
                     WO4) with chlorine and sulphur dioxide was studied in a vertical reactor with a static bed and upward flow of reactive gases. Wolframite samples collected from five different deposits of Argentina were carefully purified by hand under a binocular microscope. Upgraded specimens with this methodology had a variable ratio of divalent metals (0.06<
                     x
                     <0.84) for similar tungsten content (WO3
                     =72.4–73.3%). Experimental conditions more appropriate to make chlorinations were established using the iron-rich wolframite. Under these conditions, the tungsten extraction was determined as a function of the ratio of iron(II) and manganese(II) present in each sample. Physicochemical characterization of the system involved measurement of wolframite cell dimensions, identification of reaction products formed from metallic elements (tungsten, iron and manganese) and reactivity evaluation of both divalent metals by means of thermodynamic parameters. Results obtained show that iron-rich wolframites had higher reactivity with respect to other solid solution specimens. Reaction products identified were all volatile, except manganese(II) chloride found in liquid state. Thermodynamic analysis confirmed that formation of iron oxychloride (FeOCl) as an intermediate chlorination product would be feasible, although it was not possible to observe any evidence of this reaction under experimental conditions used. Finally, it is indicated that the highest reactivity of iron-rich wolframites was attributed to the volatile nature of all their reaction products, to iron(II) oxidation easiness if compared with manganese(II) and to possible formation of iron oxychloride.Scheelite (CaWO Ores of both minerals after their upgrading are chemically processed to recover tungsten by leaching with soda in autoclave, caustic leaching in autoclave or roasting with soda and leaching. The selection of the most convenient process is performed taking into account the mineral and tungsten content of the ore. The product formed with the three processes is soluble sodium tungstate. Undesirable impurities that remain dissolved together with tungsten are removed by solvent extraction or ion exchange. In successive stages, it is possible to obtain tungstic acid (H Tungsten market shows at present time a noticeable interest for the manufacture of APT, the most important precursor for the majority of used products, and tungsten carbide (WC). In order to attend this demand, tungsten ores are treated by means of the most convenient process to minimize costs and to assure a permanent provision of both products. Basic aspects to recover tungsten by chlorination of scheelite and scheelite–wolframite concentrates were analyzed by Chlorination reaction begins with the adsorption of chlorine on the surface of the reactive solid ( A previous study about chlorination of an iron-rich wolframite using chlorine and sulphur dioxide permitted to observe the relatively low manganese reactivity with respect to iron. Even when the reaction mechanism is not clear, oxygen removal from the solid oxidic phase and transport of formed chlorides affect in a direct way to tungsten recovery ( Wolframite minerals present in diverse deposits from Argentina have a ratio of divalent metals (Fe/Mn The identification of minerals and reaction products was carried out by chemical analysis, SEM–EDX and XRD. Tungsten extraction was determined by a chemical analysis of the chlorination residue. Each value reported in this work was the average of two chlorinations performed in the same way with similar reproduction. Chemical analyses were made by titration and gravimetry. SEM tests were performed with a microscope JEOL JSM-6360LV. Superficial chemical composition was determined with a Philips 505 scanning electron microscope and EDAX microanalysis system. XRD analyses were carried out with a Philips 3 Five samples were chosen from diverse wolframite deposits of Argentina. Mineral species (impurities) associated to wolframite that could be identified are in agreement with the genesis of its respective deposit. Wolframites formed by vein systems (samples 1, 4 and 5) are associated mainly to sulphide (pyrite, chalcopyrite and arsenopyrite), crystalline quartz, scheelite, feldspars and micas. Principal species present in wolframites of pegmatite origin (samples 2 and 3) are crystalline quartz, feldspars, micas, scheelite and iron oxide minerals. Impurities were carefully separated by hand under a binocular microscope. Purification of each sample was considered as finished when the wolframite concentration was higher than 95% (w/w). The location of deposits and approximate contents of main impurities of wolframites are indicated in Selection of samples was performed in order to include a wide range of the ratio of divalent metals present in wolframites (Fe/Mn Scheelite (CaWO Chlorinations were made with chlorine (chlorinating agent) and sulphur dioxide (reducing agent). The chlorination equipment used was composed of a vertical reactor with a static bed, a premixing chamber of gases at the reactor bottom and three cylinders (chlorine, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen) with its control valves and flowmeters. The excess of reactive gases and volatile reaction products were bubbled in Ba(OH) The reactor was heated by an electric furnace with temperature control. The test temperature was reached while a nitrogen flow circulated. When the system was stabilized to the selected temperature, nitrogen was replaced by reactive gases maintaining the same flow rate during the time corresponding to that test. Then, the furnace was turned off and cooled down to reach the room temperature while nitrogen circulated again. Reaction temperature was measured by a thermocouple and displayed on a digital thermometer. Each test was made with 1 Cell dimensions for studied wolframites are given in Selection of chlorination experimental conditions (amounts of chlorine and sulphur dioxide, reaction time and temperature) was carried out in order to study the different behavior of wolframites. Reagent amounts that correspond to the reaction stoichiometry to form tungsten oxychloride and chlorides of divalent metals were determined from an average chemical composition of the five samples. Such amounts, for 1 The effect of the reaction time and temperature on tungsten(VI) extraction was established through sample chlorination with higher iron(II) content (San Martín–San Luis) using flow rates above mentioned. Tungsten extraction was analyzed by means of two different ways, in one of them, the process was carried out as a function of reaction time at a unique temperature (value selected arbitrarily). In the other one, the temperature was the process variable but now, reaction time was maintained constant (value determined in the previous stage). Results obtained are shown in Tungsten extraction increased slightly after 5  The formation of a non volatile reaction product or the presence of a liquid phase on the mineral surface affects its subsequent chemical attack ( At the reactor exit, very hygroscopic solid substances were collected. The chemical analysis of these substances allowed to establish that they were: WO In the upper part of the reactor where hygroscopic solid substances were condensed, the temperature of the gaseous flow decreased to ∼300 The manganese(II) did not form any reaction product possible to be collected at the reactor exit as it occurred with tungsten(VI) and iron(II). From SEM observations, it was established that the grains of all residues had a uniform surface without superimposed particles (segregated) that suggests the presence of a non volatile reaction product. SEM–EDX analysis of the ceramic fiber next to the zone in contact with the mineral revealed the presence of manganese and chlorine. This situation is concomitant with the fact that neither reaction product containing manganese at the reactor exit nor on the residue surface were identified. Manganese(II) oxidation would not be carried out by chlorine since the standard reduction potential of the metallic element is higher than the one of the chlorinating agent. This is an important difference with the iron(II) such as it was indicated, the chlorine causes the cation oxidation (2FeCl Standard reduction potentials (Eh) of both divalent metals and of chlorine are: 0.77 The released oxygen during chlorination reacts with sulphur dioxide to form sulphur trioxide. The presence of this volatile reaction product was determined through the BaSO Tungsten oxychloride, chlorides of both divalent metals and sulphur trioxide are obtained by wolframite chlorination. According to these reaction products, it is possible to state that the behavior of each specimen depends on the facility of iron and manganese to react with chlorine. The free energy change (Δ Δ In wolframite, iron and manganese are coordinated to six oxygen atoms (octahedral symmetry) by metal–oxygen bonds. The Fe(Mn)Cl From a thermodynamic point of view, it was established that the combination of the metallic oxide with chloride is much more difficult for iron than for manganese. In order to explain the higher reactivity of iron-rich wolframites, it is analyzed if some reaction product of this element is easier to be formed than FeCl FeOCl was indicated as a reaction product formed during wüstite (FeO) chlorination with chlorine and with chlorine in carbon monoxide presence ( It is known that FeOCl decomposes thermically in the range 230–430 According to two equations above mentioned (wüstite chlorination and thermal decomposition), the Fe In order to verify the reactivity of the iron(III) oxide, chlorination (900 Chlorination of natural wolframites (Mn Wolframite reactivity depends on the ratio of their divalent metals and results obtained show clearly a different behavior for each specimen of the solid solution. The maximum tungsten extraction was 86% for the sample with 94% Fe/Mn The variation of cell dimensions of wolframites with different content of divalent metals was minimum and this fact would not explain the unequal mineral reactivity. MnCl It was observed that iron(II) is the only one of the two divalent metals present in wolframite that is oxidized by chlorine and that the iron(III) oxychloride (FeOCl) formation can be performed with a partial rupture of the metal–oxygen bond. Even when main physicochemical characteristics of the system are favorable for the formation of such intermediate reaction product, not any evidence of its presence could be determined under experimental conditions used to perform chlorinations. This substance makes it possible to give an alternative explanation about the higher iron(II) reactivity with respect to manganese(II).