Addition of 0.08wt%Ca into AZ31 melts significantly reduces the average grain size of thin strips produced by twin-roll-cast to 30μm from 100μm. Like Zr, due to the high chemical activity, the Ca added into the melts reacts with Al and forms Al2Ca intermetallic compound. X-ray diffraction result approves the existence of Al2Ca in the thin strips, which formed in the melts. Crystallographic examination of relationship between Al2Ca and Mg using the edge-to-edge matching model indicates that Al2Ca particles are effective inoculants for heterogeneous nucleation of Mg. It is considered that Al2Ca is a potential and effective grain refiner for Mg alloys and the grain refinement through addition of Ca in the AZ31 alloy is attributed to the inoculation effect of Al2Ca particles formed in the melts.Due to the low plasticity, producing thin strips of Mg–Al alloys normally involves multiple rolling processes in low reduction rate. This process involves a number of annealing treatment processes between two rolling passes during conventional hot rolling Under the conditions of the twin-roll-cast, addition of grain refiners into the molten metals, which is also called inoculation treatment, is the most effective approach to produce castings with fine grains. Because of the invalidity of Zr in grain refinement in Al-containing Mg alloys due to the chemical reaction between Al and Zr, development of new and effective grain refiners for this type of alloys has become an emergent task and active research topic Based on previous success, the aim of the present research is to develop a new and different grain refiner for Al-containing Mg alloys using the edge-to-edge matching model. Because Ca is chemically more active than Mg, and according to the Al–Ca and Mg–Ca binary phase diagrams, the melting temperature of Al AZ31 molten alloy with the weight of about 1.0 Small sample blocks were cut from the middle of the thin strips of the AZ31 alloys with different additions of Ca. Microstructure of the samples was examined in optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectrum (EDS), and the average grain size at the center of each sample was measured using the linear intercept method. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to detect the Al The optical microstructure of the AZ31 thin strips with different Ca contents is shown in The mechanism of grain refinement by adding Ca in the AZ31 alloy is debatable. Possibly, it is resulted from both the solute effect and heterogeneous nucleation effect even though it is still unclear that which one actually dominates the grain refining process. StJohn and Easton et al. In addition, taking Zr as an example, because Zr cannot refine the grains in Mg–Al based alloys due the chemical reaction between Zr and Al   Grain refining efficiency of inoculated particles, to a great extent, depends on the crystallographic matching between the particles and the metal matrix The matching directions and matching planes are normally the close packed or nearly close packed directions and planes. For Mg matrix, the directions and planes were previously identified and reported   Under the twin-roll-cast condition, addition of 0.08 The authors are grateful to the financial supports from the