In this research, chloride–hypochlorite leaching of gold from a highly refractory pyritic concentrate was conducted and effects of stirring speed, temperature and particle size on the leaching rate were investigated. Results showed that the particle size had a significant positive effect on the gold recovery. In this system, iron hydroxide layer formed on the pyrite particles, decreasing the gold recovery. Removing this layer by hydrochloric acid and further leaching by chloride–hypochlorite increased the gold recovery. About 96% of gold was extracted from the concentrate after three stages of chloride–hypochlorite leaching/hydrochloric acid washing.Hypochlorite solution has been recognized as a strong oxidizing reagent to oxidize metal sulfides (  In this paper, first effects of stirring speed, temperature and particle size on the chloride–hypochlorite leaching of gold from a refractory pyritic concentrate were investigated. Then, the leach residue was washed by hydrochloric acid to remove the hydroxide layer and increase the gold recovery in the next stage leaching. The concentrate used in this study was obtained from Barika Mine in Iran. Particle size of the concentrate measured by laser particle size analysis (CILAS 1064) was 90% < To run a leaching experiment, 100 Initial pH of the leachant was about 11. After addition of the concentrate to the leachant, pH dropped due to oxidation of sulfide minerals which generate acid according to reaction Below pH Leaching curve included three zones. In the first 1   To investigate the effect of particle size on the leaching process, the concentrate was ground using a low energy ball mill for 2 and 4 Using SEM/EDX analysis and after much searching in the sample with particle size of 90% <  The residue washed by hydrochloric acid was leached by chloride–hypochlorite for 2 In the next stage, in order to oxidize the remaining un-oxidized pyrite particles, the residue of the 2nd stage leaching was washed by hydrochloric acid and then leached by chloride–hypochlorite for 2  Particle size of the concentrate is more effective than temperature and stirring speed on the chloride–hypochlorite leaching of gold. Direct chloride–hypochlorite leaching of the concentrate yields 67.1% gold recovery. Iron hydroxide layer as oxidation product of pyrite forms on the particles which can be removed by acid washing. Chloride–hypochlorite leaching/hydrochloric acid washing in three stages increases the gold recovery to 95.7%.