Objectives
                  With a decreased number of teeth, a reduction in chewing function can contribute to changes in food choices and ultimately impact on overall nutritional status. This study compared the impact of two tooth replacement strategies for partially dentate older patients on masticatory performance and nutritional status.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients aged 65 years and older were randomly allocated to two different treatment groups. For the RPDP-group (removable partial dental prostheses) each participant was restored to complete dental arches with cobalt-chromium removable prostheses. For the SDA-group (shortened dental arch), participants were restored to 10 occluding pairs of natural and replacement teeth using adhesive bridgework. Masticatory performance was assessed with a colour-mixing ability test. Each patient provided haematological samples that were screened for biochemical markers of nutritional status. Patients were also assessed using the Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA).
               
                  Results
                  Eighty-nine patients completed the test for masticatory performance and provided blood samples and MNA scores at baseline (BL) and after 12 months (12m). Masticatory performance (p<0.001) and MNA (p<0.05) increased significantly in both groups, but no significant between group differences were noted. A mixed picture was observed for nutrition biomarkers. Mixed-effect linear regression models did not demonstrate that nutritional status could be predicted from masticatory performance.
               
                  Conclusions
                  These results indicate that prosthodontic rehabilitation according to the principles of the SDA is equivalent to RPDPs in terms of restoration of chewing capacity for partially dentate older patients. However, masticatory performance may only have minor associations with nutritional status for this patient group.
               
                  Clinical significance
                  Replacing teeth with either RPDPs or SDA provides a prerequisite for efficient chewing. Further research is required to determine the impact of oral rehabilitation coupled with nutritional counselling for this patient population.As preventative strategies continue to advance, more and more older adults are now retaining natural teeth into old age. This trend can be seen throughout most of the western world and has resulted in an increasing proportion of partially dentate older patents. Consequently, the prevalence of edentulism is becoming an increasingly scarce condition in high-income households in countries such as North America In older people, it has been shown that the perceived ability to chew foods is closely associated with the number of natural teeth remaining, as well as the number of occluding pairs of teeth Chewing is a complex function of the oro-facial system. The ultimate goal is to break down and lubricate foodstuffs, and thus form a cohesive bolus that is safe to swallow The aim of this study was to compare the chewing efficiency of partially dentate older patients with RPDP with those restored to a SDA. The study also aimed to investigate if an improvement in masticatory function was associated with an improvement in overall nutritional status. A randomised controlled clinical trial (RCT) was conducted to compare the two treatment modalities (Trial Registration no. ISRCTN26302774). The inclusion criteria for patients involved in the study were: aged 65 years and older; minimum of six remaining sound natural teeth in either arch, seeking replacement for missing natural teeth; ability to accept routine dental care in a dental chair In this study patients were randomly allocated to one of two treatment groups; the RPDP treatment group, or the SDA treatment group. A computer-generated schedule in SAS© was utilised to perform the randomization remote from the clinical setting. The randomisation was stratified according to gender and age, and was carried out in blocks of varying length. For both the CUDH and SFDH recruitment sites a separate schedule for the randomisation was produced. Both the RPDP and SDA treatment groups contained patients recruited from both recruitment sites, and these were randomised independently. The randomisation procedure was performed by a research assistant, and the allocation of treatment groups was carried out by the clinical operator who was blinded to the allocation. For the duration of the study patients were assessed using an intention to treat analysis; patients were analysed according to the initial treatment intent (determined by the randomisation process), and not the treatment eventually administered. For the patients to be involved in the study they were required to be dentally fit. Prior to treatment onset they received standardised dental care which included extraction of unrestorable teeth, restoration of caries and replacement of defective direct restorations, extensive oral hygiene instruction and non-surgical periodontal treatment. The patients within the RPDP group had complete arch restoration; with missing teeth replaced using cobalt-chromium frameworks. For the SDA group patients, adhesive resin bonded bridgework (RBB) was carried out according to a standardised protocol throughout the arch to restore patients to a premolar occlusion of 10 occluding pairs of natural and replacement teeth. Posterior teeth distal to the SDA were left unopposed. Minimal tooth preparation within enamel only was carried out to produce retentive forms and increase the surface area for bonding. For the purpose of this study the RPDP and RBB used were constructed by the same dental laboratory and all operative treatment was conducted by a single clinician with postgraduate training in prosthodontics. The primary outcome measure for this RCT was oral health related quality of life (OHRQoL), which was measured using OHIP-14 Masticatory performance was assessed with a previously validated colour-mixing ability, i.e. bolus-kneading, test The chewing gum was placed in each patient’s mouth and they were asked to chew normally, with the operator counting the chewing strokes. After 20 chewing cycles, the gum was retrieved from the oral cavity and placed in a transparent plastic bag. The gum was then flattened to a 1 To assess nutritional status, the mini nutritional assessment (MNA) was administered by a research nurse at baseline (pre-treatment) and 12 months post-treatment intervention. The research nurse was blinded to the treatment group allocation of all participants involved. Haematological samples were provided by participants and screened in Cork University Hospital for biochemical markers of nutritional status including serum albumin, serum cholesterol, ferritin, folate, vitamin B12 and 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (vitamin D) according to standard hospital protocols. Haematological samples were collected from each participant at baseline and 12 months post-treatment intervention, by a research nurse blinded to the treatment group allocation. A power calculation was made based on summary OHIP-14 score data from the UK Adult Dental Health Survey as this was the primary outcome measure for the study. The sample size calculation (α All variables recorded were summarised using appropriate descriptive statistics and graphics, and presented by time-point and treatment group. All statistical analysis was carried out using R, version 3.2.2 (The R Project for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria), with the additional package “lme4”. Frequency and descriptive statistics were calculated for numerical and categorical variables (mean, standard deviation, median and quantiles as appropriate). Student’s For all analyses performed the level of significance was set to 0.05. A total of 89 participants were recruited into the study and randomly allocated to RPDP group (n Masticatory performance was very similar at baseline for both groups and increased significantly 12 months after prosthodontic rehabilitation (differences for both groups p A detailed article on the nutritional parameters has been reported elsewhere As baseline and at the 12 months follow-up, no significant correlations were observed between masticatory performance (VOH) and MNA score or any of the haematological biomarkers tested ( In summary, this RCT demonstrates a significant improvement in masticatory function in partially dentate older adults rehabilitated with either RPDPs or according to the principles of the SDA. Although the number of occluding antagonist pairs of teeth was significantly higher in patients with RPDP, there was no significant difference in the increase in masticatory function compared to patients restored to a SDA. The study results illustrate that nutritional status is not consistently associated with masticatory function based on linear regression models. However, with increasing masticatory function some nutritional parameters, including MNA, improved. Chewing may be assessed subjectively, i.e. chewing ability or objectively. For the objective evaluation numerous methods have been described The current randomised controlled clinical trial was performed with an adequate sample size, both for the primary and secondary outcome measures. The number of teeth and number of occluding posterior teeth have been described as one of the most important predictors for masticatory function Removable partial dentures are a popular tooth replacement treatment offered to many patients There are several available alternatives to RPDP treatment, including functionally orientated approaches such as the shortened dental arch (SDA) concept Although masticatory performance at baseline and 12 months was not significantly associated with various markers of nutritional state or MNA score, it is still worth noting the magnitude of evidence suggesting the relationship between oral health status and diet and subsequently nutritional state in the older adult population Some studies have shown that patients with missing natural teeth replaced with removable dentures can improve their dietary choices whilst other studies have shown little change In this study, regression models were used to predict masticatory performance at two different time points (baseline and 12 months) and the difference between the two, using factors, including markers of nutritional status, that were also assessed at baseline and 12 months. Although none of the factors tested were significant predictors of masticatory performance, potentially due to poor model fit or small sample size, there are conflicting opinions regarding the relationship between masticatory performance, oral health status and various markers of nutritional status These results indicate that prosthodontic rehabilitation according to the principles of the SDA is equivalent to RPDPs in terms of restoration of chewing capacity for partially dentate older patients. Enhanced masticatory performance alone does not signify improved nutritional state. None. Funding by the