Concentrators processing PGM bearing ores make use of polysaccharide depressants to reduce the recovery of the undesired naturally floatable gangue minerals, mainly silicates, present in the ore. Recent work has shown that high depressant dosages can completely depress naturally floatable gangue and thus prevent it from reporting to the concentrate. These high depressant dosages can, however, have a negative effect on the recovery of valuable minerals present in the ore by reducing the stability of the froth. In order to counterbalance the effects of depressant addition, frothers are added. It is, however, preferable to maintain independent control over bubble size and froth stability which is difficult to achieve with only one frother. An alternative strategy is to use a blend of frothers, e.g. a weaker frother in combination with a stronger frother. Such a system allows an additional degree of freedom: changing the ratio of the two frothers provides more independent control of bubble size and froth stability. This study demonstrates through the use of batch flotation tests how blending low molecular weight alcohols with commercially available frothers impacts the solids and water recovery, as well as the valuable mineral recovery and concentrate grade in different PGM ores. Higher water and solids recoveries together with higher valuable mineral recoveries (>90% copper and >70% nickel) were obtained from tests using frother blends.Frothers are heteropolar surface-active compounds containing a polar group (hydrophilic) and a non-polar (hydrophobic) group capable of adsorbing at the water–air interface. The most widely used commercial frothers include: natural oils such as terpineol (as in pine oil) and cresols, C5–C8 aliphatic alcohols, polypropylene glycols and their alkyl ethers (commonly referred to as polyglycol frothers), mixed ethers, aldehydes and ketone co-products of oxo alcohol production and alkoxyalkanes such as TEB (tri-ethyl-butane) ( Glycol methyl ethers are low viscosity liquids which are completely or partially soluble in water. They produce fine fragile froths that are usually very selective and have no collector action. DOW frothers are known to produce froths of high selectivity for most ore types and are used in the processing of a wide variety of sulphide ores at pulp alkalinities ranging up to pH 12.5–13.5 ( The presence of a frothing agent is fundamental to every flotation process. In addition to the formation of froth, frothers have a considerable effect on increasing the air dispersion in the flotation machine ( Blending of flotation frothers is becoming common practice, apparently enhancing performance ( In an attempt to understand the impact of frother blends on metallurgical performance, The ultimate goal in understanding the effects of flotation frothers and their blends in both pulp and froth zones is to increase the metallurgical performance in flotation circuits. In hydrodynamic terms a good frother facilitates both the reduction to the target bubble size, and adequate froth stability over a range of operating conditions. Frothers are often described as either weak (most alcohol) or strong (most polyglycol). In practice, frothers that are stronger increase the amount of water in the froth and consequently are less selective due to increased entrainment. It is therefore important to identify a frother blend that will provide the optimum control in each flotation circuit across a useful range of dosages and ore characteristics. Little work has been conducted to investigate frother blends and none suggests the mechanism of action of these blends ( Batch flotation tests were performed to investigate the influence of frother blends on metallurgical performance in platinum bearing ores. A modified Leeds flotation machine consisting of a perspex flotation cell with a capacity of 3 Two ores from the Merensky Reef in the Bushveld Igneous Complex, South Africa, were used in the study. Synthetic plant water was used throughout the experiments; distilled water was modified by the addition of various chemical salts to contain total dissolved solids of 1023 The batch flotation procedure developed at the Centre for Minerals Research, University of Cape Town ( Feeds, concentrates and tails were filtered, dried, weighed and analysed for copper, nickel and sulphur. Copper and total nickel analysis of all samples was done using a Bruker S4 Explorer XRF spectrophotometer. Sulphur analysis was carried out using a LECO S 632 sulphur analyser. All tests were conducted in duplicate. Error bars displayed on figures indicate the standard deviation between duplicate tests.  It is well understood that an increase in water recovery is related to an increase in froth stability (  The next series of tests focused on the polyglycol/alcohol blend ratios that gave the best results from the first set of experiments i.e. 4:1 and 1:4. The use of frother blends with polyglycol frother being added to alcohol at a ratio of 4:1 also resulted in greater water and solids recoveries than obtained with the individual alcohol frothers. In this instance higher solids and water recoveries were obtained than individual polyglycol frothers. The behaviour of the blends was as seen previously when small amounts of polyglycol frothers were blended with alcohol, in that the amount of solids and water recovered increased in the order 1-pentanol Slightly higher solids recoveries, but significantly higher water recoveries were obtained from tests in which DOW 250 was used rather than DOW 200. This supports the findings of A second series of batch flotation tests was conducted under the same conditions i.e. with polyglycol/alcohol frothers at the ratio of 4:1, using a second Merensky ore sample. The results obtained for the recovery and grade of copper, nickel and sulphur from tests conducted on ore #1 using DOW 200, DOW 250, pentanol, hexanol and MIBC, both individually and as blends, are shown in Future work will include bubble size measurements, surface tension measurements and the determination of entrainment. The results obtained from this investigation suggest that frother blends may help improve the performance of a circuit by control of bubble size, independent of control of froth stability and solids holding capacity. A synergistic effect was observed, with the use of the frother blends resulting in enhanced performance compared to any of the frothers used individually. Higher water and solids recoveries were obtained from tests using frother blends than from tests using the pure frothers. The highest valuable mineral recoveries were achieved with the use of certain frother blends than with the pure frothers. This work has shown that there is scope for plants to implement the use of a dual frother system in order to improve the performance of the circuit and that the addition of just a small amount of one type of frother to another is needed to bring about these enhancements. The authors would like to thank the