In this paper, a scalar wave is solved in the fully explicit finite difference time domain scheme for different stencils based on the cubic crystal system. In particular, we study four systems: the simple cubic, the body-centered cubic, the face-centered cubic and the compact packing cubic. In many papers that are focused on the artificial anisotropy induced by these grids in the propagated wave, one candidate is often better than all the others. In this manuscript, we study the stability, the physical phase velocity error and the anisotropy under two views. Firstly, we consider the same burdens or density of nodes per cubic wavelength and secondly we look at the asymptotic case. We also investigate the computational complexity based on several considerations: burdens, asymptotic time and implementation difficulties. Therefore, we pointed out how each problem or application, due to its different characteristics, has an appropriate grid in order to be treated properly.Fully explicit finite difference time domain (FDTD) is a numerical method which has experienced successive enrichments since the early 1930s      Other excellent publications have already applied these meshes so as to solve the wave equation by means of FDTD Therefore, the main goal of this manuscript is to clearly establish the pros and cons of the studied lattices from several points of view highlighting that the appropriate grid relies upon the particular idiosyncrasy of the problem under consideration. In this way, the tradeoff between accuracy and computational cost is not unique. We summarize the main aspects which have to be considered in the choice of one of these grids taking into account, as the fundamental criteria, the characteristics of the problem under study.  The paper is organized as follows. In Section In chemistry, crystallography, and materials science the coordination number (CN), of a central atom in a molecule or crystal is the number of atoms, molecules or ions bonded to it. However, in this context given a specific point in a grid, the number which is associated with all their nearest neighbors is the CN. Therefore, by using this concept of CN, we can summarize the studied stencils in this manuscript as follows:      The discretization of the wave equation In the approximation process we assume that space is discretized by voxels with side lengths in the Cartesian axes equal to The calculations that lead to the discretization of the wave equation for each of the different grids are explained in The nature of equations Traditionally the dispersion relation is calculated by assuming a harmonic solution of the wave equation, then, in the Euler exponential notation this solution Also, its minimum value, which is linked to a particular pair of angles   CPC-grid is less accurate than BCC-grid, FCC-grid for all possible directions under the same DPCW (see We see that along the Cartesian axes (see In  Until now, we have done a qualitative description in In 1928 Courant et al. found out the stability condition in the standard fully explicit FDTD  In summary:  Given a particular scalar wave which it is pulsed in time, its highest frequency or shortest wavelength imposed by means of Nyquist–Shannon Sampling Theorem the maximum value for the spatial grid size. After to establish the spatial grid size, the stability condition, which is specified in rows two and three in A larger time stepping leads to less number of updated steps in the way to accomplish a simulation. The last sentence asserts a half-truth because the complexity of the algorithm also play a role in the total time that a simulation requires (see the last row in The above sentences are a study focused on the simulation duration, but the accuracy is an essential issue too. We demonstrated that different stencils present different kinds of accuracy (see rows four, five, six and seven in We have carried out four simulations. In all simulations we do not update the boundaries of the computational domain to simulate perfectly reflecting boundaries. Anyway, this is irrelevant because the front of the spherical wave, which departures from the center of the computational domain, does not reach the boundary of the computational domain. There is no causality in the solution related to the boundary conditions. The first test corresponds to a SC-grid of  It is evident that the 3D cross section to the spherical wave portrayed in This work was carried out within the framework of the Research Projects 3180130 and 3170082 supported by The wave equation The Laplacian operator discretization for the FCC-grid was taken from The critical points of the dispersion relation 