This communication describes a new hybrid method for storing hydrogen in solid inorganic hydride materials as well as producing it from water based on the reaction between LiOH/LiOH·H2O and LiH. As a hydrogen storage method, the release and uptake of hydrogen in this method are accomplished via a series of simple reactions with good kinetics within a practically reasonable temperature range. The reversible hydrogen storage capacity of the material system is 6–8.8wt.% at <350°C. This capacity is one of the highest among all other metal hydrides known to date in the same temperature range. As a hydrogen production method, 100% of hydrogen generated by this method comes from water by its reaction with alkali metal oxides. This method is also an environmentally friendly alternative to the current commercial processes for hydrogen production. The preliminary thermodynamic calculation on energy required for complete regeneration shows that the current system is energetically favorable.Hydrogen is undoubtedly one of the key alternatives to replace petroleum products as a clean energy carrier for both transportation and stationary applications. Interest in hydrogen has grown dramatically since 1990, and many advances in hydrogen production and storage technologies have been made during the past decade A major challenge for using hydrogen as a fuel today is to develop efficient and effective methods for hydrogen storage that can not only store hydrogen safely but also supply it where it is needed and when it is needed. One of the methods for hydrogen storage is based on chemical reactions of solid inorganic hydrides that release hydrogen In the present communication, we describe a hybrid approach for hydrogen storage by which the release and uptake of hydrogen are reversible via a series of simple reactions based on the reaction between LiOH/LiOH·H  Reactions It is noted here that aqueous solubility of LiOH is 12.8 One mole of LiOH·H Clearly, reactions 1a, 1b, 2a, 2b and 3 constitute a hydrogen generation and regeneration cycle. From a hydrogen storage perspective, it is an off-board reversible storage technique as oppose to storage techniques that recharge reversible reactions on-board using high pressure hydrogen gas. The most unique feature of this method is that the recharge of hydrogen is accomplished using water.  It should be noted that Groups IA and IIA elements such as Na, Ca, Mg, K, and Ba would undergo reactions similar to Although this new approach for hydrogen storage has the potential, several scientific and technological challenges remain. First of all, understanding the reaction mechanisms and hence controlling the rate of dehydrogenation is crucial for applying this method in practical situations. Secondly, a key factor that will determine the future prospects of this technology is the energy efficiency of the entire cycle. It was estimated that for a hydrogen-storage technology to be practically viable the total energy required for the regeneration of the reactants must be no more than 1.6 times of the energy content of the hydrogen produced The starting materials, lithium hydroxide (LiOH, 98%), lithium hydroxide monohydrate (LiOH·H The mixtures of LiOH/LiH in the present communication were mechanically milled in an SPEX 8000 high-energy mill under argon atmosphere for 30 The identification of reactants and reaction products in the mixture before and after thermogravimetric analysis was carried out using a Siemens D5000 model X-ray diffractometer with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation ( A scanning electron microscope (SEM) with EDAX was used to characterize the particle size and chemical composition of the samples after different processing. SEM samples were prepared by attaching a small amount of the powders in a carbon-based conductive tape in the glove box. To demonstrate the basic concepts of the method described above, we used thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods to verify the reaction path and products. In order to determine the reaction paths of reaction It is noted that reaction The experiment also demonstrated that when LiOH instead of LiOH·H To demonstrate the uptake of hydrogen, Li The complete regeneration of the reactants for reaction With regard to the reversibility of the hydrogen uptake and release reactions, the above information clearly shows that the method introduced in this communication is different from that of the conventional method of using reversible solid hydride materials. For conventional reversible hydrogen storage materials, a given reaction is reversible for either the release or uptake of hydrogen under controlled conditions. Reaction With respect to hydrogen production, hydrogen gas is produced commercially today by two methods: (1) the reforming of natural gas and (2) the electrolysis of water. Although the latter method generates hydrogen from water, it still relies heavily on fossil energy for generation of the electricity that is required to carry out the electrolysis process. Considerable research is underway to integrate power generation from renewable energy sources such as wind and solar energy with the electrolysis of water so that the production of hydrogen is free of the use of fossil energy. The hybrid method described in this communication provides another alternative for hydrogen production from water that is environmentally friendly provided that metallic reducing agent such as Mg can be produced by recycling MgO using renewable energy. As shown by Needless to say, a large quantity of thermal energy is required to produce Mg, which can be supplied by either burning of fossil energy or the use of renewable energy. A preliminary estimation of the energy required for Mg regeneration versus the energy contained the hydrogen generated, has been carried out under ideal conditions. The results showed that the reversible cycle as described in this communication is energetically favorable. However, a detailed and reliable energy balance analysis, which is beyond the scope of this communication, must be carried out under realistic conditions involving the energy balance and efficiencies, taking into account not only the thermodynamics of the reactions but also various heat exchange steps. A new hybrid method is described for storing hydrogen in solid inorganic hydride materials as well as producing it from water. As a hydrogen storage method, the release and uptake of hydrogen in this method are accomplished via a series of simple reactions with good kinetics within a practically feasible temperature range. Although these individual reactions are essentially known, this work demonstrates that these reactions can be exploited collectively to accomplish what is otherwise difficult. The reversible hydrogen storage capacity of the material system is 6–8.8 This research is made possible partially by the financial support from the US Department of Energy (DOE) under contract number DE-FC36-05GO15069 since March 2005. The cost-share contributions by the University Utah to this project are also acknowledged.