The precipitation of iron from zinc leach solutions using ammonium peroxodisulfate (APS) as an oxidant was studied and evaluated. The effects of important process parameters, such as pH, temperature and concentration of oxidant, on the precipitation of impurity ions and on zinc loss were investigated. The results indicated that pH and temperature primarily affected the compositions of the iron precipitates and that the concentration of oxidant affected the amount of iron and other impurity ions that were removed. Under process conditions of pH1.5, 90°C and a 30% volume of APS/leach solution (0.5M), the removals of Fe, Mn and As were 99.95%, 100% and 99.87%, respectively. Notably, cobalt was also precipitated as cobalt oxy-hydroxide (CoO·OH) under suitable precipitation conditions. It is possible to precipitate Co with rates between 70% and 90% depending on the concentration of APS. The Co precipitation tests revealed that higher Co concentrations in the pregnant solution help to precipitate Co at higher rates using this method.In hydrometallurgical processes, chemical precipitation is needed to purify solutions by removing impurities such as iron, copper, and cadmium, among others. Iron can significantly disturb the electrowinning of zinc through electrochemical short circuiting ( Several processes have been applied in zinc industries to remove dissolved iron, such as jarosite ( One of the most important parameters that affect the electrolysis of zinc is the presence and concentrations of impurity ions in the zinc electrolyte. Some of the cathodic impurities, particularly iron, nickel and cobalt, consume power by depositing on the zinc surface and re-dissolving in the acid electrolyte, whereas some of them, such as lead and cadmium, co-deposit with zinc and cause impure cathode zinc. However, another group of electropositive ions, including copper, germanium, arsenic and antimony, which are the most detrimental impurities, deposit with zinc and cause re-dissolution of deposited cathode zinc ( Ammonium peroxodisulfate (APS) is well known as a strong oxidant ( The present study, in which APS was used as an oxidant, intends to assess the effects of pH, temperature and concentration of oxidant on the removal of iron and other dissolved impurity ions from a zinc leach solution before the cementation process and to identify the forms of precipitates obtained under predetermined conditions. In the experiments, a leach solution derived from Çinkur zinc plant leach residues by roasting and leaching processes was used. The roasting and leaching conditions and the material characterization methods that were used in this study have been described in detail elsewhere ( The precipitation process was conducted in a fully electronically controlled Hendes 2-L glass reactor, which is schematically illustrated in XRD analyses of the precipitates were performed using a Rigaku D/Max 2200 X-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper target X-ray tube. The scanning process was performed between 3 and 80° at a rate of 2°/min. All Eh-pH diagrams were constructed using HSC Chemistry software (ver.5.1). To determine the effect of pH in the process, precipitation experiments were conducted using a 10% volume ratio of APS/leach solution that was added by volume at 90  According to the mineralogical analysis (XRD) results of the precipitates obtained from the pH tests, the formation of 2-line ferrihydrite was observed at all pH values tested. Moreover, jarosite peaks at lower pH (3.0–3.5) and goethite peaks at higher pH (4.0–4.5) were observed. In addition, goethite peaks began to appear and increase and jarosite peaks began to decrease and disappear with increasing pH ( To determine the effects of the concentration of APS, precipitation tests were performed with 0.5  When the species in the Mn-H In the precipitation tests performed to determine the effects of temperature, reaction temperatures between 85 As shown in To investigate the effect of APS on cobalt precipitation, a series of precipitation experiments were conducted using a synthetic CoSO  Precipitation equations for the oxidation of Fe, Co and Mn with APS can be written considering the XRD analysis results and Eh-pH diagrams as follows: To compare the metal removal percentages and solution concentrations obtained after APS precipitation (90 In all the tests conducted using APS, arsenic, antimony and molybdenum were precipitated at the rates of over 97%, 80% and 91%, respectively. Additionally, considerably lower concentrations were achieved for arsenic and antimony in the zinc electrolyte by oxidizing with APS. The large precipitation of arsenic under the process conditions is quite remarkable. Normally, arsenic forms hydrogen arsenate (HAsO  The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: The zinc solution obtained from the 2-hour precipitation with APS has a > To precipitate all iron, it is sufficient to add a 0.5 It was determined that iron precipitated primarily as 2-line ferrihydrite. Precipitates may consist of jarosite or goethite depending on the process pH and temperature. Certain cations, such as arsenic, antimony and cobalt, which are extremely detrimental to zinc electrolysis, were removed via precipitation with APS. It was not possible to precipitate cadmium and nickel, which are other detrimental ions for the electrolysis, under any of the applied conditions. Notably, cobalt at any initial concentration in the solution could be decreased below 5