In recent decades, considerable amounts of rare earth elements have been used and then released into industrial wastewater, which caused serious environmental problems. In this work, in order to recycle rare earth cations (La3+ and Ce3+) from aqueous solutions, MnFe2O4-Graphene oxide magnetic nanoparticles were synthesized and after characterization studies, their adsorption isotherms, kinetics, thermodynamics and desorption were comprehensively investigated. Characterization was performed using XRD, FE-SEM, FT-IR, Raman spectroscopy, VSM, BET and DLS. REE adsorption on MnFe2O4-GO was studied for the first time in the present work and the maximum adsorption capacity at the optimum condition (room temperature and pH = 7) for La3+ and Ce3+ were 1001 and 982 mg/g respectively, and the reactions were completed within 20 min. In addition, the adsorption data were well matched with the Langmuir model and the adsorption kinetics were fitted with the pseudo-second order model. The thermodynamic parameters were calculated and the reactions were found to be endothermic and spontaneous. Moreover, the Dubinin-Radushkevich model predicted chemical ion-exchange adsorption. Desorption studies also demonstrated that MnFe2O4-GO can be regenerated for multiple reuses. Overall, high adsorption capacity, chemical stability, reusability, fast kinetics, easy magnetic separation, and simple synthesis method indicated that MnFe2O4-GO is a high-performance adsorbent for REE.Rare earth elements (REE) consist of 15 lanthanides, scandium and yttrium [ The quantity of REE recycling is currently very little owing to inefficient collection system [ In the past two decades, use of magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) for metal ions adsorption has been rapidly grown because of their large surface area, high reactivity, novel magnetic properties and ease of separation [ It is widely agreed that bare MNPs are not stable against aggregation, oxidation and acidic conditions because of their high chemical activity and surface susceptibility [ In the present work, synthesis and characterization of MnFe The main reason for selecting La The chemicals used in this research are graphite fine powder extra pure (CAS number: 7782-42-5), FeCl MnFe GO was synthesized using improved Hummers method [ 0.5 g of the as-prepared GO was dispersed in 400 mL DI water by 15 min ultrasonication. Thereafter, 0.005 mol of MnSO Adsorption experiments were generally carried out by shaking (250 rpm) the tubes containing 0.30 g/L well-dispersed MNP (sonicated for 5 min) and 100.0 mL solution of REE at different reaction times. The adsorbent was then retrieved by a permanent Nd−Fe−B magnet (N42 grade, 1280mT). The pH was adjusted using 0.1 M H Desorption experiments involved adding 0.030 g REE-loaded adsorbents into DI water with pH = 3 (The pH was adjusted using 0.2 M HNO The phases analysis of the samples was performed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Inel-Equinox 3000 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (l = 0.15406 nm). The average crystallite size was calculated from the full width at half maximum (FWHM) using the Debye-Scherrer equation. The surface morphology and size of adsorbent were analyzed using MIRA3 TESCAN field emission scanning electron microscope ((FE-SEM)). The concentrations of La and Ce ions were determined by an Agilent 7500 inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry ((ICP-MS)). The magnetic properties of samples were investigated using a Meghnatis Daghigh Kavir Co. (Iran) vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) at room temperature (298 K). The specific surface areas of MNPs were determined using the multiple-point Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method with Microtrac BELSORP-mini II at 77 K. A Rayleigh WQF-510A Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy ((FT-IR)) was used to characterize the presence of specific chemical groups in the samples. Also, Raman measurements were carried out using a Takram P50C0R10 (Iran) spectrometer (Nd:YAG laser). For determination of zeta (ζ) potentials, a Malvern ZEN 3600 dynamic light scattering (DLS) was employed and pH of solutions were measured by a Metrohm 827 digital pH-meter. The XRD patterns of MnFe The surface morphology and particle size of samples were investigated using FE-SEM. As shown in The (FT-IR) information in The Raman spectroscopy is carried out to investigate the properties of graphene materials [ Magnetic properties of the samples were studied using VSM under applied field of 10 kOe. The hysteresis loops of MnFe The results of multiple-point BET analysis are listed in The zeta (ζ) potential of adsorbent at different pH is shown in The pH of the reaction is an important factor for adsorption capacity and it can change the surface charges and speciation of the metal ions [ As shown in The Langmuir, the Freundlich and the Dubinin-Radushkevich (D-R) models were employed to study the adsorption isotherms. The Langmuir isotherm assumes that monolayer adsorption occurs on homogeneous surface and it has been commonly used to explain nanoadsorbents behavior [ The Freundlich isotherm is an empirical equation that assumes surface sites, on which adsorption occurs, are heterogeneous [ The Dubinin-Radushkevich (D-R) isotherm is studied to determine the nature of the adsorption (physical or ion-exchange chemical), which is related to the sorption mean free energy (E). The D-R isotherm equation [ The adsorption isotherm data are shown in The effect of contact time is shown in The adsorption kinetics was investigated by pseudo-first order and pseudo-second order models [ As listed in The thermodynamic studies are necessary for the practical applications. In order to investigate the effect of temperature on the changes in K As listed in The adsorption capacities of REE ions onto different adsorbents are summarized in Reusability is an important factor for a superior adsorbent, especially to be employed in the practical application. Furthermore, considerable amounts of nanoparticles are usually lost during the desorption processes, which can cause the critical environmental problems. Therefore, an efficient desorption with minimum nanoparticles lost seems necessary. The as-prepared adsorbents were reused after desorption by eluting with 0.2 M HNO MnFe There are no conflicts to declare. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of