Sodium chloride has various functions in bread, but its reduction is a topic that should be focused on due to nutritional recommendations. This study addresses effects of sodium reduction on both dough and bread properties. 50% NaCl was systematically substituted by different combinations of KCl, MgCl2 and CaCl2. Stiffness of the yeasted doughs decreased with increasing calcium content, and crumb structure as well as bread volume and sensory perception was also affected by divalent cations, which can be attributed to a weakened protein network. In contrast there was no significant influence of potassium on dough stiffness and extensibility. Crumb cell structure and crust firmness were comparable to the reference and a reduction of sodium chloride seems feasible for levels up to 50%, corresponding to 0.75 g NaCl per 100 g, without negatively affecting sensory properties. The correlations identified between salt level, dough properties and bread characteristics are helpful to predict product quality.It is well established that the current dietary sodium intake in developed countries is far above nutritional recommendations. It represents a serious health concern as it contributes to the increase in blood pressure and of the cardiovascular risk which is the worlds' leading cause of death and disability, the most common cause of premature invalidity and, therefore, of enormous public health relevance ( Because of the amount of consumed bread and its salt content, this product accounts for approx. 30% of the overall sodium intake ( The most simple but lengthy and quantitatively limited approach is to gradually reduce sodium content over a long period of time without introducing any new components; by doing so it is expected that consumers become familiar with less salty products ( Although numerous studies investigated different strategies for sodium reduction in bread, it is difficult to compare results when different formulations or different initial salt contents were applied (e.g., For all experiments, deionized water, wheat flour type 550 from the 2016 harvest (Dresdener Mühle GmbH, Dresden, Germany), fresh yeast from Uniferm GmbH & Co. KG (Werne, Germany), and sodium chloride (Carl Roth GmbH & Co. KG, Karlsruhe, Germany) were used. Moisture content of the flour was determined according to standard 110/1 ( The reference dough consisted of 3 g yeast and 1.5 g NaCl dissolved in 55.1 g deionized water per 100 g flour (corrected to 140 g/kg moisture). The selected amount of water corresponds to a dough consistency of 600 Brabender Units, which was determined following standard 115/1 ( All dough components were mixed in an SP12 Diosna spiral mixer (Dierks & Söhne GmbH, Osnabrück, Germany) for 60 s at 30 Hz followed by 4 min at 50 Hz, reaching a final temperature of 26 °C. During proofing (60 min at 26 °C and 80% relative humidity) the dough was kneaded twice for 15 s, subsequently shaped into pieces of 500 g and baked for 25 min at 240 °C (MIWE Condo, Michael Wenz, Arnstein, Germany) after a final rise (50 min, 32 °C, 80% humidity) in greased loaf pans. Baking trials were performed in duplicate with 8 loaves each. The breads were allowed to cool under defined conditions (20 °C for 2 h) and analysed immediately afterwards. In separate trials, each dough was prepared for the respective analyses in a 300 g farinograph cell (Brabender GmbH & Co. KG, Duisburg, Germany), by kneading 5 min at 63 rpm, in threefold replication. Dough stiffness and extensibility was determined using a TA.XTplus Texture Analyser (Stable Micro Systems Ltd., Godalming, Surrey, UK) and a Kieffer dough extensibility rig by following the procedure described by Dough stickiness was defined as the maximum pull-off force from a defined dough surface. The measurements were performed using a Chen-Hoseney cell in the TA.XTplus Texture Analyser as described by Relative baking loss was calculated from mass difference of 16 loaves before and after baking, and bread volume was determined using the canola seed method 10–05.01 ( Crust firmness was determined with the TA.XTplus Texture Analyser by penetrating the surface of the loaves at 12 individual points with a plunger of 4 mm diameter at a testing speed of 40 mm/s. The maximum force was evaluated from 8 breads per formulation (n = 96). The breads were then cut, and crumb firmness of two stacked 12.5 mm thick central slices was measured by compression with a plunger of 50 mm diameter at a test speed of 1.7 mm/s up to 40% compression (10 mm) with the TA.XTplus Texture Analyser following approved method 74–09.01 ( Six 12.5 mm thick bread slices were scanned with an HP Scanjet 8200 (Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, USA) at a resolution of 200 dpi to analyse the crumb structure. Using the ImageJ software (National Institutes Health, Bethesda, MD, USA), the images were converted to 8-bit greyscale, cropped to 70 × 70 mm To evaluate whether bread with NaCl (reference) can be distinguished from breads made with different blends of substitute salts, forced choice duo-trio tests ( Outliers were identified at a significance level of P ≤ 0.05 by, depending on sample size, applying either the Dixon (n < 30) or the Grubbs test (n ≥ 30). Analysis of variance with subsequent Student-Newman-Keuls and Bonferroni post hoc-testing at P ≤ 0.05, and regression analyses were conducted with SAS University Edition 6p.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, USA). Correlations are significant (P ≤ 0.05) for coefficients |r| ≥ 0.67. Sensory results were interpreted in compliance with ISO standard 10399 (  Dough stiffness was highest for the reference and for the K For all samples, extensibility was highest after the 60 min proofing period whereas the differences in extensibility between the 0 min and 110 min samples were not significant. For a yeast containing standard dough with NaCl, Extensibility for K Generally, a sticky dough should be avoided as it might be the cause of processing delays ( The relative mass (= moisture) loss during baking varied from approx. 8.3–8.8%, with some of the differences being at the edge of significance (see Another important quality indicator is bread volume, which was lowest for the reference and highest for the calcium containing breads and, especially, for the Ca Crust and crumb firmness were analysed individually and the effects of sodium replacement are shown in  As regards it appearance, the crumb showed an average lightness of 68.5 ± 0.3, an average chroma of 14.9 ± 0.1, and an average hue angle of 85.6° ± 0.3°. The colour distance ΔE* to the reference for all formulations was <0.5, thus below the visually just-noticeable-difference threshold. In compliance with other studies the impact of sodium substituents on crumb colour is insignificant ( An important parameter for practical relevance of sodium reduction is sensory perception. With exception of the samples without CaCl In contrast, the sensory perception of breads K Besides effects of sodium replacement, correlations between individual dough and bread properties were observed. In this study technofunctional properties of sodium reduced wheat dough, and quality parameters of the resulting breads were systematically analysed. In contrast to the common procedure, analysis of dough properties was carried out in the presence of yeast, and the dependency of dough texture on proofing time was shown. Generally, divalent cations affected dough and bread properties to a higher extent than monovalent cations. Particularly CaCl We would like to thank Dresdener Mühle GmbH for providing the wheat flour that was used in this study.