New cellulose triacetate membranes (CTA) containing the macrocyclic polyethers dibenzo-18-crown-6 (DB18C6), hexathia-18-crown-6 (HT18C6), diaza-18-crown-6 (DA18C6) and hexaaza-18-crown-6 (HA18C6) as fixed carriers were prepared, characterized and applied for facilitated transport of copper(II), silver(I) and gold(III) metal cations. FTIR, X-ray, SEM and TGA analyses showed that the polyethers crystallize inside the membrane and no new chemical bonds have been formed. A comparative study of the transport parameters across such fixed sites membranes (FSM) and supported liquid membranes (SLM) containing the same carriers has been made. The mass fluxes obtained with FSM are higher than that obtained with SLM when increasing the carrier concentration. However, beyond 1.13×10−3
                     g of carrier/cm2 of membrane, the mass flux of all three ions through the FSM reaches a value almost zero due to the formation of multilayers of carrier or aggregates onto the membrane matrix which was revealed by SEM observations of FSM-cross sections. The stability of the membrane was constant over 15 days.Despite their well known advantages like a high selectivity of transport supported liquid membranes are not used yet on an industrial scale. The main reason is the low stability or the short lifetime of the membrane, which is unable to provide efficient application on an industrial scale Few transport studies through cellulose triacetate membranes have been reported recently. Macrocyclic polyethers compounds have been used as carriers due to their high selectivity towards metal ions such as silver, copper and gold However, all these works were dedicated to the facilitated transport study but no one, to our knowledge, has reported the characterisation of these new materials. The aim of this work is to get insights into the structural organisation of the FSM containing crown ethers as carriers using different physical and chemical methods. The optimal parameters influencing the transport have been determined, discussed and compared to those obtained with SLMs containing the same carriers Copper(II) nitrate, silver(I) nitrate, sodium gold(III) tetrachloride, chloroform, cellulose triacetate (CTA), and 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether (2NPOE) were analytical grade reagents purchased from Fluka. The carriers dibenzo-18-crown-6 (DB18C6), diaza-18-crown-6 (DA18C6), hexathia-18-crown-6 (HA18C6) and hexaaza-18-crown-6 (HA18C6) were products of Aldrich. All reagents were used as received without further purification. The aqueous phases were prepared by dissolving the different reagents in distilled water. The supported liquid membrane supports were Celgard 2500 supplied by Hoechst Celanese Corporation (NY, USA) (membrane porosity 45%, pores size 0.04 The membranes were prepared according to the procedure reported by some authors The transport cell used for metal ions transport experiments consisted of two compartments, made of teflon with a maximum capacity of 45 The metal concentrations were determined by withdrawing at different time intervals aliquots of 0.5 IR spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 710 spectrophotometer. The SEM observations were made using a JEOL JSMT-T 330 A apparatus. X-ray analyses were recorded on a SIEMENS diffractometer. TGA were carried out using a Perkin-Elmer thermogravimeter. As reported in literature, the transport of metal ions M   The obtained results showed that all the maximum transmittance values given by the spectrum of the reference membrane (without crown ether) are also present and almost not changed on the membranes containing the crown-ether molecules. Measurements on CTA showed the same radical as those obtained in the CTA-crown ether membranes. However, some additional specific peaks due to the radical CNC at 1150.82 and 3300  Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermogravimetric analysis (DTA), are widely used to investigate the thermal decomposition of polymers and to determine some kinetic parameters, e.g. rate of decomposition, order of reaction and activation energy. The values of these parameters if changed as compared to the reference CTA polymer, could serve as pieces of evidence for specific interactions between components of the modified polymer CTA membrane and could contribute to the elucidation of the distribution of CTA, the plasticizer 2-NPOE and the carriers (crown-ethers) in the membrane matrix. As far as we are aware, there is no mention in the literature concerning the thermal properties of FSMs, if they are changed or not. Thus, in order to throw some light on this point and even bonding interactions between CTA, 2NPOE and the different crown-ethers used unrealistic, we made thermogravimetric analysis on the reference membrane (CTA–2NPOE) and the FSMs containing the crown ethers.  Cellulose triacetate membrane degrades in two steps ( CTA–2NPOE membrane ( CTA–2NPOE–Crown ether membranes (  In order to determine the number of active sites of the carrier, the FSM was equilibrated in a solution (50 In In the goal to verify if the membrane is working according to the mechanism described before governed by diffusion and not by passing through the pores of the membrane, we have realised an experiment using equimolar solutions of copper in the feed and strip phases. The feed phase was kept highly concentrated by nitrate ions, the driving force of the co-transport.  In  Repeated transport tests of silver ion were carried out for characterising the stability of the SLM. Feed and strip phases were renewed every 24 New fixed site complexant membranes containing crown ethers capable of achieving the facilitated diffusion of silver(I), copper(II) and gold(III) ions have been prepared and characterized. The resulting membranes were homogeneous when the quantity of crown ether per square centimeter of membrane was lower than 1.13×10 The inclusion of a selective macrocyclic polyether in the matrix of a polymer can gives rise to stable membranes able to transport ions and to work for long time. This approach opens large perspectives for utilizing the carrier mediated transport technique in the treatment of hydrometallurgical solutions.