Background
                  Open reduction and plate fixation has gained recognition as an effective treatment for certain types of clavicular fractures. However, 88% of cases report some implant-related problems. To determine the optimal plate position, the aim of the present study was to compare implant-related irritation and proportion of plate removal in patients with clavicular fractures undergoing plate fixation by an anteroinferior or superior approach.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospectively collected data of 39 patients who underwent anteroinferior plating for displaced midshaft clavicular fractures were compared with prospectively collected data of 60 patients who were treated with superior plate fixation as part of a multicenter randomized controlled trial. Electronic medical records were reviewed for reports of complications, in particular, implant-related irritation and implant removal during follow-up. In addition, all patients were contacted in June 2014 to obtain additional information. The primary outcome parameter was implant-related irritation.
               
                  Results
                  Univariate and multivariate regression analysis showed plate position was not significantly associated with implant-related irritation. Higher rates of asymptomatic patients with the plate still in place were observed in the anteroinferior group (46% vs 22%, P = .01). Almost an equal percentage of implant removals was seen in both groups because of implant irritation (36% vs 37%, P = .938).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The present study found the surgical approach of clavicular plating was not associated with implant-related irritation. Future studies are needed to determine whether there is an optimal approach for clavicle plating.Clavicular fractures are common orthopedic injuries. If the decision is to treat a clavicular fracture surgically, open reduction and plate fixation has gained recognition as an effective treatment for certain clavicular fractures, leading to union rates of 94% to 100% accompanied by a low rate of associated complications. Because of the advantages and disadvantages seen in both techniques, which approach is better is still unclear. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to determine the optimal plate position comparing implant-related irritation and the proportion of plate removal in patients with clavicular fractures undergoing plate fixation by an anteroinferior approach or a superior approach. A retrospective analysis of the surgical databases of 5 Dutch hospitals was performed in which patients treated with anteroinferior plating were compared with patients treated with superior plating. All patients who underwent open reduction and anteroinferior plating in the Meander Medical Center for midshaft fractures of the clavicle between November 2008 and June 2013 were eligible for inclusion in the anteroinferior group. Data on patients who were treated with superior plate fixation as part of a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial were used for comparison. In this previously reported Plate or Pin study, plate fixation was compared with intramedullary pin fixation in patients with a DMCF and included patients from January 2011 until August 2012. The 5 participating hospitals were level 1 (St. Elisabeth Hospital, Medical Center Haaglanden) or level 2 (Meander Medical Center, Antonius Hospital Nieuwegein, and Diakonessen Hospital, Utrecht) trauma centers, which are all regional teaching hospitals. Anteroinferior plate fixation was performed or supervised by 1 trauma surgeon in the Meander Medical Center, and a total of 8 trauma surgeons performed or supervised the superior plate fixation in the other hospitals. Each surgeon had extensive experience (>20 procedures) with the surgical technique. In the anteroinferior group, acute fractures in the middle of the clavicle were treated surgically using plate fixation based on the surgeon's and patient's preference. In the superior group, patients were randomized to superior plate fixation or intramedullary fixation. Only patients who underwent plate fixation were eligible for analysis in the current study. A DMCF was defined as displacement of at least 1 shaft width between the fracture parts. Patients undergoing anteroinferior plate fixation The plate was first fixated using a locking screw in the most lateral plate hole. The image intensifier was then used to position the plate as laterally as possible without compromising the acromioclavicular joint. After the first (lateral) screw was inserted, the most medial nonlocking screw was positioned so that the plate was adequately engaged against the bone. The clavicle was predrilled, and the drill bit angle was verified under image intensification to ensure the correct angle had been achieved and that all screws were bicortical. The patient was positioned in a beach chair, semisitting position. An incision was made over the fracture site. If possible, supraclavicular nerves were identified and spared, and the fracture site was identified. After fracture reduction, a plate was positioned and fixed on the anterosuperior surface of the clavicle starting medially using nonlocking screws (DePuy Synthes BV). Locking screws were placed on the outer sides of the plate. Specific plate types were used according to surgical preference. Ideally, a minimum of 3 bicortical screws was placed on each side of the fracture to ensure rigid fixation. If additional interfragmentary compression was necessary or possible, lag screws were placed. Only in fractures with severe comminution was a bridging plate used. Finally, fascia and skin were closed in layers. The electronic medical records were reviewed for baseline patient and implant characteristics, complications, and implant removal during follow-up. Complications that were noted included infection, implant-related irritation, implant breakage, nonunion, and refracture after implant removal. Reinterventions needed to treat these complications were also noted. In addition, all patients were contacted in June 2014 to obtain additional information regarding implant-related pain, prominence, or removal. Patients were followed up until the implant was removed or, if the implant was still in place, until they were contacted in June 2014. The primary outcome parameter was implant-related irritation. This topic was discussed at each outpatient clinic visit and again when all were contacted in June 2014. To further classify the subject, we consistently used standardized questions to divide patients into 6 groups: (1) plate still in place, no irritation; (2) plate still in place, experiencing irritation, but implant removal not necessary; (3) plate still in place, experiencing irritation, but no request for removal due to fear for reoperation; (4) plate still in place, experiencing irritation, considering removal; (5) implant removed on patient's request without irritation; and (6) implant removed due to implant related irritation. Baseline characteristics and postoperative implant-related irritation are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) or ranges for continuous variables and were compared using Student Open reduction and plate fixation was performed in 136 patients: 74 patients underwent anteroinferior, and 62 patients underwent superior plating. Thirty patients were excluded because treatment concerned delayed or nonunions, lateral third fractures, or insufficient follow-up. Seven patients could not be reached in June 2014 and were lost to follow-up, resulting in a 99 patients eligible for the current analysis. The group with anteroinferior plate fixation consisted of 39 patients and the group with superior plate fixation consisted of 60 patients. The groups did not differ significantly in age, gender, or affected side ( A statistically significant difference was observed in the mean follow-up time between the anteroinferior and superior group ( Complaints of implant-related irritation were documented in 51% of the patients in the group treated with an anteroinferior plate compared with 68% of the patients in the superior plating group ( Univariate logistic regression analysis was used to identify potential risk factors for development of implant-related irritation. The analysis showed that patient age <40 years ( Although the decision to treat clavicular fractures conservatively or operatively is still being debated, a shift towards surgical treatment has been seen in recent decades, and open reduction and plate fixation is one of the current treatments of choice when the decision is to treat a clavicular fracture surgically. Despite good functional outcome and bone healing, complications (especially implant related) are often seen after surgery. To determine whether there is an optimal plating technique regarding implant related irritation, this study aimed to compare the 2 most commonly used plating techniques, an anteroinferior vs a superior approach. The present study demonstrated an equal removal of implants due to implant-related irritation (36% vs 37%), although implant removal rates were higher in the superior plating group. In the anteroinferior group, 3% requested implant removal without any complaints of irritation, whereas 10% of the patients in the superior group requested implant removal without irritation. We believe there will always be some patients who will be asymptomatic after plate fixation of DMCF but still request implant removal because they are uncomfortable with having an implant in their body after the fracture has healed. In the group in which the plate was still in place at least 1 year after surgery, a higher proportion of patients treated with an anteroinferior approach reported no irritation (46% vs 22% respectively, Wang et al That implant-related irritation is caused by early biomechanical implant failure could be hypothesized. In the literature, proponents of both anteroinferior and superior plating were seen. Some studies conclude that anteroinferior plating is preferred because of a more stable construct against deformation as a result of the increase in bending rigidity and construct stiffness. One study directly compared clinical outcome and complications after anteroinferior and superior plating. Our study has several limitations that need to be addressed. First, the retrospective study design has obvious limitations. Although irritation was discussed with all patients contacted in June 2014, some information could be lost due to inadequate patient reports. Second, patients in the superior group were randomized to this surgical procedure, whereas anteroinferior repair was by the surgeon's or the patient's preference. Because biomechanical studies show that a different plate or plate location is favored in different fracture types in plate construct stability, the potential selection bias may have affected the outcome in the anteroinferior group. Third, the nonsignificant difference may be due to the small sample size and compromises the results, leading to false-negative results. The next limitation is inherent to the study's multicenter and multisurgeon design. The interhospital and intersurgeon variation of participating centers in dealing with implant removal could have influenced the proportion of implant removals. This may have influenced each patient's subsequent assessment about his or her plates. We believe, however, that interhospital and intersurgeon variation does reflect daily clinical practice, and therefore, these results can be acknowledged as representative. Furthermore, 4 patients in the anteroinferior group and 3 patients in the superior group were lost to follow-up. They could not be reached in June 2014 and were not included for analysis. The analysis of the surgical databases did not show any complications for these patients. Finally, no standardized and validated irritation scale is currently available to classify irritation. The present study found that an anteroinferior surgical approach and superior approach showed no significant difference in rates of implant-related irritation after a follow-up of at least 1 year. In a subgroup of patients in whom the plate was still in place, an anteroinferior position of the plate resulted in a higher proportion of patients without any complaints of irritation. To determine, however, more definitely whether there is an optimal approach for clavicular plating, plating position should be investigated in future studies, preferably in a randomized, prospective setting. We thank M. Verhofstad, PhD, S. Meylaerts, PhD, and E. Hammacher, PhD, for their contributions concerning the Plate or Pin trial. We thank O.A.J. van der Meijden, PhD, for his help in editing the manuscript. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.