The treatment of distal femoral fractures has evolved; nevertheless, these fractures remain difficult to treat and carry an unpredictable prognosis. Over the years, many different strategies have been used with varying success. This review outlines the problems presented by distal femoral fractures and the results of current surgical techniques.The treatment of distal femoral fractures has evolved over the years, but despite this, they remain difficult to treat and carry an unpredictable prognosis. Many different fixation methods have been described. Although many studies have been reported, direct comparison between them is not possible because of differences in patient factors, fracture types and evaluation methods. There are few comparative studies on which to base decision-making. Distal femoral fractures are often multifragmentary, and/or intra-articular, and are subject to deforming muscular forces that render non-operative treatment a poor option. These factors also place high demands on any surgical implant and may lead to failure. The aim of this review is to assess the current, available literature on distal femoral fractures, with particular reference to the various available treatment methods. Fractures of the distal femur comprise 4–6% of all femoral fractures. The main zones of weakness in the distal femur are (1) the transition from diaphysis to metaphysis, (2) the sagittal plane through the intercondylar notch, where the patella can act as a wedge and (3) the junction between the trochlear groove and medial, or lateral, condyle. Fractures tend to follow these planes of weakness, but can be associated with significant fragmentation, either as a result of high-energy trauma, or of osteoporosis ( The quadriceps, adductors, hamstrings and gastrocnemius muscles can all cause displacement of the fracture fragments. The popliteal artery is relatively fixed in the adductor and soleus canals. It lies in close relation to distal femur and can be damaged by a posteriorly angulated fracture. Fortunately, this is rare, with an incidence of approximately 0.2%. Neer et al., Non-operative treatment remains an option only in selected cases, either by treatment in a long-leg cast, in cases where displacement is minimal, or otherwise in traction. For many fractures, casts fail to control the fragments adequately, for the reasons outlined above. Many patients do not tolerate casts and the prolonged immobilisation of the knee joint always leads to stiffness. Good results have been reported with closed methods of treatment with low non-union rates (0–0.7%). Neer et al. reported on 110 patients treated by a variety of operative and non-operative methods. Reliable operative methods have evolved and more recent studies that compare operative and closed methods of treatment show a worse outcome, with an increased rate of complications, in the non-operative groups. Developments in implants and improvements in surgical techniques have made fixation the treatment of choice in most distal femoral fractures. Open reduction, in skilled hands, allows the articular surface accurately to be reconstructed. Other benefits include early ambulation and mobilisation of joints, although protected weight-bearing is usually required until the fracture has united. The main disadvantage of operative intervention is the potential for additional damage to the local blood supply that may lead to non-union and infection. There has been a slow evolution of implants and techniques in attempts to minimise these problems. Designed in 1959, this implant was a major step forward in the treatment of supracondylar fractures of the femur. Although technically difficult, this procedure can give good results in skilled hands. There are over 500 cases reported in literature with good or excellent results in 52–85% of cases, depending on the series. This device came into widespread use in the 1980s. Its two-piece configuration makes it more forgiving and less technically demanding than the ABP, as the position of the plate can be determined after the lag screw has been inserted. Intercondylar fractures are fixed prior insertion, using intercondylar lag screws, but compression can also be applied by the condylar lag screw ( There are about 120 cases reported with good or excellent results in 71–74% of cases. This plate was designed to be used when the fracture is too fragmented to allow reconstruction with an ABP or DCS, especially in the presence of coronal fracture lines. As a result, it tends to be used for more severe fractures. It has an expanded distal end, contoured to the distal femur, that allows multiple lag screws to be passed across the condyles. Its main drawback is its lack of strength and this can lead to problems in terms of plate bending, angulation between the screws and the plate, or fatigue failure. The screws do not lock in to the plate; therefore, the construct does not function as a fixed angle device, unlike the ABP and DCS. The screws can toggle independently at the screw–plate interface and may lead to implant loosening. This device is no longer widely used because of these concerns and the development of locking plate devices. Sanders et al. recommended using an additional medial plate and bone graft, in order to provide stable fixation and to prevent varus angulation, particularly in the presence of a deficient medial cortical buttress. These devices (Rush rods, Enders nails, Zickel nails) are rarely used. They provide partial fixation and can only be used for extra-articular fractures, since they cannot reduce, or hold, any intra-articular component. They usually require an additional cast, or functional brace. Their main advantage is that they are easy to insert and require minimal dissection, therefore, preserving the soft tissues. Good results have been reported especially in the elderly. Antegrade femoral nailing has been used to stabilise supracondylar fractures. This method is most suitable for high extra-articular fractures, but some authors also recommend IM nailing for intra-articular fractures. Any intra-articular fracture is reconstructed with percutaneous lag screws prior to nail insertion. Around 150 cases have been reported, with good or excellent results in 76–100%. Although designed for diaphyseal fractures, retrograde femoral nailing may also be used for supracondylar fractures. Again, this technique is most suitable for high, extra-articular fractures. The distal locking screws are more proximal and further apart than a supracondylar nail, which makes this technique more difficult in low fractures. Its advantage over the antegrade nail is that insertion and reduction of any intra-articular component can be carried out through the same incision. At the authors’ institution, retrograde femoral nails have been used in selected cases, predominantly for extra-articular fractures extending from the supracondylar area into the diaphysis, when a supracondylar nail would be too short to allow adequate fixation. Supracondylar nails were a development of retrograde femoral nails, adapted to improve the quality of the fixation in supracondylar fractures ( The ABP, DCS and CBP were designed to be inserted using classical AO techniques of anatomical open reduction, combined with rigid internal fixation. This may require a wide surgical exposure, particularly in complex fracture patterns, and risks further damage to the local blood supply, with the potential for non-union and deep infection. This has led to the concept of indirect reduction and bridge-plating. The ABP and DCS have been used successfully in this way. The SCN has been used percutaneously with some success. Henry reviewed 111 such cases and compared the results of those treated by open and percutaneous methods. Open insertion was associated with increased surgical time, increased blood loss and increased non-union (5.6% versus 2.6%). The LISS™ plate was designed for use with minimally invasive approaches and indirect reduction techniques, with the aim of making these difficult goals easier to achieve. Notwithstanding its recent introduction, around 570 cases have already been reported, with good or excellent results in 72–74%. The role of external fixation in the treatment of distal femoral fractures is usually limited to temporary fixation, before formal reconstruction is possible, or as a definitive fixation in some complex fractures, particularly severe open fractures. Like minimally invasive techniques, the use of external fixation allows stabilisation without extensive soft tissue disruption. There are a few retrospective studies with small numbers of cases. Total knee replacement may be used for some intra-articular, or low extra-articular fractures, in the elderly, There has been a number of studies comparing the biomechanical properties of these implants in human cadavers, These studies suggest that locked plates may hold some biomechanical advantages over other methods. ABP and DCS constructs seem to behave similarly for extra-articular fractures. The DCS may perform better for some intra-articular fractures. The SCN is not as strong as the DCS, or ABP, in torsion, but performs similarly in axial loading and AP bending tests, when used for extra-articular fractures. How strong the construct should be in order to allow union without displacement is not known. Comparison between these cohort studies is difficult, as there are many different outcome measures. Generally speaking, the older studies have lower expectations. As methods have improved, expectations have been raised. Similarly, the number of complex fractures varies from study to study, making direct comparisons difficult. Despite the numerous cohort studies, there are very few that compare different surgical options. In an extensive literature search, we found no prospective, randomised trials comparing different surgical procedures for acute distal femoral fractures. In addition, only three non-randomised, comparative studies were found. Hahn et al. compared the LISS™ plate and the ABP. Markmiller et al. compared the LISS™ plate and a SCN, in a non-randomised, prospective study. The surgical fixation of distal femoral fractures has evolved to the point that non-operative treatment carries with it greater risks of complications, rendering surgical intervention the option of choice in the majority of such fractures. Questions remain over which implant should be used, for which fracture, in which patient. Biomechanical studies suggest some advantages to the LISS™ plate, with it performing better than the DCS in some studies. The SCN, on the other hand, has been shown to be weaker in torsion than the DCS, but comparable in AP bending and axial loading tests. How relevant these findings are to the clinical setting is not clear. The results of cohort studies, flexible nailing and CBP excepted, have yielded similar results with a number of techniques and implants. The use of minimally invasive techniques is showing some promising results, in the hands of expert trauma surgeons, but it is not yet clear how well these results can be reproduced by less specialised fracture surgeons. There are few studies between comparing the most commonly used implants and even less comparative information on the treatment of the complex intra-articular fractures. The choice of implant is likely to depend on several factors, including bone quality, fracture type, the presence of any open injury and surgeon preference. The treatment of distal femoral fractures continues to evolve, but there is still only limited evidence on which to base treatment choices.