The objective of this work was to study the possibility of achieving a selective removal of iron from acid mine waters (AMW) by precipitation/biosorption producing an easily filterable pulp and a solution containing valuable metals such as copper, zinc etc. This treatment is an alternative to the traditional neutralization with Ca(OH)2, that produces a precipitate of ferric hydroxide (Fe(OH)3) and gypsum (CaSO4), which is extremely difficult to filter and is contaminated with heavy metals. The composition of the investigated solution was established in order to simulate a typical composition of AMW. To prevent the co-precipitation of the heavy metals in significant amounts, iron precipitation has to be carried out at low pH. The effect of the addition of a biomass (grape-stalks or cork powder) on the selective removal of iron and on the sedimentation and filtration operations was determined. The results showed that at pH 3 and for a solid–liquid ratio of 4 g/l it is possible to eliminate 65% of iron and only 5% of copper. Using 8 g/l of biomass the iron removal increased up to 85% of iron and 74% of copper, 90% of zinc and 99% of nickel remained in solution. The addition of the biomass to the pulp also allowed to improve the sedimentation and filtration operations.The acid mine waters (AMW) result from the oxidation of complex sulphides by atmospheric oxygen and bacteria thus originating the formation of sulphuric acid and the dissolution of iron and the heavy metals. For pyrite the reaction is The accumulation of the highly contaminated waters is an important environmental problem associated with mining industry and yet to be solved. Traditionally, the treatment of acid mine waters (AMW) consists in the neutralization with Ca(OH) The classical treatment produces during the precipitation stage a gelatinous precipitate of hydrated iron oxide hydroxide ( The addition of biomass to the AMW before iron precipitation may favour the sedimentation and filtration of ferric hydroxide precipitate. Beneficial effects on iron removal from solution due to biosorption are also expected. Biosorption with low cost adsorbents has been pointed out as an alternative to traditional treatment methods of effluents contaminated with heavy metals ( The metal concentration removed by the biomass, The filtration data were treated using the general filtration equation valid for constant filtration area and pressure ( The relation between For compressible filtration cakes Combining Eqs. All the chemicals were analytical grade and were supplied by Merck. Metals were added in the sulphate form and the analyses were carried out by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Perkin-Elmer 3100). Ferrous ion was measured by volumetric analysis with potassium dichromate. Measurements of the solution pH were read with a Metrohm pH meter. NaOH was used for pH adjustment. The biomasses used in this work were grape stalks, a by-product of the winery industry, and cork powder. Grape stalks biomass was supplied by the Portuguese winery “Adega Cooperativa da Arruda dos Vinhos”, while cork powder was supplied by the Portuguese company CODICORK cortiças-LDA. Both biomasses abound in Portugal and have a negligible commercial value. The Sauter mean diameter of the biomass samples was determined by laser scattering using the MastersizerX from Malvern Instruments and the values obtained were 59.7 μm for cork and 39.6 μm for grape stalks. The precipitation/sedimentation tests were carried out in a Jar Test Equipment (Velp Scientifica) using a solution containing 3.58 The kinetics of the precipitation was studied in a baffled stirred tank reactor (1 l) in a temperature controlled water bath. For stirring, a three bladed propeller (diameter=6 cm) at 200 rpm or higher was used. At pre-set time intervals, samples were then withdrawn using syringes equipped with a glass filter membrane that allowed an extremely fast solid–liquid separation. About one third of the supernatant obtained in each sedimentation test was decanted. The remaining pulp was gently homogenised and poured onto a Whatman GFA 47 mm diameter filter. The vacuum was then switch on (absolute pressure of 6 kPa) and the volume of filtrate was measured as a function of time. Time counting was ended just before air passes through the filter cake. Filtration experiments were also carried out in a filtration unit having positive controlled pressure. The experimental conditions are comparable to those existing in an industrial filtration unit. The filtration mediums used were Whatman GFA filter paper or two superimposed membranes of polypropylene supplied by TEFSA (TEFSA––Técnicas de Filtración, S.A., Barcelon, Spain). Thus, a volume of 2 l of the mixed metal solution was stirred for 15 min at 280 rpm using a paddle type propeller. The biomass was then added and the pulp was stirred for more 30 min. Afterwards the suspension was pumped to the filter using a peristaltic pump. Pressure was adjusted and kept constant during all the experiment. The time recording started with the opening of the bottom valve. The filtrate was collected into a graduate glass cylinder. It was observed that the first 50 ml of filtrate were highly turbid, due to the presence of a significant amount of particles of Fe(OH) In pure solutions of each metal having the same concentration as in the mixed metal solution used in this work (3.58 The effect of the presence of the biomass on iron precipitation from the mixed metal solution was investigated carrying out experiments at controlled pH of 3, with and without the addition of biomass (grape stalks). The results showed that the presence of 4 g/l of biomass after 24 h of contact increased iron removal from 80% to 87%, while the use of 6 g/l of biomass increased this value to 95%, thus meaning that the presence of the biomass contributed to a more efficient removal of iron from the solution. It is worth noting that without pH control, the pH of the solution decreases during iron precipitation, being in this case the influence of the biomass on iron removal negligible. The effect of pH on the particle size of the iron precipitate was measured using the MastersizerX. The results allow concluding that the particle size of iron hydroxide increases with pH. In fact, the Sauter mean diameter of the particles augmented from 20 μm at pH 3 to 27–28 μm at pH 6. However, with the increase in the pH, the precipitate is more gelatinous and difficult to settle.   It is important to emphasize that the removal of copper from solution can be ascribed to co-precipitation with the iron hydroxide and also to biosorption. In fact, The mechanism of metals removal during the addition of a base to the mixed metal solution in the presence of biomass can be ascribed to precipitation together with biosorption, as previously referred to. In fact, biosorption may be the main mechanism of the removal of metals at low pH (pH  As it follows from Because it is reported in the literature that biomasses can act as reducing agents for heavy metals (  The observed increase in the amount of Fe(III) reduced to ferrous iron or removed from solution can be explained by the presence of a larger number of active sites of the biomass, due to the rise of the biomass concentration. Assuming that precipitation did not take place at pH 2, it is also possible to conclude that using 30 g/l of grape stalks around 20% of the iron was removed by biosorption. The reduction of ferric to ferrous ion by the biomass also explains the differences between the results presented in The influence of the biomass on the sedimentation rate of iron hydroxide is presented in  Preliminary filtration tests of the pulp were carried out in a laboratory filter, with and without the addition of biomass and diatomite that is the filtration aid generally used in industrial filtration units. From  The effect of the biomass on the filtration rate is shown in In order to study the effect of the pH on the rate of filtration, experiments were carried out at pH 3 to 8. The pressure was kept constant at 500 kPa and the filtrating medium was a GFA Whatman membrane filter.  An anomalous filtration curve was observed at pH 3, which may result from the fact that at this pH the flocks are very small and a significant amount of the precipitate pass throughout the filtering membrane. As a consequence, an apparently high filtration rate is observed in the beginning of the filtration experiment. Once the cake is properly and uniformly established, its behaviour is the one of a cake with a high resistance.  The analysis of the content of iron in solution after the collection of 1400 ml of filtrate is presented in In order to study the influence of the pressure on the filtration rate, experiments were carried out from 200 to 600 kPa. In this set of experiments the concentrations of iron and biomass were, respectively, 2 and 6 g/l, while the pH was set at 4. Two superimposed membranes of polypropylene were used as filtration medium in order to withstand the high pressure applied.  The fitting of Eq. The application of Eq. The results presented in this work allowed to conclude that the addition of biomass (grape stalks or cork powder) to the synthetic AMW contributes to increase the removal of iron from solution, as well as the rate of the sedimentation and filtration operations. Concerning the precipitation stage, at pH 3 it proved not possible to precipitate iron without partially removing copper and minor amounts of zinc and nickel. However, the level of contamination of the iron precipitate is low. Thus, for a solid–liquid ratio of 4 g/l of cork it is possible to eliminate 65% of iron and only 5% of copper. Using 8 g/l of biomass, the yield of the iron removal increased up to 85%, while 74% of the copper, 90% of the zinc and 99% of the nickel remained in solution. Contents of biomass higher than 6 g/l favoured the sedimentation of the iron precipitate and led to higher rates of filtration. The initial rate of filtration increased 50% when the pressure was increased from 100 to 500 kPa. The authors would like to thank to Professor Maria de Fátima Farelo for her helpful discussion.