Al-TiB2 in-situ metal-matrix composite has been synthesized by reaction with commercially pure molten aluminum and potassium hexafluoro titanate (K2TiF6) and potassium tetrafluoro borate (KBF4) adopting stir casting method. Varying amounts of salts based on stoichiometric calculations were added to obtain 0, 5 and 8wt.% of TiB2 in the composites. The melts were allowed to solidify with or without electromagnetic stirring in a rotary magnetic field. The effects of varying percentage of TiB2 reinforcements and magnetic stirring have been characterized by microstructural evolution and consequent improvement in mechanical properties. The application of rotary electromagnetic stirring (EMS) during solidification has shown very prominent effect on the aluminum matrix and the morphology of TiB2 particles and the consequent mechanical properties like hardness, tensile strength, and dry sliding wear resistance.In the solidification of metals and alloys either natural or forced convection is responsible for the fluid flow. The natural convection is arising out of variations in density occurring during solidification process caused by temperature or composition differences or both. In contrast, the forced convection is a result of any physical disturbance created in the melt like mechanical, ultrasonic or electromagnetic vibration or stirring. During solidification, the liquid is present not only in bulk but the semi-solid mushy zone as well. The as-cast structure of the solidified mass is governed by two effects-i) the growth direction of columnar solidification front changes into the upstream direction of the flow Electromagnetically induced forced flow causes a refinement of the grain structure and enhances the columnar to equiaxed transition (CET). The principle of this transition is that the electromagnetic stirring creates a Lorentz force ‘F′ in the metal by an alternating magnetic field ‘B′. The field is generated by an electrical current density ‘j’, flowing in an induction coil and this current density, in turn, induces a current density of ‘j Aluminum based in-situ ceramic reinforced metal matrix composites have become an important class of advanced materials for aerospace, automobile, chemical and transportation industries because of their high strength-to-weight ratio, high elastic modulus and increased wear resistance over monolithic alloys Despite of several advantages exhibited by in-situ Al-TiB The experimental set-up ( For the synthesis of Al-TiB Metallographic samples were prepared adopting conventional method of preparation and chemically etched with Keller's reagent. The optical microstructures were observed under Leitz Metallux − The commercial purity aluminum used as a matrix metal for synthesis of the composites was analyzed in optical emission spectrometer and the elemental analysis is shown in The XRD patterns of the composites are shown in K 2KBF Al Apart from the TiB The optical microstructures of Al-5%TiB The microstructure is composed of solidification induced dendritic structure. The dendritic structure exhibits cross-sections of primary α-Al dendritic arms. The TiB It is further evident from In composites solidified with electromagnetic stirring, the refinement is further increased due to forced convection current under rotary electromagnetic field. It is causing dendrite fracture and/or remelting and movement of the fractured dendrites as well as TiB The SEM micrographs of the Al-TiB It is evident from The effect of weight percentage of in situ formed TiB Fractography of the tensile samples reveals contrasting features. The fracture surface of the commercial pure aluminum exhibits typical ductile fracture with deep and equiaxed dimples ( The influence of applied normal load with fixed sliding distance and sliding speed on the wear loss of Al–TiB At lower load the effect of TiB It can be observed that the wear loss is inversely dependent on the hardness. This result is consistent with Archard's equation (Q  SEM micrograph (  In-situ Al-TiB Rotary electro-magnetic stirring (EMS) during solidification of the composites has a prominent effect on further refinement of grains and TiB Due to favorable microstructural features consequent improvements in mechanical properties like hardness, tensile and wear properties are achieved. The improvement in the properties can be attributed to combined effects of grain refinement α-Al, percentage of nano- TiB Dry sliding wear resistance increases with weight % increase in TiB