Innovative biotechnology processes for enhanced exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbon streams from source rock are the main topics of Petroleum Biotechnology – Developments and Perspectives edited by Rafael Vazquez-Duhalt and Rodolfo Quintero-Ramirez. This is a very timely book as the world battle with its vast hunger for oil coupled with the need for improved extraction from established oil reserves and ever tightening environmental regulations. The book is Volume 151 of the “Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis” Series and comprises of 19 chapters written by contributors from well-established industrial, governmental and academic research centres around the world. Especially interesting is the contribution from Statoil ASA R&D Center in Norway where the science behind petroleum biotechnology is linked up with business opportunities such as enhanced oil recovery and lowering cost of environmental cleanup of crude oil. Later chapters are dealing with opportunities and challenges in bio-desulphurisation and the removal of other polluting elements such as nitrogen and metals. Very interesting was the highlighting of the prospect for biotechnology to process aromatic compounds and upgrade heavy oil and asphaltenes both in-ground and at the refinery. This approach could be a viable alternative to the vast increases in pre-FCC hydrocracking observed lately as the world oil supplies are getting heavier. Highly enlightening and inspiring was the chapter on “The microbial diversity of deep subsurface oil reservoirs” by N.-K. Birkeland at University of Bergen, again from Norway, indicating that oil wells contain a range of microorganisms, which can potentially be commercially utilised, such as sulphate-reducing bacteria withstanding 80 Petroleum Biotechnology – Developments and Perspectives is clearly addressing researchers in the field but clever editing has to certain degree made the first part of the book available to a range of other readers such as students and non-scientists that are interested in inspirational new ideas within the petroleum field. As the editors are quoting from Arthur C. Clarke “The only way to discover the limits of the possible is to go beyond them into the impossible”. Have a good read.