This work presents the synthesis of two hybrid materials: collagen (COLL)–polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) (1:2wt) and collagen–polyvinyl alcohol/hydroxyapatite (HA) (1:2:3wt). Starting from the above compositions, different kinds of composites were obtained based on the drying methods: controlled drying at 30
                     °C and freeze drying. The materials were analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared microscopy (FTIR) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) as well as by measuring the density, porosity and absorption of xylene for each sample by Arthur method. Based on the SEM images, the freeze drying and the controlled drying could be clearly concluded to lead to porous and dense COLL–PVA/HA hybrid materials, respectively. Such materials have exhibited a stratified morphology, the distance between sheets increasing with the increase of the organic components content. Based on the literature data, the obtained COLL–PVA/HA composite materials are valuable bone grafts materials and drug delivery systems.Many composite materials based on natural and/or synthetic components were prepared and tested as bone grafts. Due to the compositional similarity with bone, collagen and hydroxyapatite-based composite materials were extensively studied in the literature Although the COLL/HA and PVA/HA composite materials have been extensively studied and tested, ternary collagen–polyvinyl alcohol/hydroxyapatite composite materials have been poorly studied in the literature Degirmenbasi et al. One of the most recently published papers dealing with ternary collagen–polyvinyl alcohol/hydroxyapatite composite materials was prepared by electrospinning technique by Asran et al. Poursamar et al. This work presents the synthesis and the characterization of collagen–polyvinyl alcohol/hydroxyapatite hybrid materials with 1:2:3 Collagen gel (2.41%, pH PVA solution was obtained by dissolving 5 The mineralization process has involved two successive stages as described in our previous work The collagen gel and the PVA solution were mixed in order to obtain hybrid COLL–PVA materials 1:2 weight ratio. In the case of COLL:PVA:HA 1:2:3, after the addition of hydroxyapatite precursors, the pH was adjusted to 9 by a NaOH solution to provide a pure HA precipitation. Both compositions were divided in two parts and dried under controlled atmosphere (A) (30 All samples were characterized by XRD, FTIR and SEM; the porosity was measured by the Arthur method. X-ray diffraction analysis was performed by a Shimadzu XRD 6000 diffractometer at the room temperature. In all cases, the Cu K The SEM images were obtained using HITACHI S2600N microscope with an EDAX probe. All samples were covered with a silver layer prior to imaging. IR spectroscopic measurements were performed on a Shimadzu FTIR 8400 spectrophotometer. The spectra were recorded over a 400–4000 The density, the porosity and the xylene absorption were measured by the Arthur method. The samples were weighed and allowed to stay under vacuum (0.4 XRD diffractograms of the resulting hybrid materials ( The diffractograms of COLL–PVA 1:2 and COLL–PVA/HA 1:2:3 hybrid materials have revealed no evident differences from the point of view of the material crystallinity, the drying method inducing no differences from the point of view of the sample crystallinity. In the case of the COLL–PVA/HA 1:2:3 composite materials, the two diffractograms recorded for the two materials were found to be similar, with same peaks and almost the same intensity. The presence of hydroxyapatite (COLL–PVA/HA 1:2:3) has induced the occurrence of the characteristic peaks of HA (2 Infrared spectroscopy ( The spectral attribution of the main absorption bands can be easily made also taking into account the well known COLL/HA composite materials. The characteristic collagen peaks have appeared at: 3250–3305 Although all these bands are present in the four materials, the intensity of these peaks is dependent on the component ratios and also on the drying method. For instance, the amide A and B bands can be used to study the interactions between the four components (including water). In the presence of HA (COLL–PVA/HA 1:2:3 composite materials) the intensity of the amide A band has decreased as compared to that of COLL–PVA 1:2 materials while the amide B band could not be identified. As we mentioned before The hydroxyapatite characteristic absorption bands have appeared at: ∼3300 The characteristic PVA absorption bands have appeared at: 2940 Obviously, some absorption bands are overlapped, especially for the same functional groups from collagen and polyvinyl alcohol, most of such bands being only identified after deconvolution (linear). The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy can be used to monitor the ester group (derived from PVA) concentration during the material preparation. It can be concluded that the ester groups abide a hydrolysis process even under mixing with acidic collagen gel; the hydrolysis being more intense in the controlled air drying than freeze drying (as the freeze drying takes less time). In the case of COLL–PVA/HA 1:2:3 composite materials the relative intensity of the C The scanning electron microscopy has a decisive significance for the complete characterization of such materials. Therefore, the SEM images were recorded at different magnifications on all COLL–PVA/HA materials (with the component ratio of 1:2:0-blank, non-mineralized sample and 1:2:3-mineralized sample obtained by freeze drying and controlled drying). The SEM images have given some morphological information about the four materials. In fact, the two morphologies are similar, the compact materials resulted from the continuous remodelling and restructuring until it becomes compact; if the freeze drying is used, once the materials are frozen the restructuring is blocked and the materials retain their initial high porosity. For both compositions, the controlled air drying at 30 A higher magnification ( The osteointegration of the bone graft materials is induced, among the rests, by the porosity. The density, porosity and absorption ( Hybrid materials with intermediary properties were obtained by a mixed drying method which involves controlled drying followed by freeze drying (not presented in this paper). Even if only preliminary mechanical tests were made, the presence of PVA seems to improve the compression resistance of these COLL–PVA/HA composite materials with ∼20–30% comparing with that without PVA (COLL/HA composite materials) obtained in the same conditions. The properties of the materials are strongly influenced by their composition and processing. For this purpose two types of materials were prepared: COLL–PVA 1:2 and COLL–PVA/HA 1:2:3. Both types of materials were dried by controlled drying (at 30 As a general rule, based on SEM images and porosity measurement by the Arthur method, the presence of polyvinyl alcohol was revealed to induce a stratified morphology of the hybrid materials, and the freeze drying was revealed to induce a porous morphology while the controlled air drying was leading to compact morphology. Comparing with the COLL/HA composite materials or even with pure collagen-based precursors By freeze drying, the presence of HA has led to a less porous but stratified composite material, the mean distance between the sheets decreasing from 60–120 (for COLL–PVA materials) down to 40–70 By controlled air drying (at 30 The obtained porous COLL–PVA/HA composite materials can be valuable candidates for bone grafts as they provide a good cellular (especially osteoblasts) attachment and are to be tested This work was partially funded by the