Contact angles of aluminosilicate clays are difficult to determine. Not only does their small particle size present measurement difficulties, but contact angles may vary with relative humidity and cation composition. In this paper, we determined the effects of relative humidity and exchangeable cations on contact angles of three aluminosilicate clays (smectite, kaolinite, illite). Contact angles were measured on clay films with the sessile drop method under different relative humidity (19, 33, 75, 100%), and with clays saturated either with Na, K, Mg, or Ca. The results showed that the water contact angles on smectite increased with relative humidity between 19 and 75%, but for kaolinite and illite, little differences in water contact angles between 19 and 75% relative humidity were observed. For all three clays, however, the water contact angles decreased at 100% relative humidity as compared to the lower relative humidities. Cations affected not only the adsorption of water but also the surface charge, and both factors influenced the contact angles of the clays. Negligible effect of the different cations Na+, K+, Mg2+, or Ca2+ on contact angles was observed.Subsurface colloids are small, discrete solid particles indigenously present in subsurface natural porous media, which can be mobilized by means of surface and hydrodynamic forces Inorganic colloids influence contaminant fate in soils and geological media. Colloids can facilitate the transport of contaminants Contact angles are particularly important when colloidal particles are interacting with the air–water interface, such as during transport in water-unsaturated porous media or during flotation processes. When an air–water–solid interface line forms on a colloid, strong capillary forces pin colloids to the air–water interface, and the absolute magnitude of the force depends on the contact angle Determining contact angles is challenging because contact angle measurement are affected by many factors, including temperature Many surfaces possess a surface roughness or have a porous structure, both of which can affect the contact angle measurements. The use of conventional Wilhelmy plate and Washburn wicking methods to determine contact angles of porous materials has been critically reviewed and found to yield erroneous measurement results It has been argued that most Wilhelmy plate and sessile drop measurements on rough surfaces have yielded non-equilibrium contact angles Shang et al. Aluminosilicate clays often have a structural negative charge that is balanced by exchangeable cations. The nature of these cations changes the contact angle of the clays. Janczuk et al. The effects of cations and anions on contact angles and surface free energies of cholesterol have been studied by Chibowski et al. When the surface shows roughness, it is difficult to separate the effects of surface roughness and surface chemistry. A way to separate the effects of surface roughness and surface chemistry is to use molecularly smooth surfaces. Nishimura et al. Aluminosilicate clays associate with water molecules, and the amount of water and the thickness of the water films on the clay surfaces is controlled, in part, by the vapor pressure or relative humidity of the surrounding atmosphere The effects of cations and relative humidity on contact angle have been studied mainly for smectite clay, but little consideration has been given to the effects of the pretreatment of the clays and to different types of clays. In this study, we therefore focused on investigating the effects of pretreatment, adsorbed cations, and relative humidity on contact angles of three typical aluminosilicate clays: smectite, kaolinite, and illite. We saturated the clays with Na We used three aluminosilicate clays: Arizona smectite (SAz1), Georgia kaolinite (KGa1b), and illite. The smectite and kaolinite were obtained from the Clay Minerals Repository (University of Missouri), and illite (No. 36, Morris, Illinois) from Ward’s Natural Science (Rochester, NY). The clays, as received from the suppliers, were fractionated by gravity sedimentation in a sodium hexametaphosphate solution (0.5 Subsamples of the size-fractionated clays were then treated to remove organic matter with H Finally, the clays were saturated with Na, K, Mg, or Ca by treating with 1 Treatment-specific characteristics of the clays are shown in The K-saturated smectite was analyzed by X-ray diffraction to determine interlayer characteristics (Philips XRG 3100 diffractometer equipped with a graphite monochromater and with Cu-K Diluted stock suspensions (with deionized water) were used to coat microscope cover glass slides ( After air-drying, the clay-coated slides were placed into air-tight plastic boxes (volume 900 Aliquots of the equilibrated clay samples were removed and analyzed for their disjoining pressure using a WP4 dewpoint meter (Decagon Devices, Pullman, WA). Relative humidities and disjoining pressures of equilibrated clays are shown in The clay films were examined with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FEI-Quanta 200F, FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR) under controlled relative humidity. The conditions in the microscope chamber were set to Static contact angles were determined with the sessile drop method using a digital goniometer (Drop Shape Analysis System, DSA100, Krüss GmbH, Hamburg, Germany). In a comparative study, we found that the sessile drop method is the preferred method for determining contact angles of smectite, kaolinite, and illite It has been pointed out that contact angle measurements on rough and porous surfaces may not provide the true equilibrium angles, unless the system is triggered into a thermodynamic equilibrium by using vibrational disturbance We used polar and apolar liquids for the contact angle measurements: double deionized water (E-pure, Barnstead, electric conductivity The X-ray diffraction patterns indicated that the pretreatment procedure resulted in formation of hydroxy-Al (Al-OH) in the interlayers of smectite. The interlayer spacing reduced from 1.20 The electrophoretic mobility data ( To assess the effects of relative humidity on contact angles, we measured contact angles at four different relative humidities ( Increasing relative humidity increases the amount of water on the clay surfaces ( According to Laird For kaolinite, adsorption of water occurs via interaction with mineral surface groups (–OH) and adsorbing water molecules encounter a more homogeneous surface (no charge sites/no exchangeable cations). Literature data indicate that adsorption of water on kaolinite is less than 0.018 For illite, there is higher charge density, which results in a lower contact angle compared to smectite, and a smaller change of contact angle with increasing water because the surface is more uniform, i.e., has fewer nonpolar regions ( The effects of relative humidity and cations on interlayer spacings and water adsorption on smectite are summarized in We tested the effect of different cations on contact angles by using a constant relative humidity of 33%. The two different pretreatments resulted in different composition of the exchangeable cations on the clay surfaces. The non-treated clays contained trace amounts of organic matter, and different types of cations on the surface. For the Ca-saturated clay dialyzed to 1 Electrophoretic mobilities measured for the different treatments shown in The contact angle measurements showed good reproducibility, as indicated by small standard deviations ranging from The effect of cations was, in part, confounded by the different water contents of the clays. Different cations caused clays to have different water contents at a constant relative humidity ( Our results showed that contact angles of aluminosilicate clays were little affected by relative humidity between 19 and 75%, but a smaller contact angle was observed at 100%, caused likely by the expansion of the adsorbed water film on the clay surface at 100% relative humidity. The type of exchangeable cations did not cause a significant change in contact angles as cations affect multiple factors related to contact angle. While for illite, the contact angles decreased after the pretreatment, i.e. the mineral became more hydrophilic, the opposite was found for smectite, where the mineral became more hydrophobic after pretreatment. Kaolinite contact angles were not affected by the pretreatmemt.