The application of mineral beneficiation techniques to valuable rare earth element (REE) bearing minerals requires a significant amount of research. A previous paper (Jordens et al., 2016) described a series of physical separation processes employed to pre-concentrate rare earth minerals (REM) and reject iron oxide minerals from the Nechalacho Deposit. In addition to grade and recovery information it is important to understand the performance of these separations from a mineralogical perspective. Information on liberation, mineral associations, magnetic properties and size-by-size recoveries can be used to further improve process designs for this deposit.
                  This work employs automated mineralogy (QEMSCAN), scanning electron microscopy and a vibrating sample magnetometer to characterise the products from laboratory gravity separation (Knelson and Falcon centrifugal concentrators) and magnetic separation (varying intensity wet drum magnetic separators). The information gathered is then used to identify the optimum fraction for downstream flotation separation. The selected flowsheet included a Knelson centrifugal concentrator and low intensity drum magnetic separation resulting in a total rare earth oxide (TREO) recovery of 11.75% and a TREO grade of 7.50%.The characteristic properties of rare earth minerals (REM) governing their behaviour in physical separation processes such as specific gravity and magnetism are relatively well documented, however the application of this knowledge to the processing of real REM ores is not. Most REM have relatively high specific gravities (SG), as well as paramagnetic properties, suggesting that the development of beneficiation flowsheets for these minerals should begin with gravity and magnetic separation. The response of a mineral deposit to physical separation processes should always be examined from a mineralogical perspective as mineral liberation, mineral associations and the behaviour of different particle sizes can provide crucial insight into the best means of optimising the beneficiation process. The Nechalacho REM deposit (Northwest Territories, Canada) contains many different REM as well as diamagnetic, low SG gangue minerals such as quartz and feldspar. A pre-concentration process involving multiple stages of gravity and magnetic separation has been applied to this deposit with the results described in The ore used in this work originated from the Nechalacho Deposit (Avalon Rare Metals, Northwest Territories, Canada). Details regarding the operation of the various gravity and magnetic separations may be seen in Section 2 of All samples used in this study were prepared as polished sections and analysed by QEMSCAN at the Advanced Mineralogy Facility at SGS Canada (Lakefield, Canada). QEMSCAN is an EVO 430 automated scanning electron microscope equipped with four light-element energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers and iDiscover software capable of processing the data and images. QEMSCAN operates with a 25 If the minerals or constituent phases comprising the sample are chemically distinct, QEMSCAN is capable of reliably discriminating and quantifying minerals. Magnetite and hematite are grouped and referred to as Fe-oxides. Distinction between the two minerals when needed was conducted by optical mineralogy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The mineral definitions were validated and refined to fit the particular samples. A reference mineral list was developed using XRD (primarily to define the major minerals), a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer, and electron probe micro analysis (EPMA). The coarse samples (>300 The Particle Mineral Analysis (PMA) method was used for finer size samples (<300 REM in QEMSCAN were identified based on their major REE. For example, monazite is defined as (Ce,La,Nd)PO The compositions of the REM were determined using the wavelength-dispersive spectrometer (WDS) mode on the JEOL JXA-8900L electron microprobe at McGill University ( Representative samples of each product of gravity and magnetic separation, as well as the feed, were analysed with a cold field emission SEM Hitachi SU-8230 (Hitachi High-Technologies, Canada) equipped with an XFlash 6|60 SDD (Bruker Nano GmbH, Germany) energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer. The X-ray maps were acquired at an accelerating voltage of 15 Vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) measurements were conducted using a 7300 series VSM (Lake Shore Cryotronics, USA). Powder samples of <100 XRD, SEM, EPMA and QEMSCAN analysis identified a number of silicates including biotite, plagioclase, quartz, K-feldspar, Fe-oxides (both magnetite and hematite), lesser proportions of muscovite/clays, chlorite, amphibole, carbonates, and trace proportions of other minerals ( The processed data includes information such as mineral content (wt%), liberation and association of the minerals, grain-size, and classification of the minerals by their specific gravity among other parameters. The mineralogy of the feed sample as determined by QEMSCAN is shown in The liberation characteristics of individual particles, as well as particle associations between various minerals in the feed, were also determined from QEMSCAN analysis. Due to the complex mineralogy of the deposit, the REM containing predominantly LREE (bastnäsite, synchysite, allanite, monazite) were grouped together for this analysis and collectively referred to as light REE minerals (LREM). The series of centrifugal gravity and drum magnetic concentration processes used for this work is shown in The results of gravity separation can be better understood by using QEMSCAN data to assess recoveries of individual particles sorted by either size or specific gravity (SG). This is possible by associating an SG value to each mineral in the deposit and then calculating the SG of each measured particle as a function of the different mineral phases in the particle. The volumetric composition of a particle is estimated from the two dimensional phase map of the particle as well as stereological corrections in the QEMSCAN software ( A composite view of the distribution of SG across the various size fractions in the feed material is shown in A comparison of the total (Knelson The particle size and SG information can be filtered by the mineral phases contained in a given particle in order to evaluate the distribution of particles contained in a specific mineral across size classes ( The choice of magnetic separation steps in this flowsheet ( The coarse fraction of the feed exhibits a lower degree of ferromagnetism ( If the oversimplification of treating all samples in this flowsheet as binary mixtures of a paramagnetic mineral and a ferromagnetic mineral is made, then it is possible to semi-quantitatively evaluate and compare the ferromagnetic mineral content of each sample using Honda-Owen analysis. This analysis is more typically used in the elimination of the effects of a ferromagnetic impurity from VSM data for a paramagnetic sample ( Size-by-size recoveries of zircon, LREM and iron oxides are shown in Mineral and elemental grade and recovery results were reported for these separations in Scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy were used to qualitatively identify important elements (Zr, Fe, La, Ce, Nd, and Y) as well as REM in the feed ( The ultimate goal of the processes presented in Sections Graphs of upgrade ratio versus recovery were created for the streams produced from centrifugal gravity concentration and wet drum magnetic separation (  As one of the criteria for the final fraction from this process is to maximize the recovery of HREE, graphs of elemental upgrade ratio versus recovery are shown in The final decision on which fraction to carry forward for downstream flotation is based on two factors: maximizing both REO grade and recovery; and avoiding an unnecessarily complex physical separation process. For this reason the RE Mag and Non-Mag fractions from the Knelson gravity concentrate were selected as the feed to downstream flotation processes as this achieves a high upgrade ratio ( Similar graphs of upgrade ratio versus recovery were also created for the oversize material screened from the Knelson gravity concentrate ( An expansion of this work to develop a stage grinding, gravity and magnetic separation circuit could include a grind to a much coarser particle size (∼300 This paper described the mineralogical characterisation of the products from gravity and magnetic separation steps applied to a REM feed from the Nechalacho deposit (Northwest Territories, Canada). Characterisation of the product streams using QEMSCAN, SEM and VSM measurements allowed the following conclusions to be made: REM recovery from this deposit using centrifugal gravity concentration is effective although recovery decreases with decreasing particle size. The Knelson Concentrator in this process exhibited greater selectivity for particle size and particle specific gravity compared to the Falcon Concentrator. This may be due to the lack of fluidizing water in the Falcon (different bowl geometry), higher centrifugal accelerations experienced by the particles or the different distribution of mineral particles fed to the Falcon as opposed to the Knelson. The oversize material in the Knelson gravity concentrate is enriched with zircon, suggesting that a coarser initial grind size should be investigated with centrifugal gravity separation and low intensity magnetic separation to produce a heavy REE-enriched concentrate. The optimal fraction from this process to send to a downstream flotation stage is the non-magnetic fraction left after low intensity wet drum magnetic separation of the Knelson gravity concentrate with a total RE oxide (TREO) recovery of 11.75% and a grade of 7.50% TREO, 10.69% iron oxides and, 35.80% silicates (quartz It is important to note that this process is not representative of the currently selected process design or recovery for the Nechalacho deposit. Any application of this process to this deposit would require optimisation in order to ensure appropriate grade and recovery targets are met. The authors would like to acknowledge funding from the