The comment is often made that “sustainable mining” is an oxymoron, as mining by its very nature involves the removal of a non-renewable resource. Nonetheless, sustainability and mining are not necessarily antithetical. There is a solid business case for good management of environmental and social issues, which often makes for a more efficient operation while reducing the risk of legal action and helping companies to prepare for future regulatory changes In response to this trend, the mining industry has shown increasing interest in environmental and social sustainability in recent years. This concern is evidenced by initiatives such as the formation of the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM); the Mining, Minerals and Sustainable Development (MMSD) report; the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI); the Mining Certification Evaluation Project (MCEP); and an alphabet soup of other acronyms. Are any of these endeavors really making a difference? In the first paper in this section, Andy Whitmore argues that the mining industry's record of social and environmental performance has been unsatisfactory, and continues – despite rhetoric around “sustainability” – to cause ecological problems while damaging the health and livelihoods of local people. He discusses a meeting that took place in London in May 2001, at which community activists and their supporters formed an international network called Mines and Communities (MAC). At this same meeting was drafted the London Declaration which debunks a set of industry myths, all based on the assumption that mining is an essential part of economic development. While Whitmore concludes on a pessimistic note, the authors of the other papers in this section are more hopeful that collaborative solutions are at least possible if not currently in place. Illustrating his points with a case study of Ghana, Abraham Kumah notes that the costs of gold mining have largely been transferred to local people and their governments. However, he believes that mining has the potential to provide great benefits to the developing world. Kumah argues that these advantages can be attained through greater intervention by host governments, including the taxation of mining operations, more stringent fines for environmental damage, the encouragement of investment in other sectors, the requirement of environmental and social reporting, and frequent auditing. According to Kumah, corporations also need to achieve better community relations and to improve their social practices, including properly planned and compensated resettlement. Jeremy Richards also suggests ways in which the wealth generated through mining may be redistributed more equitably. He would like to see the prices of mined products reflect the true cost of their production – the environmental and social impacts. Richards argues that host governments should require revenue-based royalty payments and should impose taxes on waste, while providing incentives for the implementation and expansion of environmentally sound technologies. Meanwhile, Richards observes that minerals are, ultimately, limited in quantity and should be treated as loans rather than consumables; in the scenario he proposes, consumers would pay for the manufacture and use of the product, finally returning it to the producer or a recycling facility rather than to a landfill. International organizations, such as the ICMM, could play a role in creating trans-national regulations that would encourage such equitable and sustainable practices. The last three papers in this section provide positive examples of projects in which mining companies have worked with other stakeholders in innovative ways. Robert Gibson describes Inco's “sustainability-centred approach” to an environmental impact assessment at Voisey's Bay in Labrador, Canada. The resultant agreement included a commitment to provide benefits to the local community in exchange for access to lands they traditionally owned, the establishment of a multi-stakeholder body to monitor environmental impacts, and the promise of further negotiations over land claims. Particular contextual factors made these agreements possible: the long-term commercial viability of the mine, and the political strength and determination of the government of Newfoundland and Labrador as well as that of the Innu Nation and the Labrador Inuit Association. While such circumstances may not always be present, Gibson concludes that the Voisey's Bay case provides guidelines for interactions between mining companies and local stakeholders. Another instance of constructive collaboration between companies and communities, as described by John Meech et al., is the Britannia Beach Sustainable Development Project. This project, located at an abandoned mine site, includes several components, such as a Remediation Fund sponsored by remnant companies of the original mine operators, an earth plug research project at the University of British Columbia, and a workshop at which stakeholders cooperated in the design of a sustainable community at the site. The authors claim that the community, once transformed, will provide a model of environmentally and socially responsible restoration. Finally, Silvana Costa and Malcolm Scoble point to an important role for academia in helping to promote long-term solutions for the mining industry. The Sustainability Working Group, composed of a wide range of stakeholders, has developed courses and research projects within the University of British Columbia's Department of Mining Engineering. Costa and Scoble maintain that the mining industry should fund similar projects at other institutions of higher education, which in turn should follow this example, contributing to the global project of sustainability by providing pioneering research and well-trained future mining professionals.