High-velocity experiments on fault gouge taken from the Nojima fault that slipped during the 1995 Kobe earthquake were conducted to investigate physical mechanism associated with the slip-weakening behavior. With increasing slip, the friction values of the gouge sheared at 0.62 MPa normal stress and 1.03 m/s slip velocity decrease exponentially from a peak value of more than 0.6 to a steady-state value of 0.2. The textures of the gouge are characterized by grain comminution, oblique and parallel shear planes and localized deformation zone with strongly preferred orientation in the friction weakening stage, and folding and fluttering structures at the steady-state friction stage. Numerical modeling based on the temperature measurements close to the gouge layer shows that the temperature inside the gauge layer did not exceed 400 °C during the experiments. In a slide–hold–slide test, a full strength recovery of the fault gouge was observed only after 12 s slip pause and the slip-weakening curves are the same between the two successive slips. The steady-state coefficient of friction decreased from 0.8 to about 0.2 when the slip velocity increased from 0.006 m/s to 1.03 m/s. This high-velocity weakening feature was observed in a synthetic quartz gouge as well as in the Nojima gouge. Although it is unclear which mechanism causes the weakening among thermal pressurization, silica gel lubrication, flash heating, moisture-draining and so on, the present experimental results suggest that the high-velocity weakening is related to the high heat production rate. Finally, the flow structures observed in the samples deformed up to the final steady-state stages have never been reported in previous slow-rate experiments and could be a key structure characteristic of high-velocity frictional sliding.Since Frictional properties of rocks at low slip rates (< In spite of this success, there still remain important unsolved problems of seismic fault motion that cannot be explained with the slow slip rate fault properties. One is the frictional strength of natural faults. In-situ heat flow measurements along the San Andreas Fault suggested low strength (i.e., friction coefficient < Recently, rotary-shear apparatuses allow us to conduct laboratory experiments at high slip rate with almost infinite sliding displacement, providing a variety of frictional behaviors of rocks during earthquakes. Fault gouge zone is composed of granular materials resulting from fracturing and wearing during fault slip. This feature is commonly found in natural active faults (e.g., In this paper, we conducted high-velocity friction experiments on fault gouge samples taken from the Nojima fault, southwest Japan. We obtained microstructure evolution of the fault gouge, temperature change during high-velocity sliding, velocity dependence and material dependence of the frictional weakening, and strength recovery of the weakened fault, which provide useful information about the physical processes associated with the high-velocity friction weakening. We also show that the microstructures observed in experimental fault gouges sheared at high velocities are similar to those observed in natural gouge samples along the Nojima fault. The Nojima fault is located along the northwest margin of Awaji Island, southwest Japan and was activated by the 1995 Kobe earthquake ( Samples for experiments were collected from a fault outcrop at the Hirabayashi trench site. At this site, the fault core zone consists of three gouge zones: blue–gray clayey gouge (BCG), gray consolidated gouge (GCG) derived from Cretaceous granodiorite, and dark brown clayey gouge (DCG) derived from Pliocene–Pleistocene Osaka group sandstone ( The BCG samples were disaggregated by hand and passed through a 500 µm diameter sieve to produce a homogeneous simulated gouge samples required for the experiments. X-ray diffraction analyses of the sample show that a fine-grained matrix is composed of quartz, smectite, and kaolinite ( All experiments were conducted using a rotary-shear, high-speed friction testing apparatus described in Data on torque, normal force and axial displacement were recorded by a digital data recorder at an interval of between 1 and 500 Hz depending on the slip rate. Normal stress ( Before starting the experiment, the pair of the specimens containing the fault gouge layer was set to the specimen holder and pressed at the same normal stress level as the experimental condition. The applied stress induced axial shortening due to compaction of the gouge layer. It took several minutes before the axial shortening becomes constant. The thickness of the gouge layer was to be about 1 mm. At the start, the electric motor was turned on and the rotation speed of the motor was increased up to the target value. The electromagnetic clutch was then turned on to transmit shear rotation to the gouge layer. A series of experiments was performed at a constant To estimate a temperature rise in the gouge layer during the high-velocity friction experiments, we measured temperature distribution in the stationary specimen using 4 chromel–alumel thermocouples (CA-1, CA-2, CA-3 and CA-4). Their locations are shown in Another series of experiments was conducted to examine whether the high-velocity frictional behavior changes with slip rate and gouge type, and how the fault strength recovers which was weakened by a high slip experiment. All experiments in  We summarize the microstructural observations of the gouge samples through the high-velocity sliding experiments in the following (see also In We numerically calculated the temperature distribution in the specimen by fitting the observed temperatures at 4 positions to estimate the temperature distribution within the fault gouge layer from the numerical modeling. The calculation was done assuming an axi-symmetric 2-D problem using a published computer program of the finite element method by The following assumptions were used in the calculation. The initial temperature in the calculation area is 20 °C. The surface of the specimen adjacent to the steel holder is a constant temperature boundary of 20 °C. The other surface of the specimen and the surface of the gouge are adiabatic boundaries. The frictional resistance multiplied by a slip rate at a radial position gives the rate of frictional work at the position. All the frictional work is transferred to heat source resulting in temperature rise in the gouge zone. During the initial increments of shear, the deformation is uniformly distributed across the gouge zone. As the shear increases, the deformation localizes along a narrow band within the gouge zone (see the microstructure in  The temperature distribution at the center of the fault gouge layer, which is estimated from the numerical calculation, is plotted against the radial distance from the center of the cylindrical specimen in  To investigate the velocity dependence of the slip weakening, we conducted a series of experiments performed at a constant The Nojima fault gouge sample contained several kinds of minerals. To examine which mineral controls the observed slip-weakening behavior of the gouge, we conducted high-velocity friction experiments on synthetic pure quartz gouge (10 μm  Laboratory experiments show that the Nojima gouge (blue–gray clayey gouge, BCG) exhibits dynamic slip weakening at high slip rates; the friction decreased gradually from a peak value of more than 0.6 to a steady-state value of 0.2 with shear displacement. This slip-weakening behavior was not observed at slow slip rate (~ Several mechanisms have been recently proposed that could account for a decrease of frictional strength of faults during high-velocity slip. These mechanisms include frictional melting (e.g., Numerical modeling based on direct temperature measurements close to the gouge layer shows that the maximum temperature inside the gouge layer did not exceed 400 °C during high-velocity shear. This indicates that the weakening is not caused by frictional melting because the estimated temperature is far below the melting temperature (~ Thermal pressurization of pore fluid can decrease effective normal stress, which results in reduction in frictional strength. Thermal pressurization can occur in our dry experiments because pore fluid derived from adsorbed water on surfaces of mineral grains and structure water of clay minerals contained in the Nojima gouge. When the temperature of the gouge rises up to more than 100 °C due to frictional heating, the water desorbs from the gouge grains as vapor and thermally expands in pores of the gouge. If the water vapor cannot effectively escape from the gouge, pore pressure would develop to weaken the gouge during frictional sliding. Whether the thermal pressurization occurs or not depends on hydraulic diffusivity, Here, the characteristic time, which is defined by However, it might not be appropriate to apply these laboratory estimates under isotropic pressure to the Nojima gouge, which was subjected to large shear deformation during the experiments. Permeability measurements conducted on several kinds of gouges (quartz, feldspar, muscovite, and crushed-granite) during shear deformation using rotary-shear apparatus showed that To conclude whether the thermal pressurization plays an important role for the weakening of the gouge, we should carefully investigate the variations in Flash heating is a phenomenon where asperity contacts of fault surfaces are thermally weakened by local heating during high-speed frictional sliding, causing a dramatic reduction of frictional strength ( In the moisture-draining model proposed by These differences might be due to the different sample assembly. We used rock–gouge–rock sandwich samples jacketed by Teflon ring and How do the present experimental results help understand the mechanisms of real earthquakes at depth? In natural faults, normal stress applied on fault planes at depth is 1–2 orders of magnitude larger than in the experiments. To appropriately extrapolate the present results to real earthquakes, we need to fill the gap between the nature and the experiments. Although we do not have any crucial evidences at this moment to conclude which of the above mechanisms causes the weakening of the fault gouge at high slip rates, we confirmed that the heat production rate during frictional sliding is a key factor for the weakening. There is another difference between the nature and the experiments that the natural fault zones are commonly saturated with pore water. Our experiments show that the fault recovers its strength rapidly within several tens of seconds after slip terminates. The healing time is several orders of magnitude shorter than for previous slow-rate experiments ( The textures of the Nojima fault gouge sheared at high slip rates are divided into two groups; grain comminution, oblique and parallel to the shear planes, localized deformation zone with strong preferred orientation at the friction weakening stage, and folding and fluttering structures at the steady-state friction stage. The relationship between frictional sliding and the development of the microstructures within the fault gouge has already been examined in laboratory experiments at low velocities ( The microstructures characterizing the BCG samples sheared up to the steady-state stage are very similar to microstructures observed in naturally deformed GCG samples: a wavy boundary plane ( The relationship between texture and frictional strength is extremely important to interpret mechanical histories from the microstructural description of fault gouge; we may estimate whether the fault slips to the steady-state friction or not during an earthquake. We conducted high-velocity friction experiments on fault gouge samples taken from the Nojima fault, southwest Japan. The friction of the gouge sheared at a constant We discussed possible mechanisms that caused the high-velocity weakening of the Nojima gouge including frictional melting, thermal decomposition weakening, thermal pressurization, silica gel lubrication, flash heating, and moisture-draining. The first two mechanisms can be ruled out because of lower temperature rise (less than 400 °C) during high-velocity sliding which is lower than melting and decomposition temperatures of the Nojima gouge. However, further investigation is required to determine the major cause for the high-velocity weakening of the Nojima gouge among the rest of four mechanisms. Although the mechanism of the weakening is still unclear at present, the slip rate and normal stress dependence of the high-velocity weakening suggest that this weakening can occur at depth where heat production rate associated with faulting motion is high. The flow structure of the gouge samples sheared up to the steady-state stage have never been reported in previous slow slip rate studies; this would be a very important texture that characterizes high-velocity frictional sliding. It is similar to the texture observed in the natural fault gouge taken from the Nojima fault. This indicates that the high-velocity friction experiments on the Nojima gouge can reproduce seismic fault motion of the Nojima fault. We can interpret a mechanical history from the microstructural description of fault gouge using the relationship between the mechanical behavior and shear texture obtained from the high-velocity friction experiments. We thank Akito Tsutsumi for valuable discussions, and Wataru Tanikawa, Hiroyuki Noda, Yasutaka Aizawa for their help in the experiments. This study was supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for Young Scientists. We appreciate two anonymous reviewers for their helpful reviews of the manuscript.