The critical acceleration of materials is a well-predicted precursor to catastrophic failure, the predictive power of which has been confirmed through analyses of volcanoes, landslides and rock failure experiments. Understanding the development, acceleration and physical controls of structural damages remains a core issue in engineering. Using a microscale damage mechanics model and a new geometric model for crack propagation, we derived the macroscopic strain function of the geometric parameters of damages under specified loads. The factors influencing the acceleration of crack development were revealed, along with the basis of the relationship between the evolution of damage and fracture parameters and external loads over different scales. We experimentally validated these results using intact samples and samples with pre-formed cracks. Although the mechanisms of crack propagation differed among samples, the observed behaviours were generally consistent with our theoretical results. Different samples exhibited different damage expansion characteristics and warnings before destabilisation; however, common features were observed at critical locations. These findings can provide foundations for predicting larger fractures in engineering settings under different conditions and thus, for improving the safety and stability of engineering projects.Rocks are heterogeneous materials that naturally contain different types and patterns of defects. The mechanical behaviour of rocks is mainly determined by the properties of these defects and of the constituent minerals and matrices. Understanding the failure and evolution of crack development in rocks is of great importance when investigating the deformation and failure process of rock masses during water conservancy and both hydropower and mining engineering. Macroscopic changes in such materials are mainly caused by the gradual accumulation of damages. Thus, this topic has attracted much research attention and microcracks are now taken into consideration when studying the deformation, damage and failure processes of brittle rock media. In the past several years, many researchers have studies the evolutionary mechanisms and mechanical properties of macroscale cracks in brittle materials, including rocks. Important progress has been made, especially with respect to the coalescence and propagation modes of cracks in quasi-brittle materials and the influence of prefabricated cracks on rock strength Much research has been focused on the expansion of microscopic cracks, evolution of damage and instability of specimens has been done in the laboratory, yielding fruitful results In 2015, Entacher and Schuller The initial damage in the process of rock failure begins with the evolution of microstructural damages. Spagnoli et al. Predicting destruction is a core issue in disaster prevention (e.g., earthquakes, landslides, etc.), material life assessments and design safety. Such predictions must be based on the detection of the response signal of a given sample under external loading, through which the precursory features directly related to catastrophic damages can be determined. Previous research Many studies on mesoscale damage mechanics models for rocks have primarily been focused on the underlying physical mechanisms, while ignoring the expansion and variation of cracks during the mechanical deterioration of the samples. Moreover, existing studies on the acceleration of damage according to the critical power law have mainly been founded on continuous damage mechanics models. Due to the different understandings of failure mechanisms, the existing models are unable to reveal the evolution of the physical factors driving damages at different cracking scales. Therefore, they cannot adequately reflect the growth of cracks, which is important during the evolution of structural damages. In this study, the contributions of crack parameters at different scales to the damage and characteristics of failed samples were studied based on the evolution of cracks at different scales. To this end, a new multiscale damage evolution model and a geometric equation of the damage process were constructed. We then focused on the extension of cracks themselves and the effect of crack propagation on the mechanical properties of rocks and the evolution of damages. Based on the principles of meso-damage mechanics, homogenisation and the basic principles of thermodynamics, the physical nature of the damage process was analysed, and the critical characteristics of the power law and inherent physical controls were revealed. Multiscale SEM-based experiments on the time-dependent propagation of cracks were used to validate the rationality of the theoretical model, which showed that the theoretical results explained the experimental phenomena very well. In order to reveal the critical power law acceleration characteristics of the damage process, we first established a multiscale instability equation. Considering that rocks are composed of matrices, phenocrysts/clasts, and (micro)cracks of different scales, the damage in each representative elementary volume (REV) unit will develop continuously and the cracks will be continuously oriented. The meso- and macroscale transformations also change constantly owing to local microscopic and macroscopic damages. As the macroscopic mechanical properties of rocks continue to deteriorate, their lifespans are altered and shortened, leading to instability and damage. The deterioration of the mechanical properties of each unit affects the weakening of the material and is related to the extended evolution of (micro)cracks of different scales. Quasi-brittle rocks weakened by microcracks are typically modelled as heterogeneous materials and investigated within a combined homogenisation/thermodynamic framework. Their relevant REVs consist of a solid matrix phase and a large number of microcracks randomly oriented and distributed therein. The matrix is commonly assumed to be linearly elastic and to obey the generalized Hooke's law: A linear elastic homogenisation method was adopted from the local variable of the characteristic unit to the macroscopic variable of the rock material. This scheme is shown in The effective properties predicted by the Mori–Tanaka homogenisation scheme According to the homogenisation scheme shown in The relationship between macroscopic stress and strain can be expressed as: The first part of Eq. Through Eqs. Subsequently, the conditions needed for cracks to open and close can be obtained by their respective criteria: The thermodynamic force associated with the damage variable, Meanwhile, the equation describing the damage process is as follows Comparing Eqs. The derivative is obtained from the two sides of Eq. This formula may be further written as: Thus, the equation for the acceleration of the damage process can be expressed as: As damage acceleration approaches infinity ( We assumed that the microcracks distributed inside the matrix of a given rock mass were elliptical and had a certain thickness, 2 The normal vector of a family of fractures in a rock matrix is In this study, we modified the existing equations for damage and fissure parameters. Budiansky and O’Connell After further crack development, the crack extended from the surface to the body and the thickness during propagation was taken into account, as shown in The geometric crack model is shown in With the variable change In order to reveal the critical power law acceleration characteristics of the damage process, we established a multiscale damage instability equation, focusing on the evolutionary characteristics of adjacent damage points. Cracks are constantly transformed from being microscopic to mesoscopic and macroscopic (i.e., they are constantly developed from the progression of local microscopic damage to macroscopic damage). Thus, the macroscopic mechanical properties of rocks continue to deteriorate, affecting and shortening their lifespans and leading to instability and damage. Such deterioration is also related to the extended evolution of (micro)cracks of different scales. The damage process is related to the strain of the sample, such that: On this basis, we further studied the critical power law singularity and the power exponent of the acceleration of damage. Adding Eqs. Which could be further simplified as: When a rock is near to failure, the extended length of the fracture is maximized (i.e., As a result, there is an approximately The damage value calculated using Eq. In situ mesoscopic tests of marble under uniaxial compressive loading were conducted using a Hitachi S-570 SEM (Hitachi, Ltd., Japan) at a resolution of 3.5 mm, maximum acceleration voltage of 30 kV and magnification ≥50,000 times; a servo loading system was also developed by the Institute of Mechanics with a load range of 0–2000 N, measurement error of 0.5 N, maximum stroke of 0–10 mm and displacement measurement error of 0.001 mm. The fractographic morphology and mesostructural evolution throughout the loading process were systematically investigated in real-time. The specimen production process is shown in Six marble specimens with pre-existing flaw were prepared for in situ SEM analyses of uniaxial compression. The results for specimen #1 were selected to analyse crack initiation, growth and the propagation process for marble specimens with pre-existing flaws. Seven marble specimens without pre-existing flaws also were selected for in situ SEM tests under uniaxial compression. The results for specimen #5 were selected to analyse the mesoscopic damage process. The relationship between the crack evolution of the intact specimen under compressive loading and the curve of the stress–strain is shown in The gradual expansion of microscale cracks led to the formation of mesoscale cracks and even macroscale cracks, as shown in For intact marble specimens, a mathematical expression for crack width was obtained by experimentally fitting of the data. As Eq. The same analytical process allowed us to deduce the relationship between the maximum rate of damage expansion and the maximum crack width, corresponding, such that In this study, we began our investigation of fracture behaviour from the perspective of mesoscale damage mechanics, considering the expansion of the geometric parameters of the crack itself during propagation. We then derived the main physical variables controlling the damage variable ( Different samples exhibited different damage expansion characteristics and the warning signs before instability consequently differed. However, common features were observed at critical locations. Our results may provide insights that can be used to develop a warning system for possible large fractures in engineering scenarios under different conditions. Moreover, they can serve as a foundation for future research on the safety and stability of engineering projects. The evolutionary mechanism and controlling factors of multi-scale rock cataclysm and deterioration process were established by means of homogenization with macroscopic strain as the link. However, the main variable, macroscopic strain, can be measured at micro scale, macroscopic scale or engineering scale, expanding the connotation of multi-scale mechanics research. In the traditional study of mechanics, the impacts of crack geometry on the mechanics properties of rocks have received less attention than is warranted. This study provides a foundational exploration of the theory and practice of accounting for crack geometry and propagation when predicting the process from damage to failure in rock systems. In essence, it provides an important theoretical basis for the study of planar fractures to the study of spatial fractures. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the colleges and universities in Henan Province that facilated this work. This work was supported as a project of the Henan Key Laboratory of Underground Engineering and Disaster Prevention (Henan Polytechnic University), the State Key Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China - Shanxi Joint Foundation on Coal Based Low Carbon (grant no. U1810203), the Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51404095), the Key Laboratory Open Fund (grant no. 2013KF-06), the Education Department of Henan Province Science and Technology Research Projects (grant nos. 16A560020 and 13B560040), the Scientific Research Foundation of Henan Polytechnic University (grant no. B2011-105) and the Youth Foundation of Henan Polytechnic University (grant no. Q2012-22A).