Despite its shortcomings, the T10 method introduced by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) in 1989 is currently the method most frequently used in North America to calculate disinfection performance. Other methods (e.g., the Integrated Disinfection Design Framework, IDDF) have been advanced as replacements, and more recently, the USEPA suggested the Extended T10 and Extended CSTR (Continuous Stirred-Tank Reactor) methods to improve the inactivation calculations within ozone contactors. To develop a method that fully considers the hydraulic behavior of the contactor, two models (Plug Flow with Dispersion and N-CSTR) were successfully fitted with five tracer tests results derived from four Water Treatment Plants and a pilot-scale contactor. A new method based on the N-CSTR model was defined as the Partially Segregated (Pseg) method. The predictions from all the methods mentioned were compared under conditions of poor and good hydraulic performance, low and high disinfectant decay, and different levels of inactivation. These methods were also compared with experimental results from a chlorine pilot-scale contactor used for Escherichia coli inactivation. The T10 and Extended T10 methods led to large over- and under-estimations. The Segregated Flow Analysis (used in the IDDF) also considerably overestimated the inactivation under high disinfectant decay. Only the Extended CSTR and Pseg methods produced realistic and conservative predictions in all cases. Finally, a simple implementation procedure of the Pseg method was suggested for calculation of disinfection performance.Over the last two decades, many North American water treatment plants (WTPs) have been forced to implement new processes to meet the increasingly stringent standards related to primary disinfection of drinking water. Furthermore, although the T10 method has often been criticized for its shortcomings, this regulatory method for evaluating disinfection performance has remained largely unchanged ( Disinfection performance depends on three main factors: (i) inactivation kinetics, (ii) disinfectant decay in water, and (iii) reactor's hydrodynamics. Several models exist to describe the inactivation kinetics that occurs in a batch reactor or a plug-flow system. The simplest, the Chick–Watson model ( In real contactors, the macroscopic hydraulic behavior of the flow ( As an alternative to the previously described models, several studies ( The complexity of disinfection performance evaluation has led to extreme simplifications or the development of highly sophisticated methods. Our final objective is to propose a simple and reliable method for predicting the performance of reactive contactors ( Microbial inactivation can be described using the second-order Chick–Watson kinetic model (  The disinfectant decay (after the immediate demand) can be modeled as first-order kinetics with the differential rate law given by Eq.  The N-CSTR model (also known as the tanks-in-series model or gamma model) assumes that the contactor is composed of N completely stirred-tank reactors in series whose resultant RTD is given by:  The PFD model (also known as the axial dispersion model) assumes that the reactor is similar to a non-ideal pipe in which a degree of longitudinal dispersion occurs. From a mathematical standpoint, several forms of the axial dispersion model are possible depending on the degree of dispersion and the boundary conditions (  where As shown by  Four tracer curves were fitted, originating from three full-scale ozone contactors and one full-scale chlorine contactor all located in Quebec (Canada). The tracer test results for these contactors were obtained from previous studies ( The methods studied in this article do not differ in their evaluation of the inactivation kinetics. Generally, they vary in the assumptions with respect to the hydraulic behavior of the flow inside the contactor. The inactivation calculations of all of the following methods are based on the same RTD. However, the methods differ in their assumptions with respect to micro-mixing. The SFA assumes that the fluid is fully segregated,  where Using Eqs. As opposed to SFA, MMA assumes that the fluid is fully micro-mixed,  The Pseg method is based on the N-CSTR model. The use of the N-CSTR model to directly calculate inactivation was first proposed by  The USEPA methods attach additional importance to the physical configuration of the contactor (the number of chambers and their volumes). The T10 and Extended T10 methods also use the T10/HRT derived from the RTD but do not fully exploit the information contained in the RTD. The T10 method assumes that the reactor (or the chamber if the disinfectant concentration is measured after each chamber) behaves similar to a plug flow reactor with an HRT equal to T10 (which is the residence time for 10% of the flow as estimated from the tracer test results). Moreover, for reactive chambers, this method conservatively considers that the fluid is only exposed to the effluent disinfectant concentration. Considering these two assumptions, the integration of Eq.  The Extended T10 method is quite similar to the T10 method because it is based on the same assumptions. This method was developed to predict the performance of disinfection contactors composed of three or more consecutive reactive chambers. The disinfection performance is calculated for each chamber using Eq. The procedure for the Extended CSTR method is the same as that of the Extended T10 method: the global performance of the reactor is obtained by summing up the performances of individual reactive chambers. The difference lies in the fact that the Extended CSTR method assumes that each chamber behaves similar to one CSTR, and consequently, the performance of the entire contactor behaves similar to  To validate the previous methods, a pilot-scale chlorine contactor was built to run a series of two A step tracer test was performed to characterize the RTD of the contactor. Rhodamine (keyacid rhodamine WT liquid I.D. 70301027) was used as a tracer (diluted 10,000 times) and the test was run using de-mineralized water. Rhodamine was injected upstream from the second static mixer (similar to the Duplicate bench-scale inactivation assays were carried out to define the batch kinetic parameters of disinfectant decay ( Two disinfection experiments were carried out to assess the validity of the methods under low and high disinfectant decay conditions. The first experiment was carried out in borate-buffered demand-free water (pH 9.1,  Microbial inactivation values were calculated from the fitted RTDs using MMA and are summarized in  As expected for reactions whose order is greater than one (i.e., microbial inactivation), the MMA provided conservative results compared with that of SFA. The MMA and SFA methods represent the extreme conditions of micro-mixing. Consequently, the actual disinfection performance of any contactor must be located between the predicted inactivations of these two boundaries. Reviewing the predicted inactivations given in The last method investigated, the Pseg method, predicted an intermediate performance (between those of the MMA and SFA) for all conditions; however, the predictions were typically much closer to the MMA values. This result was expected because the fluid is assumed as fully micro-mixed in each CSTR. The CSTRs in series are nevertheless distinct one from another, which inherently provides a level of segregation. This hypothesis ( Prior to the pilot-scale assays, bench-scale assays were conducted to experimentally measure the chlorine decay and  The observed experimental inactivation averaged 5.9 ± 0.5 log. The T10 and Extended T10 methods largely overestimated this performance because median inactivations of 11.5 log and 13.2 log were respectively predicted. Such an observation is coherent with the theoretical calculations provided previously in From As expected, the addition of humic acids had a large impact on disinfectant decay. The first-order chlorine decay parameter rose to 0.88 min From Considering the results obtained under low and high disinfectant decay conditions, the Extended CSTR method, the MMA with N-CSTR adjustment and the Pseg method should be favored. The other methods (T10, Extended T10 and SFA) are not as reliable and can lead to major overestimations or underestimations of performance. Therefore, these methods are not recommended, especially in the context of performing a QMRA. Among the three remaining methods, the MMA is by far the most complicated to implement in a water utility and is computationally intensive and sensitive to the algorithm used to converge toward a solution; for these reasons, it is not recommended. Out of the two methods remaining (Extended CSTR and Pseg), we recommend the Pseg method. Although the Extended CSTR method was well suited for the current application, the assumption that each chamber of the contactor behaves as a CSTR is rarely accurate, even for contactors with conventional configurations ( The suggested procedure for setting up the Pseg method is described in The present work showed that The T10 and Extended T10 methods can lead to important overestimations of the disinfection performance in the current inactivation ranges; The Segregated Flow Analysis (used in the IDDF approach) also significantly overestimates the performance; The hydraulic behavior of a contactor cannot be solely evaluated from its number of chambers in series. This evaluation requires the completion of tracer tests; The Partially Segregated method presented in this article can be used to predict the disinfection performance of reactive contactors easily and correctly. The authors acknowledge Mélanie Rivard for completing the analysis of