Introduction
                  Bilateral proximal humerus fractures are rather rare and occur due to high energetic traumas in young patients and even low energetic traumas in older patients having osteoporosis. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) is the most popular treatment for this type of fracture while other types of treatment such as arthroplasty or conservative treatment are also, but less commonly used.
               
                  Presentation of case
                  This report presents the case of an 80 years old female patient with bilateral proximal humerus fractures and a history of hypothyroidism. The patient was treated with simultaneous open reduction and internal fixation and presented a normal and full-range motion in both shoulders after follow-up.
               
                  Discussion
                  Frequency of proximal humerus fractures has increased with the increase in life expectancy. Osteoporotic people are at higher risk. Around five percent of all extremity fractures are humerus proximal end fractures for people below 40 years old and 76 % for cases of people over 40 years old, with females being more susceptible. ORIF is the treatment of choice for such fractures. Replacement arthroplasty, minimally invasive techniques and conservative management are other options depending on fracture characteristics.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This is an interesting rare case of simultaneous bilateral proximal humerus fractures in an elderly female patient, treated operatively with satisfactory results on follow up.Around five to eight percent of fracture cases include proximal humerus fractures [ This is the case of a 80 year old female patient with a history of hypothyroidism on adequate treatment who presented one hour after a fall from height. She reports falling with the elbows flexed and a direct impact to the face and shoulders. Patient reports living alone, able to perform all activities of daily living prior to trauma. On physical examination, patient was found to have decreased and painful bilateral shoulder ROM, with intact proximal and distal neurovascular structures. Patient suffered from bilateral proximal humerus fractures seen on plain radiographs and on CT scan with 3D reconstruction ( The fractures were treated with open reduction and internal fixation. Using a deltopectoral approach, beach chair position and arm rest, dissection and identification of cephalic vein, further dissection done reaching the bone. Biceps was identified then tenotomy was done. Reduction under fluoroscopy after impaction of the fracture in a valgus position. The bones were reduced and fixed with K-wires for provisional fixation, using abduction and traction, and then a proximal anatomical plate was placed anterolaterally, lateral to the bicipital groove to neutralize any medial comminution under fluoroscopic guidance with repair of the medial and lateral tuberosities. The plate was fixed with 10 screws ( At four months follow up, after multiple physiotherapy sessions, the patient had full range of motion restored and was back to her daily routine activities, without any symptoms. The frequency of proximal humerus fractures has increased with the increase in the average life expectancy. Osteoporotic people are at higher risk of such fractures. Around five percent of all extremity fractures are humerus proximal end fractures for cases of people below 40 years old and 76 % for cases of people over 40 years old. In addition, females are three times more at risk than males [ Proximal humerus fractures are common with ongoing debate as to what the best treatment modality is, depending on the patient age. Bilateral proximal humerus fracture are very rare, with direct trauma to both shoulders simultaneously as a mechanism of action. In our case of an elderly patient, bilateral proximal humerus fracture was treated by simultaneous open reduction using mini-invasive technique and internal fixation with anchor on the left side for rotator cuff repair. This surgery is associated with less morbidities and less risk to the patient with excellent results. In such cases, it is important to prepare hemiarthroplasty prosthesis and reverse shoulder prosthesis as backup in case of failure of open reduction and internal fixation due to irreducibility of fracture of lack of good bone stock. No funds were received in support of this study. Ethics committee has given approval for publication. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request. No identity identifiers are present whatsoever in the manuscript. Joseph Maalouly: contributed to the writing and editing of this article. Dany Aouad: contributed to the writing of this article and the submission. Nabil Dib: contributed to the writing and editing of the article along with the figures. Antonios Tawk: contributed to the editing and finishing of the article. Georges El Rassi: contributed with the case, surgical management and editing of the article. This case has been registered in the IRB committee of St Georges Hospital University Hospital. Dr Dany Aouad. Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed. The authors declare no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this article.