Phosphate flotation has been used by industry for more than a half century but still faces many technical challenges. Such challenges include not only the selection of the chemical reagents but the characteristics of the feed itself. This paper deals with the investigation of feed characteristics and how these characteristics affect the flotation separation efficiency of feed material from a selected phosphate operation. Specifically why some feed, from the same mine, is efficiently separated with high recovery (good feed) while other feed is more difficult to separate (bad feed). The study was conducted using both traditional analytical techniques and more advanced techniques such as X-ray microtomography. The results reveal that the bad feed was highly porous, coarser in size, and, most significantly, exhibits a lower degree of liberation. Such bad feed was inefficiently separated by fatty acid flotation and improved recovery would require controlled grinding in order to improve the extent of liberation.As in any mineral processing operation the efficiency of the flotation separation may be determined by many different feed characteristics all of which may influence product grade and recovery. Phosphate flotation is no exception. These feed characteristics include extent of liberation, slimes content, and surface chemistry features. Liberation is an essential factor which strongly affects recovery and product grade. If there is inadequate liberation the separation efficiency will be limited. Liberation depends on the microstructure (texture) of the ore such as particle size, grain size distribution of the valuable minerals, mutual relationships between the valuable mineral and the gangue minerals, and the bonding between valuable and gangue minerals. There are many tools available for liberation analysis which can be classified into 1D and 2D techniques such as optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and its modifications the QEM/SCAN system and the JKTech Mineral Liberation Analyzer ( The topic of stereological correction in mineral liberation analysis has been examined extensively and various models for estimating 3D liberation characteristics from 2D polished section measurements have been proposed as first demonstrated in 1985 ( The objective of the present paper is to characterize the feed material variation encountered at the CF flotation plant (Florida). Some feed samples are efficiently separated by fatty acid flotation while other feed material from the same mine are not. The study focuses on the characterization of the individual particle properties and their distribution (texture) in terms of size, shape and liberation in addition to surface area measurements and mineral identification by XRD. Also, in this study a comparison is made between two different techniques for liberation analysis; 2D analysis using optical polarizing microscopy (OPM) and 3D analysis using the X-ray microtomography (XMT). Two Florida phosphate feed samples from the CF flotation plant were studied. According to flotation results, the samples were classified as good feed and bad feed. The BPL and insoluble residue for these samples are given in The feed samples and their flotation products were investigated for the same reason, to elucidate the effect of mineralogy and liberation on the separation efficiency. The flotation data of the good and bad feeds are given in Micromeritics ASAP 2010 Surface Area Analyzer was used for BET surface area measurements. Mineralogical analyses for the phosphate flotation samples were conducted by X-ray diffraction analysis which was carried out using a Philips X-ray diffractometer and an Optical Polarizing Microscope. Also, some characterization has been accomplished using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Liberation analysis was conducted by using two different techniques; optical polarizing microscopy for the study of liberation in 2D by using thin sections made from different samples, and X-ray microtomography for the study of liberation in 3D. The particle size distributions of the two CF feed samples are presented in Surface area is an important characteristic with respect to the adsorption of flotation chemicals, including collectors and depressants. When the material has a much higher surface area it is necessary to adjust the dosage of chemicals accordingly. Surface area, average pore diameter and average pore volume were determined for the two feed samples by BET and the results are given in Quantitative mineralogical study was performed using optical polarizing microscopy and X-ray diffraction for all flotation samples. The results ( After flotation most of the apatite is separated into the concentrate ( In the liberation analysis two techniques were used optical polarizing microscopy for 2D analysis and X-ray microtomography for 3D analysis. The liberation analysis in 2D was conducted by counting particles with respect to apatite content beginning with particles (0.0%), then locked (gangue–phosphate) particles with grade classes ranging from 0.0% to 100% according to the phosphate content, and finally apparently liberated phosphate mineral particles (100%). The percent of liberated phosphate particles was calculated as follows:Liberated phosphate percent The liberation analysis ( On the other hand, the liberation analysis ( The liberation analysis ( The liberation analysis ( CF good tails contain a very small percent of phosphate (2%) with excellent liberation ( The mineralogical study ( As mentioned before the CF bad tail contains a considerable amount of phosphate (10%), and the liberation analysis ( A high-resolution cone-beam X-ray microtomography system, installed at the University of Utah was used for detailed 3D liberation analysis of the flotation samples ( X-ray tomographic reconstruction produces a three-dimensional map of X-ray attenuation coefficients of the irradiated portion of a packed particle bed. Differentiation of features within the sample is possible because the linear attenuation coefficient ( Several experiments were carried out in order to determine the applicability and confidence of this methodology for the analysis of packed particle beds. Variations in particle shape and size have been tested to estimate their influence on the results. Phosphate ore particles were used for the experiments. Based on the developed 3D watershed segmentation algorithm, 2D image sections for the packed particle bed are shown in The phosphate CF samples (feeds, concentrates, and tailings) were studied by X-ray microtomography. 2D sliced sections obtained from the middle of the packed particle bed for good feed, concentrate and tailing are shown in The 3D liberation analysis ( The mineralogical and liberation analyses (2D and 3D) of the flotation feed and products indicate the following regarding:  The CF bad tail has a slightly higher content of phosphate (∼10%) and low degree of liberation (4% of the phosphate particles), so the main reason for phosphate loss in the bad tail is the lack of liberation of locked phosphate particles. The CF good tail contains ∼2% apatite. The reason for the small phosphate loss in the tail is the lack of liberation of coarse interlocked particles.  The CF bad concentrate contains ∼17% quartz present mostly as unliberated very coarse particles of irregular shape. The CF good concentrate has a considerable amount of quartz (∼25%), and more than 50% of this amount is liberated and of fine particle size. Most of the unliberated quartz is found in coarse irregularly shaped particles. So the feed would require controlled grinding to increase liberation for improved separation efficiency. Mineral liberation analysis in 2D (thin section analysis) and in 3D (X-ray micro CT) provides important information that cannot be obtained by other analytical techniques. In the present case of phosphate rock samples from CF Industries, the small differences between good feed and bad feed in surface area, porosity and mineral composition are insufficient to explain the poor recovery of bad feed during the fatty acid flotation process. The poor recovery is attributed to insufficient liberation, where the bad feed has lost 10% of its phosphate content as unliberated particles in the tail. So the CF Industries bad feed would require further size reduction to increase liberation in order to enhance recovery. Regarding the good feed, only a slight improvement can be made in separation efficiency if the few very coarse phosphate particles are separated via screening before flotation process and ground to increase liberation. The authors would like to acknowledge FIPR (Florida Institute for Phosphate Research) for sponsoring this work. Also they thank H. El-Shall, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida and G. Wang; Arr Mazz Custom Chemicals, Winter Haven, Florida for their support.