Laboratory-scale experiments were conducted to recover lanthanum and cerium from Indian red mud in sulfuric acid medium. The method includes acid leaching of red mud pulp and subsequent liquid–liquid extraction of the leached metals with different organic extractants, in order to establish the technical feasibility of extraction and separation simultaneously. Maximum recovery of lanthanum (99.9%) was recorded with 3M H2SO4 at ambient (35°C) temperature, S/L ratio of 10g/L and agitation rate of 200rpm in 1h time. While 99.9% cerium recovery was achieved at 75°C and solid/liquid ratio of 10g/L in 3M H2SO4. Significant specificity for complete extraction of lanthanum, cerium and scandium by Cyanex 301 was noted as compared to the solvents such as DEHPA and Cyanex 272.At all the alumina plants, 1.0–1.6 Red mud is a complex material whose chemical and mineralogical composition varies widely, depending upon the source of bauxite and the technological process parameters ( The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of lanthanum (La) and cerium (Ce) recovery from Indian red mud, with sulfuric acid leaching, followed by liquid–liquid extraction in order to check the feasibility of their purification. The factors evaluated for optimization of leaching parameters were acid concentration/pH, temperature and solid to liquid ratio, followed by metal separation by solvent extraction. Complete study for solvent extraction is under progress and is not elaborated here. Washed Indian Red Mud sample was used in this study. To ascertain the metal concentration, each sample after coning and quartering was analyzed under ICP-OES and characterized by XRD (Bruker D8™) and EPMA (JEOL™). Chemical Analysis using ICP-OES ( The leaching of the metals was performed at different conditions by varying the parameters such as acid concentration/pH, temperature and solid/liquid (S/L) ratio. It may be noted that all the experiments were performed at ambient temperature (35 Since the concentration of lanthanum and cerium was low and may not be suitable for separation by precipitation, solvent extraction was performed using 3 different extractants (0.15 Parameters such as acid concentration/pH, S/L ratio and temperature were varied to test the feasibility for extraction of lanthanum and cerium under defined conditions. Experiments showed that the extraction efficiency of lanthanum was high at low acid concentration as depicted in Experiments were also conducted at low acid concentrations while varying the pH during the leaching of rare earths from the red mud. Results given in Results plotted in Effect of S/L ratio on the leaching of lanthanum and cerium from the red mud was examined and results are plotted in A feasibility trial was carried out to purify lanthanum, cerium and scandium (in g/L: 0.065 La, 0.096 Ce, 0.041 Sc) from the leach liquor of red mud using solvent extraction. Experimental results illustrated in  The Indian red mud sample used in this study contained ~ Maximum extraction of lanthanum (99.9%) was achieved by leaching the red mud with 3 Leaching of cerium was found to be maximum (99.9%) in 3 Complete extraction of lanthanum, cerium and scandium from the leach liquor of red mud was achieved by Cyanex 301, whereas extraction of cerium was poor with DEHPA and Cyanex 272. Authors are thankful to the