Recently, an unusual shape of the efficiency curve for a hydrocyclone classifier is reported by Bourgeois and Majumder [Powder Technology 237 (2013) 367–375]. They report actual recovery of near zero sized particles to underflow as zero. Such perfect separation of the finest particles is in total disagreement with the knowledge base and experience accumulated over many years of hydrocyclone practice. However, the authors assert that the efficiency curves reported by them are determined from a carefully generated experimental data followed by a rigorous statistical analysis. It is likely that their anomalous observations are due to systematic errors in size analyses.Recently, Bourgeois and Majumder start at zero for near zero sized particles; remain constant for some limited size range (Stage 1); increase with size till the efficiency reaches a critical point (Stage 2); followed by a fall in efficiency till it reaches a minimum (Stage 3); and finally a monotonic increase with size (stage 4). as Type I curves. At times, Stage 1 may not be prominent ( We propose to show that Type I curves are inconsistent with the efficiency curves published so far. Typically, the efficiency curve of a hydrocyclone classifier is a continuous function defined for all sizes greater than zero; starts at R Periodically, however, efficiency curves with a dip in the efficiency, referred to as ‘fish hook’, are reported [3 - 9]. Fish-hooks are reported in CFD simulations a gradual decrease in efficiency from near zero sizes to a minimum followed by a monotonic increase with increase in size as Type II curves. Interestingly, Bourgeois and Majumder too reported Type II curves ( A key concept in hydrocyclone modelling is the ‘centrifugal/corrected efficiency’ postulated by Kelsall Typically, the procedure for prediction of hydrocyclone performance using any of the models involves prediction of the corrected efficiency curve and R Although, Kelsall's bypass concept has been questioned For multi mineral ores also, it is logical to expect that fine particles follow water irrespective of density A general function which represents efficiency curves with or without fish hook is the modified Whiten function. This function which is incorporated in commercial software packages such as JKSimMet and Limn® Here E Plitt-Reid function based equations to represent efficiency curves with fish hooks have also been proposed. Of these, the functions proposed by Finch It is important to note that whether the modified Whiten function/Plitt-Reid function is used to fit an efficiency curve with a fish hook to experimental data or included in a simulation model for predictive purpose, the efficiency of near zero sized particles is equated (or predicted as equal) to water recovery. Successful usage of Eq. From the foregoing, it is evident that whether or not fish hook is present in the efficiency curve, there is a consensus that the efficiency of near zero sized particles is equal to  It is also significant that, there are no other reports in literature showing such perfect separation of finest particles as reported by Bourgeois and Majumder However, the assertion of Bourgeois and Majumder In this context, the investigations of Keck and Muller The above observations of Keck and Muller give credence to our conjecture as Bourgeois and Majumder  The efficiency curve reported by Bourgeois and Majumder showing perfect separation of the finest particles is inconsistent with all the knowledge base and experience accumulated over many years of hydrocyclone practice. There are no other reports in literature which show zero efficiency of near zero sized particles. It is likely that their anomalous observations are due to systematic errors in size analyses by laser diffractometry. Nagu (Nageswararao) Karri acknowledges inspiration from