High calcium in the municipal solid waste incineration (MSWI) fly ash made it a potential material for replacing part of the calcium flux used in iron ore sintering process. The results show that the sintering indexes were not negative affected but improved slightly as MSWI fly ash added, which is mainly because the ultra-fine material helped to obtain a better granulation and produced liquid phase under high temperature. Removal rates of harmful elements were improved as the increased content of chlorine brought in by the MSWI fly ash, which means that the residual contents of K, Na, Pb and Zn in the finished sinter were not increased significantly. 93.03% of the dioxins in the MSWI fly ash was degraded due to the fast heating rate and high temperature during sintering process, both of which are favorable factors for the degradation of dioxins. Although the addition of the MSWI fly ash made the concentration of SO2 and dioxins in the flue gas increased, standardized discharge can still be realized through conventional activated carbon system for flue gas purification. Therefore, the resource utilization and harmless disposal of MSWI fly ash can be realized through iron ore sintering process.Municipal solid waste incineration (MSWI) is confirmed to be a functional method in many developed countries for disposing municipal solid wastes (MSWs) due to its high volume and mass reduction. This method is promoted and popularized by Chinese government to deal with the booming growth of MSWs. As it is reported, 228 million tons MSWs were produced in 2018 in China, while less than half of the MSWs were treated through incineration ( Nevertheless, MSWI fly ash, a hazardous waste containing toxic dioxins and heavy metals, is inevitably produced during the incineration process. And the production of MSWI fly ash is approximately 5% of the MSWs production ( Conventional thermal methods for MSWI fly ash disposing mainly include sintering ( It is remarkable that ironmaking & steelmaking and cement production are two typical well-developed high temperature processes in China. Both of them have large capacity. It is reported that the production of crude steel and cement reached 928 million tons and 2.2 billion tons in 2018 ( Actually, researches on cement kilns co-processing MSWI fly ash have been done as the MSWI fly ash riches in calcium that the process of cement production needs ( Throughout the ironmaking & steelmaking process, iron-containing solid wastes are produced and the production is about 10% of the crude steel ( In comparison with sintering dust from the first two electric fields in the electrostatic precipitator, the chloride concentration in the MSWI fly ash are in the same level. And the difference is that MSWI fly ash has higher calcium concentration and lower iron concentration than sintering dust. For iron ore sintering process, both the calcium and iron are necessities. Therefore, the similarities of chemical compositions made iron ore sintering process a promising way to treat MSWI fly ash. Min et al. has explored the emission rule of dioxins and metallurgical properties of finished sinter after adding MSWI fly ash ( While the effective treatment of toxic dioxins and harmful elements (heavy metals, alkali metals) in MSWI fly ash is the core issue of concern. Therefore, in this paper, the degradation mechanism of toxic dioxins in MSWI fly ash were analyzed as well as the reactions between different harmful elements. Besides, potential problems during engineering practice, including whether the sintering indexes can be guaranteed and whether the current flue gas disposal system is still applicable as MSWI fly ash is added were also answered. Finally, through the comprehensive evaluation proposed in this study, the feasibility of this method has been further confirmed. The MSWI fly ash used in this study was provided by a MSWI plant, which was equipped with grate furnace and the treatment capacity is 1.8 million tons per year. And the production of MSWI fly ash is about seventy thousand tons per year. As MSWI fly ash was collected from the dust removal system, it is a fine particle size material. The size distribution of the MSWI fly ash used in this study has been tested with a laser particle size analyzer (Malvern Mastersizer, 2000; Malvern Panalytical Co., the UK). The result was shown in The main chemical composition of the MSWI fly ash was given in Usually, K, Na, Pb, Zn, Cl are recognized as harmful elements if MSWI fly ash were to be added into sintering process. Therefore, these elements in MSWI fly ash in this study were payed significant attention. From MSWI fly ash is a hazardous material containing the dioxins. The concentration of 17 toxic dioxins in the MSWI fly ash was given in The laboratory-scale sintering pot (Φ 100 mm × 700 mm) was conducted to simulate the industrial sintering process. Main process of sintering pot trials includes the following steps: 1) The iron ore sintering raw materials and the MSWI fly ash were well-mixed; 2) The raw mixture was fed into a drum (Φ 600 mm × 300 mm) for granulating; 3) 1 kg hearth layer was charged into the sintering pot, then the granules were charged above hearth layer; 4) Sintering process starts as solid fuels were ignited with a nature-gas igniter; 5) The sintering process ended as the burning through point was reached, at which the temperature of exhaust gas reached the maximum value. The main equipment was shown in The permeability of sintering bed that can reflect the resistance of granulated mixture, was used to evaluate the effect caused by the addition of MSWI fly ash. The test of permeability was carried out with a cylinder (Φ 200 mm × 100 mm). Granulated mixtures were charged into the cylinder. Then air was sucked in from the top of the cylinder at the flow of 10 m Sintering indexes including vertical sintering velocity, yield, tumbler index, and productivity are used to evaluate the quality. Vertical sintering velocity is the ratio of the height of sintering bed to the sintering time, mm·min Besides, the sintering flue gas compositions were also tested with specific flue gas analyzer (Photon, Madur Co., Austria), the detailed information was shown in In this study, the test of PCDD/Fs mainly focused on the 17 toxic PCDD/Fs. The test of PCDD/Fs in the MSWI fly ash and the sinter obtained from the co-process sintering of iron ore and MSWI fly ash were conducted according to the Chinese standard of HJ 77.3–2008. The PCDD/Fs in the flue gas of conventional iron ore sintering and the flue gas when processing the MSWI fly ash were carried out according to the Chinese standard of HJ 77.2–2008. As shown in To make sure the representativeness of sampling, the inlet of sampling gun should be placed in the central position of the gas duct, as shown in The dust generated during sintering process was collected to reflect the changes of particle emission caused by the addition of MSWI fly ash. The collection can be realized by replacing the dioxins sampling gun with the dust sampling gun (1050D, Laoying Co., Qingdao, China), as shown in The concentrations of element K, Na, Pb, Zn in sintering raw mixtures, MSWI fly ash and finished sinter were measured through Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES Optima 30, JobinYvon, France). The content of chlorine was examined through ion chromatograph (Model 120, Dionex, USA) ( High temperature during iron ore sintering process can help to remove part of the hazardous elements. Hence, the calculation method of removal rate was introduced, as shown in equation Nowadays, 360 m Although high content of calcium in the MSWI fly ash made it a calcium-containing resource, potential problems caused by adding the hazardous materials containing dioxins and harmful elements still exist, and mainly involves the following three aspects (as shown in Sintering indexes. Iron ore sintering is a high temperature process during which fine particles were agglomerated. As the most significant factors, the quality and yield of sintering are directly reflected through sintering indexes. Therefore, whether the addition of this ultra-fine particles, MSWI fly ash, would affect the sintering indexes should be researched. Concentration of typical harmful elements in finished sinter. Finished sinter is the raw material of blast furnace. The content of harmful elements including K, Na, Pb, Zn, Cl are strictly restricted, namely K Pollutants in the flue gas. Dioxins is inevitable to be generated during the conventional sintering process due to the complexity of raw materials. More dioxins would be brought in as the MSWI fly ash was added. Hence, the degradation ratio of dioxins brought in by the MSWI fly ash should also be researched during high temperature sintering process. And the pollutants emissions, such as dioxins, SO The raw materials for iron ore sintering used in this study came from an iron ore sintering plant in China. It mainly consists of iron ores, dolomite, limestone, quicklime, coke breeze, blast furnace return fines and sintering return fine. The main characteristics of the sintering raw material were shown in Moisture and coke breeze in the raw mixture are the main key factors that guarantee the smooth of sintering process. In this study, the appropriate ratios of moisture and coke breeze for conventional sintering have been figured out through factor experiment. They are 7.75% and 4.31%, respectively. Adding 1% MSWI fly ash into the iron ore sintering raw mixture without changing the ratios of the moisture and coke breeze. As shown in Sintering indexes were affected as the granulation performance was promoted. The results were shown in The improvement of sintering indexes is due to the increase of liquid phase that can combine the particles of raw mixture. High content of calcium in the MSWI fly ash made it similar to the flux used in sintering process. High temperature melting characteristic of MSWI fly ash was measured through in situ analysis (S/DHTT-TA-III, Research Institute of Chongqing metallurgical, China), as shown in Dioxins would be formed during the conventional sintering process, and the concentration of the 17 toxic PCDD/Fs could be 3.13 ng I-TEQ m From 17 toxic PCDD/Fs in the flue gas per ton of sintering raw mixture after adding 1% MSWI fly ash can reach 19.85 ng I-TEQ m Sintering process begins as the raw mixture in the top layer is ignited, and ends as the raw mixture in the bottom layer is transformed into finished sinter. During the process, all the raw mixture from top layer to bottom layer will experience five stages (shown in Although it seems that the concentration of 17 toxic PCDD/Fs in the flue gas increased after adding the MSWI fly ash, actually the absolute value of these PCDD/Fs brought into by the MSWI fly ash has been reduced during the high-temperature process. This can be calculated as follows: All the sintering tests were carried out with the same mass of sintering raw mixture. Assuming that these PCDD/Fs coming from conventional sintering raw mixture (without MSWI fly ash) is constant; During the sintering process, the mass of PCDD/Fs released by the sintering raw mixture is the same. Before adding the MSWI fly ash, the mass of 17 toxic PCDD/Fs released by sintering raw mixture can be calculated according to equation The mass of 17 toxic PCDD/Fs brought in by 1% MSWI fly ash can be calculated according to equation After adding 1% MSWI fly ash, the mass of 17 toxic PCDD/Fs in the sintering flue gas can be calculated as equation The degradation ratio of 17 toxic PCDD/Fs brought in by 1% MSWI fly ash during sintering process can be calculated according to equation 93.03% of the 17 toxic PCDD/Fs brought in by the MSWI fly ash was degraded during the high temperature process of iron ore sintering. The concentration in flue gas indeed increased. Fortunately, the current flue gas disposal system of iron ore sintering is complete. The flue gas disposal process usually includes dust removal, desulfurization and denitration. It was found that the dioxins in the flue gas can also be absorbed during the dust removal process, and the average removal rate of this process can reach 70.51% ( Then, the residue dioxins in the flue gas will be 0.083 ng I-TEQ m The characteristic of flue gas emission during sintering process before and after adding MSWI fly ash has been tested. The results were given in Based on the data in The content of harmful elements in the raw mixture after adding different ratios of the MSWI fly ash were calculated. The results were shown in The concentration of hazardous elements in the finished sinter were measured, and the results were given in To obtain clean finished sinter, the hazardous elements should be highly removed. The removal rates of these hazardous elements were improved as 1% MSWI fly ash was added (shown in From The improvement of the removal rates can also be reflected by the changes of dust particles. As shown in As another hazardous material brought in by MSWI fly ash, dioxins in the finished sinter should also be concerned. Therefore, after adding 1% MSWI fly ash, 17 toxic PCDD/Fs in the finished sinter have been tested, and the total concentration is only 0.16 pg I-TEQ g How did the addition of the MSWI fly ash affecting on the sintering process have been given in No new kind of gas pollutant produced when MSWI fly ash was added, but the concentration of gas pollutants including PCDD/Fs, SO In the meantime, more hazardous elements in the raw mixture were transformed into chloride and then removed as particles. Therefore, the quantity of particles in the flue gas increased but the finished sinter is cleaner. Electrostatic dust precipitation is also suitable for the particle reduction. The adaptability to complex raw materials and the ability of removing parts of harmful elements in the raw mixture made iron ore sintering process able to dispose and even utilize the calcium-based MSWI fly ash. The granulation performance, sintering indexes and species of gas pollutant were almost in the same with the ones of conventional sintering as MSWI fly ash was added. Although the concentration of SO Most of the 17 toxic PCDD/Fs in MSWI fly ash were degraded during the high temperature process. And the chlorine brought in by MSWI fly ash promoted the volatilization of harmful elements in both MSWI fly ash and sintering raw mixture so that cleaner finished sinter was obtained. As MSWI fly ash was added, the concentration of dioxins in the flue gas increased. Although this problem can be solved through flue gas disposal system containing active carbon, it still brought the increase of operation costs and became a limitation of the MSWI fly ash adding ratio. Considering the generation mechanism of dioxins, it can be speculated that the increase of dioxins concentration in flue gas is due to the increased probability of chloride contacting with copper-containing catalysts as MSWI fly ash was dispersedly distributed. Therefore, the future research is to find an appropriate way realizing the reduction of dioxins in flue gas during sintering process.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the