In this study, extraction characteristics of Cu, Co, Zn and Fe from copper converter slag by oxidative leaching with potassium dichromate–sulphuric acid lixiviant were investigated. The experimental results indicated that the presence of dichromate has a large influence on the extraction of metals. Cu recovery seems to be feasible by leaching with a lixiviant containing potassium dichromate and sulphuric acid because of high Cu extractions and low Fe concentrations in pregnant liquor. Also, copper extraction yields increased by increasing the dichromate concentration while Co, Zn and Fe extractions considerably decreased.The converter slag generated during the pyrometallurgical copper production generally contains significant amounts of some valuable metals such as copper, cobalt, nickel and zinc. In order to lessen the copper lost, returning the converter slag to the smelter furnace is applied as a common practice. In this case, beside the operational problems encountered, the volume and viscosity of smelter slag are unnecessarily increased and thus the high copper loss is occurred. Because of these problems, it is needed to discard converter slag from time to time. In last few decades, there has been growing interest in hydrometallurgical processes to recover the valuable metals from copper smelting slags. In these studies, efforts are mainly focussed on the leaching processes with or without some pre-treatments. Recently, dichromate compounds have been considered as oxidizing agents for dissolving the sulphide minerals in some studies. For this purpose, oxidation of pyrite ( The aim of this study is to investigate sulphuric acid leaching of copper converter slag in the presence of dichromate which is an efficient oxidant. In this regard, the effects of the concentration of sulphuric acid and dichromate on the recovery of metals were examined. Besides the extraction efficiencies of copper, cobalt and zinc, the leaching behaviour of iron was traced. Converter slag sample used in this study was obtained from Ergani Copper Plant, Maden, Elazig, Turkey. The slag sample was crushed in a jaw crusher and ground in a ball mill and then sieved. The fraction of −74 μm (200 mesh) was used in all experiments. Particle size distribution analyses indicated that the mean particle diameter of −200 mesh converter slag sample is 25.3 μm. The chemical analyses of this material was: 0.45% Co, 4.36% Cu, 52.18% Fe, 1.92% S and 0.64% Zn. Fayalite (Fe Batch leaching runs were carried out by shaking 250 ml glass conical flasks containing pre-determined amount of converter slag sample and 100 ml of solutions having a various concentrations of K In order to determine the most suitable lixiviant composition, the slags were leached with solutions containing 0–0.3 M K Effects of H The fact that the decreasing Fe, Co and Zn extraction values with the increasing of dichromate concentration necessitates further mechanistic explanations. Firstly, it must be noted that the presence of Co and Zn in iron-based mineral phases i.e., fayalite and magnetite restrict their extractions. The lower extraction values of metals such as Co, Fe and Zn mostly present in silicate and ferrite matrices may show the passivation of slag particle surfaces stemming from the adsorption of chromate species such as Cr Furthermore, reduced values in Fe, Co and Zn extraction yields in the presence of dichromate originated from the other reasons such as formation of insoluble chromate compounds with iron, and/or hydrolysing of iron(III) under the high oxidative conditions present. It is well known that the amount of soluble Fe is reduced by hydrolysing to its insoluble compounds such as hematite, goethite and jarosite in the acidic leaching processes applied under oxygen pressure. It has been reported that the mechanism of such iron removal processes is very complex ( From the results of this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: sulphuric acid leaching of copper converter slag in the presence of dichromate is more advantageous with respect to the leaching with sulphuric acid alone. Significant amount of Cu could be extracted by leaching with a lixiviant containing potassium dichromate and sulphuric acid. Also, iron concentration of leachates could be decreased significantly by using this process comparing with the ordinary H Cu extraction from converter slag increased with the concentration of dichromate used in leach process. Also, extraction of Cu increased with H In conclusion, since copper extraction is high and iron contamination is limited, it can be considered that the sulphuric acid leaching of copper converter slag in the presence of dichromate is a reasonable recovery method. Forthcoming studies related to the leaching kinetics and the effect of various parameters on the metal extraction by using sulphuric acid–dichromate lixiviant are in progress. This study was supported by the Research Foundation of Firat University under project no. FÜNAF-454 and Turkish Republic Prime Ministry––The State Planning Organisation under project no. DPT-97K120990.