The preparation of the Zr 84 wt%–Al 16 wt% non-evaporable getter alloy by means of mechanical alloying and its hydrogen absorption characteristics were investigated. Scanning electron micorscopy and energy dispersive X-ray analysis revealed that the mechanical ball-milling with Ni was successfully employed to coated nickel particles on the surfaces of the Zr–Al getter alloy. The resulting composite particles with pure nickel on the surface of the Zr–Al getter compound show good gettering performance and fast sorption kinetics without any activation process.For sealed-off vacuum devices and, especially, a field emission display (FED), the attainment and the maintenance of a good vacuum for extended periods of time is requisite for good performance. The use of non-evaporable getters (NEGS) would be an the effective solution to the vacuum need of the devices Most promising NEG materials are mainly based on alloys of metals of the IV group (particularly Ti and Zr), which form a passivating surface layer. In order to be able to absorb the active gases, NEGS need an activation at high temperature, providing a clean metallic surface. The activation of the getter must be done when it is used for the first time or whenever exposed to air. The heating process for activation causes deleterious effect of the thermal load on the surrounding walls and electronic components of vacuum devices. Therefore, getters having a significant activity at room temperature without previous activation are useful in applications of NEGs. It has been also known that hydrogen is the dominant residual gas species in the field emission based vacuum microelectronic devices Traditionally the getter materials are produced by melting under a purified argon atmosphere or vacuum, and this method usually contains a complicated process involving heating the ingots to obtain a good homogeneity and pulverising them to powder. It is noted that mechanical ball-milling is an effective way to synthesize materials such as amorphous alloy powders and intermetallic compounds in the past decades Mechanical alloying (MA) of a mixture of pure Zr powder (99.7%, -325 mesh) and pure Al powder (99.9%, -325 mesh) was carried out in a SPEX 8000 mixer/mill using a hardened steel vial and balls under argon atmosphere. The ratio of ball weight to powder weight was 4:1. At regular intervals, a small amount of powder was taken for X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). In order to coat nickel particles on the surfaces of the as-prepared Zr–Al alloy, a Fritsch “pulverisette 7” planetary mill was chosen because it generates a high shear interaction as the result of the ball rolling on the wall of the grinding containers. In this experiment, Zr–Al powders mechanically alloyed had particle sizes ranging between 325 and 80 mesh, and Ni powder was less than 635 mesh. The two kinds of particles were mixed to the Zr-Al/Ni weight ratio of 1/2 and ball milled for up to 2 h at a constant speed of 800 rpm in argon atmosphere. Four 4 mm diameter steel balls were used as milling media and the ball-to-power weight ratio was kept at 10:1. We examined cross sections of particles as a function of milling time on the SEM and used an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) technique such as element maps to follow the Ni, Zr and Al distribution. The room-temperature hydrogen sorption characteristics have been investigated for 0.3 g of getter alloy powders of size +325 mesh, using a modified Sieverts' apparatus   Therefore, in order to obtain the alloy of Zr The SEM micrographs in  The ball-milling technique was successfully employed to coat nickel particles on the surfaces of the Zr–Al alloy. The resulting particles show an improved activation behavior for hydrogen sorption. The mechanical alloying process used in the present study appears to be a simple method to prepare the Zr 84 wt%–Al 16 wt% non-evaporable getter alloy powder. This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation through contract 96-0300-06-01-3.