Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), a key regulatory enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway, catalyses the first rate-limiting reaction to produce ribose-5-phosphate for nucleic acid synthesis and NADPH to use in reductive biosynthesis. The available studies indicate an antioxidant role for G6PD and variation in its levels as a result of cellular insult. In this study, the activity of G6PD was monitored during Nʹ-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA)-induced hepatic damage in Wistar rats. NDEA generates hepatotoxicity and possesses mutagenic effects. To induce hepatic damage, NDEA was administered at doses of 100mgkg−1
                     body weightweek−1 (i.p.) for 14days. The animals of the control and treated groups were sacrificed each week. The extent of liver damage was ensured by LFT biomarkers, such as transaminases, ALP, bilirubin and the hepato-somatic index (HSI) along with histopathological observations of H&E and Masson's trichrome stained liver specimens. The results of the present study show that at the selected doses, NDEA significantly elevates LFT proteins and bilirubin and damages the lobular architecture in a dose-dependent manner. Software analysis of zymograms indicates maximum activity of the hepatic G6PD levels in day-14 NDEA-treated animals. Our spectrophotometry data further support the above findings on hepatic G6PD levels and demonstrate an approximately 1.63× and 1.66× fold increase in day-7 and day-14 NDEA intoxicated animals (P<0.05). It is concluded that elevation in the G6PD activity is apparently the consequence of NDEA-induced intoxication or oxidative stress, leading to hepatic damage to provide sufficient NADPH for microsomal detoxification and ribose-5-phosphate for DNA synthesis and repair, respectively, to maintain the cellular redox status.Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), also known as β- Because the liver is reported to contain the highest amount of G6PD activity ( Nʹ-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), acrylamide, bis-acrylamide, Tris, glycine, ammonium per sulphate (APS), N, N, N′, N′-tetramethyletylenediamine (TEMED) and glucose-6-phosphate (disodium salt hydrated) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Bovine serum albumin (BSA), haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains, phenazine methosulphate (PMS), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-monosodium salt (NADP) and nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) were purchased from SRL, India. All other chemicals, reagents and salts used in this study were of AR grade. Six to eight week old adult male albino rats ( Animals were categorized into two groups comprising ten rats each. Group-I animals (control) were the saline control and received normal saline. Group-II rats (NDEA treated) were given only Nʹ-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA) at doses of 100 Quickly excised liver samples were processed for homogenate preparation in ice cold 50 The protein quantity of the liver homogenates was estimated using the method of Formalin fixed liver specimens were processed to prepare 5-μm thick liver sections as per the protocol of Non-denaturing vertical slab polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) was performed (80 Gel-Pro (Media Cybernetics, USA) and Scion Imaging (Scion Corporation: Beta release-4.0) software programs were used for quantitative estimation of the enzyme activity in the zymograms. The differences between the control and treatment groups were evaluated by Student's t-test. The values were considered statistically significant at P Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is the key enzyme that catalyses the first step of the pentose phosphate pathway to produce NADPH and ribose-5-phosphate ( The liver is structurally heterogeneous and therefore executes various important functions, such as detoxification, hydrolysis of fats; production of urea and cholesterol; storage of vitamins, glycogen and minerals; processing of nutrients; and filtration of blood. Any insult by chemicals, viruses or parasites causes hepatic injury that directs the transdifferentiation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) into myofibroblast-like cells. These activated HSCs are characterized by the marked loss of lipid droplets as well as increased cell proliferation to induce the disproportionate synthesis of extra cellular matrix (ECM) and consequent expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) ( Our results based on the biochemical parameters and HSI are consistent with previous reports in which NDEA or NDMA shows a significant increase in LFT proteins and altered HSI due to hepatic intoxication ( The results of this study further show that the levels of G6PD significantly vary between the control and NDEA treated groups. Upon increasing the contrast of the gels, the software analysis demonstrates the highest levels of G6PD in the day-14 NDEA-treated group, which received a dose of 100 The literature suggests that under proliferative conditions, G6PD gene expression increases both in foetal hepatocytes ( None. Financial assistance from