In order to demonstrate the strength and possible weaknesses of the digester–screw press (DSP) system for small-scale oil palm fruit processing, a comparison was made of its performance and that of the erstwhile hand-operated hydraulic extraction system. Indices of evaluation include oil yield and quality, and operational economics. The results indicate that the throughput of the DSP system was four folds of that of the hydraulic system, whilst also operating at higher oil extraction efficiency (89.1%). There was no significant difference between the quality of the palm oil obtained from the two systems. However, the economic analysis of the systems indicates that at throughput of 0.75 t/h and above, the DSP system was more economical than the hydraulic system in terms of equipment, labour, material and floor space requirement and revenue accruing from the processing operation.Palm oil, the most important product of the oil palm ( The palm fruit is a sessile drupe, one-seeded fruit enclosed in a fleshy pulp of variable shape of about 20–50 mm long. The fruit has a kernel consisting of an irregularly shaped mass of white soluble proteins or albumen enclosing a cylindrical embryo, an endocarp or shell, a mesocarp or fleshy part (pulp) with cells filled of oil (in which individual bodies are clubbed together) and a coloured exocarp or outer skin ( The unit operations involved in palm oil processing include fruit sterilisation, fruit loosening/stripping, digestion, oil separation and clarification ( All the operations are carried out in different ways in large scale, intermediate and small-scale plants. The methods employed invariably influence the yield of oil and its quality. In the large scale plant, all the processing operations are fully mechanised, with sophisticated conveyance systems. The use of screw expellers in oil separation and the recapturing of oil by a sludge centrifuge for further clarification enables over 90% The throughput of a small-scale processing plant is expected to be in the range 1.0–1.5 t/h ( A variety of small-scale mechanical processing devices have been developed. The hand-operated hydraulic system, which uses a separate digester (horizontal or vertical types), is very popular and prevalent ( A new concept, the digester–screw press (DSP) system, was recently developed by the Nigerian Institute for Oil palm Research (NIFOR), Benin City ( The equipment constituting the digester screw press system, (a) A steriliser which is a cylindrical drum (b) A hand-operated 400 mm long palm fruit stripper consisting of a shaft with stripping arms enclosed inside a cylindrical drum, perforated to allow passage of fruits into the discharge chute. (c) A diesel engine-powered DSP. The DSP essentially consists of an upper part (horizontal digester with beater arms) and a lower part (the screw press with worm in a cage) resting on a supporting frame. The horizontal digester is 1200 mm long and 360 mm in diameter. It is provided with a feed hopper at one end, and discharges its content into the screw press 150 mm away from the other end ( (d) A clarifier, consisting of the oil separating and drying units as well as an auxiliary water reservoir and a furnace. The oil separating unit consists of three concentric cylinders with the inner one equipped with a sieve which receives the crude oil. A separate diesel engine-powered horizontal digester consisting of a cylinder cage of A hand-operated hydraulic press. For the two systems used, the fruits were run through the machines once without recycling. The digestion and pressing times were determined based on this. Digestion is considered adequate when a consistent uniform paste has been obtained. The operating conditions were ensured to be optimal based on a preliminary experiment. The batch experiment was replicated twice for each system. Fresh fruit bunches were quartered (cut into approximately four pieces) and sterilised for 1 h in the steriliser. The sterilised quarters were passed into a stripper. About 480 kg of hot stripped fruits, being the full capacity of the two sterilizers used at the small-scale unit of NIFOR, were processed using the DSP. The digestion/pressing times were noted. The crude oil collected was then transferred into the clarifier and the time taken for complete clarification was also noted. Pure oil collected was weighed using a Mettler 750 scale with 0.02 kg accuracy. For the hydraulic system, 480 kg of fruit were also digested in a separate horizontal digester and subsequently subjected to oil expression in the hand-operated hydraulic press. Digestion time and pressing time was noted and the crude oil weighed. The crude oil collected was clarified and the pure oil collected. The throughput of each of the two systems was calculated as the ratio of the weight of fruit processed in tonnes to the time taken in hours. The pure oil yield was taken as the ratio of the weight of oil collected over the weight of fruit processed. The extraction efficiency was calculated as the ratio of oil yield to the oil content of the palm fruit. Some physical properties (specific gravity and colour) and chemical quality parameters of the purified oil were determined. The chemical quality parameters were FFA, saponification value, peroxide value, iodine value and moisture content. The specific gravity was determined using a 10 ml constant volume specific gravity bottle, while Munsell colour charts were used for colour determination. Titration and titrimetric methods as recommended by The economic analysis was based on a work study of the material and labour input against returns for the small-scale processing unit of NIFOR. The number of items of each equipment required, labour requirement and space requirement at different throughput were estimated for each of the systems. The total cost of equipment including running cost, maintenance cost and labour cost were also calculated. The estimated gross returns over a period of time for each throughput and the net profit were determined. The yearly processing cost and revenue were based on the peak production periods (April and September). NIFOR, being a government establishment has 20 working days per month, giving a total of 40 days for the yearly processing period (  The use of the DSP machine enabled the throughput of processing to be increased four fold when compared with that of the hydraulic system. The clarifying time was also reduced by half. Obviously, the thoroughness of the digestion operation (crushing and pulverisation of the fruit into a pulp) and the pressing method determine how easily oil is released during extraction. The use of the screw press in the DSP enhances the size reduction operation thus allowing for better exposure of the oil cells and subsequently easing the flow of oil from the cells. The duration of the whole processing operations was also similarly affected. Thus, in a continuous clarifying process as this, the time of completion of the digestion and pressing operations affect the clarifying time as clarification of oil does not end until oil from the expression process is clarified. The analysis of the contents of the crude oil from the two systems is presented in From  The labour requirement of the hydraulic system and the DSP system at the throughput used in the experiment were 10 and 6 man-hour, respectively ( The estimated processing (running) cost per annum for the DSP system as a percentage of the hydraulic system is shown in Based on the extraction efficiency of the two systems and prevailing market cost of palm oil, the expected monthly revenue from the DSP system was found to exceed that of the hydraulic system by 14%, while the processing cost per tonne (of fruit) for the DSP, at a throughput of 1.3 t/h, was found to be 92.4% The comparative evaluation of the DSP system which is being developed and the conventional hydraulic press system undertaken in this study revealed that the DSP system has many comparatively favourable attributes and is to be preferred to the hydraulic system. The throughput capacity, extraction efficiency and consequent economic advantage of the DSP system over the hydraulic system further enhances its suitability for small-scale palm fruit processors particularly those operating at throughput of about 1.0 t/h of fruits. However, the quality of palm oil from the two systems compares favourably well. The adoption of this new technology by small-scale processors should go a long way in preventing waste of harvested fruits usually experienced in the peak season of production.