Fuel characteristics of biodiesel derived from kernel oils of Sclerocarya birrea, Tylosema esculentum, Schiziophyton rautanenii and Jatropha curcas plants were investigated in comparison with petroleum diesel. The fuel properties under review include flash point, cloud point, kinematic viscosity, density, calorific value, acid value, and free fatty acids. These were determined and discussed in light of major biodiesel standards such as ASTM D 6751 (American Society for Testing and Materials) and EN 14214 (European standards). The best biofuel in terms of cold flow properties was S. rautanenii, with a cloud point of 0 °C and a pour point of −5 °C. The good cold flow properties demonstrate operational viability during the cold season. The heating values of S. birrea and S. rautanenii biodiesel fuels were found to be 9.2% and 10.3% lower than that of petroleum diesel while those of T. esculentum and J. curcas were both 9.7% lower. Other fuel properties analysed demonstrate that biodiesel fuels produced from kernel oils of S. birrea, T. esculentum, S. rautanenii and J. curcas plants have properties that are comparable to, and in some cases better than, those of petroleum diesel. The results of this study indicate the feasibility of producing quality biodiesel fuel from indigenous seed oils found in Botswana. A balanced allocation of resources however needs to be established to ensure that the cultivation of these oil-bearing plants does not compete with the cultivation of food crops.The environmental impact of petroleum fuels, coupled with the depletion of known petroleum reserves, make renewable energy sources more attractive and justify the continued search for alternative renewable fuels. Biodiesel is among the renewable energy resources that has attracted considerable attention in recent times. Biodiesel is highly favoured as alternative to petroleum-based diesel because it is renewable, non-toxic, biodegradable, non-flammable and environmentally friendly Biodiesel fuel is derived from vegetable oils or animal fats The successful introduction and commercialization of biodiesel in many countries around the world has been accompanied by the development of standards to ensure high product quality and user confidence. Some of the major biodiesel standards are ASTM D 6751 and the European standard EN 14214. In the current study, fuel characteristics of biodiesel produced through alkali transesterification of three plant oils indigenous to Botswana and Materials used for experimentation include matured seeds (obtained from ripened fruits) of Eight kilograms (8 kg) of plant seeds were charged into a multi-perforated stainless steel compression chamber, with stainless steel discs placed at intervals of 2 kg of plant seeds. The piston was located to keep the top disc into position. The hydraulic system was then operated manually to lift up the platform upon which the multi-perforated stainless steel compression chamber sits, thereby compressing the seeds and forcing the oil out of the kernel (seed) and through the 1 mm diameter perforations of the compression chamber. The hydraulic system was operated to a maximum pressure of 30 bars to ensure maximum oil extraction while avoiding over loading the system. The extracted oil was filtered, bottled and kept in a cold room pending conversion to biodiesel as described in Section Solvent extraction was done to establish true kernel oil content (yield) of the four plant species under review, grown under natural conditions. The process involved seed grinding to fine powder, Soxhlet extraction, filtration, distillation and purging. The solvent was prepared by mixing 300 ml of hexane and 100 ml of iso-propyl alcohol in a 500 ml flask. The mixture ensures total extraction of all lipids as hexane extracts all non-polar lipids and iso-propyl alcohol polar lipids. The separation of solvent from the oil was achieved through a distillation process performed using a rotary evaporator. To ensure that no trace of solvent remains in the oil sample, the oil was purged with nitrogen gas (nitrogen drying) for approximately 40 min. Nitrogen is used because it is inert and does not react with oil components. Chemical analysis was performed to establish fatty acid profiles of the extracted oils to evaluate suitability (quality) for use as feedstock for biodiesel production. The method involved analysing standard (reference) samples, generating calibration curves for fatty acids identified in the standard samples, and identifying and quantifying fatty acids present in the extracted oil samples. To establish the chemical composition of the standard samples, Arachidate was injected into the standard mixtures as an internal standard (IS) and the samples were run ten (10) times through the Gas Chromatograph - Mass Spectrometry (GC–MS) system at ten (10) concentrations of equal interval from 10 ppm (parts per million) to 1 ppm. At each concentration, peak areas and retention times for all fatty acids present were captured from the chromatogram. Peak area ratios (Analyte/IS) were calculated for all fatty acids present at all concentrations, and these were used to generate calibration curves for each fatty acid in the standard samples. The oil samples were also run through the GC–MS system under similar conditions and peak area ratios (Analyte/IS) calculated for each fatty acid detected. The instrument used for composition analysis is the Waters GCT premier Time of Flight (TOF) mass spectrometer (MS) coupled to the Agilent 6890N gas chromatograph (GC) system. In addition, the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) developed Automated Mass Spectral Deconvolution and Identification System (AMDIS) software package, (chemdata.nist.gov/massspc/amdis) was used for peak identification. The AMDIS extracts spectra for individual components in a GC–MS data file and identifies target compounds by matching these spectra against a reference library, in this case the NIST library. One micro litre (1 μl) of oil sample extract was injected into the system using an auto-injector. The injector temperature was set at 260 °C in the splitless mode. Helium was used as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Separation was achieved using a 30 m DB5 – MS column. The oven temperature was kept at the initial 100 °C for 2 min, and then gradually increased from 100 °C to 290 °C at a rate of 10 °C per minute. The total run time was approximately 35 min. The mass spectrometer (MS) conditions that were employed were a positive polarity of electron ionisation (EI), a source temperature of 180 °C, and an emission current of 359 μA. Other MS conditions including electron energy and resolution were set by the system's auto tune function. Detection was by the micro channel plate detector (MCP) whose voltage was set at 2700 V. The sample composition was identified and quantified using the NIST (2005) mass spectral library using a combination of the Masslynx acquisition/data analysis software and the AMDIS by NIST. The procedure described in Section Biodiesel was produced through an alkali catalysed transesterification process in the laboratory under strict observation and controlled conditions. One litre of crude plant oil was filtered and pre-heated to approximately 105 °C for about 10 min to eliminate water. The oil was allowed to cool to approximately 58 °C and then charged to a 2 L transparent reactor. A solution of methanol of 99.5% purity and 7.5 g of potassium hydroxide pellets of 98% purity as catalyst was prepared and mixed until all the pellets had dissolved in methanol, and then charged to the reaction vessel. The molar ratio of methanol to oil was fixed at 1:6, which is optimal ratio for the transesterification of vegetable oils The petroleum diesel used for comparison was purchased from a local Shell petrol Station and had properties including boiling point of 422 K, vapour pressure of 53 Pa, density of 831 kg/m The fuel characteristics of biodiesel produced from the four oils were analysed for relative density, viscosity, cloud and pour point, flash point, heat of combustion, and acid value. The viscosity (dynamic) measurements were made according to ASTM standards D445, and were measured using a Fungilab Premium Series (PREL 401024) viscometer coupled to a Thermo Fisher Scientific heating bath circulator. Kinematic viscosity could be approximated using the density at 40 °C and the dynamic viscosity. The cloud and pour points were determined using the ASTM standard test methods ASTM D97 and D2500. The ASTM D93 standard test method for flash point by Pensky–Martens closed cup tester was used for the determination of flash points of the diesel fuels. The heat of combustion of the diesel fuels was determined using the IKA C200 Calorimeter system that has automatic data acquisition through the CalWin calorimeter software which handles calculations for the calorific values of samples. The acidity values of the biodiesel fuels were measured according to the ASTM D664 standard test method Oil yields for different plant species, fatty acid profiles of studied plant oils, ester composition of biodiesel fuels and physicochemical property analyses results are presented in The oil yield regarded as the actual oil content in this study is the one determined using solvent extraction method and not press (mechanical) extraction, as the latter is dependent on machine efficiency. After running four Soxhlet extractions for each of the indigenous species, the average oil content was determined as a proportion of total mass.  The ester composition of biodiesel fuels indicates that the most abundant compounds include methyl palmitate, methyl oleate, methyl stearate and methyl linoleate. These are all long chain compounds that are largely saturated, with a small degree of unsaturation. The characteristic ester composition of biodiesel depicted by the mixture of these compounds has a strong influence on its fuel properties. Fuel properties of plant oil and its derived biodiesel improve in quality with increase in carbon chain length and decrease as the number of double bonds increase, except for cold flow properties. Thus the cetane number, heat and quality of combustion, freezing temperature, viscosity and oxidative stability increase as the chain length increases and decrease as the number of double bonds increase. A fuel whose constituent mixture of compounds is fully saturated will depict higher cetane number and better oxidative stability, but poor cold flow properties. The small degree of unsaturation depicted by the presence of double bonds in compounds like methyl oleate and methyl linoleate is significant as double bonds inhibit crystallization, thus lowering the cloud point of the fuel. A low cloud point is a desirable fuel property as it ensures that a fuel remains in the liquid phase at low temperatures. Thus on the basis of composition, biodiesel fuels derived from SB, TE, SR and JC plant species generally depict potential for good properties trade-off between cold flow properties, oxidative stability and cetane number. The flash point is a fuel property that determines the safety of a fuel during its handling and storage. It refers to the lowest temperature corrected to a barometric pressure of 101.3 kPa (760 mmHg), at which application of spark causes the vapours of a specimen to ignite under specified conditions of test. This test, in part, is a measure of residual alcohol in biodiesel that determines the flammability classification of the fuel. The cloud point of petroleum diesel was found to be the same as that of SB 100 and JC 100, while that of SR 100 was lower and that of TE 100 higher. The difference in value is more significant for TE 100, with a cloud point of 8 °C relative to 2 °C for petroleum diesel. All the four biodiesel fuels have pour points that are higher than that of petroleum diesel, with TE 100 recording the highest value of 6 °C. These values of cloud and pour points are perceived to be high especially for application in cold climatic conditions. This is due to a high degree of saturation depicted by ester composition of the fuels, which does not sufficiently inhibit crystallization. The pour and cloud point analyses in the characterisation of biodiesel is very important as it determines the suitability of the fuel for large storage and pipeline distribution. Pour point is the lowest temperature at which the fuel can still be moved, before it has gelled. Higher proportions of saturated fatty acids accounts for higher pour point of biodiesel The heat of combustion or calorific value of a fuel is a very important factor in the fuel economy and power deliverability. The results presented in Acid value is a direct measure of free fatty acids (FFAs) in the biodiesel. Free fatty acids are undesirable in the fuel because they may cause corrosion of the fuel tank and engine components. The results from this work, shown in Density is an important property of fuel since other performance characteristics like heating value and viscosity are correlated with it Viscosity is another important property of fuels used in diesel engines. It is a measure of the internal fluid friction of fuel to flow which tends to oppose any dynamic change in the fluid motion, and is the major reason why straight vegetable oils are transesterified to methyl esters (or biodiesel). This property influences the injector lubrication, atomization and combustion processes that take place in the diesel engine. The kinematic viscosity of biodiesel produced from the four oils fall within the ASTM (1.9–6.0 mm The following conclusions can be made from the work discussed in this manuscript; The results of this work has established that the oil bearing seeds of Of the four biodiesel fuels, Biodiesel fuels tested met requirements of major international biodiesel standards such as ASTM D 6751 and EN 14214. The abundance of non-arable land for the cultivation of food crops in Botswana favours the cultivation of On the basis of environmental advantages of biodiesel coupled with good fuel properties discussed in this work, individual farmers, private and public enterprises who depend on diesel to power machinery are encouraged to harvest or cultivate 