Mineralogical characterisation is typically used to assist in the development of processing strategies for ores. This paper describes the application of mineralogical characterisation techniques in the development of flotation strategies for processing an ore from a low-grade silver deposit that contains a variety of rock types that have undergone hydrothermal alteration where zinc, lead and silver sulphides are typically the primary minerals of economic interest. Comprehensive mineralogical characterisation of the feed, concentrates and tailings from batch flotation tests was undertaken using both the mineral liberation analyser (MLA) and laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (LA-ICP-MS). The results of mineralogical characterisation of the feed (head grade, 116ppm) indicated that the majority of the silver occurred as solid solution in pyrite which assisted in the development of the flotation strategy used for this ore which resulted in approximately 87% of the total silver being recovered to rougher concentrate at a grade of 485ppm.Mineral characterisation plays a key role enabling the recovery of valuable minerals through using mineral processing techniques such as hydrometallurgy, magnetic separation or flotation. It provides information on the minerals that contain the target element and the presence of any detrimental elements (such as As) or minerals that are present in trace amounts in the ore under study. There are a wide range of analytical techniques that can be used to describe and quantify both the elemental deportment and the mineral characteristics (such as grain size, liberation and association) on an unsized and size-by-size basis. Silver in nature can be found in a wide range of Ag-bearing minerals that includes a list of more than 200 minerals that contain silver at levels that are economically viable. In many ore deposits silver is typically hosted by between five and ten silver minerals, which can make the development of an appropriate flowsheet for the extraction of silver challenging ( Flotation of silver ores can be performed as bulk flotation or selective flotation ( The use of a sulphidizing agent followed by flotation using a cationic collector ( The use of an optimum amount of the sulphidizing agent followed by flotation with an anionic collector ( The use of a chelating collector to enhance the recovery of the oxidised silver minerals ( Sulphidizing agents are commonly used due the reactive nature of silver minerals. Some work in the use of sulphidization for silver minerals was carried out by Mineralogical characterisation is used in the development of a flotation strategy and to understand the response of different minerals with respect to their liberation characteristics. The overall composition of composite particles, and the % surface exposure of the mineral of interest can be obtained from MLA or QEMSCAN measurements. For MLA the data may be expressed as either mineral locking or mineral liberation by free surface. Both approaches are widely used by researchers and metallurgists to identify the liberation of minerals in an ore. Mineral locking gives information on the type of particles the mineral of interest occurs in i.e. liberated, in a composite with one other mineral (binary) or in a composite with more than one other mineral (ternary and higher). No detailed information about the grade of the mineral of interest in binary or ternary classes is provided. Mineral liberation by particle composition provides information about the grade of the mineral of interest in each composition class. Performing a mass balance on the flotation products provides recoveries and grades of the specific system under study, however to gain a deeper understanding of the behaviour of the system, particularly with respect to the nature of the losses and potential for further optimisation, size-by-size analysis is required ( The approach using mineral locking data from the MLA was developed to transition between traditional mineral liberation data collected from using optical microscopy techniques and that collected from automated SEM-based systems ( The aim of this paper is to assess the recovery of valuable minerals for a low-grade complex silver ore in a size-by-size and size by liberation analysis. The minerals that were the focus of the study concentrated on pyrite and sphalerite as the main sulphide minerals in the ore. All remaining minerals were grouped as non-sulphide gangue (NSG). The experimental methodology for this work included a combination of mineralogical and flotation characterisation. Mineralogical characterisation of the ore was initially performed on a sample that was crushed to −3.32 Mineralogical characterisation of the flotation feed was carried out on a sample which had been ground to a P80 of 100 Mineralogical characterisation of the flotation products was also performed; some of the concentrates (see The flotation characterisation included the development of an appropriate flowsheet to produce the highest silver recovery and grade in a rougher concentrate. This is shown in Following this feed preparation stage, flotation was carried out in a JKMRC 5 The other reagents used: were sodium silicate (1000 A combination of MLA and LA-ICP-MS was used to determine the silver deportment in the flotation feed. These techniques showed that the majority of the silver in this sample occurs as solid solution in pyrite (with an average Ag content in pyrite of 2936 Preliminary MLA analysis from one size fraction of the ore (−425/+300 As shown in Pyrite presented different textures with colloformic layered/botryoidal concentric fabrics as can be shown in In most base metal processing operations, metallurgists consider pyrite as iron sulphide gangue. However, from the information provided by the mineralogical characterisation it is clear that the flotation approach needed for developing a flowsheet to target silver requires the production of a pyritic concentrate. Liberation analysis, on the flotation feed ground to a P80 of 100 From the mineralogical analysis the implications for processing this ore are firstly, to maximize recovery of pyrite (which contains the majority of the silver present in the sample), discrete Ag minerals and sphalerite which will respond to the sulphide mineral flotation conditions and; secondly to maximize the recovery of pyrite that have been considerably modified from their original form (could have a degree of oxidation) by the use of sulphidization technology to modify their surface characteristics. It is noted that the pyrite is an important silver carrier, and this exists at a feed grade of 6.7%, requiring substantial additions of reagents such as collector(s) and activator(s) for recovery at this head grade. Additional size reduction, targeting the coarser less liberated size fractions is also required to provide a flotation feed with sufficient liberation of sulphides; this lead to the incorporation of MIG into the flowsheet, to reduce the P80 below 100 Initial characterisation of the flotation behaviour of the ore included a preflotation evaluation to determine the presence of naturally floatable minerals, followed by bulk flotation. Bulk flotation test were performed using a number of different strategies including: finer feed grind and/or a regrind stage to improve liberation of silver-bearing minerals; determination of total silver recovery through an evaluation of the recovery of silver-bearing minerals that favourably respond to standard sulphide flotation; the use of sulphidization technique over a range of pH values to target potentially oxidised minerals; and the application of techniques to activate pyrite and sphalerite to maximize silver recovery. The cumulative grade and recovery results for the optimised flowsheet, based on chemical assay, are shown in The grade recovery curves in  To calculate the size-by-size mineral recoveries, modal mineralogy from MLA analysis by size fraction of the flotation products was used. All flotation products streams (concentrates and tail) were measured by size fractions and a combination of modal mineralogy and the mass balanced data were used to perform the mineral recovery by size calculations. The results from this mineral mass balance by size are presented in Water recovery is also indicated in Incorporating mineral liberation into the recovery by size analysis was done using mineral locking data from the MLA measurements. Mineral locking data provides information on the distribution of the mineral of interest in a number of particle classes including: liberated (particles that contain >95% by weight of the mineral of interest); binary (particles that contain the mineral of interest and one other mineral) and ternary (particles that contain the mineral of interest and more than one other mineral). The flotation feed and products can then be analysed to determine the response of these different classes of particles during flotation. The characteristics of particles which contain pyrite in the flotation feed are shown in The analysis of the tailings provides information on where the valuable mineral (the Ag-bearing pyrite) has been lost. Pyrite losses are predominantly as the result of pyrite being present in binary composites as shown in Mineralogical characterisation was essential to develop the most appropriate strategy to recover the silver in this ore. A key outcome from this characterisation was an understanding of the silver deportment and the liberation characteristics of the dominant silver host, which were used to develop a flotation process to target pyrite. The liberation study by size of the flotation products indicated that recovered pyrite is predominantly liberated with the main pyrite losses occurring in the −53/+38 The authors would like to thank Mr. M. Alexander and Mr. S. Carey for their assistance in the project, and acknowledge the support provided by the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC), Sustainable Minerals Institute (SMI) of the University of Queensland. Also the authors want to acknowledge the assistance of Gary McArthur (MODA) for the LA-ICP-MS analysis.