This chapter discusses the theory of countercurrent extraction separation of rare earths, which is established by Gangxian Xu, including the way of calculation of the process parameters using the equations and optimization of a process, the way of dynamic simulation of a process to verify the parameters of the process designed by static methods to achieve the information from the start to the stable state of the process, and the way of stating a process to accelerate the system to the equilibrium state.Solvent extraction is a method to separate compounds (extraction complexes) based on their relative solubilities in two different immiscible liquids, usually aqueous solution and an organic solution with extractant. Cascade extraction is a solvent extraction process with cascading a lot of single-extraction stage to repeat mixing the organic phase with the aqueous phase to make the extraction reaction between two phases with the mass transformation to equilibrium state for improving the separation effect. Based on the different flow ways of aqueous phase and organic phase, cascade extraction can be divided into the cross current extraction, the countercurrent extraction, the half-countercurrent extraction, the fraction extraction, the reflux extraction, and so on. The following are the several ways of extraction used in extraction-separation of rare earths: Cross stripping: The agent consumption of aqueous stripping solution in process is high. Thus, it is only used for stripping Tm, Yb, and Lu from the loaded organic phase since they form the strongest extraction complexes with extractants such as P Countercurrent extraction: When Countercurrent scrubbing or stripping: When Fraction extraction: When Reflux extraction: In fraction extraction, S can be replaced by the loaded pure B organic phase, or W can be replaced by aqueous scrubbing solution of pure A, or S and W are all changed. When Half-countercurrent stripping: Organic phase is added into every extraction cell, and the stripping aqueous is passed through every cell, but the organic stays in the original cell. It is similar with extraction chromatography process and used in stripping process to lower the acidity of stripping aqueous solution and increases stripping effect. Cocurrent extraction: There is no separation effect. It is only used to saponify the organic phase with ammonium or sodium hydroxide and load rare earths from aqueous phase into organic phase or called rare earth saponification, for extraction separation of rare earths or concentrating them into the stripping solution by acid stripping. For the above illustration on different extractions, they all have their own range of applications, and the most important one is the fraction extraction, which can obtain high-purity product with high recovery and is easy to reach to or get close to optimized process target. L. Alders It should be mentioned that Professor Biaoguo Li and Professor Chunhua Yan have also made great contributions to the development of the countercurrent extraction theory. This chapter consists of the papers published by these three professors and discusses the countercurrent extraction theory systematically. The process design by using the equations from this chapter is mainly applied in the 1980s and now has been replaced by the computational simulation program or software including static simulation and dynamic simulation with the basis of the theory of countercurrent extraction separation of rare earths.  In countercurrent extraction, organic phase flows from the first to the To know the purity of  The mass balance means that the amount of component Mass balance is introduced into series equations to verify Eq. Mass balance in the first stage is  Distribution ratio, Extraction ratio, Eqs. The mass balance of the first extraction cell connected to the second extraction cell is as follows: Eq. Similarly, we can prove that Two sides of Eq. Eq. Eq. When For the less extractable component  Normally selecting To answer the question of how much the purity of the less extractable component The purity,  P If the percentages of La and Pr in feed are 50%, namely, What would be the purity and recovery of La are through the 10 stages of countercurrent extraction? The provided stage efficiency is 90%, and then, the effective number of the stages is  The purity of La is satisfied, but the recovery is very low. If the recovery is increased to 70%, what would be the purity?  It is easy to change Provided that the effective stage number is still 9, Therefore, the recovery is increased to 70%, and the La purity is lowered to 98.7%. Based on the above example's conditions, how many stages should be increased to make the recovery of La 70% with purity of 99.95%? With purity of 99.95% and the purification times of La, The number of stages adopted in real application should be increased to 16.9/0.9 If the separation factor, The recovery of From Eq. This means that the theoretical number of stages, 2499, is needed to get the purity of 99.95% with 80% recovery. From here, we can see that it is impossible to obtain high purity and recovery at the same time by using countercurrent extraction method. The order of the extractability of rare-earth elements is represented by the order of English alphabet rank: For the two-outlet process system, two components, the more extractable component and the less extractable component, are considered in equation deduction; for example, in real extraction separation of For the three-outlet process system, besides consideration of the more and the less extractable components, the intermediate extractable component should also be considered. For example, in real separation of For two-outlet process system, the parameters calculated by the equations for multicomponent system are only approximately applicable; for three-outlet system, the parameters calculated by the equations for more than three component systems are only approximately applicable. The separation factors,  Alders' fraction extraction theory provided that the extraction ratios, In the deduction of the equation to calculate the number of stages and so on parameters for two-outlet system, the composition of the aqueous solution at feed stage for the more extractable component In the deduction of the calculation equations and simulation calculation, the flow ratios of the aqueous phase to the organic phase in extraction section and scrub section are assumed to be constants, respectively, and the mass transfer between adjacent stages satisfied the “piston flow” model. Based on the extraction equilibrium and the principle of mass balance and the purities of products, recovery, and so on separation indexes, Guangxian Xu  Aqueous solution feed  In as the basis. In the aqueous solution of the feed, the mole fractions or weight percentage of Let Let From Eqs. Let When the two products, from the organic-phase outlet and aqueous-phase outlet, are high-purity products, From the mass balance of the extraction section, yields are as follows: From the mass balance of the scrubbing section, yields are as follows: These two equations above are the operation line equations for the total elements. There are also similar operation line equations for components The extraction ratios of The maximum extraction amount, From Eq. The ratio of For the system of the constant mixed extraction ratio, in most of the scrubbing stages,  Eq. The ratio of Therefore, the mixed extraction ratio in the extraction section equals to Now, we deduce the relationship between Using Eqs. The relation equation of Eqs. Organic Phase Feed   For the system of separation elements Thus, The product, Thus, the total purification times in the fraction extraction process are decided by the purities of the two-end products and independent of the feed composition. Unextracted fractions, The extracted fractions, (1 It is easy to verify them: Normally, in a highly efficient fraction extraction-separation process, The recoveries of the products are as follows: If If N Pr is the more extractable component, and Nd is the less extractable component, so From Eqs. From Eq. From Eqs. Thus, the recovery of Pr is 99.7%, and the recovery of Nd is 99.93%.  When We assume that the mass ratio of component The reasonability of this assumption will be verified in Because of separation factor, Thus, From the operation-line equation Substituting Eq. Multiplying That is, Let the right side of Eq. In this way, we obtain the extraction ratio at the extraction section for aqueous solution feed, which must satisfy the following inequality: Otherwise, it is impossible to effectively separate When For example, This means that the extraction ratio in the extraction section must be more than 0.75 to separate mixed Therefore, the extraction ratio in the extraction section must be more than 0.95 to separate mixed Similarly, the mixed extraction ratio in the scrub section must satisfy the following inequality: When the product from organic outlet is high-purity When two high-purity products are supposed to obtain at two outlets, yields are as follows: The five equations in  When the products from two outlets are high-purity products, yields are as follows: Therefore, it yields the following relational expressions: In Eq.  Other extreme values of extraction parameters for different According to Alders' theory, the relationships between the purification times and six extraction parameters, These two equations are the links between separation indexes and extraction parameters. It is very difficult to find out the main factors that determined the values of We will get rid of Alders' equations and divide the fraction extraction system into two parts: the countercurrent extraction section and countercurrent scrubbing section. When the feed is the aqueous solution, the feed stage is combined into the extraction section as shown in We assume that the concentration percentages of components This means that the stages from the first stage to Therefore, Normally, Similarly, the stages from the ( Taking Eqs. These are two fundamental equations to calculate the number of the stages of fraction extraction needed for the constant mixed extraction ratio system. The conditions of application of these two equations are that the extraction ratio In the actual processes of solvent extraction separation of rare earths, The relationship between the single-metal extraction ratio and mixed extraction ratio is If component The disadvantages of the normal-concentration plot to find the number of stages in the extraction process are the following: It is very difficult to count the number of stages clearly for very small separation factor system. The equilibrium lines of the pure component However, using the log purity plot to find the number of stages can overcome these two disadvantages. Based on this method, new equations of calculating the number of stages can be deduced out, and at same time, the assumption of constant The separation factor The meanings of the symbols are listed in Combining Eqs. Eqs. Since Eqs. These two equations are the equations of purity equilibrium lines for component Eq. Hence, Substituting into Eq. Because Eq. substituting into Eq. For the system of the constant mixed extraction ratio, This is the equation of purity operation line for component Similarly, as above, the following equation is for component When the product The mass-balance equation for component Using the similar method and procedures to deduce and verify, yields For component When the product When When two lines are intersected, the In the scrubbing section, when Solving Eq. When two products from two outlets are high-purity products, which means that One extraction system is used to separate A/B two elements; the effective separation factors measured are The composition of the feed is  Therefore, the extraction section is controlled, and using Eqs. Based on the data above, the purity equilibrium line and operation line are calculated as follows: The coordinate of intersection is The following are the purity equilibrium line and operation line in the scrubbing section: The coordinate of intersection is Four lines can be drawn in the log coordinate by utilization of above equations to calculate the point by point such as Starting from The method of log purity plot discussed above eliminates the assumption of constant When The ratio of purity increment Δ The subscript Integrating the above equation yields And from above equation,  Although some approximation is used in the deduction of Eq. Similar deduction can prove In the above equation,  If the feed is the aqueous solution and the purity of When If If the feed is the organic phase, the purity of B in the feed stage is assumed to be equal to the weight percentage of B in aqueous feed, Similarly, The above results are consistent with Eqs. An example of application is solving the number of stages of the example used in the method of log purity plot by using the equation of analytic method.  The optimum parameters are Using Eqs. Applying Eqs. The calculated results above are basically consistent with those solved by the log purity-plot method. Eqs. There are two kinds of computational programs used to calculate stage by stage. The first one is to start from the first stage and calculate the composition of The second computational program for calculation stage by stage is to start from the feed stage. The feed stage is set to be the first stage and assumed the composition of The second computational program is used to illustrate the calculation stage by stage. The composition of With provided separation index of To simplify the calculation, let the separation factors in extraction and scrubbing sections be equal, where Calculation of extraction section stage by stage Let feed stage Where in aqueous phase in organic phase If In organic phase, In aqueous phase, The formulas used to calculate the In organic phase, In aqueous phase, In Calculation of scrub section stage by stage Let feed stage If In aqueous phase, In organic phase, If The equations to calculate the In aqueous phase, In organic phase, In the Therefore, the total number of stages in both the extraction and scrubbing sections is Example of calculation stage by stage In order to illustrate the calculation, the conditions are More than 500 different cascade extraction systems have been calculated, and the ranges of calculation are The comparison of the numbers of stages calculated stage by stage with those calculated by stage number equation has been made. There are not much differences between the two groups of results for the common used processes. The results in  Generally speaking, the big differences occur at The meaning of k in  The equations of the minimum extraction ratio and the methods used to calculate the number of stages have been discussed in the last section. The former gives out a range for extraction ratio, and the latter provides a method to calculate the numbers of stages in both the extraction and scrub sections based on the composition of the feed, and the required purity of the two-outlet products after extraction ratio is selected. But how to choose the optimal or better extraction ratio is still a problem that needs to be solved. The following section will discuss this issue. The optimized process should be the one with the best economic effects; this also means that from the provided composition of the raw feed to the required purity products, recoveries, and output, the plant can obtain the maximum profit by the application of the optimum process. However, it is a very complicated problem to optimize one process. The target of optimizing the process under provided conditions is to design one or several process schemes for the plant to choose. Optimization of the process involves many factors to consider and many tasks to accomplish. For a designated separation task, the first step is to choose the best extraction-separation system with the advantages of a bigger separation factor and extraction capacity, simple flow sheet, operational safety, low extractant cost, low agent consumption, wastes coming from the process being easy to be dealt with, and so on. But normally, one system does not have all these advantages, and the most suitable system should be selected by considering the comparative importance of the advantages. After one extraction system is selected, the single-stage optimization proceeds by conducting tests to define the most suitable extraction ratio, the concentrations of the feed and the scrubbing solution, the acidity, and so on. The optimization of the cascade extraction process is to design the optimal process using the separation factor of the system, the separation indexes, and so on conditions. After the definition of the process conditions, choosing the extraction equipment is the next concern. The optimization of the cascade extraction process will be discussed later in this chapter. In the industrial production of rare-earth extraction separation, the first requirement is the excellent separation effect with high-purity products and high recovery; the second is the high output that would lower the operation cost. Therefore, the optimum process is the process with the best separation effect under the circumstance of the same total volume of extraction cells and daily output; in other words, under the circumstance of the same total volume of the extraction cells (the number of stage multiplies the effective volume of single stage) and separation effect, the maximum daily output of the separation plant can be achieved with the lowest agent consumption. Eqs. When The selection of the optimal extraction ratio controlled by the extraction section will be discussed first. The daily output of product In the above equation, Let Hence, From Kremser equation, Substituting Eqs. Substituting Eq.  Differentiating Eq. Using Taylor series to expand ln By only taking the first item and substituting into Eq. Eqs. Similarly, under the scrubbing-controlled condition, the optimum extraction ratio equation for the scrubbing section is proved to be If Substituting Eq. This is the equation of the optimum reflux ratio in the extraction section. If and This is the equation of the optimum reflux ratio in the scrubbing section. In the cascade extraction process, the bigger the value of Let From Eq. Eq. Therefore, From Eq. When Therefore, It is clear that using the equation of optimum extraction ratio deduced above and based on the value of  When or therefore, or  When or therefore, or  When or hence, Here, In the discussion of the formula of extreme value, we have paid attention to the two products from two outlets that are highly pure, and the feed is an aqueous solution; Here, the following equations can be obtained:  The results in The optimum In Several hundreds of calculated data have been summarized to prove that Aqueous solution feed Organic feed Eqs. This is the simple calculation method to design the cascade extraction process for the constant mixed extraction ratio system. Based on the composition of the feed and the separation indexes, Eqs. This design method was proved to be reliable and practical by naphthenic acid, P There are 167 equations deducted for optimizing the countercurrent extraction processes, but about only 30 equations are commonly used in the design of the extraction processes. These equations are summarized with the same equation number so as to refer and examine the procedures of their deduction. One suitable extraction system is selected for the specific separation requirement, and single-stage test should be conducted to find out the suitable phase ratio, the ratio of saponification of extractant, the concentration of the feed and scrubbing aqueous solution including acidities, and so on. The average separation factors, If the difference between Based on the composition of the feed, the target is to separate components If Eq. Eqs. If If the purities of the two products are set to be Organic-phase feed or aqueous-phase feed is firstly to be set according the process requirement. In most of the situations, it is very easy to make up the raw material of rare-earth oxides into the aqueous solutions; therefore, the aqueous feed is very convenient. Another advantage is to reduce the size of the equipment using aqueous solution with high concentration. But for multicomponent mixture of Calculation of Normally, the equations for calculation of the optimized values of Calculation of When the aqueous solution feed is used, the following equations must be satisfied: Take When the organic-phase feed is used, the following equations must be satisfied: Take Generally speaking, the equations in The approximate or precise equations could be used to calculate the numbers of stages in both the extraction and scrubbing sections. The approximate equations are as follows: When In equation, When The values of Here, providing 3 The results calculated are summarized in a table that is similar with One overall extraction-separation process used for the separation of the mixed rare earths into pure individual product must contain many subprocesses of extraction separation. Therefore, the trends of the flow sheet and every single process must be calculated as discussed above; the following factors such as the connections of upstream and downstream processes, the quality of the products, the stabilities of the processes and recoveries, the flexibilities of the products, the agent consumption and operation cost, the investment of the equipment and filling cells, and the waste treatment must be comprehensively assessed to select the best process flow sheet.  The purity requirement of Gd  One acidic extractant can separate Eu Separation factors Calculate purification times Hence, Calculate the process parameters. Calculate process parameters by the optimal equations Due to aqueous solution feed, Let Take Take When the concentration of the rare-earth feed Hence, Assuming 3 Calculate process parameters by the equation of extreme value Take  Take  Calculation of the various selective countercurrent extraction parameters Set Block diagram Take There is one extraction system with the separation factor,  Calculate Calculate the process parameters Calculate the process parameters by the optimal equation Due to the use of the aqueous solution feed, Because Thus, the extraction process has 24 stages in the extraction section and 21 stages in the scrub section, a total of 45 stages. Calculate the process parameters by extreme-value equations: This process has 21 stages in the extraction section and 16 stages in the scrubbing section. Calculate various parameters of countercurrent extraction process for selection Process parameters of Block diagram Omit The conditions are the same as those in Example 2, but the feed changes to organic-phase feed. Calculate the extraction process parameters.  The calculations of Calculate the process parameters. Calculate the process parameters by the optimum equations: The extraction stage controls the process for organic-phase feed: Organic-phase feed is used in this example; the purity The process needs 29 stages in the extraction section and 18 stages in the scrub section, total of 47 stages. When the rare-earth concentration of the organic-phase feed Let Hence, Calculate various selective countercurrent extraction parameters by extreme equations The calculation results for Thus, this process needs 23 stages in the extraction section and 15 stages in the scrub section. Block diagram of the process When When one countercurrent extraction process is designed, the common way is to do bench-scale simulation tests of countercurrent extraction with a group of separation funnels to test and verify if the process is reasonable and able to reach the expected separation target or index. No matter what kind of starting methods is used, the countercurrent extraction system gradually reaches its equilibrium state or stable state from unequilibrium state with the increase of the times (or so-called rows, phase transfer) of shaking separation funnels. Because the separation factors of adjacent rare-earth elements are very small, the purity requirement of individual rare-earth element is very high, and it will spend a very long time to make the extraction system reach the equilibrium state, so the conducting test is both costly and time-consuming. The purpose of computational simulation of separation funnel tests for replacing manual bench-scale test is to obtain more accurate, reliable, and a lot more test results in short time. This section will discuss the mathematical model, computer program, and simulation results of the process from the starting to the equilibrium state for single component and will also examine the relationships between the number of rows and the degree of equilibrium, the number of stages, the extraction ratio, and the way of the starting under certain degree of equilibrium. In order to help readers to easily understand, the first is to introduce the fundamental law of the countercurrent extraction process for single component and then introduce the simulation method of the mathematical model and computer program. Two questions are often encountered during the countercurrent extraction test; the first one is how many rows (phase transfer) of separation funnels should be shook to make the system to some degree of equilibrium from the starting of the test; the second is the influence of the number of stages, Normally, when For example, countercurrent extraction system 1: System 2: Although  For any group of ( In the range of Let Hence, the following equation can solve the value of Now, the following example is used to explain the application of One countercurrent extraction system has 30 stages; the average extraction ratio of component Looking up, The results calculated by the computer are These results are basically consistent with those looked up from the tables and demonstrate that the method discussed above is feasible to solve The values of  The figure of When  The introduction above is the issue of dynamic equilibrium of the countercurrent extraction using the pyramid style to start. The cascade extraction test is often started by way of the block style. The starting way of the block style means that before starting the test, the aqueous phase and organic phase are preadded into every separation funnel (when the number of stages These two kinds of starting the cascade test influence the equilibrium, but the characteristics discussed above do not change. For example, the shapes in the figures of the relationship between G and the number of stages n, and    The figure of In most of the situation, when T table is used to introduce the dynamic equilibrium of the countercurrent extraction test with five stages by the pyramid-style start.  Let  (From P. Li, H. Yu, G. Xu, Theory of countercurrent extraction III. A mathematical model for the dynamic equilibrium of countercurrent extraction, Acta Sci. Nat. Univ. Pekin. 2 (1980) 66–84 (in Chinese).) The example discussed above is ratiocinated to general condition; let When Substituting Eq. Combining Eqs. When Let  Taking the number of stages Because Substituting this into Eq. The coefficients in parentheses are It can be seen that the expression of In general condition, based the theorem proved,  In actual calculation, the coefficients In order to calculate using Eq. This is equivalent to After operation, the content in B[1] is changed to If the common factors, Repeating the above operation, the various values in B[l] for Hence, the coefficient of B[6] is Similar method is used to recur to It can be seen from the discussion above that computer can do these calculations; therefore, the calculation block diagram should be detailed to explain. Using 10 kinds of extraction stages, It seems that the requirement of calculation is only for From Eq.  Based on the requirement of the calculation and the calculation method illustrated above, the block diagram Application of fraction extraction can achieve two high-purity products with high recovery, but when two elements needed to be separated have similar chemistry properties and small separation factor, the number of stage will be very big, the amount of bench-scale and pilot plant tests for the process design is going to be huge, and the periods of tests would be very long, especially for rare-earth extraction separation. Conducting dozens even more than 100 stages of cascade extraction tests is an extremely time-consuming work, and the only solution of this problem is that utilization of computational simulation program replaces manual tests to achieve the parameters of the processes, shortening the test periods and improving design accuracy. Application of mathematical model or equations deduced above to design the parameters of the process of countercurrent extraction is a kind of static design. The process designed is the equilibrium state of the process without any information of the variations of the system state from the start to the equilibrium. For example, how long will it take to reach the expected results and the system equilibrium using separation funnels or small-size extraction cells to do cascade extraction tests. The equilibrating courses of some tests could be very slow, so it is very difficult for these kinds of small-scale tests to reach their equilibrium states, and this will result in incorrect conclusion. In order to find the solution of the problem mentioned above and study the regularity of the countercurrent extraction process, Xu et al. A two-component system is used to illustrate the simulation program.  Set process parameters Composition of feed: Separation index: The purities of the products from the aqueous solution outlet and organic-phase outlet are Separation factors: The separation factors between Calculation Parameters Based on the parameters provided, the utilization of the equations deduced in the last several sections and the static computational programs can calculate the required basic parameters of the extraction process, such as the numbers of stages in both extraction and scrubbing sections According to the particular case, one group of optimum process parameters selected among many of them is used to calculate the dynamic equilibrium. To verify the process parameters, the calculated parameters  Total Mass in Every Stage The characteristic of the system of the constant mixed extraction ratio in each stage of the extraction cells is that the total amount of mass in organic phase Relational Expressions of Extraction Equilibrium    One quadratic equation could be obtained from Eqs. In the above equation, Two roots could be obtained by solving Eq.  A quadratic equation can be obtained from Eqs. One root from Eq.   Based on the characteristics of the method of separation funnels and the requirement of the number of cascade extraction stages, in the simulation program, an array is used to represent one group of separation funnels to operate and store the data of the separation funnels. The number of array elements,  Provided parameters: Calculation parameters: Control parameters: feed addition (aqueous solution or organic-phase addition) and the ratio G of the number of phase transfer to the number of stages  Before starting the test, according to  To equilibrate the two phases in each separation funnel, the shaking operation of separation funnels must be carried out; the values of In order to conveniently do the phase transfer (phase moving), the separation funnels are divided into odd row and even row (the same funnels but for convenient accounting); all the separation funnels in the tests are shook to the equilibrium (for every separation funnel), and then, the phases are transferred from odd row to even row (no feed is added in even row), which only means that the half row of shaking or phase transfer is finished. The next step is to shake the separation funnels to the equilibrium state, and then, the phases are transferred from even row to odd row (the feed is added in this step), which is called the second-half phase transfer; the entire steps of these two half-phase transfers are called one-whole phase transfer or one-row shook; the number of the (whole) phase transfer is represented by I, and the unit of progression is 0.5. I is used as an independent variable in dynamic simulation; it is suitable to adopt the ratio   After extraction equilibrating operation, based on the rule of separation-funnel operation, the phase transfer should be made between the separation funnels. Take component In the calculation, the following equations are used to simulate the separation process: From the above equations, when the subscripts of  After a row of separation funnel was shook and the phase transfer was finished, one feed should be added into the  In the operation of the separation funnel test, every row of the separation funnel is shook, and one product from the organic-phase outlet and one product from the aqueous-phase outlet are obtained. When the test is done, one group of mass distribution data in each stage could be obtained. But when every row of the separation funnel is shook by computational simulation, the following dynamic parameters, which cannot be obtained in the real test, could be exported: Distribution of the purities In the equation, Degree of mass balance for entering and exiting the system Amount of average accumulation (aqueous feed) Extraction section: Scrubbing section: The entire system: Four calculation examples are used to illustrate the dynamic courses of cascade extraction for two-component and multicomponent system. There is one process of cascade extraction separation of two-component system with aqueous solution feed, and the process parameters are listed in  The purity variations, B1P and ANMP, of two products from two outlets increase with the increase of B1P monotonically increases with the increase of The results of XBP for stages 9–11 in  The course from the starting to the system equilibrium for cascade extraction is that two components One countercurrent extraction system is used to separate two components, and the provided process parameters and calculated parameters are listed in Due to the requirement of the high separation index of the system and the small separation factor, it will take a very long time for the system to reach the equilibrium state after starting; One acidic extraction system is used to separate mixed three components of rare-earth Based on the process parameters in  It is worthy to notice that in multicomponent systems and unequilibrium state, the purity of the product from one outlet (normally, the product consists two or more components from this outlet) is much higher than that required in a certain period, but this product is not the common product due to the lack of the intermediate components and in turn influences the downstream process, in which the product is used as the feed. One countercurrent extraction system with aqueous feed is used to separate the mixed rare earth of the four components of The simulation results are demonstrated in The stagewise distributions of each component in both the aqueous and the organic phases in the steady state are showed in For the multicomponent system, according to the requirement of the products, the production of pure individual rare-earth product must link up several processes; the optimization of these processes requires to compare and verify many process schemes and select the processes that equilibrate quickly and consume lower agents. The computational simulation of the dynamic courses of the cascade extraction can provide the information, which cannot be obtained from laboratory tests, and thus eliminates the blindness of the test and design. There are two basic courses from the start to steady state for cascade extraction-separation process: the first is that every component in the system continually redistributes with its own distributing capability in two phases, concentrating the more extractable component(s) into the scrubbing section and the less extractable component(s) into the extraction section; the second is that the accumulations of various components continuously change and make them trend to those of steady state. Two courses are interrelated, and the second one is substantially more important. The variations of parameters with It can be seen from the calculation results above that the purities of both products do not increase monotonically with the increase of When a rare-earth extraction-separation process with constant mixed extraction ratio is started, the concentration of each component in each stage gradually changes with the more extractable component moving into the scrub section as organic phase moves, and the less extractable component moving into the extraction section as aqueous phase moves. The accumulation of each rare-earth element changes with the difference between its amounts of feed and outflow from the aqueous and organic phase. When the process reaches its equilibrium state, the amount of each rare-earth element entering the process is 100% equal to its outflowing amount from aqueous outlet and organic outlet at any moment, but the accumulation of each rare-earth element does not change with time. For the systems of multicomponent extraction separation, the intermediate components must have some accumulative peaks. Professor Chunhua Yan The following examples are used to further explain the accumulation peaks. The composition of the feed is listed in The cutline of the first example is set as The main accumulative peaks of Tb ( The cutline of the second example is set between   Because the concentration of Also, the value of the main accumulative peak for the intermediate elements increases with the increase of the intermediate components in the feed. When one cascade extraction-separation system and its feed are fixed, the accumulation amount of each component is also fixed; the locations of the accumulation peaks will depend on Highly valuable rare-earth elements such as Pr, Eu, and Tb have very low content in the rare-earth concentrates and therefore are very difficult to separate and purify into their very high-purity products with high recovery due to the extraction operational issues. When these valuable rare-earth elements are enriched to certain percentages, they will be separated and purified easily into high-purity products. The accumulation of the intermediate elements can be used to enrich these highly valuable rare-earth elements to the expected percentage by three-outlet technology by suitably increasing the extraction amount, The calculation results demonstrate that for two-component system with reasonable process parameters, the composition of the aqueous phase (aqueous feed) in the feed stage or in the organic phase (organic feed) or one stage before ( For the multicomponent systems, the accumulations for intermediate components in extraction cells are quite different; the concentrations of the multicomponent in any extraction cells (in the extraction and scrubbing sections) are not the same or close to those of the feed, so more attention must be paid to this issue when calculating the parameters of the multicomponent of the countercurrent extraction system. The study on the dynamic equilibrium of the cascade extraction system for the separation of two or multicomponent rare-earth elements illustrates that for the system with small separation factors, the requirement of the product purity is high and percentage difference of the feed composition for each component is much higher; the process parameters are calculated using the equations in Based on the dynamic simulation of the cascade extraction program, the method of the simulation calculation of the reflux start is introduced to discuss the total reflux and single reflux of the starting methods systematically, and several process examples of extraction separation of rare-earth element are used to illustrate the advantages of the reflux models: total reflux, single reflux, large reflux, and normal operation. Because of the different definitions of reflux extraction, based on the characteristics of the constant mixed extraction ratio of the system of solvent extraction separation of rare earths, the definitions of the reflux extraction are as follows: Definition of total reflux extraction: In the course of the cascade extraction, the feed is not added, no products are produced from two outlets, and the scrubbing amount equals to the extraction amount, that is, Here, in this extraction system, the mixed extraction ratio of the extraction section is In the course of the cascade extraction, a certain amount of feed  In the course of cascade extraction, one product ( Here in the system,  In the course of cascade extraction, one product ( Here in the system, It can be seen that in the course of total-reflux and single-reflux extraction, the reflux ratios in the extraction and scrubbing sections are all bigger than those of the normal extraction. The principle of the computational simulation of the separation funnel method has been discussed in the last section. All the methods used in the computational simulation are the same as those discussed in the last section. Based on the characteristics of the simulation of cascade system using separation funnel and the reflux extraction, the separation funnels are filled as shown in According to the characteristics of the extraction-separation system, the following ways are used to simulate the dynamic courses of reflux extractions.  In the course of total-reflux extraction, if In the course of total-reflux extraction, if  If the difference of the contents between A and B in the feed is big, the single-reflux extraction method can be directly adopted to start: If If In order to illustrate the results of the simulation of reflux starting and discuss the differences of various starting methods, Xu et al.  In this example, the separation factor is small, the percentage difference between component In order to clearly demonstrate the characteristics of the system states with different starting methods, The main process parameters of one cascade extraction system with aqueous solution feed to separate two mix rare-earth elements are listed in Because the contents of components A and B in the feed are the same, the computational simulating calculation is to follow the dynamic course of the total-reflux start and then transfer to normal operation. The results will be compared with those of the normal-starting method. All the results are listed in It can be seen from Large quantity of the calculation results for the different multicomponent systems, and different process parameters for the reflux start demonstrated that the reflux methods are able to accelerate the progress of cascade extraction equilibrium and shorten the time required to reach the steady state to only one-tenth or several percentage of that with normal starting method.  In the course of total reflux, for each stage, Based on the deducing method in   From Eqs. In normal operation, Similarly, based on the equations of equilibrium and operation line in the scrubbing section,   From Eqs.  One parameter,  The migrating rates and the distributions for each component can illustrate different separation efficiency.  There are two states in the course of total-reflux start; the first one is that the big difference presents between the more extractable components and the less extractable components in feed; by adopting the optimization process parameters, total-reflux operation can make a higher percentage of the component in the feed reach or exceed the accumulation amount of the steady state and in turn make the purity of this product reach or exceed the separation target of this product (for Example 1). The second is that when the content of the more extractable components in feed is close to that of the less extractable components, the total-reflux operation can make the elements that needed to be separated all reach or exceed the required purities of both products (for Example 2). Based on actual situation of the system, the operation of the system is transferred to normal operation suitably to simultaneously eliminate the unqualified products. The cascade extraction system efficiently separates the components; the accumulation amounts of the steady state for each component in each extraction cell must be reached, which do not change with the different starting methods, but determined by the composition of the feed, separation targets, separation factors, extraction amount Total reflux has the maximum separation efficiency but cannot change the accumulation amount in each extraction cell. It can be seen from the results of Example 1 that total reflux in scrubbing section only is adopted to make component The ratio G of the number of phase transfers to the number of stages required for single reflux could be estimated by the calculated accumulation amount. In Example 1, single reflux is transferred from total reflux; there is no component In the above equation,  The coefficient in the denominator of the equation is introduced in the calculation of From If a small amount of component The results in In the course of transferring the cascade extraction system to the normal operation from the reflux starting, there is a course of process transition to gradually increase the mass rate of the feed (but less than normal operation) or reduce the mass rate of the scrubbing acid or organic phase; this step actually is a larger reflux-ratio operation by comparison of the normal operation. On other hand, the operations of total reflux or total reflux in the extraction or scrubbing section only would result in emulsion occurring in the first two stages since the lack of metal ions in the aqueous phase would increase the pH of the aqueous phase (stages 1 and 2). A larger reflux-ratio operation is recommended in the actual situation by leaving a little amount of metal ions in the aqueous phase to prevent emulsion, but the amount loaded should be as small as possible to reduce rare-earth loss. Therefore, the reasonable and feasible model of the reflux operation is It must be pointed out that for the method of reflux starting in the cascade extraction system, when the purities of both products reach the separation target, the system does not in fact reach the steady state or equilibrium state; at this moment, the content of other rare-earth elements as impurities in pure products is only less than that of the requirement; the composition of the products is not stabilized, and the mass that entered the cascade extraction system does not equilibrate with that exited the system (see Moreover, the model of the reflux starting is not only used for starting the system of countercurrent extraction-separation of rare earths but also used to adjust the process operation. For a long time, the fraction extraction processes applied in the separation of rare-earth elements only have two outlets, the organic phase outlet and the aqueous phase outlet. If the feed consists of three or more components, the single process is only able to obtain one pure product and one mixture product at most. With the development of the rare-earth separation production and application, the processes of extraction separation of rare-earth elements are required to be flexible and simple and to have low operation cost to produce various products. Three-outlet extraction process is an extraction process, which can produce two pure products and one enrichment of the mixture product and can be widely used in the systems of countercurrent extraction separation of multicomponent with high economic and technical indexes. Since Biaoguo Li and Chunhua Yan et al. Because of the similarity of the calculation courses of the three-outlet extraction process for the multicomponent system, three-component system is used as an example to discuss. Component The basic relationships between the process parameters for the three-outlet extraction were studied and reported Purity and recovery of product Purity and recovery of product Purity and recovery of product When the mole fractions of the feed are In the above equations, The system that opened the third outlet in organic phase has similar basic relationships. Based on the definition of purity and recovery, yields are as follows:  Substituting Eq. In the actual calculation, let For  With If  If If If If If If  If According to the mass balance, yields are as follows: Substituting Eqs. If If  If If If In brief, only four separation indexes in the six separation indexes for the process of three-outlet system are independent after the introduction of the suitable approximate conditions, so that there are 15 groups of ways of the separation indexes provided. If the accurate calculations are necessary, five separation indexes must be provided to solve the other separation indexes. The theoretical analysis and test results demonstrate that the required extraction amount for the third outlet opened in the extraction or scrubbing section at aqueous and organic phase is different. How to select a suitable extraction amount in the process design is the key issue that needs to be solved. Based on the characteristics of the constant mixed extraction ratio, the method to calculate the extraction amount for the three-outlet process has been suggested. There are eight kinds of mass distributions for the three-outlet system with the feed of the aqueous and organic phases and different location of Although there are eight kinds of three-outlet systems, only four kinds of them with the third outlet opened in aqueous phase are used. These four kinds of systems will be discussed later in this section. Each component must meet the purification requirement for the three-outlet system: In order to meet this requirement, the system should have one minimum extraction amount. If the third-outlet system is opened in the extraction section, the minimum extraction amounts will be Based on the separation factors of the system, the separation indexes, the composition of the feed, and the relationships of mass balance, the equations to calculate It can be seen from Eqs. The results of the calculation show that the separation effect of the system with the minimum extraction amount is very poor; the bigger number of stages is required to reach the separation target. Therefore, the extraction amount, The method of stage-by-stage calculation and the analytic method could be used to calculate the number of stages. Because the method of stage-by-stage calculation based on the mass balance and the equilibrium of two phase has been discussed earlier, the simple method to calculate the number of stages for the three-outlet system is to divide the three-outlet process into three subcountercurrent extraction sections, and Eqs. In general situation, two outlets, aqueous- and organic-phase outlets, at the two ends of three-outlet process, are required to produce pure products, and product This kind of system could be divided into three sections: 1 Here,  Here,  Here, The number of stages for this kind of system can be calculated by substituting the separation factors in each section and the numbers calculated by Eqs. The basic separation process of the system is showed in the following block diagram: The whole system could be divided into three sections: 1 Here,  Here, In the equation,  Here, According to Eqs.  A system with saponified acidic organophosphorous extractant is used to separate Sm/Eu/Gd with the aqueous feed. Provide parameters: Composition of the feed: Separation factors: Separation target: purity of Gd Calculate parameters: Purities, recoveries, and outlet fractions are In the equation above,  Minimum extraction amount and the location of the third outlet Eqs. Extraction amount and the number of stages In the three-outlet countercurrent extraction system, the extraction amount, For one group of parameters, Normally, when the process parameters of a three-outlet extraction process have been calculated by the above methods, the next thing to do is to verify and make a few adjustments using dynamic simulation programs. At the steady state, the stagewise mass distribution of each component in the aqueous solution and the organic phases calculated by the dynamic simulation program is often used to guide the operation of the three-outlet process. A lot of the dynamic simulation of the three-outlet processes To examine the process parameters in  One system with saponified acidic organophosphorous extractant is used to separate La/Pr/Nd with the aqueous feed. Based on the known conditions, the principle of the minimum extraction amount is used to calculate the location of the third outlet. One group of parameters would be selected for the process design. Here, The results of simulation show that the process parameters in the table of the block diagram are reasonable and the process can reach the designed separation target.  By comparison with the two-outlet process, the three-outlet process has two pure products and one enriched product; the enriched products could be Pr The calculation results show that the There is an accumulation peak of component