Flotation tests at laboratory scale describe the metallurgical behavior of the minerals that will be processed in the operational plant. This material is generally composed of ore and gangue minerals. These tests are usually scarce, expensive and sampled in large supports. This research proposes a methodology for the geostatistical modelling of metallurgical recovery, covering the change of support problems through additive auxiliary variables. The methodology consists of simulating these auxiliary variables using a Gibbs Sampler in order to infer the behavior of samples with smaller supports. This allows downscaling a large sample measurement into smaller ones, reproducing the variability at different scales considering the physical restrictions of additivity balance of the metallurgical recovery process. As a consequence, it is possible to apply conventional multivariate geostatistical tools to data at different supports, such as multivariable exploratory analysis, calculation of cross-variograms, multivariate estimations, among others. The methodology was tested using a drillhole database from an ore deposit, modelling recovery at a smaller support than that of the metallurgical tests. The support allowed for the use of the geochemical database, to consistently model the metal content in the feed and in the concentrate, in order to obtain a valid recovery model. Results show that downscaling the composite size reduces smoothing in the final model.Downscaled simulation locations are visited in a random order. At every simulation location, perform simple kriging of the sub-composites previously simulated to determine the mean and variance of the conditional distribution at a new sub-composite location. Simulate  Test 1: rejection condition Calculate Test 2: rejection condition Once simulated values are accepted, add to conditioning information and go back to The sample support of drillholes (whether geochemical grades, geological logging, metallurgical testing, etc.) is often different. In the case of geochemical grades, the drillholes are composited to a constant length to perform conventional statistical and geostatistical analyses, for example exploratory data analysis, variogram analysis, estimation or simulation (eg. ( Flotation tests are usually performed to describe the behavior of a mineral in the metallurgical process plant. The metallurgical response will depend mainly on two factors: the geological properties of the material and the operational parameters. There are different studies where the relations between geology and the metallurgical response are observed ( Linear regression models are used to estimate the recovery of an ore body ( Geostatistical modelling needs defining the estimation units (domains) on which the study is being performed ( In the case of recovery, domains are established on geological and metallurgical information. Within these domains, variables are estimated or simulated using classical statistical and geostatistical algorithms such as multivariate regression and Gaussian simulation ( Another complication associated with modelling the recovery is the scaling problem going from laboratory small scale test to production volumes ( This research deals with the issue of downscaling the support of geometallurgy tests done at the laboratory to match the support of geochemical and mineralogical composites. Downscaling methodologies have been developed by different authors, where change of support accounts for the statistical consequences ( The objective of applying this methodology is to reduce the support of the metallurgical recovery variable in order to facilitate the application of conventional geostatistics tools. The upscaling procedure is not considered in this article because it generates a decrease in the variance of data and, consequently, predictive models with low resolution. The objective of this research is the assimilation of small support samples (eg, geochemical variables) with large support samples (eg, geometallurgical variables) to generate high resolution models. To find multivariate correlations usual statistical tools are correlation coefficients, principal component analysis, cross variograms, scatter plots, etc. ( Samples with geological information are usually measured on supports different from the metallurgical tests. Metallurgical tests require much larger sample volumes, in order to analyze the different attributes and their operational characteristic ranges. To integrate geological and metallurgical information, it is convenient to change the variable different supports to a standardized support for all measurements. For non-additive categorical variables (e.g. lithology or mineralogy code), the majority code can be assigned to the composite or the sample code located in its center. In the case of continuous variables, there are different tools to increase or decrease the sampling support: Composite: method of up-scaling, is based on averaging an attribute based on the sampling lengths. This is not recommended for non-additive variables because it biases the result by using a linear average. Gibbs sampling: down-scaling method, allows to simulate samples with higher sampling density by scaling basic statistics and spatial continuity. It also allows to consider mathematical restrictions in the simulation. A schematic example of down-scaling with 3 samples ( The value of Scaling of basic statistics. Scaling of spatial variability (smaller support implies increased variability). Integration of measured geochemical variables to small support. Physical constraints of the problem (inequalities and relationships). The methodology is now presented for the particular case of separating a composite of length  Equation 1. 2. 3. Every location where a sample at support 4. Backtransformation to calculate 5. Calculation of the recovery at support The condition Notice that the back transformations In our case, it is easy to show that: The relationship can be graphically observed in Rejection tests (conditions of inequality) are based on the physical constraints in the recovery calculation. It can be observed that with more rejection conditions, the variance of the data simulated at support The change of support methodology was applied to a basic case study in 2D. Statistical validations are presented. Copper grades and metallurgical recovery values were simulated in 10 drillholes. The support used is The 30 m composites are uniformly spaced every 150 m in the horizontal and every 30 m in the vertical direction. The distribution of mass of metal concentrate is log-normal with a coefficient of variation of We apply the methodology previously described to obtain Using the copper grade ( The quantile-quantile comparison of the distributions of Estimated The following case study corresponds to a campaign with 50 real drillholes where some samples have been selected for flotation analysis calculating the metallurgical recovery of copper in sulphide minerals. The samples for the flotation rougher test have different lengths with a mean of The copper grades have been composited at a nominal length of 20 m (block size of the estimation model) using the proposed methodology. 99 simulations using the Gibbs sampler were performed at the 20 m support. For each realization, the cooper recovery in each block of the model was calculated as ratio between the sum of  The next step is to estimate metallurgical recovery in the block model with 40 m composites (conventional methodology) and using the 20 m composites obtained with the proposed methodology. The estimates from 20 m composites show greater variability. Smoothing can be observed in The mean difference is close to 0.0 (−0.073) with a standard deviation of 0.9. Approximately  This result shows the difference in the estimate considering the size of the sampling support. This affects the resolution of a predictive model. The estimate with a larger support will not capture extreme data (high or low metallurgical recovery) that are usually important results from an operational point of view. Therefore reducing the sampling support to perform an estimation or simulation allows generating models of better resolution to capture small-scale variability, which may help improving the performance of the mining project. Modelling geometallurgical variables often causes problems when conventional geostatistics tools are applied. The main causes are the condition of heterotopic sampling and differences in the measurement supports. This article provides a new compositing approach based on simulations through a Gibbs Sampler. Statistical and geostatistical characteristics are preserved with this methodology: global mean, spatial variability and bivariate relations. The simulated values at smaller support can be used as input for simulations, in order to account for the uncertainty stemming from the variability of small support samples, or they can be averaged for estimation purposes, as shown in the case studies presented in this paper. In this article, two advantages of the method were highlighted: Reduction of support allows data assimilation (geological samples and metallurgical tests) for the application of conventional geostatistics tools; for example search of multivariable correlations for generation of geometallurgical predictive models. Reduction of support allows generating estimation models or simulation models with higher resolution and less smoothing. These models allow the description of local variability on a smaller scale, identifying extreme value zones that are important from a metallurgical point of view. The expected metal of the simulation is 28,263 The advantages of estimating metallurgical recovery using this compositing methodology was illustrated through a case study. The results were compared with the traditional methodology to estimate recovery, with important local biases that can generate operational problems in the mineral processing plant. Reducing the size of the composite is associated with an increase in local variability that was captured in the estimation. This information is captured in the methodology through scaling the variance of the distribution. The methodology was applied to metallurgical recovery data that fulfil the physical conditions associated to the non-additivity of this variable. The authors would like to thank the industrial supporters of ALGES Laboratory, as well as the support from the We acknowledge the support of the