We propose a fracture growth mechanism based on mutual rotations of the particles leading to breakage of inter-particle bonds. This criterion can be expressed in terms of the moment stresses, which at the crack tip show a singularity of 3/2 power for Modes I, II and III – stronger than the conventional one. The moment stress singularity leads to relative particle rotations and bending of inter-particle bonds. Approximation of the stress distribution at the crack tip by a power law asymptotics for instance such as Typically the local failure is presumed to occur in brittle materials under tensile stress ( Isotropic Cosserat continuum is defined by the following equilibrium and constitutive equations in co-ordinate frame ( where σ where Substituting the constitutive equations into the equations of equilibrium and using the representation of deformation measures The presence of moduli γ, ε, β which have dimensions of Pa/m  In order to estimate the Cosserat lengths we model, following [ Here Using the homogenisation by differential expansions [ Substituting with other Cosserat lengths being of the same order. Given that the bond diameter cannot be greater than the particle we have 2 The above analysis shows that the Cosserat lengths are of the order of the grain size. As the process zone size should be of the same order we deal with asymptotics of distances from the crack tip The limiting transition of Cosserat characteristic lengths tending to zero corresponds to tending to zero the Cosserat moduli γ, ε, β. This limiting transition being applied to  Applying the described procedure to the crack problems one can find the distribution of the moment stresses at the tip of cracks of three classical modes (the conventional stress singularity remains the same). Mode I crack: Mode II crack: Mode III crack Here ν is the Poisson’s ratio. It is seen that different crack models produce different non-vanishing components of the moment stress. Another interesting feature is that the moment stress has singularity of order of 3/2 which is higher than the conventional stress singularity. Since the energy release rate is still the same as for a conventional crack the moment stresses do not contribute to the energy. Therefore the non-integrable stress singularities do not lead to infinite energy release rate. We propose a fracture growth mechanism based on mutual rotations of the particles leading to breakage of inter-particle bonds. This criterion can be expressed in terms of the moment stresses, which at the crack tip show a power law singularity with exponent -3/2 for Modes I, II and III – stronger than the conventional one. This strong nonintegrable singularity does not lead to infinite energy since in this approximation the moment stresses at the crack tip do not contribute to the energy release rate. 