Copper (Cu) extraction rate from chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) is normally slowed down by the passivation layers formed on CuFeS2 surface. Cost-effective CuFeS2 extraction strategies are therefore strongly expected in both academic and industrial worlds. This study investigated CuFeS2 leaching in the presence of NaCl and the results showed that NaCl played a significantly positive role on Cu extraction in air-saturated solution. Smaller CuFeS2 particle size led to a higher Cu recovery while pH 1.0 was optimum. In addition, the increment of NaCl concentration increased Cu extraction rate and recovery significantly. Moreover, Cu extraction from CuFeS2 was increased apparently with increased temperature, with an approximately 100% Cu recovery being achieved at 348 K and 0.1 M NaCl, within 144 h. XRD indicated that the major products formed were crystalline elemental sulfur (S0) rather than Cu–S like compounds at a NaCl concentration greater than 0.1 M, indicating that crystalline S0 did not inhibit Cu extraction. This study therefore provides a promising strategy of applying seawater in hydrometallurgical processing of chalcopyrite.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Although leaching, as the key step in the hydrometallurgical treatments, has been intensively studied since 1970s To date, seawater has been paid increasing interests in many mineral processing plants ( Some studies reported that the formed surface layer was porous S The enhanced Cu extraction from CuFeS However, most of the previous studies with very fast Cu leaching kinetics were completed with the addition of various oxidants ( Chunk CuFeS The XRD ( 1 g of CuFeS The leach residues were filtered, washed, dried and determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Cu Kα The effects of particle size on Cu extraction in pH 1.0 solution controlled at 328 K in the presence of 0.1 M NaCl were investigated at three size fractions (−38, +38 to −75, +75 to −150 µm), to insure the leaching within a reasonable lab time scale. The influence of pulp pH on Cu extraction was investigated in the solution containing 0.1 M NaCl at 328 K ( Cu leaching rate is normally increased with increased acid concentration. However, a reasonable H The effects of NaCl concentration on CuFeS The positive roles of NaCl might be because the Cl  In order to investigate the phase evolution in the presence of various NaCl concentrations during CuFeS Shrinking core model is the most widely applied one for CuFeS As Cu concentrations under differing temperatures were linearly increased with time, Eq. It is widely accepted that According to our previous study Eq. Aromaa and Dutrizac In addition, some studies indicated that the presence of Cl No jarosite or Fe oxy-hydroxide was detected in the leaching residues ( Traditionally, the role of Cl In addition, when Cl Furthermore, the kinetic analysis indicated that CuFeS CuFeS The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors acknowledged financial support from