The photooxidative mineralizations of two microorganisms-produced glycolipid biosurfactants 4-O-(4′,6′-di-O-acetyl-2′,3′-di-O-alkanoyl-β-d-mannopyranosyl)-d-erythritol (MEL-A) and 1-O-(6′-O-acetyl-2′,3′-di-O-alkanoyl-β-d-mannopyranosyl)-d-erythritol (MEL-B) were examined by monitoring the temporal changes in UV absorption, the time profiles of CO2 evolution and the changes in interfacial tension occurring by an advanced oxidation process in the presence of a metal-oxide (TiO2). Features of their mineralization are compared to the photomineralization of the anionic dodecylbenzene sulfonate (DBS) surfactant carried out under otherwise identical conditions. The adsorption of surfactants on the TiO2 surface and the positions of attack of the photogenerated OH radicals on the surfactants’ structure were assessed by molecular orbital (MO) calculations of partial charges and frontier orbital electron densities, respectively. The photodegradation of DBS was faster than the MELs as also evidenced by surface tension measurements, whereas the photomineralization of the anionic DBS surfactant was definitely slower than that of the MEL biosurfactants due to the hydrophobic alkyl chain in the DBS structure. Possible initial mechanistic stages of the photooxidation of MEL-A and MEL-B are proposed based on experimental data and comparison with MO calculations.Biosurfactants are natural surfactants produced abundantly by microorganisms from natural resources such as vegetable oils. They possess several advantages over synthetic surfactants that include, among others, mild production conditions and high environmental compatibility In this article, the phoooxidative mineralization of the two microorganisms-produced glycolipid biosurfactants 4- The glycolipid 4- An aqueous dispersion (50 The photodegradation of the three surfactants was monitored by the decrease of UV absorption features at 190 Molecular orbital calculations were carried out at the single determinant (Hartree–Fock) level for optimization bearing the minimum energy obtained at the AM1 level The biochemical oxygen demand (BOD; determined over a 10-day period) and total organic carbon (TOC) for the MEL-A, MEL-B biosurfactants and the DBS substrate with initial concentrations 50 Time profiles of the concentration changes from the UV absorption features during the photoassisted degradation of MEL-A, MEL-B and DBS surfactants are illustrated in The temporal evolutions of CO The increases in the interfacial tension that accompanied the photoassisted degradation and mineralization of MEL-A, MEL-B and DBS solutions are displayed in Analysis of the initial adsorption on the TiO  The atoms having the most negative charge in MEL-A and MEL-B are the oxygen atoms. Averaged partial point charges of all the oxygen atoms in the MEL-A were 6-fold greater (negatively) than the charges on the carbon atoms. The MEL-B biosurfactant showed a similar tendency. Accordingly, the oxygen atoms in the MEL structures are the positions of closest approach of the biosurfactants to the TiO For DBS, the anionic sulfonate moiety (–SO In the initial stages the MEL biosurfactants are strongly adsorbed on the TiO We are grateful to the personnel of the water treatment company Nippon Filter Co. Ltd. for assistance in measuring the biochemical oxygen demand for the surfactants examined in this study and the staff at Fujitsu Co. Ltd. for discussions on the MOPAC calculations. NS is grateful to Prof. Abe for a Visiting Professorship at the Tokyo University of Science for the period July–August, 2008.