This study proposes a new type of hydrocyclone. Through the testing of a simulation and experiment, if the overflow section at the hydrocyclone is changed to a tubular membrane, the fluid near the overflow pipe will be allowed to pass through and particles will be filtered out. Therefore, the turbulence surrounding the overflow exit can be weakened. The flow of the overflow can be increased, and its clarity can be raised. This is extremely valuable for the recycling of precious liquids and it can otherwise serve as a grading hydrocyclone. Complex flow field inside the hydrocyclone and hydrodynamic study is done with the help of commercial Fluent software. The pressure and the axial velocity decreases form the hydrocyclone wall towards the center.Hydrocyclone is a favorable classifying equipment for its separation of solids A lot of efforts have been made in the past to develop efficient hydrocyclones by designing a hydrocyclone with some new structures in an aim to change the flow characteristics of the conventional hydrocyclone. The water injected hydrocyclone Zhao et al. Thanks to current development, computational methods of design have significant advantages in the empirical data, such as freedom of changing the geometry rapidly for verification of possible changes in separational efficiency The global behavior of the flow inside on a conical hydrocyclone is well known from numerical, CFD calculations, and experimental proofs The geometry and sizes of this hydrocyclone is displayed in The linear systems associated with the solution of the pressure and momentum equations have been solved with a tolerance on the residual to 10 The inlet fluid is moving at a constant speed, and the boundary condition is as follows: The outlet fluid is moving under the absolute pressure of 1 No-slip boundary conditions were applied on all walls of the hydrocyclone. Starch powder with a density of 3200 It is known that the vapor core diameter increases as the vortex finder diameter increases, but it is invariant to the size of the apex opening. Most investigations into the flow field inside hydrocyclones have verified that the motion of the central air core and the nearby liquid in conventional hydrocyclones is in a state of forced vortex. Falcon’s investigation  The partition curve shows the fraction of a material of a special size in the feed to a classifier that reports to the coarse product stream. In the case of a hydrocyclone, this is an underflow.   Besides, another thing can also be found in the picture: The concentration of 3  In An increased knowledge of how a certain change of the flow field has an impact on the overall separation process would be of great benefit for the continued development of hydrocyclones. This study substituted a solid overflow tube with a ceramic membrane tube with porous filter material. The membrane overflow pipe allows the fluid nearby to pass through and filter out particles. Therefore the turbulence surrounding the overflow exit and short circuit flow can be weakened. The possibility of coarse particles flow out through overflow is largely decreased. This made the trend of the bulk separation efficiency curve only slightly changed, but it made the concentration of the overflow lower, and that of the underflow higher. This design is suitable for applications where precious metal particles need to be retrieved at the underflow. As the concentration is increased, the cost of subsequent drying can be reduced accordingly. The authors would like to thank the