Due to the influence factors such as pulp ions and surface conversion, efficient flotation separation of smithsonite from calcite remains a challenge in the actual system. In this paper, the effect of an effective inhibitor sodium alginate (NaAl) on flotation separation of smithsonite from calcite using a mixed cationic/anionic collector of octadecylamine acetate (ODA) and sodium amyl xanthate (SAX) was studied. Flotation results indicate that NaAl is perfectly effective for the separation. The results of adsorption amount measurements show that collector can both adsorb on smithsonite and calcite surfaces by the co-adsorption of ODA-SAX complex even in the presence of NaAl. The strong adsorption of macromolecular NaAl increases the surface hydrophilicity of calcite and may cover the micromolecular collector. The results of zeta potential and spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis confirm that NaAl adsorbs on calcite surface by chemisorption, hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interaction while weakly adsorbs on smithsonite surface by hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interaction. Na2S increases the selectivity of NaAl due to the lower reactivity of Zn on the sulphidized smithsonite surface than that of Ca on the commonly exposed calcite surface.With the gradual exhaustion of zinc sulfide, people’s demands for zinc oxide are becoming stronger and stronger [ By now, it is still preferred to rely on flotation to separate smithsonite from calcite [ Depressants, aiming at floating objective minerals and excluding gangue minerals, are commonly used to increase the selectivity of flotation [ Sodium alginate (NaAl), one of the by-products of iodine and mannitol extracted from kelp or sargassum, is widely used in food thickeners, pharmaceutical industry, printing and textile industry [ In this paper, octadecylamine acetate (ODA) and sodium amyl xanthate (SAX) mixed at a specific ratio were chosen as the collector due to their insensitivity to pulp ions [ Pure smithsonite was supplied by Yunnan, China, and pure calcite was purchased from Hunan, China. The minerals were crushed, ground and screened to obtain the sample of -74 + 37 μm for the flotation tests and adsorption amount measurements. The XRD patterns of the smithsonite and calcite ( Chemical pure octadecylamine acetate (ODA, CH Mineral flotation was implemented with an XFG-type flotation machine purchased from Changchun, a city of China. As depicted in the reported literature [ Smithsonite and calcite with a weight ratio of 1:1 was used for mixed binary minerals flotation tests. Mixed binary minerals flotation and single mineral flotation were operated in the same flow except for the feeds. The flotation products were all assayed for Zn. The recovery and grade were calculated by the processed concentrates and tailings as shown in Adsorption amount measurements were conducted with a TOC-LCPH analyzer (Japan) at 15℃. First, 2 g of mineral was placed into a beaker pre-treated with 35 mL DI water with a magnetic stirrer(1600 r/min). Second, the pH was adjusted and the slurry suspension was conditioned with desired reagent. After stirring for 30 min, the slurry suspension was put into a 50 mL vial and placed into a centrifuge (9000 r/min) to centrifuge for 20 min. Finally, the measurements were started. The total organic carbon (TOC) and total organic nitrogen (TON) in the supernatant can be measured when using ODA and SAX as mixed collectors. Because nitrogen can only be found in ODA, the ON of ODA is equivalent to TON. The measured amount of organic nitrogen (ON) and organic carbon (OC) in ODA are linear fitted in First, we can resort to the fitting curve in Zeta potential measurement was carried out with a Coulter Delsa440sx Zeta analyzer at 15℃. First, setting the beaker containing 30 mg -2 um sample and 40 mL 10 1 g of the −2 μm mineral powder was placed into a beaker filled with 35 mL DI water and stirred on a magnetic stirrer at 15℃, then the pH was adjusted to 10 and the desired flotation reagents were added. After stirring for 30 min, the sample was filtered, washed thrice with DI water at pH 10, and the wet mineral sample was desiccated in a vacuum oven at 45 °C for 10 h. The measurement samples were prepared by mixing 30 mg dry potassium bromide into 1 mg dry mineral powder. The whole operation process made sure that the samples met the test requirements. FTIR studies were conducted at an IRTracer-100 FT-IR spectrometer(Japan)using diffuse reflection method. The resolution of the spectrometer is 2 cm In this study, octadecylamine acetate (ODA) and sodium amyl xanthate (SAX) mixed at a specific ratio was chosen as the collector due to its more insensitivity to pulp ions [   In order to find the appropriate pH interval where the separation can be effectively achieved, mixed binary minerals flotation was carried out at the pH of 7–11 and the results are shown in  To reveal the effects of NaAl on the adsorption of ODA and SAX, the adsorption amount of ODA and SAX on mineral surfaces under different reagents condition were studied as shown in To reveal the interaction mechanism of the reagents with the two mineral surfaces, the zeta potential of smithsonite and calcite treated with desired reagent under different pH were measured. The results are presented in As is shown in Hence, we believe that Na FTIR spectroscopy analysis, a method widely used to define the mechanism of adsorption, was carried out to further detect the interaction mechanism of regents with the mineral surfaces. The IR spectra of NaAl and IR spectra of smithsonite and calcite conditioned with desired reagents were measured under the same circumstances. The results are shown in FT-IR spectra of smithsonite under different reagents and FT-IR spectra of NaAl are shown in  According to the above analysis, a schematic diagram of separation model and depression mechanism can be obtained as shown in A possible separation model of smithsonite and calcite is shown in  According to above analysis and discussion, conclusions are obtained as follows: The flotation results show that NaAl can selectively suppress calcite using mixed collectors ODA/SAX, the recovery of calcite suffers a tremendous decrease while that of smithsonite merely reduces by about 20 %. The adsorption of NaAl cannot increase the differences of the adsorption amount of collector between smithsonite and calcite surfaces. In the presence of NaAl, collector can both adsorb on smithsonite and calcite surfaces by the co-adsorption of ODA-SAX complex. The strong adsorption of macromolecular NaAl increases the surface hydrophilicity of calcite and may cover the micromolecular collector. NaAl selectively interacts with calcite by chemisorption due to the lower reactivity of Zn on the sulphidized smithsonite surface than that of Ca on the commonly exposed calcite surface. Yuanjia Luo and Guofan Zhang designed the experiment; Yuanjia Luo and Hongjiang Liu, Qiongyin Mai performed the experiments, collected all the data and wrote this paper; Changbin Li, Haigang Feng contributed the reagents and materials; Yuanjia Luo and Qiongyin Mai wrote and revised the paper; Guofan Zhang analyzed the data and involved in the discussion of the results and approved reading the manuscript.