The adsorption of lanthanum, cerium and praseodymium onto microcapsules containing 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHPNA) was investigated. Through scanning electron microscopy imaging of the microcapsule-surface and neutralization titration estimation of the amount of EHPNA extractant remaining in the microcapsule, the microencapsulated extractant was characterized. As a result, it was found that the microcapsules with a mean particle diameter of 143μm contained the extractant of 1.63×10−3
                     mol/g-microcapsule. The adsorption behavior for each of the metals was measured from the metal adsorption equilibrium and the metal adsorption rates, from which it was estimated that the formation of a metal complex contributes to the overall adsorption rate of the metals. The separation of each of the metals was examined using a column packed with the microcapsules. It was found that the separation of the metals was most enhanced under the conditions of the microcapsule-packed column of 10cm, the flow rate of 0.002L/min, and the initial metal feed solution at pH2.0. The separation of lanthanum, cerium and praseodymium from a La–Ce–Pr mixed solution was then examined in detail, with effective separation of these metals achieved within eight repetitions of the adsorption–desorption step.There has been a recent increase in demand for a number of valuable metals such as rare-earth metals that are commonly used in materials such as the flint of lighter, the luminescent materials and white LED, but which cannot be obtained as a raw material in Japan. This has therefore created a growing need to separate and recover such metals from waste water and recycled materials. In the case of industrial waste treatment, only very dilute aqueous solutions of valuable metals are obtained, which requires new technology to be developed. Various methods already exist for the recovery of metals from aqueous solutions, with liquid–liquid extraction methods having been the most commonly employed so far ( Over the last several decades, alternative techniques for the solvent extraction of metals from dilute solutions have been developed, with typical examples including: supported liquid membranes ( In this study, we therefore explore the use of microcapsules as an alternative method for the recovery and separation of lanthanum, cerium and praseodymium from a solution containing those three metals. The purpose of the work is to develop an effective separation technique for rare-earth metals by microcapsule method. We select here 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester as an extractant for the rare-earth metals, which is one of the excellent extractants widely used in industry. The metal extractant used in this study was 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (abbreviated as EHPNA hereafter), which was kindly supplied by Daihachi Chemical Industry Co. Ltd., Osaka, Japan and was used without further purification. The monomer used to make the polymer matrix of the microcapsules was divinylbenzene (DVB), with 2, 2′-Azobis (2, 4-dimethylvaleronitrile) (ADVN) used as the polymerization initiator and toluene employed as a DVB diluent. All chemicals used were JIS (Japanese Industrial Standards) special grade reagents. For the metal source, JIS special grade LaCl The reactor used for the preparation of the microcapsules has been described elsewhere ( The amount of extractant encapsulated in the microcapsules was measured as follows: First, 0.1 Solvent extraction of La, Ce and Pr was conducted in a flask charged with 0.01 A 0.01 A shallow bed reactor ( For each metal, the initial concentration was varied from 0.001 to 0.01 The experimental procedure used to assess the effect of temperature was largely the same as that described in The aqueous solution containing the three dissolved metal salts was adjusted to pH Desorption solutions with various pH values (1.1, 1.5 and 2.0) were passed through the packed column with a column height 10 The feed solution with a pH One more column with a height of 10 In the experiment mentioned in  The solvent extraction equilibrium for lanthanide ion was reported as follows ( Using Eq. We analyzed the results of solvent extraction experiments by the slope analysis based on Eq. Further the relationship between the extent of metal extracted and the equilibrium pH is shown in  Right vertical axis of  The complex formed between the metal and EHPNA diffuses into the microcapsule pores. In The rate of metal ion adsorption onto the microcapsule was analyzed using Eq.   Furthermore, if the adsorption rate of the metal ion is assumed to be a In Eq. The relationship between In The typical result is shown in It was found that the optimum separating condition was the microcapsule-packed column of 10 It was found that the optimum separating condition was the use of two 10 The result of reprocessing operation eight times is summarized in Using the exiting solution after the eighth reprocessing operation shown in Finally, the separation of Ce and Pr was examined. The mixture solution of Ce and Pr in The adsorption and separation of lanthanum, cerium and praseodymium by microcapsules (143 These results were subsequently adapted to the separation of lanthanum, cerium and praseodymium from a La–Ce–Pr solution using a column packed with these microcapsules, in which it was found that the separation of the metals was most enhanced under the conditions of the microcapsule-packed column of 10 The separation of lanthanum, cerium and praseodymium from a La–Ce–Pr solution was then examined in detail, with effective separation of these metals achieved within eight repetitions of the adsorption–desorption step. The potential for separating La and Ce, and for Ce and Pr in desorption step alone was also identified. Thus the information obtained in this study sheds new light upon potential techniques for the separation of rare-earth metals in hydrometallurgical operations, or in the recycling of waste materials.  surface area of microcapsule (m initial metal concentration (mol/L) metal concentration at equilibrium (mol/L) distribution ratio of metal mean particle diameter of microcapsule (m) activation energy (J/mol) adsorption rate constant (L/(mol weight of microcapsules (g) amount of metal adsorbed at equilibrium (mol/g) amount of metal adsorbed (mol/g) gas constant (J/(mol initial adsorption rate of metal (mol/(L temperature (K) time (min) initial concentration of extractant (mol/L) initial concentration of lanthanide ion (mol/L) The authors wish to express their thanks to Daihachi Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. for providing the EHPNA used in this study.