This study examines main and interaction effects of frother type, collector and pH on the efficiency of column flotation of Florida phosphate. Two types of frothers are used including sodium alkyl ether sulfate, as an anionic frother, and mixed polyglycols as a nonionic frother. A mixture of fatty acid and fuel oil is used as a collector. The results show that column flotation, depending on the operating conditions, can give phosphate concentrates of high grade (∼31% P2O5) at a recovery as high as (∼99%). However, interaction between frothers and the collector and consequently the flotation efficiency were found to be dependent on frother type. Specifically, anionic frother was found to lose its ability to stabilize the froth in the presence of low dosages of collector. An anionic frother used in the presence of conditioning water containing residual collector (i.e., supernatant water after conditioning solids with collector) resulted in a significant reduction in recovery. This phenomenon does not occur with the polyglycol (nonionic) frother. Flotation results of the three-phase system have been confirmed by results obtained in two-phase experiments where a low dosage of collector is added while measuring air hold-up in the presence of different frothers. The residual collector reduces air hold-up and increases bubble size when added with the alkyl ether sulfate (anionic) frother. On the other hand, a synergistic effect was obtained in the presence of the nonionic frother.Industrial application of column flotation has gone from virtually zero in the seventies to a wide acceptance in the nineties. As a consequence of the widespread of plant trials that have occurred during the past few years, there has been a rapid growth in practical knowledge related to column design, construction, operation, air sparging and control ( One of the key aspects of flotation is the formation of a froth phase in which the valuable minerals are retained for further upgrading. In most of industrial operations, the presence of a surface-active chemical reagent (frother) is required to economically operate froth flotation processes ( A bubble produced in water is instable. One of the prerequisites for a successful flotation operation is the stability of the bubble–particle aggregate. A frother has a number of functions in flotation. First, it reduces the surface tension of the air–liquid interface in order that a stable bubble is produced in the system. Secondly, it influences the kinetics of bubble–particle adhesion. Thirdly, it thins the liquid layer by interacting with collector molecules. Finally, it stabilizes the bubble–particle aggregate ( Frother–collector interaction in froth flotation was first postulated by Christman in 1930 ( Two theories for bubble–particle adhesion have been suggested. They are known as linear and lamellar theories. The linear theory states that conditioned particles maintain contact with the gaseous phase by penetration through the air–bubble film. The lamellar (or film) theory holds that the attachment takes place without penetration ( Several authors ( As mentioned above, despite the importance of such interactions in flotation processes little information is available on the choice or combination of a frother for a given collector (or mineral–collector) system. Thus, the goal of this study is to investigate the effect of frother type and its interaction with the collector (fatty acids mixed with fuel oil) on the efficiency of the column flotation of Florida phosphate. A belt feed (−1.4+0.5 mm, i.e., 14×35 mesh) sample of Florida phosphate was used in this study. The sample contains 19.7% P Flotation tests were conducted using a 14.61-cm (5.75-in.)-diameter by 1.83-m (6-ft)-high Plexiglas flotation column. The feeding point is located at 30 cm. (1 ft) from the column top. A discharge valve and a variable-speed pump were used to control the tailings' flow rate. Three flowmeters were used to monitor the flow rates for air, frother solution and water, respectively. An external two-phase sparger (Eductor type) was used to generate air bubble in the column. In two-phase experiments, the required amounts of frother and collector were added to 50-l of tap water and pH was adjusted. This solution was continuously agitated using a stirrer throughout the experiments. The solution (containing either frother alone or its mixture with collector) and air were first introduced into the column through the sparger at a fixed flow rate. Then, the discharge valve and pump were adjusted to get the desired underflow and overflow rates. The experiments were performed at superficial air velocity of 0.7 cm/s. Gas hold-up was measured using differential pressure gauge. After every parameter was set and two-phase system was in a steady state, the gauge readings were recorded for few minutes. The average of these readings was taken for gas hold-up calculation. Bubble diameter was estimated using the drift-flux method ( In three-phase flotation experiments, the phosphate sample (∼40 kg) was conditioned at 72% solids in an agitated tank for 3 min with, if otherwise not mentioned, 2.0 kg/t of collector at pH 9.5. Then, the conditioning water was decanted in a container. The conditioned feed material (without its conditioning water) was then loaded into the feeder bin located at the top of the column. Tap water containing the desired concentration of frother was first introduced into the column through the sparger at a fixed flow rate. Then, the discharge valve and pump were adjusted to obtain the desired underflow and overflow rates. Air drawn into the eductor, was regulated by a control valve. A superficial air velocity of 0.7 cm/s and a negative bias of about −0.5 cm/s were used. After running the column for few minutes to achieve a steady state in the two-phase system (indicated by the stability of differential pressure gauge readings), the phosphate material was fed to the column. The feed solid content was fixed at about 66% solid by adding tap water to the feed tank by means of a variable speed pump. The feed rate of sample can be controlled by adjusting the feeder's auger rotational speed. The column was run for another few minutes (at least twice the retention time) to reach steady state before taking any samples. The steady state condition was also indicated by the stability of differential pressure gauge readings. Timed samples of tailings and concentrates were collected after the column attained steady state. These tests were run to study interaction of frothers with residual collector. For that purpose, conditioning water (decanted from the conditioned feed and containing residual collector) was added to the feeder instead of tap water. It is important to mention that it was difficult to reach steady state condition when an anionic frother was used while adding conditioning water to the feed samples. Under these conditions, wt.% floated decreased with time. The collected samples were dried, weighed and analyzed for P Effect of frother concentration on grade and recovery of phosphate was studied in the absence of conditioning water (i.e., tap water is added to feed samples). The results are shown below. Effect of frother type and its concentration on phosphate column flotation is summarized in It should be noted that feed to industrial columns includes the conditioning water. Such water may contain a residual collector, which could influence frother performance. Therefore, it was decided to investigate the role of conditioning water. Several experiments were performed to study the kinetics of column flotation process for Florida phosphates in the presence and absence of conditioning water while using different concentrations of both frothers. Solids in this feed were kept constant at about 66% by weight. These results indicate that the efficiency of flotation process (in terms of wt.% floated) is nearly stable while using tap water with either frother irrespective of the sampling time of the froth (concentrates) and tails, as shown in These results demonstrate that there is a detrimental interaction between the anionic frother and the residual concentration of fatty acid (or its mixture with fuel oil) present in such conditioning water. Such interaction prevents the anionic frother from controlling bubble diameter, as indicated by a significant decrease in the gas hold-up ( Some authors (Espinosa-Gomez et al., 1988) have argued that slimes associated with water could adversely affect the performance of carbonate–silicate column flotation using commercial fatty acid by enhancing coalescence and froth collapse. It is assumed that completely coated bubble surfaces may not have free surface for particle collection. However, this argument may not apply to the case in the present study. That is because the deterioration in the wt.% floated (i.e., phosphate concentrates) happens only in the presence of the anionic frother. It is also worthy to mention that the % solids of generated slimes in conditioning water is very small (∼0.4–0.45 wt.% solids). Such small amount is suspected to affect the flotation performance. Thus, this deterioration of flotation column performance in the presence of the anionic frother and conditioning water could be attributed to an interaction between this type of frother and the residual concentration of collector (fatty acids and fuel oil) present in the system. In order to understand the mechanisms responsible for the effect of collector on frother performance, a further study involving two-phase and three-phase systems containing the collector mixture with both frothers was conducted using statistical design. The three-phase experiments have been studied, in detail, in a recent work by the authors ( A 2 The data in Estimation of the main effects of different variables, and their interactions, as well as analysis of variance have been carried out using Yates' method ( Frothers retard bubble coalescence and froth collapse by a combination of mechanisms including electrostatic repulsion, the Marangoni effect and stabilization of water on the bubble surface ( The results in As mentioned earlier, residual collector is found to affect stability of the froth and consequently flotation performance especially in the presence of the anionic frother. This can be confirmed by the data given in In flotation columns, a frother must be used for controlling bubble size to attain the required separation efficiency. This can be cleared by examining the data in It is clear from the data in Fatty acids can adsorb at both air–water and solid–water interfaces. Thus, they may co-adsorb with nonionic surfactants. On the other hand, ionic surfactants can compete with fatty acids for adsorption at the air–water interface. Thus, in the case of co-adsorption, a synergistic effect could be realized leading to such improvement in gas hold-up values as depicted in In the case of anionic frother, however, a dramatic reduction of gas hold-up is noticed when the collector is added. This could be attributed, as mentioned above, to the competitive adsorption between the frother and collector molecules at the air–water interface. The results show a detrimental interaction (X Similar results have been reported for other flotation systems ( It seems from this discussion that some degree of interaction between frothers and collectors appear to take place in many flotation systems. Some of these interactions are detrimental and the others could be beneficial as indicated by the data obtained in this investigation. However, a further systematic study is needed to illustrate the mechanisms controlling such interactions. The results strongly suggest that performance of a flotation column can bee dependent on the combination of frother and collector used. Interaction between frothers and the collector and consequently, the flotation performance, are found to be dependent on frother type. Replacing conditioning water (supernatant containing residual collector) with tap water during three-phase experiments, give phosphate concentrates of good recovery (∼99%) and high grade (∼31% P The gas hold-up obtained with nonionic frother (mixed polyglycols) is significantly higher than that obtained using anionic (sodium alkyl ether sulfate) surfactant under the same experimental conditions. The effect of increasing frother concentration indicates that both frothers have positive effect on the value of gas hold-up. However, the effect of the nonionic frother on gas hold-up (+5.75) is significantly higher in comparison to the anionic (+0.55) frother. Financial support from the following institutions is acknowledged and greatly appreciated: the Florida Institute of Phosphate Research; the Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Particle Science and Technology at the University of Florida; the National Science foundation (NSF), under grant EEC-94-02989; and the Industrial Partners of the ERC. The authors would like also to thank Mr. R. Sharma (graduate student at University of Florida) and Dr. Y.H. Cheng (from CF Industries, FL, USA) for their help during conducting experimental parts of this study.