A novel method based on UV–vis spectrometry is developed for simultaneous determination of zinc, nickel, cobalt and copper without any separation steps. The method studied in this paper is the combination of ratio spectra derivative and kalman filtering spectrophotometry. First, using absorbance of zinc standard solution as divisor, the ratio spectra derivative obtained can completely eliminate the interference of zinc on trace ions. Second, the trace ions are simultaneously determined by kalman filtering spectrophotometry. Last, based on obtaining trace ion concentrations, a calibration curve for zinc is established. The linear determination ranges are 10–70 mg/L for zinc, 0.2–1.4 mg/L for trace ions of nickel, cobalt and copper. The results show that the predicted results of zinc, nickel, cobalt and copper by this proposed method is superior to PLS method. The work reported here is an effective attempt for the simultaneous determination of zinc, nickel, cobalt and copper in industrial wastewater of zinc hydrometallurgy, and will have more applications.The industrial wastewater of zinc hydrometallurgy mainly includes a large amount of zinc (Zn) and trace metal ions such as nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co) and copper (Cu), the ratio of main zinc ion to trace ion concentration is as high as 350. Due to the inherent toxicity of heavy metal ions, excessive emissions will seriously pollute water resources and affect human health. Therefore, it is very meaningful to detect and strictly control the concentration of metal ions in real time [ At present, several methods such as Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), Voltammetry, High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), Ultraviolet-visible (UV–vis) spectroscopy, Atomic fluorescence spectrometry (AFS) have been proposed for simultaneous determination metal ions [ However, traditional UV–vis detection is mainly for single ion. When applied to multi-metal ions, it is necessary to pre-separate each component by chemically method, the steps are cumbersome, and the real-time performance is poor [ In this paper, a novel method based on UV–vis spectrometry is developed for simultaneous determination of Zn, Ni, Co and Cu in their mixtures without any separation steps. The method studied is the combination of ratio spectra derivative and kalman filtering spectrophotometry. First, using absorbance of zinc standard solution as divisor, the ratio spectra derivative obtained can completely eliminate the interference of zinc on trace ions [ Kalman filtering spectrophotometry uses a minimum mean-square error as a criterion to mathematically process a series of measurement data containing errors, filters out interference as much as possible, and separates and resolves concentration values by recursive process. Generally, kalman filtering describes the linear system using system state model and measurement model, the two equations are expressed as, respectively: In multicomponent detection based on UV–vis spectrometry, The proposed method combining with ratio spectra derivative and kalman filtering is given in brief in following. If four mixtures containing Zn, Ni, Co and Cu are considered, and the four components obey Beer-Lambert law, the absorption spectra of four components with wavelength The ratio of In Eq. (1) Measure absorbance of the mixed standard solutions at each wavelength, and use multivariate linear regression equation to calculate the coefficient matrix. (2) Set initial state and initial covariance matrix: (3) (4) Calculate measurement noise (5) Calculate error covariance matrix (6) Using measured absorbance (7) Judge: set (8) Output the estimate concentration of Ni, Co, Cu. According to Eq. The absorption spectra were measured on a Purkinje T9 spectrometer using 1 cm matched quartz cuvette. The T9 spectrometer used an enhanced high-sensitivity photomultiplier tube, equipped with a hybrid C–T dual-single optical system, which can measure over a wide wavelength range of 185 nm–900 nm A Lenovo personal computer fitted with Uvwin software was used for all measurements and data treatment. Algorithm for collected spectral data was calculated using MATLAB software. In this method, acetic acid-sodium acetate was prepared as buffer solution, nitroso-R salt solution was prepared as chromogenic reagent. A series of mixed standard solutions containing various rations of metal ions and 7.5 ml buffer solution and 5.00 ml chromogenic reagent were placed in a 25-ml calibrated flask and completed to the final volume with deionized water (final pH 5.5). The final concentration ranges were 10–70 mg/L for zinc, 0.2–1.4 mg/L for trace ions of Ni, Co and Cu. The measurements were carried out on Purkinje T9 spectrophotometer, using 1 cm cuvette. Scans were carried out in the range from 350 to 800 nm at 1 nm intervals. In general, in industrial wastewater of zinc hydrometallurgy, the concentration range of main zinc ion is 10–70 mg/L, and the concentration range of trace ions of nickel, cobalt and copper is 0.2–1.4 mg/L. To evaluate the linear behavior of each metal complex, an individual calibration curve is shown in We used a uniform design method to prepare 40 groups of metal mixed solution containing Zn, Ni, Co and Cu in different proportions. The mixture absorbance was measured by T9 spectrometer in the range from 350 to 800 nm at 1 nm intervals, shown in The absorption spectra of 20 mg/L of zinc (Zn), 0.4 mg/L of nickel (Ni), 0.4 mg/L of cobalt (Co) and 0.4 mg/L of copper (Cu) in the wavelength range of 350–800 nm are shown in In order to eliminate the interference of zinc on trace ions, we propose a method that uses absorbance of zinc standard solution as divisor. As can be seen from A mixture solution containing 0.6 mg/L Ni, 0.8 mg/L Co and 0.9 mg/L Cu is prepared. The true values are indicated by the horizontal lines, the estimated concentrations of Ni, Co, Cu by Kalman filtering aIgorithm are shown in When the concentrations of Ni, Co and Cu in a set of mixed solution are obtained by the kalman filtering algorithm. According to Eq. We prepared 10 groups of metal mixed solution containing Zn, Ni, Co and Cu in different proportions for evaluation of PLS (partial least square) and RSD-KF (ratio spectra derivative and kalman filtering) models. In industrial wastewater of zinc hydrometallurgy, the concentration ratio of main component zinc and trace metal ions in the solution reaches as high as 350, resulting in overlap and interference in mixtures. Thus, simultaneous determination of zinc and trace ions in industrial wastewater is very difficult due to ions lower sensitivity and overlapped peaks. In the paper, a novel method combining ratio spectra derivative and kalman filtering spectrophotometry has been successfully used to determine Zn, Ni, Co and Cu in metal mixtures without any separation steps. The linear determination ranges are 10–70 mg/L for zinc, 0.2–1.4 mg/L for trace ions of Ni, Co and Cu. The results show that the predicted results of Zn, Ni, Co and Cu by this proposed method is superior to PLS method. The work reported here is an effective attempt for the simultaneous determination of zinc, nickel, cobalt and copper in industrial wastewater of zinc hydrometallurgy, and will have more applications. The work is supported by the