Quarry yield can be increased by choosing the appropriate cutting direction for the primary blocks. This increase will reduce the extraction costs and the resulting environmental impact. This paper presents a computational approach to automatically predict and optimise the cutting of ornamental commercial rock quarry from primary blocks. Our work complements previous ones, which are focused on the primary blocks prediction, since we start with primary blocks and optimise their cutting for ornamental purposes.
                  The developed method uses data from the three main families found in an exploited deposit and numerical procedures to calculate the appropriate advance direction for the exploitation yield optimisation. Specifically, the family system is numerically modelled to determine the maximum block to be extracted and its surrounding parallelepiped (SP). Then a 3D mesh is created for use in the rock-cutting process and to determine the optimum advance direction.
                  Modelling the rock-cutting process permits the results for any cutting parameter and advance direction to be obtained automatically. The obtained data have allowed us to observe large variations in the exploitation yield by modifying the cutting advance direction and how the developed method automatically predicts the optimum advance direction for maximising exploitation yield. Furthermore, the developed method has been implemented in a computer tool, which presents the results graphically.
                  The automatic prediction of the cutting output is of significant practical utility because it enables exploitation yield to increase while reducing dump size. These improvements imply economic and environmental benefits because more commercial blocks will be extracted from a single exploitation, and the disposable volume will decrease.Ornamental rock extraction (dimensional stones) was previously performed in huge blocks because the rocks should be both resistant and decorative. However, because of the development of construction materials, the ornamental rocks have adopted a clear decorative function. Subsequently, the blocks section was reduced, producing small blocks with lower quality construction materials. These blocks are used for floors and facades, and their thickness depends on their strength conditions. From the perspective of the exploitation and the optimal use of an ornamental rock quarry, the main goal of mining companies is to obtain commercial blocks from a fresh rock without fissures or cracks, with the colour features demanded by the market and with a geometrical shape as regular as possible (parallelepiped, if possible). The need to obtain an intact rock with a particular shape and volume makes ornamental rock extraction techniques differ significantly from other mining methods. In fact, extracting ornamental rocks requires non-destructive and flexible techniques (diamond wires, chainsaws), which allow rock blocks to remain intact and minimise the extraction of low quality materials. Despite such techniques, the recovery ratio in an ornamental rock quarry is low, as the discontinuity of the rock mass limits the extraction of intact blocks with appropriate market dimensions. Therefore, wide spaces are necessary to dump the disposable materials, so enormous dumps are generated together with its related negative environmental and/or social effects. They may also become a security risk factor if they are near exploitation centres, workplaces or towns. Increasing the exploitation yield reduces not only dumps but also the size of the dug areas, consequently reducing the extraction costs and the environmental impact of mining. This paper presents a computer tool to predict and optimise the cutting of ornamental commercial rock quarry from primary blocks (or in situ blocks), depending on the geotechnical characteristics of the deposit. This tool will be significantly useful in practice since it allows optimisation of the yield through exploitation advance direction analysis. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 1.1 summarises related works. Section 2 shows the details of the developed algorithm for rock cutting modelling and optimisation. Section 3 presents the application of this algorithm to a real case, and finally, Section 4 reports the conclusions of the work. Previous work The remaining related works focus on predicting the primary blocks that can be extracted from a given quarry, depending on its joints and fractures. Lu and Latham Basante et al. Latham et al. Nikolayev et al. Ülker and Turanboy Many other methods accurately predict IBSDs. They include the modelling of discontinuity surveys and the computer determination of the blocks dissected by discontinuities In general, previous works focus on the primary blocks prediction. Our work is complementary to these works because it starts with primary blocks and optimises their cutting into ornamental commercial blocks. In a given deposit, different discontinuity families (or discontinuity sets) can be found, depending on their genesis and the local tectonic. However, to make their exploitation profitable, a maximum of three main families is recommended (persistent and continuous families in all deposits). For this reason, the developed algorithm begins with three main families, F1, F2 and F3, that are identified by their direction ( As shown in The determination of the maximum block to be extracted requires the following input data: the direction ( With the data from these three families, our first step is to calculate the normal vector related to each plane After obtaining each Intersecting the three planes in pairs yields the axes The parallelepiped formed by the three families (considering their corresponding spacing Finally, the volume of the parallelepiped (  To calculate the surrounding parallelepiped (SP) of the maximum block to be extracted, the following input data must be known: the maximum block to be extracted (calculated as detailed in Section 2.1); the dimensions of the cutting blocks to be obtained; the cutting type (horizontal or parallel to the plane of the base for the maximum block), which will determine the plane of cutting (i.e., the reference plane); and the cutting advance direction requested by the user. The first step in obtaining the SP is building a local system of coordinates The next step is projecting the eight vertexes of the maximum block After each projected point with The SP is defined with these six boundary values. Its dimensions are: At this point, the SP of the maximum block to be extracted is defined in the local reference system. To determine its coordinates in the global reference system The obtained SP is parallel to the plane of cutting and a multiple of the cutting dimensions previously stated in its three axes. After creating the SP, we must generate a 3D mesh formed by parallelepipeds with dimensions equal to the desired cutting blocks’ dimensions. For example, As stated in Section 2.2, when we determine the SP of the maximum block to be extracted, we consider that the dimensions of the SP are multiples of the cutting dimensions. For this reason, at this point, the number of cutting blocks determined is an integer and the created mesh will contain the maximum block to be extracted. After the mesh has been created, to know the blocks that will constitute the production, the cutting blocks inside the maximum block to be extracted must be determined. To determine if one parallelepiped is inside another, all the vertexes of the first parallelepiped (each cutting block) must be verified to be inside those of the second parallelepiped (maximum block to be extracted). For this task, a local normalised reference system must be created After determining the blocks for the production, the number of blocks obtained, the volume cut and the output of the cutting (production and yield) must be determined.  Modelling the cutting process permits the results for other different cutting parameters to be automatically calculated. For example, if we specify a cutting plane parallel to the base plane (and the remaining cutting parameters equal to the ones used in such example) for the maximum block to be extracted shown in This section presents an additional module to the three modules previously presented that optimises the cutting yield by analysing the advance direction of the exploitation. In the developed algorithm, the advance direction is measured counter clockwise from the North. So, a direction equal to 90° corresponds to the West. The cutting Optimisation Module starts from a minimum direction ( Moreover, the user must have previously indicated the other values for the incoming data, that is, the data of the three main families, the dimensions of the cutting blocks and the type of cutting to be conducted (horizontal or parallel to the base plane). Once such data are defined, the cutting algorithm is executed: Section 2.1 is applied to determine the maximum block to be extracted, and then for each advance direction of the cutting, Sections 2.2 and 2.3 are applied to obtain and store the number of cut blocks and the yield for each direction. Therefore, the direction that produces the highest yield can be identified. Because we have the algorithm has been implemented, the process can be repeated as many times as required to improve the quality of the solution. For example, The optimum cutting direction in this case is 70°, and we obtain 757 cut blocks and a yield of 71.68%. The results are better than the results corresponding to the 650 cut blocks with a yield of 61.54% that were obtained by manually selecting the cutting direction ( The algorithm described in Section 2 has been implemented in C# in the Microsoft Visual Studio platform. The developed tool (named CUTROCK) has been used for optimising the cutting in several deposits currently under exploitation. This section presents the results obtained for one of these deposits. In particular, this section presents the application of the optimisation algorithm in the quarry “San Cosme”. This quarry is located 7  Specifically, the study focuses on the limestone formation Moniello, which is mainly grey and has two types of facies: one granular with microcrystal and huge clear grey fossils and another that is micritic with microscopic dark grey fossils. Sometimes, areas with a reddish band full of calcite veins may be filled with silex and thus create thin plates. The main characteristics of this limestone are the well-known “bird’s eyes” (millimetric sparry In general, Moniello’s Formation strike covers an area of 8 A key factor in the ornamental rock quarries is the low density of the mass diaclasis which is conditioned by the size of the block to be extracted. Consequently, this subsection will particularly analyse the joints in the studied quarry. Other less relevant aspects (e.g., “in situ” and laboratory tests, RQD calculations) are set aside. In addition, the value obtained for Bieniawski’s RMR index in this deposit after the field study is noted, as it is one of the most widely used quality indexes. The study area is platy in benches of different thickness limited by sub-vertical planes of stratification with a low density fracture net. Furthermore, we have observed the presence of areas of a nodule nature, which makes the cutting difficult (see In certain cases, the planes of stratification are real detached areas of which advantage is taken during the exploitation works at the quarry. In general, such planes are more open for exploitation at the top of the benches because the decompression of matter, and tend to close at the lowest part. The planes of stratification are also more vertical at the current front of the extraction site ( The planes of discontinuity for benches 1 and 2 of the quarry have been measured. The exploitation front lines present a healthier aspect with a low density fracture net. Hence, we should discuss isolated planes rather than families of joints. Despite this focus, the measurements prove that there are preferential orientations. These measurements were then entered into the software application DIPS The photo in The rock mass has been defined using the 1989 Bieniawski classification The RMR has been estimated based on the remarks related to the current quarry exploitation front. Fewer assessed areas may be evident according to the Bieniawski classification, but in general, the mass constitutes a 1st CLASS MASS or a VERY GOOD MASS. Although some zones with lower Bieniawski classification may be observed, the mass typically constitutes a 1st CLASS MASS or a VERY GOOD MASS.  Based on the analysis of joints for the quarry’s benches of exploitation (see Section 3.1.1), we used the developed tool CUTROCK to calculate the optimum advance direction to be followed in this quarry to achieve the greatest yield by decreasing the amount of rubble produced. As stated in Section 3.1.1, we have identified four families of joints in this quarry, and the stratification is the most outstanding feature for its persistence and presence (141/87). The three remaining families are similar with respect to their number of planes. Hence, for the calculation, we chose the planes that present the worst conditions (i.e., open joints or soft fillings) in the field study, as fractures are more likely in these planes than when the joints are closed or cemented. When entering the family data, our tool shows the maximum block to be extracted ( Once the family data have been entered, we established the cutting data to obtain “big blocks”, these are blocks with an estimated volume of 4.2 The selected cutting parameters are shown in The simulation conducted with the developed computer tool, obtained the optimum advance direction N120W. As shown in this chart, advancing in the direction N120W generates the maximum yield, 15.1%. Any other orientation significantly decreases the yield, and even with a 10° lower orientation (N110W), the yield for such a block will be 0%. However, with a 10° higher orientation (N130W), the yield will be 5%. For example, assuming a saw cutting speed of 5 In addition, the simulation performed by our tool includes a graphical representation of the result of the optimum advance direction ( One of the advantages of the developed algorithm is that it conducts the automatic modelling and the simulation of the rock cutting for any of the 3 families with the requested cutting parameters. Hence, our tool has been used to predict the production for the three families specified in  If we analyse the results of the simulations and if we consider as rubble those blocks smaller than the blocks considered initially, we infer that the maximum yield for this quarry is 40.6%, with 15.1% corresponding to the “big blocks” and the difference (25.5%) to the “small blocks”. Obviously, the yield will vary if other cutting dimensions are considered. However, their modelling and simulation will be automatic with the developed algorithm. Ornamental rock cutting optimisation in a quarry allows the exploitation yield to be increased and reduces both the extraction costs and the environmental impact. In this paper, we have presented a computational algorithm that allows the ornamental rock cutting to be optimised, based on the data of the three main families of discontinuities in a deposit. The number of main families chosen for the algorithm is based on the criterion that states it for a deposit to be profitable, it should not have more than three main families. We must emphasise the importance of conducting a previous deep geotechnical study of the quarry, as the data may be conditioned by the areas where families spacing varies. From this study, our algorithm will perform reliable automatic simulations and will obtain optimum results to be put into practice. The developed algorithm has been implemented in a computer tool that allows very fast choosing and solving of multiple cutting situations for “big” and “small” blocks. The results obtained show, numerically and graphically, the cutting results according to the selected parameters and the optimum advance direction that will obtain the maximum yield for the exploitation. The developed computer tool has been used to optimise the cutting in different deposits currently under exploitation. In this paper, we present the results for the limestone quarry “San Cosme”, located in Asturias (in northern Spain). As shown for a specific practical case, our work is very useful in automatically predicting and improving the quarry yield.