Gas wells traversing active longwall panels are susceptible to failure on account of various strata movements induced by mining activities. To reveal the dynamic impacts of longwall mining on the survivability of these shale gas wells, particularly during the mining cycle as the twin flanking panels successively approach and then pass beyond the wells, a three dimensional finite element model is applied to explore the evolution of potential distress to the wells by defining the magnitudes of various well deformations. The results demonstrate that, wellbores undergo accelerated or significant deformation (increase or decrease) when each advancing panel approaches within tens of meters and the deformation stabilizes as the panel passes the well by tens (deep mining, ∼300 m) or up to one hundred plus (shallow mining, ∼100 m) meters. Wells are more susceptible to instability when each panel, especially the second panel, advances past the well by approximately 50 m in the case of deep mining and more than one hundred meters for shallow mining with the accumulative deformation reaching the maximum. For mining at shallow depths (∼100 m), wells deform by axial compaction, longitudinal distortion, lateral compression and tension in the vicinity of the seam, and by shear in layers close to the surface. Conversely, for deep mining (∼300 m) the most severe deformations are mainly restricted to the seam and its shallow roof and floor. Locating the well slightly closer to the rib of the second advancing panel (e.g., 7.5 m out from the pillar-center for a 50 m wide three-entry longwall pillar) achieves improved well integrity.Ensuring the stability and security of hydrocarbon wells is a crucial issue in petroleum and natural gas recovery ( Generally, a protective barrier pillar is retained to protect the wellbore as it transits an unmined portion of the seam. However, the diameter of a gas well is usually 20–40 cm, which is far smaller than that of a vertical shaft (6–10 m) for coal mining. Therefore, gas wells are significantly more sensitive to strata movement than access shafts. Although the pillar can provide certain protection for the well, the effect of significant movements of the overlying strata induced by full extraction (longwall) mining may be damaging. Numerous studies have explored the stability of oil and gas wells including physical–mechanical or chemical–mechanical interactions between clay minerals and drilling fluids ( The survivability of gas wells can be informed by parallel studies probing the performance of gob gas ventholes ( In this work, we extend a two-dimensional modeling study on the stability of gas wells in longwall mining areas ( In this work, a large scale three dimensional model is used to replicate the morphology of interbedded shales and sandstones or limestones adjacent to a coal seam and with the deformability properties of the units and interfaces controlling the response. We examine the distribution and dynamic evolution of shear offsets, bed separation and compression and various strains along vertical well trajectories induced by mining activities, as the twin flanking panels successively approach and pass by these wells. Finally, we evaluate the three dimensional impacts of longwall mining upon the performance and stability of wells. Modes of borehole instability for gas wells transiting coalbeds extracted by longwall mining can be classified into several categories: In this analysis we neglect any added resistance applied by well casing – as this resistance will be trivial in comparison to the applied deformations. Consequently, we do not mesh the well, but use quantities (displacements and strains) of a series of nodes and zones which correspond to the five candidate vertical well trajectories to demonstrate the specific characteristics of wellbore deformation. Shear is the primary mode of wellbore instability for gas wells penetrating alternating soft and stiff beds under the effects of longwall mining. We adopt the Mohr–Coulomb strength criterion to determine whether the surrounding rock will yield, with this criterion is defined as Within the Appalachian Basin in western Pennsylvania, the Pittsburgh coal seam is the most economically important coalbed, of which the overlying and underlying strata mainly comprise soft shales interbedded with stiff sandstone or limestone. The most common failure mode for gas wells piercing longwall panels is by shear instability, which occurs at weak interfaces between the layered strata. In order to fully replicate the probable response of weak interfaces between layers, interface elements are adopted in our model to represent the weak contact along which slippage, bed separation and compression may occur. We use the model FLAC3D ( In the linear elastic regime ( In the perfectly plastic regime ( At every calculation time If If If A large scale three-dimensional geomechanical model is constructed using the commercial software code FLAC3D ( The Pittsburgh coal seam and its overlying and underlying strata within the Appalachian Basin mainly comprise layered strong sandstones or limestones and relatively weak shales. We simplify this model to one comprising a single 2 m thick coalbed with alternating massive shale and sandstone layers each ∼10 m thick ( The entire model is 600 m long × 2000 m wide × 142/342 m thick with a flat ground surface. Panels 1 and 2, which have the same dimension (600 m long × 370 m wide × 2 m thick), straddle a 50 m wide central pillar that incorporates a 15 m wide yield pillar, a 5 m wide gate road and a 30 m wide barrier pillar, as illustrated in The model is run to an initial equilibrium by gravity loading to assign the pre-mining stress condition. Then the gate road, followed by panel 1 and then by panel 2 are excavated sequentially. Panel advance is simulated by stepwise excavation – using twenty-eight stages for each panel. Locations of the panels after each excavation stage are indicated in We observe that both the cases of a shallow seam (∼100 m) and a deeper seam (∼300 m) result in larger deformation for gas wells compared to the case of a seam at intermediate depth ∼200 m ( We examine the deformation of the overlying layered strata as it is undermined, stretched, tilted, then lowered, and finally recompacted ( We explore this deformation behavior in this analysis. With recovered data of deformations, strains and distortions we evaluate the potential performance of wells under the dynamic impacts of longwall mining to define the potential for failure through the full mining cycle. For clarity, deformations and strains discussed in the following are detailed in We compare the total horizontal shear offset ( As apparent in As for wells penetrating the deep seam (300 m), development of the greatest Clearly in this cycle, shear deformations on wells undergo a repeated cyclic loading as the flanking twin panels successively approach and pass. Shear deformation is maximum when the face approaches within tens of meters and remains for more than one hundred meters after the panels have passed beyond these wells. The specific range where the strong influence of mining endures varies with seam depth and the relative distance between well trajectories and the twin panels. Generally, along the mining direction, the range of strong influence of mining on shear slippage across wells is broader for shallow-mining than for the case of a deeper seam. Along the longitudinal direction, when mining is shallow (100 m), the largest In this study, we still define the threshold for well instability by shear as 100 mm ( From the foregoing analyses, it is apparent that the rock movement and deformation within the thinner overlying strata of a shallow seam (100 m) are more severe, and the range of strong influence induced by shallow mining is relatively broad along both the transverse and mining directions. While for deep mining, strata movement (and associated deformation of wells) is mainly restricted to the shallow roof, and engenders a smaller influence along the mining direction. In the cross-section of the pillar, it is advisable to locate the well slightly closer to the second advancing panel (e.g., along candidate path 3, which is 7.5 m from the pillar center on the side of panel 2) irrespective of seam depth in order to minimize shear slippage during the entire mining cycle of panels 1 and 2.  We record the vertical relative motion of two adjacent layers (Δ As the working face moves progressively forward, the roof above the pillar edge begins to rotate and to sag, resulting in considerable compression between alternating hard and soft layers, especially between the seam and its immediate roof and floor. For shallow mining (100 m), the largest bed separation is ∼2 mm for path 2 which occurs on an interface close to the surface ( For deep mining (300 m), the greatest bed separation accounts for ∼23 mm in the mining cycle of panel 1, which is for path 1 and occurs at an elevation 30 m above the seam when panel 1 advances 50 m beyond the well ( Beside bed slippage, separation and compression between alternating soft and stiff layers can result in shear, tensile and compressive failure. For wells subject to the influence of longwall mining, the high mining-induced strains at corners of the working face, where the front and the side abutment pressure superimpose ( Evolution of the largest total longitudinal well distortions ( When mining is shallow (100 m), the largest For shallow mining (100 m), the influence of mining on well distortion along the mining direction is more extensive. Longitudinal distortions ( Regardless of mining depth, the largest Evolution of the two components ( Evolution and magnitudes of horizontal strains for wells penetrating both shallow and deep seams are shown in As apparent in On the whole, regardless of seam depth, both the compressive and extensional vertical strains grow progressively as panels 1 and 2 advance sequentially, and grow faster as each panel proceeds around these wells. Ranges of vertical strains, in the case of shallow mining, are −0.8 to 0.8 millistrain and −1 to 0.9 millistrain after first panel 1 and then panel 2 are extracted successively, and they change to −1.7 to 0.3 millistrain and −2.2 to 0.3 millistrain correspondingly when mining is deep ( The redistribution and concentration of strains induced by the movement of overlying strata resulting from full extraction mining are a fundamental threat to the stability of gas wells piercing active longwall panels. We explore and define the anticipated distribution and magnitudes of deformations likely to potential wells and their dynamic evolution during the mining cycle by means of a stepwise excavation through a large scale three dimensional finite element model. This model represents a realistic representation of the evolving mining geometry and in situ conditions to return anticipated strains as they evolve around the multiple panel geometry. Through this study, the following conclusions are drawn: The effects of longwall mining on the stability of gas wells piercing a longwall pillar display staged characteristics as the twin flanking panels first approach then pass by these wells, first on one side (panel 1) and then the other (panel 2). Evolution of various well deformations may be cyclic and peak as the panel face passes closest to the well and then wane – only to repeat as the panel passes on the other side of the pillar. The severity of the maximum effects varies with seam depth and the relative distances between wells and ribs of the twin flanking panels. Wells begin to undergo accelerated or significant deformation (increase or decrease) when each advancing panel is tens of meters away and the deformation stabilizes as each panel passes the well by tens (deep mining, ∼300 m) or more than a hundred (shallow mining, ∼100 m) meters. Wells are more susceptible to instability after each panel, especially the second panel, advances approximately 50 m past the well in the case of deep mining and more than a hundred meters in that of shallow mining with the accumulative deformation reaching the maximum. Both the total horizontal shear offsets ( Along the longitudinal direction, wells are prone to shear on weak interfaces both in the shallow roof (irrespective of seam depth) and close to the surface (only for shallow mining), especially on weak interfaces with a stiff layer above and a soft one below. Irrespective of mining depth, wells might fail by the combined impacts of distortion, tension and compression in the vicinity of the seam. Through a comprehensive evaluation of various well deformations in the whole mining cycle of longwall panels around the well, it is advisable to locate the well slightly closer to the rib of the second advancing panel, in which case, improved well integrity can be achieved. For mining at shallow depths (∼100 m), rock movement and deformation within the thinner overlying strata of the seam are more severe, and the range of strong influence induced by shallow mining is relatively broad along both the transverse and mining directions. While for deep mining (∼300 m), strata movement (and associated deformation of wells) is mainly restricted to the shallow roof, and engenders a smaller influence along the mining direction. Financial support for this work, provided by the