Copper biosorption by Sphaerotilus natans immobilised in polysulfone matrices has been studied. Firstly, a rough characterisation of biosorbent beads has been performed, and operating conditions for beads preparation aimed at biosorption have been optimised. Then, the equilibrium of the process was studied in order to determine the effect of pH and biomass concentration inside beads; experimental data were successfully fitted by the Langmuir equation, and the highest value for loading was 5.4 mg/g estimated at pH 5.5 and 0.18 g of lyophilised biomass per gram of beads. Biosorption kinetics has also been studied, and an original kinetic model was developed which is able to correlate experimental data. This model was developed from the Shrinking Core Model, considering a variable copper diffusion coefficient dependent on the process conversion. The estimated values for copper diffusion coefficient were obviously lower than copper diffusivity in water, and they depend on biomass concentration inside beads. Beads regeneration was studied using EDTA, HCl and CaCl2. Satisfactory biosorption performances were observed also after 10 sorption/desorption cycles, with CaCl2 as regeneration solution. All the results confirmed the technical feasibility of the biosorption process by a polysulfone-entrapped biomass even though biosorption efficiency should be improved.Biosorption represents an alternative technology for toxic metal removal from polluted streams. It is based on the metal-binding capacity of various biological materials, such as algae, bacteria, fungi, yeast and plant biomaterial, as demonstrated in the literature In the present paper, copper biosorption by A rough characterisation of biosorbent beads has been firstly performed, and operating conditions for beads preparation aimed at biosorption have been optimised. Then, the equilibrium of the process was characterised under different operating conditions and successfully fitted by the Langmuir equation. Further, biosorption kinetics has been studied, and an original kinetic model was developed which is able to correlate experimental data. This model was developed starting from the Shrinking Core Model, considering a variable copper diffusion coefficient which takes into account a nonuniform matrix porosity. Beads regeneration was studied and different sorption/desorption cycles were performed in order to test the biosorbent resistance.  Beads were prepared by dissolving polysulfone pellets in dimethylformamide (DMF), blending lyophilised biomass (quantity according to experimental conditions) into the polymer solution and dripping the resulting slurry through a 2-mm orifice into a water bath at 5 °C where beads are formed by a phase inversion process The biosorption experiments were carried out in batches as follows: 2 mL of beads (biomass concentration according to operating conditions) were added to the copper-containing solution. The final volume was 100 mL, and copper initial concentration was 50 mg/L. Flasks were kept at 30 °C and 150 min The regeneration experiments were carried out in batches as follows: 2 mL of exhausted beads were added to the regenerating solution. The final volume was 100 mL, and flasks were kept at 30 °C. Aliquot amounts (1.5 mL) were collected, periodically, for residual metal concentration determination. Before analysis, solids were removed by centrifugation (6000× Copper concentration was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Varian Spectra AA 2000). All samples were diluted with HNO Biomass concentration inside beads was determined by the Kjeldahl's method for protein nitrogen (heating digester Velp Scientifica mod. DK6; automatic steam distilling unit Velp Scientifica mod. UDK 130; automatic titrator Crison mod. microTT 2050). The analysis indicated that almost 100% of the available biomass was effectively entrapped inside the polymeric matrix. SEM analyses were performed by Philips SEM 505 electronic microscope. Porosity analysis was realised by Micromeritics ASAP 2000 porosimeter. In the case of immobilised biomass, mass transfer resistance inside the particle may be present. Hence, a kinetic model has to be used to estimate mass transfer characteristic parameters. The Shrinking Core Model In the case of a process controlled by the diffusion of metal ions through the liquid film ( If the process is controlled by the diffusion through the reacted shell ( A preliminary investigation was performed on the effect of polymerisation conditions on beads characteristics, such as porosity, surface area and morphology. In particular, temperature and polysulfone concentration were chosen as variables which might influence the polymer properties. Temperature modifies polysulfone dissolution, while polysulfone concentration is expected to influence the polymer cross-linking degree. Consequently, beads were prepared according to a factorial design, reported in  After a preliminary characterisation of beads with no biomass entrapped, batch biosorption tests were performed employing beads with the same characteristics reported in Results shown in Previous tests showed which ones gave the most suitable beads for biomass entrapment aimed at metal biosorption. Only beads prepared according to treatment 4 in Results in An analysis of the variance was also performed on equilibrium parameters in A further study was performed on biosorption kinetics. The main aims of this part of the work were finding the kinetic limiting step and the estimation of mass transfer's characteristic parameters. These aspects are of fundamental importance for the design of biosorption equipment. The Shrinking Core Model was used for fitting of experimental data, considering external film diffusion and intraparticle diffusion control. The kinetic control of the sorption reaction was not considered because preliminary trials performed with free biomass showed the reaction to be very fast. As a first attempt, constant apparent diffusivity was assumed in the case of controlling intraparticle diffusion in all experimental trials. A further confirmation of the model ability to correlate experimental data was found by performing a simulation under experimental conditions of test 4 in This aspect is of fundamental importance considering that such a model might be considered together with material balance equations in order to simulate biosorption equipment such as fixed beds; furthermore, the results might be very useful for the prediction of experimental data, either avoiding or at least reducing the experimental work to be performed The study was completed by an investigation on beads regeneration. Regenerable biosorbents can be used in subsequent sorption/desorption cycles, and they allow the biosorption process to be really convenient and cheap. Three different regenerating solutions were tested: EDTA 0.1 M, HCl 0.1 M, CaCl Profiles in Considering the excellent regenerating abilities of CaCl In the present paper, copper biosorption by copper concentration in solution active sites concentration in the particles, at the beginning of the process initial copper concentration in solution equilibrium copper concentration in solution copper apparent diffusivity in RBC particle metal-specific uptake particle diameter time extent of the biosorption process apparent diffusivity parameters