High glucose is one of the possible causes for osteoporosis and fracture in diabetes mellitus. Our previous study showed that silibinin can increase osteogenic effect by stimulating osteogenic genes expression in human bone marrow stem cells (hBMSCs). However, no study has yet investigated the effect of silibinin on osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs cultured with high glucose. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of high glucose on osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs and to determine if silibinin can alleviate those effects. In this study, the hBMSCs were cultured in an osteogenic medium with physiological (normal glucose, NG, 5.5mM) or diabetic (high glucose, HG, 30mM). The effects of silibinin on HG-induced osteogenic differentiation were evaluated by alkaline phosphatas (ALP) activity assay, Von Kossa staining and real time-polymerase chain reaction. HG-induced oxidative damage was also assessed. Western blot were performed to examine the role of PI3K/Akt pathway. We demonstrated that HG suppressed osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs, manifested by a decrease in expression of osteogenic markers and an increase of oxidative damage markers including reactive oxygen species and lipid peroxide (MDA). Remarkably, all of the observed oxidative damage and osteogenic dysfunction induced by HG were inhibited by silibinin. Furthermore, the PI3K/Akt pathway was activated by silibinin. These results demonstrate that silibinin may attenuate HG-mediated hBMSCs dysfunction through antioxidant effect and modulation of PI3K/Akt pathway, suggesting that silibinin may be a superior drug candidate for the treatment of diabetes related bone diseases.Diabetes mellitus is an endocrine disorder characterized by high blood glucose levels resulting from defects in insulin secretion (type 1 diabetes), insulin action (type 2 diabetes), or both ( Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) are pluripotent cells, which are able to differentiate into osteoblasts, adipocytes, and other cell phenotypes ( Silibinin, which is isolated from medicinal plant In the present study, hBMSCs were cultured in medium supplemented with physiological (NG, 5.5 Bone marrow (5 Cell proliferation was measured using a colorimetric assay based on the ability of viable cells to convert soluble 3-(4, 5-dimethyl-thiazol-2yl)-2, 5-di-phenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT; Sigma, USA) into an insoluble dark blue formazan reaction product. Briefly, cells plated in 96-well plates were treated with 5 ALP staining was performed at day 4 after cells were cultured in 24-well tissue culture plates at a cell density of 1×10 To assess cell-mediated calcium deposition, the von Kossa staining was performed at day 21 after cells were cultured in 24-well tissue culture plates at a cell density of 1×10 Real-time PCR was used to detect the expression of several osteogenic differentiation related marker genes (COL-I, ALP, OCN, BMP-2, RUNX-2 and Osterix) at 4th and 7th day respectively. Total RNA was extracted using TriZol (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions and quantified. Its concentration was determined spectrophotometrically at 260 Cellular levels of reactive oxygen species were measured using 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlorodihydro-fluorescein diacetate (CM-H2DCF-DA; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) according to the method described by The binding of thiobarbituric acid to malondialdehyde-bis-(dimethylacetal) 1, 1, 3, 3-tetramethoxypropan (MDA) formed during lipid peroxidation results in a chromogenic complex. The OXItek TBARS Assay kit (ZeptoMork, USA) was used to determine lipid peroxidation, which increase as a result of oxidative stress. In this study, an MDA standard was used to construct a standard curve. The stimulated cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS), harvested by scraper, then, the cytoplasmic proteins were isolated using an extraction kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Jiangsu, China). The protein was resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. Membranes were incubated with blocking buffer 5% (w/v) skimmed milk powder in 1×TBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 for 1 All data are expressed as the mean±S.D. Statistical analyses of the significance of differences among values were carried out by one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Dunnett's test or Student's In order to determine whether high glucose impaired the proliferation of hBMSCs, different concentrations of glucose were added to the culture medium. We found that HG (10, 20 and 30 To test the effect of high glucose on the osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs, the ALP activity and the deposition of calcium were analyzed. The ALP activity in cells cultured with HG was significantly lower than that of the control group at day 4 ( To investigate whether silibinin could recover the HG-induced suppression of hBMSCs osteogenesis, cells were incubated with silibinin (10 and 100 To further investigate the effects of silibinin on hBMSCs exposed to HG, real-time PCR was used to detect the expression of several osteogenic differentiation related marker genes (COL-I, ALP, OCN, BMP-2, RUNX-2 and Osterix) at the 4th and 7th day, respectively. Treatment with HG significantly decreased ALP and OCN expression at the 4th day, respectively. However, pretreatment with silibinin markedly recover the HG-induced suppression of ALP ( To determine whether silibinin reduces HG-induced oxidative damage in hBMSCs, intracellular reactive oxygen species and lipid peroxide (MDA) were assessed. As shown in The PI3K/Akt pathway has emerged as critical for bone development and skeletal remodeling. In this study, we examined the role of PI3K/Akt pathway in HG-induced osteogenic differentiation. As shown in Moreover, in order to examine the association between PI3K/Akt signaling and HG-induced osteogenic differentiation of hBMSC, Akt inhibitor (MK2206) was added before silibinin application. We found that silibinin could recover the HG-mediated decrease in the mRNA levels of ALP at the 4th day; however, the protective effect of silibinin was partially inhibited when pretreatment with Akt inhibitor ( High glucose has been thought to be a potential contributor for diabetic osteoporosis ( In order to determine whether HG impaired the proliferation of hBMSCs, we used the MTT assay and counting the total cell number (data not shown). Based on our results, high glucose (10, 20 and 30 COL-I is the most abundant protein in bone matrix; it constitutes about 90% of the organic bone matrix and high levels of COL-I mRNA expression would be observed during proliferation ( Oxidative damage of proteins is one of the modifications leading to severe failure of biological functions and cell death. High glucose induces lipid peroxidation in membranes by producing reactive oxygen species. The oxidative stress caused by high glucose in hBMSCs was evaluated by measuring production of reactive oxygen species and MDA, an abundant aldehyde that forms as a result from lipid peroxidation ( Signaling pathways involved in osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs can be implicated by the interactions of a compound with extracellular or intracellular molecules. It has been reported that the PI3K/Akt pathway played critical effects on bone development and skeletal remodeling ( Taken all together, we demonstrated that HG suppressed osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs, manifested by a decrease expression of osteogenic markers and an increase of oxidative damage markers including reactive oxygen species and MDA. Furthermore, we demonstrated for the first time that silibinin could prevent HG-mediated hBMSCs dysfunction resulting in defective osteogenic differentiation through antioxidant effects and modulation of PI3K/Akt pathway. However, the There are no conflicts of interest. The authors thank all the staff in the Laboratory of Orthopedic Research Institute and Scientific Research Center of Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University. This work was supported by grants from the