Thiosulphate leaching has received particular attention in recent years as an environmentally benign alternative to cyanide leaching. In this study, thiosulphate leaching combined with ultra-fine grinding (UFG) was studied for silver extraction from an arsenical refractory ore. Direct cyanidation of the ore (d80: 50 µm) led to a low silver extraction of ≤ 70% over 24 h. leaching period. Extraction of silver in cyanide leaching was improved to 85% after ultra-fine grinding. In comparison, up to 98% of silver extraction was achieved in thiosulphate leaching system after ultra-fine grinding of the ore down to 5 μm (d80) in a stirred mill. Furthermore, thiosulphate leaching is more selective than cyanide leaching with only negligible leaching of arsenic, antimony and other metals observed in this study. This is of particular importance considering the environmental concern for the presence of arsenic in cyanide leaching solutions and effluents. Effects of thiosulphate (0.2–0.6 M Na2S2O3), ammonia (0.04–0.52 M NH3) and copper (0.02–0.11 M CuSO4) on the extraction of silver were investigated using a Box-Behnken design. Statistical analysis of the experimental data (%Ag extraction at 8 h.) confirmed that all the parameters have quadratic effects in that the extraction of silver tends to improve with increasing their concentration up to a critical level above which a reverse trend occurs. The addition of a small amount (0.1 M EDTA, 50 mg/L CMC) of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) improved (by ∼20–30%) silver extraction and reduced thiosulphate consumption by ∼20%. Using nickel sulphate in place of CuSO4 also improved silver extraction with concurrent decrease in thiosulphate consumption. Recovery of silver from real pregnant leach solutions using sodium borohydride (NaBH4) as the precipitating agent was also investigated in detail. A high silver recovery of ≥98% was achieved under suitable conditions. These findings highlight that ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching in combination with ultra-fine grinding can be used as a suitable and environmentally sound alternative to cyanide leaching and the additives such as EDTA and CMC, and nickel in place of copper can improve the extraction of silver from refractory silver ores.Cyanide is the most extensively used leaching agent for extraction of gold from ores since it forms strong complexes with gold ( Thiosulphate leaching of silver/gold is carried out in the presence of ammonia (NH The presence of some inorganic/organic additives in thiosulphate leaching including ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) ( Refractoriness and treatment of silver ores have received no particular interest in that gold and gold/silver ores have become the focus of attention. Silver occurs in a variety of forms including native silver, sulphides, antimonides, sulphosalts and in solid solution within sulphide minerals ( The leaching of silver sulphide (refractory sulphides in particular) with thiosulphate solutions has not been researched extensively. Data on extractions from naturally occurring silver sulphide is limited. Recently, some researches have been performed on silver leaching by thiosulphate leaching system. The effects of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and ferric complexes such as ferric–EDTA, ferric–oxalate and ferric–citrate as alternatives to the cupric–ammonia catalysed thiosulphate system were studied to improve the silver extraction essentially from silver sulphide ( One of the main obstacles for industrial exploitation of thiosulphate leaching is the technical problems encountered in solution purification and gold recovery stages ( Thiosulphate leaching of silver appears to be limited essentially to silver sulphide with complex, refractory silver minerals having received less attention. This comprehensive study was designed to investigate various aspects of thiosulphate leaching of a refractory arsenical silver ore. The ore is essentially double refractory in character since silver occurs as both physically encapsulated silver sulphide and silver-bearing complex arsenic/antimony/base metal minerals/phases. Effect of ultra-fine grinding on the rate and extent of thiosulphate leaching of silver was demonstrated. Response surface methodology (i.e. Box-Behnken design) was adopted to investigate the main and interactive effects of Na In this study, an arsenical silver ore sample from Turkey was used. The ore sample was subjected to size reduction through crushing in a jaw crusher (−4 mm) and then grinding in a rod mill (−100 µm). The chemical analysis of the sample ( Ultra-fine grinding of the ore was performed in a laboratory scale pin-type vertical stirred mill (Union Process) at a rotating speed of 800 rpm. Alumina-based zirconia toughened micro-grinding ceramic beads (DMM AZ 2000®; 2 mm in diameter; kindly provided by Dakot Milling Media (Pty) Ltd (South Africa)) were employed as the media for grinding. Particle size analysis of the ground ore samples was determined by using a Malvern Mastersizer Hydro 2000MU. For detailed mineralogical analysis, the representative sub-samples were obtained using a Quantachrome Mini-riffler to prepare a number of resin mounts. Polished mounts were examined using an FEI Quanta 600F scanning electron microscope (SEM). A combination of image analysis employing atomic number contrast imaging (from back-scattered electrons–or BSE-signal intensity) and Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (EDS) using two Bruker 5010 SDD detectors was used to identify mineral phases and associations. The detailed mineralogical analysis revealed that the ore has extremely complex mineralogical composition and associations. Acanthite (Ag Thiosulphate leaching tests were carried out in glass reactors (1 L) equipped with a pitched blade turbine PTFE-impellers. An overhead stirrer assembly was used to agitate the reactors at a fixed speed of 650 rpm. In these tests, the effect of concentration of thiosulphate (0.2–1.0 M S The concentrations of reagents (thiosulphate, copper and ammonia) assume practical importance for thiosulphate leaching of gold ( In these tests, sodium borohydride (NaBH  Arsenical and antimonial silver minerals such as proustite, pyrargyrite and tetrahedrite (which are also present in the ore) are known to be refractory in character to cyanide leaching ( Box-Behnken experimental design for 15 runs including parameter combinations with coded/actual values for each experiment as well as the observed and predicted results (Ag extraction, %) are shown in The coefficient of multiple determinations (R The analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the regression model including linear/square/interaction contributions are shown in Response surface plots ( In the literature, most studies appear to focus on thiosulphate leaching of gold rather than silver. In a recent study, One of the main detractions to thiosulphate leaching is the prohibitively high consumption of thiosulphate ( In this study, EDTA and CMC as additives were tested to reduce thiosulphate consumption. The addition of EDTA at low levels has been reported to decrease the consumption of thiosulphate by reducing the catalytic cupric/cuprous redox equilibrium potential (   A natural polymer, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) has been used extensively in flotation to depress hydrophobic gangue minerals. It renders mineral particles highly charged to prevent the aggregation of fine particles. In thiosulphate leaching, copper(II) plays a significant role as catalyst to enhance leaching of gold and silver (  Cyanide leaching is inherently non-selective process with the dissolution of reactive minerals present in the ore, adversely affecting reagent consumption, leaching kinetics and downstream processes. The leaching of mercury, lead, antimony and arsenic are of particular environmental concern. In this regard, the dissolution of toxic metals and metalloids in thiosulphate solutions was evaluated in this study.  The dissolution of arsenic and antimony minerals has been reported to be strongly dependent on pH ( Sodium borohydride (NaBH The kinetics of the precipitation of silver under different concentrations of NaBH  This study presents, as an alternative to cyanide leaching, comprehensive assessment of thiosulphate leaching of an arsenical refractory silver ore with very complex and unique mineralogy in terms of occurrence and association of silver within a variety of sulphide/arsenical/antimonial/base metal bearing phases. A detailed mineralogical characterization of the ore has demonstrated the physical occlusion of silver sulphide (Ag The authors would like to express their sincere thanks and appreciation to the