Pellet properties are largely governed by the type and amount of oxide and bonding phases formed during induration and their stability during the reduction. In the present study, effect of MgO in the form of pyroxenite on melt formation and microstructure during the induration of hematite pellets was examined. Optical and electron microscope studies with EDS and X-ray mapping were carried to understand the amount and chemistry of different phases formed at different levels of MgO by varying the pyroxenite addition. These pellets were characterized for their strength and swelling index under blast furnace reduction conditions. Based on silicate slag chemistry formed in the fired pellets, microstructure and pellet quality, 5% pyroxenite addition to get 1.5% MgO in pellets found to be optimum flux dosage. Pellets with this optimized chemistry were also found superior to acid pellets in terms of reduction degradation index, reducibility and softening melting characteristics. Formation of magnesioferrite and high melting point slag with low FeO content in the fired pellets could be attributed to the improved performance of pyroxenite pellets.The quality of iron ore agglomerates plays a vital role in decreasing the reducing agent consumption and increasing the productivity of blast furnace. In most of the integrated steel works, the burden mix for blast furnace is decided as per the availability of the iron ore agglomerates. For blast furnace operating with mixed burden materials like sinter, pellets and lump ore, where super fluxed sinter is available with high CaO contents (∼ In case of acid pellets dolomite cannot be used as the source of MgO as it contains substantial amount of CaO. In the present study a magnesium silicate mineral called “pyroxenite” is used as MgO source. Unlike dolomite, pyroxenite does not undergo any endothermic reaction for dissociation. The later either reacts with the surrounding iron oxide to form magnesioferrite or assimilates in the silicate melt which acts as a bonding phase in the pellets. Pellet properties are largely governed by the type and amount of oxide and bonding phases formed during induration and their stability during the reduction ( In this study, the effect of pyroxenite addition on the melt formation and microstructure during the induration was examined. Optical and electron microscope studies with EDS and X-ray mapping were carried to understand the amount and chemistry of different phases formed at different levels of MgO by varying the pyroxenite addition. These pellets were characterized for their strength and swelling index under blast furnace reduction conditions. Pyroxenite addition was optimized with respect to pellet strength, swelling index, micro structure and silicate melt chemistry. Pellets with optimized MgO content were further tested for reduction degradation index, reducibility and softening melting characteristics. The following materials were used for preparing the green pellets: Iron ore fines (−10 Green pellets were prepared using a laboratory balling disc with a diameter of 600 Firing of the pellets was carried out using electrically heated rotary hearth furnace (RHF) as shown in the  Fired pellets were primarily tested for their cold compression strength (CCS) and swelling index, which are regarded as main control parameters for blast furnace pellets. Pellets with optimized chemistry based on strength, swelling index, microstructure and slag chemistry were further tested for their reducibility, reduction degradation index and softening–melting characteristics. CCS and swelling index were tested as per ISO 4700 and ISO 4698 respectively. Reduction degradation index (RDI) and reducibility index (RI) were tested as per ISO 4696-2 and ISO 7215 respectively. Image analysis is a technique that is used to provide an objective measurement of different phases in microstructure. Pellet samples were cut into half and hot mounted at 175 The signal from the camera was provided to a personal computer through a gain correction amplifier to correct the signal for optimal display. The computer software used for interpreting the camera signal into digital image was ‘Axiovision 4.7 Imaging System’ supplied by Carl Zeiss Vision. Basically, the digital image captured from the black and white camera is represented by pixels having 256 shades of grey values i.e. 0 to 255 ( Cold compression strength indicates the ability of pellets to withstand the load during their storage & handling and the load of burden material in the reduction furnace. Blast furnace needs pellets with CCS values in the range of 200–230 Swelling index indicates volume change of pellets during reduction. Higher swelling index reduces the strength of pellets after their reduction thereby causing and irregularities in the blast furnace like high resistance to gas flow, burden hanging and slipping. Maximum allowable swelling of pellets for blast furnace ranges from 14 to 16%.   As evident from image analysis and SEM-EDS results, addition of pyroxenite beyond 5% (i.e. 1.5% MgO in fired pellets) resulted in more amount of partially assimilated or relict magnesium silicate phase, as observed in microstructure, Softening–melting characteristics of pellets help in understanding the formation of cohesive zone in the lower portion of blast furnace. If the pellets soften at lower temperature and the temperature range between softening and melting is wider, then the resistance to the gas flow will be more in the cohesive zone. Results indicated that addition of pyroxenite to the pellets substantially increased the softening temperature of the pellets and decreased the softening–melting range.  Reduction degradation (measured as RDI) of pellets is an undesired phenomenon that occurs at low temperatures in the upper part of blast furnace or reduction shaft of any direct reduction unit. The primary cause of low temperature disintegration is due to crystalline transformation from hexagonal hematite to cubic magnetite accompanied by volume expansion to an extent of 25% and lattice distortion ( Volumetric expansion of iron ore pellets takes place during their reduction from hematite to magnetite and wüstite. It can be mainly attributed to the increased volume requirements for the anisotropic growth of magnetite (111) planes parallel to the hematite (0001) planes ( Softening melting properties of the pellets are affected by the liquidus phase with low melting point that is formed between wüstite and slag phase during reduction ( The effect of pyroxenite addition on the melt formation and microstructure during the induration of iron ore pellets was examined. Fired pellets with varying MgO content were primarily tested for their cold compression strength and swelling index, which are regarded as main control parameters for blast furnace pellets. Type and amount of phased formed as a result of varying MgO were measured using image analysis technique. Chemistry of oxide and slag phases was recorded using SEM-EDS analysis. X-ray mapping was also carried out to understand the distribution of MgO in different phases. Pellets with optimized chemistry, based on their strength, swelling index, microstructure and slag chemistry, were further analyzed for their reducibility, reduction degradation index and softening–melting characteristics. The following conclusions can be drawn from this work: Addition of pyroxenite up to 5% to get 1.5% MgO in the pellets was found to be an optimum flux dosage for blast furnace grade hematite pellets. FeO in the slag phase reduced from 30% in acid pellets to around 3% in pyroxenite fluxed pellets containing 1.5% MgO. Pyroxenite addition beyond 5% showed its poor assimilation in the pellet matrix and increased the amount of relict magnesium silicate phase resulting in no further drop in slag FeO. Strength of the pyroxenite pellets is comparable to acid pellets in spite of high amount slag phase that filled up the pores between the oxide grains thereby reducing the porosity. The negative effect of slag phase on pellet strength is counteracted by the reduced porosity of pyroxenite pellets. RDI of pyroxenite pellets was found to be superior, compared to acid pellets, due to the formation of magnesioferrite and more amount of silicate melt, which are more stable under the reducing conditions in blast furnace. Swelling index of acid pellets was poor due to the formation of low melting point fayalitic slag whereas pyroxenite pellets exhibited less swelling by forming low FeO high melting slag that gives sufficient bond strength to withstand the reduction stresses. Pyroxenite pellets resulted in better softening–melting characteristics compared to acid pellets due to the formation of high melting point slag and magnesio–wustite phase during reduction. Authors are thankful Mr. Mark B Denys (Chief, R&D and SS) for his encouragement, support and permission to publish this paper and to Prof A K Lahiri, Prof. T C Rao and Mr. Ashok kumar (IMTG) for their valuable guidance. Thanks are also due to Mr. Prakash Mohapatra, Mr. Krishna Murari Agarwal (Banaras Hindu University) for contributing during pelletizing test work and Mr. Shivajee Tiwari for conducting softening–melting tests.