In this study, different processes have been developed and applied to treat a rare earth phosphate concentrate obtained within the nitrophosphate process of fertilizer production. Methods to remove impurities such as Fe and Ca have been investigated as well as to separate the phosphorous and thereby facilitate dissolution of the rare earth elements (REE). These methods include thermal treatment with sodium hydroxide and sodium double sulphate precipitation with and without alkaline conversion, followed by selective dissolution in different acids. The proposed processes were compared and analyzed from the perspective of introducing an appropriate intermediate product for further individual REE separation.
                  The results have shown that after thermal treatment with NaOH at 400 °C, the phosphorous can be removed from the rare earth phosphate concentrate by water leaching. Investigation of different REE phosphate concentrates demonstrated that mixed Ca and REE phases, e.g. REEmCan(PO4)3m+2n/3 and CaHPO4 are less likely to dephosphorize than REE(PO4).nH2O and FePO4.H2O under these conditions. The recovery of REE to a mild acidic solution is limited by the presence of remaining phosphate ions and by the formation of REE oxide phases during the thermal treatment. The results also show that a solution containing 40 g/L REE; free of phosphorous, calcium and iron can be obtained after reprecipitation of the rare earth phosphate concentrate as sodium rare earth double sulphates followed by alkaline conversion with sodium hydroxide and dissolution in nitric acid.As is reported in the 2017 list of critical raw materials for the EU, rare earth elements and phosphorous are placed among the 27 most critical raw materials for the reason of supply risk and their impacts on the economy for the European countries ( The nitrophosphate process of fertilizer production is a viable alternative to recover both the phosphorous and the REE from an apatite concentrate. In the nitrophosphate process of fertilizer production the apatite is first digested in nitric acid and then Ca(NO Based on the precipitation conditions in the nitrophosphate process, the obtained rare earth phosphate concentrate consists of about 7–15% total REE, 10–16% phosphorus, 4–10% calcium and 1–10% iron. The dominant phases in the REE concentrate are CaHPO The solubility of REE as sodium double sulphate salts under mild acidic conditions is low. However, it is preferable to obtain the REE as hydroxides ( The conversion of the REE sodium double sulphates into REE hydroxides can also be carried out by reaction with NaOH. Almost a complete conversion can be obtained at 70 °C and 1.05–1.25 stoichiometric amount of NaOH based on the following reaction (Eq. In addition, there are different cracking methods for REE phosphate minerals such as monazite (Ce, La, Nd, Th)PO Monazite minerals are usually processed by alkaline digestion or thermal treatment with NaOH rather than sulfuric acid decomposition. Acid digestion is a difficult and uneconomical method for direct separation of REE from these minerals, not only because of poor dissolution and loss of phosphorus; but also, high concentration of protons in the leach liquor overburdens further separation of these metals. Further, a positive side of alkaline cracking methods is the formation of Na Alkaline cracking by thermal treatment with sodium hydroxide (at 400–500 °C) is an effective dephosphorization method for common REE phosphate bearing minerals such as monazite. This process is more energy efficient compared to the thermal decomposition of monazite minerals at ~ 1400 °C ( Dephosphorization of monazite and other REE phosphate concentrates by alkaline digestion is an alternative for thermal treatment with NaOH. In alkaline digestion, the REE phosphate concentrate is digested with excess of sodium hydroxide (40–50 wt%) at ~160–170 °C. Thereafter, the product is washed with water where a solution containing Na Against the background of previous works focusing on extraction and upgrading of a REE phosphate concentrate within the nitrophosphate process of fertilizer production ( In this study 3 different alternatives have been investigated in order to obtain a concentrate more enriched with REE, with low concentration of calcium and iron and free of phosphorous. These routes are, (i) thermal treatment with sodium hydroxide, (ii) the REE sodium double sulphate route, and (iii) the REE hydroxide route. The thermal treatment route is shown in After thermal treatment, sodium phosphate was solubilized by water leaching. Thereafter the thermally treated and washed REE concentrate was solubilized by acid leaching and the REE-rich solution can be delivered to the REE separation unit. In the REE sodium double sulphate route (  The hydroxide concentrate is then dried at elevated temperature in order to oxidize Ce to its tetravalent state. The REE hydroxide concentrate is then subjected to acid leaching. Throughout all the experiments, high purity Millipore water and reagent grade (≥ 98%) chemicals were used. The apparent solution pH was measured by means of a Thermo Scientific Orion ROSS Ultra electrode calibrated by standard solutions at pH 2, 4 and 7 at 25 °C. The powder-XRD data of samples were obtained using a Cu Kα radiation, Siemens, Model D5000 and the scans were recorded from 5° to 90° with a θ/2θ diffractometer and identified by comparison with data in the International Center for Diffraction Data (ICDD)-Powder Diffraction Files. Scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS-Hitachi S-4800) was used for chemical and imaging analysis. ICP-OES (Thermo Fisher iCAP 7400) was used to determine the concentration of the metal ions in the aqueous solutions. Each experiment was repeated minimum of two times and the average values are reported and where possible the error bars were added. Throughout this paper, the concentration of major elements and the REE in the form of total light REE (TLREE: Ce, Nd, La, Sm, Gd and Pr) and total heavy REE (THREE: Y, Dy and Er) are reported. In all the figures, error bars showing the deviation from the average were added where >3 experimental repetitions existed and the plotted lines act as an indication for the eye. A Satisfactory mass balance was established with the maximum deviation in the range ± 5% when calculating the dissolution and precipitation yields. The apatite concentrate used in this study is a fluorapatite delivered by Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara AB (LKAB). The apatite concentrate is obtained by processing the tailing deposits in Kiruna by flotation. The tailings contain 4–8% P The apatite concentrate was first dried at 80 °C for 24 h and was then dissolved in 10 mol/L nitric acid in 20% excess in an open jacketed vessel equipped with an overhead stirrer. The temperature was controlled at 70 °C. The overall reaction is given in Eq. The leach liquor was defluorinated by the addition of KNO Depending on how the process is operated (cooling crystallization temperature, final pH and temperature of the partial neutralization step), the recovery of REE and the amount of coprecipitated calcium and iron in the phosphate concentrate will vary, and this will influence the further processing of the concentrate. Additionally, a synthetic REE phosphate concentrate in the form of pure rhabdophane (REEPO The REE phosphate concentrates reported in To leach out the REE from the dephosphorized concentrates, the thermally treated concentrates were selectively dissolved in nitric and hydrochloric acid respectively. First, a slurry of 32 g solid/L acid was prepared and then the acidity of the slurry was increased from pH 11 down to −0.5 by adding nitric acid and hydrochloric acid in separate experiments. The pH, total weight of the suspension and the amount of added acid were recorded. Sampling of the aqueous phase was performed through a syringe filter (0.2 μm), 24 h after addition of acid at each pH to attain equilibrium. The concentrations of REE, Ca, P and Fe were measured by ICP-OES at each pH. The undissolved mass was filtered off by centrifugation, oven-dried at 80 °C, weighted carefully and analyzed with powder XRD and after a total dissolution with ICP-OES. The REE phosphate concentrates presented in In the next stage the REE sodium double sulphates were mixed with sodium hydroxide (20%) with 10% excess and kept under agitation for 24 h at room temperature. The REE hydroxide cake was then filtered, washed efficiently through re-pulping with water and decantation several times and finally dried either at 80 °C or at 160 °C to investigate the possibility of enhancing the oxidation of Ce The efficiency of the thermal route in terms of sodium hydroxide dosage, temperature and reaction time were investigated from the outcome of the water leaching step. The powder XRD diffractogram ( The effect of stoichiometric excess of NaOH on P recovery from different REE phosphate concentrates is shown in In As is shown in  The powder XRD analysis of the thermally treated synthetic REE phosphate concentrate (case III) after water leaching show that the thermally treated concentrate mainly consists of rare earth oxides and hydroxides (See Analyzing the thermally treated REE concentrate (III) using SEM is shown in  As is illustrated in Eq.    Selective dissolution of the rare earth oxide concentrates from case III in nitric acid at a pH of 6 demonstrated the possibility to obtain a solution with about 4 g/L REE where 70% of the total dissolved REE were heavy REE. Dissolution of P was observed below pH 0.6 which is in accordance with the dissolution of REEPO Chemical speciation calculation was carried out using the Medusa speciation software ( The reason for the low leach recovery of the REE from the thermally treated REE concentrate also at high acidity ( The composition of the sodium REE double sulfate concentrate obtained after processing the REE phosphate concentrate (case I) within the proposed REE sodium double sulphate route ( The leachability of the sodium REE double sulfate concentrate was investigated in various concentration of HCl, HNO The composition of the REE hydroxide concentrate obtained in the proposed route ( Solid characterization of the REE hydroxide concentrate ( The REE hydroxide concentrate was selectively dissolved in HNO The composition of the undissolved solid after the dissolution of the REE hydroxide concentrate in nitric acid at a pH of 1.56 is reported in In Isolation of REE from apatite concentrates can be achieved within the nitrophosphate process where a REE phosphate concentrate with high recovery of REE is obtained. As REE phosphates is only slightly soluble in mild acidic solution, in order to achieve a complete dissolution, aiming at the separation of the REE into individual elements and to reduce the burden of the subsequent separation units, the REE phosphates should be converted into more soluble compounds. This conversion should be carried out within processes that selectively remove the iron being the main impurity against REE, and recover the P content of the initial REE concentrate. Three different processes were developed with the aim to obtain a mildly acidic concentrated solution of REE with low concentration of impurities. These processes were: (i) a thermal treatment route where the REE phosphate concentrate was treated with sodium hydroxide at 400 °C followed by acid leaching, (ii) sodium REE double sulfate precipitation route and (iii) sodium REE double sulphate precipitation followed by conversion into hydroxides (REE hydroxide route).  In the thermal treatment route, the phosphorus was effectively separated from the REE phosphate concentrate (> 95%). But on the other hand, dissolution of the REE requires harsh acidic condition mainly due to the formation of REE oxides as separate phases and together with Ca. In addition, the presence of remaining phosphate ions limits the solubility of the REE at mild acidic conditions, specifically for the precipitates with higher total Ca concentration (Case I and II). In the case of REE concentrate III dissolution in nitric acid with a slurry concentration of 33 g/L after thermal treatment and water wash, gave a solution containing ~12 g TREE at pH 0.7 with a dissolution yield of 73% for LREE and 90% for HREE while under similar experimental conditions, the total REE dissolution yields for the REE concentrates from Case I and II at pH ~ 0.7 were 17% and 15% respectively. Moreover, the Fe and Ca content of the initial concentrate can not be separated from the REE bulk using this route. The recovery of REE to the aqueous phase under mild acidic conditions (pH >1) is higher compared to the sodium double sulphate route but significantly lower in comparison with the hydroxide route. The total REE recovery in the case of processing REE concentrate I by thermal treatment, by the REE double sulphate and by the hydroxide route, and after dissolution of the respective phases in nitric acid at pH ~ 1.5, were ~ 10%, 13% and 83% respectively. The main advantages of the sodium REE double sulphate route are high phosphorus recovery (> 95%) beside the efficient impurity removal where the concentration of Ca and Fe in the double sulphate concentrates were below 1 mass%. However, the lower precipitation yields of HREE as compared to LREE ( All the discussed advantages and disadvantages for the sodium double sulphate route is also relevant for the hydroxide route. But against an extra step that involves transformation of the double sulphate concentrate into a hydroxide concentrate, the solubilization of REE is greatly improved and a pregnant solution that contains up to 45 g/L REE at a pH of 1.6 can be obtained. In addition, Ce is also partially separated from the bulk of REE(III) hydroxide. The cost for processing 1 kg of REE phosphate concentrate III within the different studied routes under optimal conditions, by considering only the direct material and energy cost ( The results has shown that phosphorous can be removed from a rare earth phosphate concentrate by water leaching after thermal treatment with NaOH at 400 °C. Investigation of different REE phosphate concentrates demonstrated that mixed Ca and REE phases, e.g. REE The authors would like to acknowledge the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at