Stainless steel plant dust is considered a hazardous waste due to the fact that it contains significant levels of Cr(VI) and other heavy metals such as lead and zinc. It should therefore be treated before being stockpiled or land filled. Solidification/stabilisation processes are effective techniques for the immobilisation of heavy metals. This paper consequently describes an investigation into the stabilisation of Cr(VI) in stainless steel plant dust with silica-rich clay in a sintering process. The results indicate that Cr(VI) in the stainless steel dust can be stabilised in a 50mass% dust:50mass% clay mixture at an optimum sintering temperature of 1100°C, and minimum sintering time of 5h. Chromium emission during the sintering process was found to be low, and within environmental limits.Cr(VI)-containing solid wastes, typically dust and sludge, are generated during production processes such as the manufacture of stainless steel, chromium-containing alloys, refractory materials and chemicals. These waste materials are considered hazardous due to the toxic and carcinogenic properties of Cr(VI) compounds In a South African stainless steel plant, approximately 30 The Cr(VI)-containing dust and sludge can be treated in pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical recovery processes This paper subsequently describes the optimum sinter parameters required for stabilising Cr(VI) in stainless steel plant dust that was produced in South Africa with silica-rich clay. The possible mechanisms whereby Cr(VI) is stabilised were also studied. South African stainless steel plant dust (SPD) and clays (AS, MR and AC) were used in the stabilisation experiments ( Approximately 125 Specimens were vertically placed in an alumina crucible, and heated at 1.5 Different types of clays, sintering temperatures, ratios of clay to waste and sintering times were evaluated in order to find the optimum sintering parameters ( Since the Cr(VI) concentration in the sintered specimen is very low (possibly in the ppb range), it is impossible to directly determine the stabilisation behaviour of Cr(VI) using the available analytical methods such as SEM-EDS and XRD. Therefore, large amounts of Cr(VI) were spiked into the mixture in order to identify where Cr(VI) is and how it is stabilised in the sintering process. In these experiments, reagent grade CrO The chemical compositions of the clays and SPD were determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF). A Malvern Mastersizer 2000 was used to analyse the particle size distributions of the clays in the–1 Different leaching tests, such as the Toxicity Characteristics Leaching Procedure (TCLP) test It was found that the Cr(VI) concentration in the leachate of the modified TCLP tests are below the detection limit of the UV–vis spectrometer for Cr(VI), while the Cr(VI) concentrations from the modified ASTM D 3987-85 test are significantly higher and therefore can be determined. This is due to the fact that in the modified TCLP tests, the leaching buffer solution has a pH of approximately 4.93, while the modified ASTM D 3987-85 leaching solution has a pH of approximately 6. When the sintered product was added to the leachant, it could change the redox potential of the leachate and therefore possibly transform extracted Cr(III) species into Cr(VI) species. On the other hand, the extraction of other species from the samples, such as Fe The Cr(VI) concentration in the leachate was determined photometrically using a UV–vis spectrometer. This method is reliable when Cr(VI) concentrations are higher than 0.01 Owing to the fact that the concentrations of toxic substances (except Cr(VI)) which leached from the sintered specimens in the modified TCLP test are higher than that in the modified ASTM D 3987-85 test, the leachable toxic substances (except Cr(VI)) in the modified TCLP leachate from the selected samples were measured using an Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES). The redox potential of the leachate was determined using a Thermo Model 97-78-00 Platinum Redox Electrode. XRD, SEM-EDS and XRF were used to analyse the sintered specimens with respect to the crystalline phases present, microstructure and chemical composition. Clay AS had the best stabilisation capacity of Cr(VI), while clay AC the worst ( The effect of leaching time on the leachability of Cr(VI) from the 40%AS–60%SPD sample that was sintered at 1100 The Eh-pH diagram for chromium species confirms that the stable Cr-containing ion is Cr(III) during the TCLP leaching period (in the pH range of 4.66–5.36 and Eh range of 0.425–0.537 The effect of sintering temperature on the leachability of Cr(VI) from 50%AS–50%SPD mixtures that were reacted for 5 The 50%AS–50%SPD specimen shrank significantly at sintering temperatures above 1100 The leachability of Cr(VI) increases with increasing SPD content of the sintered specimen ( Two reference samples, i.e., pure AS clay and pure stainless steel plant dust samples, were also sintered at 1100 For the AS–SPD mixtures, the leachability of Cr(VI) from the specimens, which were sintered at 1100 The effect of sintering time on the leachability of Cr(VI) was studied by sintering 50%AS–50%SPD mixtures at 1100 The leachabilities of As, Cd, Cr, Pb and Zn from the stabilised SPD (sintered with 50% clay AS at 1100 CrO  The influence of the mass% CaO/mass% SiO The XRD and EDS analyses of the stabilised 50%AS–50%SPD mixture that was sintered at 1100 The sintered pure stainless steel plant dust (∼4,000 Chromium emissions were very low in all the experiments, and low compared to other industrial sources ( Cr(VI) in stainless steel plant dust was stabilised by mixing the dust with clay, and sintering it in air. The following conclusions with regard to the stabilisation of Cr(VI) can be drawn: When the specimens were sintered at 1100 Decreasing sintering temperature, increasing dust content and shorter sintering times increase the leachability of Cr(VI) from the stabilised stainless steel plant dust. When Cr(VI) in the stainless steel plant dust is stabilised with clay in a sintering process, other toxic substances such as As, Zn and Pb are also stabilised. A sintering process whereby steel plant dust is mixed with clay is therefore considered to be an effective process to stabilise toxic substances in stainless steel plant dust. The leachability of Cr(VI) in the stabilised stainless steel dust increases with increasing mass% CaO/mass% SiO The chromium emission factor from the stabilised stainless steel dust is low and similar to those reported for the cement industry. The stabilisation of Cr(VI) in stainless steel plant dust with clay was found to be more successful than is reported for cementation processes in which OPC is used The authors would like to thank the Technology and Human Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) of the National Research Foundation of South Africa, for financial support.