Burst fractures of the thoracolumbar spine are a common injury and can be source of great pain and disability. Fortunately, in most instances, treatment can be nonoperative with excellent results. However, there are certain situations in which a surgical approach may be indicated: a fracture with a significant neurological deficit or an “unstable” burst fracture with disruption of the posterior ligamentous complex. The literature is reviewed and surgical outcomes are presented.Traumatic burst fractures of the spine are one of the most frequent injuries, and the thoracolumbar junction (T10 to L2) is the most common location; it is seen in approximately 6% of patients experiencing blunt trauma, The conservative management of burst fractures has historically been short periods of bed rest and/or fitting with a cast or brace. However, there are certain aspects of a thoracolumbar burst fracture that may well be best treated with an operative approach. This article will examine some of those circumstances. Historically, classification systems, such as Denis Thus, thoracolumbar burst fractures may be associated with varying degrees of neurological deficits, ranging from isolated nerve deficits to conus medullaris injuries to frank paralysis. There are no level I or level II However, most articles did not focus on comparing operative versus nonoperative care, and their study designs were relatively poor: in the operative groups, there were usually many more patients with neurological deficits. However, despite limitations, most authors do conclude that the opportunity for neurological recovery improves when treating a burst fracture surgically than without. Anterior corpectomy and fixation have long been advocated as the means of best treating a burst fracture with neurologic involvement. However, a recent systematic review by Oner et al An “unstable” burst fracture is one in which the anterior column has fractured in compression, but the posterior osteoligamentous column (PLC) is also significantly disrupted, originally highlighted by McAfee's computed tomography study of 1983. Despite the long held axiom that surgery is indicated for burst fractures with PLC disruption, there are no level I or II data that directly compare the roles of operative and nonoperative treatments of unstable fractures, and there have also only been a few works that retrospectively evaluated the 2 treatments: most simply used surgical evaluation as the control and that PLC disruption was a factor in decision making for performing the surgery. There are anecdotal reports suggesting that patients with concurrent reasons for avoiding brace or orthotic wear—obesity, multitrauma, claustrophobia—might be considered as relative candidates for surgical stabilization. Simple posterior spinal instrumentation as a means of “damage control” may improve the rehabilitation of the multiply injured patient by allowing safer transfer, ventilation, and care for extremity fractures without cumbersome braces or casts.