Bleed stream from electro refining step of copper smelter was processed to recover the metals as high value products such as copper and nickel powders or salts. The process consists of partial decopperisation of the bleed stream followed by crystallization of a mixed salt of copper and nickel sulphate, leaching of the mixed salt, removal of iron, solvent extraction for the separation of copper and nickel and winning the solution to produce metal powders. After partial decopperisation of copper bleed stream, the resultant solution was subjected to crystallization which produces composite crystals with the chemical composition of 8.4–12.5% Cu, 13.7–14.38% Ni and 1–2ppm of Fe as impurity. This mixed salt was leached with water and was treated for iron precipitation. The purified solution was subjected to solvent extraction using two solvents namely LIX 84 or Cyanex 272. A 20% LIX 84 in kerosene extracted 99.9% copper and 0.059% nickel at a pH of 2.5, similarly a 5% Cyanex 272 in kerosene extracted 98.06% copper and 0.51% nickel at a pH of 4.85. LIX 84 was used for metal separation in the mixer-settler unit and a flow sheet was developed using this solvent. The pure solutions of copper after stripping it from the loaded organic and nickel left in the raffinate were further electrolysed to produce pure copper (99.9%) and nickel (99.8%) powders, alternatively pure sulphate salts could also be crystallized. Since it is well known that Cyanex 272 is used for the separation of cobalt and nickel, a few experiments were performed on the extraction of copper by using Cyanex 272. A complete study is yet to be done to develop a flow sheet by using this solvent.Copper bleed electrolyte is generated during the purification of impure anode copper in the electro-refining plant. Due to recycling of the electrolyte the impurities viz. arsenic, iron, bismuth, antimony, chloride etc. get enriched in the solution. When the concentration of the impurities reaches their upper limit of tolerance it becomes deleterious for the cathode copper production. In order to control the purity of the cathodes during the continuous operation, a part of the solution is discarded as bleed stream periodically which contains 40–50 In the existing practice the bleed electrolyte is purified by removing copper, arsenic and antimony by electrolytic stripping in the liberator cell. The purified liquor is then concentrated to crystallize out nickel sulphate and the solution left in the form of black acid can be recycled back to the system. But the associated drawbacks with this process are liberation of the arsine gas, high operation cost, poor grade NiSO Hence research in this area has been done on such bleed streams/electrolytes containing copper and other metals which could be treated by various processes such as hydrogen reduction, solvent extraction, cementation and electrowinning to produce copper as its sulphate salt which could be recycled back to the electrolysis tank or pure copper powder for powder metallurgical (P/M) applications. Of these processes the solvent extraction is often in vogue in the copper industry and more than 1.5 million tons of copper are produced by this process annually from the lean grade ores/waste streams. Copper was recovered from motor scrap and other lean grade ores/waste streams by ammonia leaching, solvent extraction with LIX 84, and electrowinning of metal from the stripped solution ( A process has been developed at NML for the recovery of copper ( Synthetic copper bleed solution containing 38.42 Analyses of the samples for low concentration of metallic contents were carried out by an atomic absorption spectrometer. Solutions containing high metals (Cu and Ni) were analyzed by conventional method ( Preliminary experiments ( Aqueous solution containing 8.39 The loading capacity of 20% LIX 84 was determined by repeated contact method and was found to be 7.94 Effect of aqueous to organic ratio was studied to carry out the shake out experiments. It can be seen from Initially the extraction of copper from the aqueous feed solution with 8.26 As 20% Cyanex 272 formed a viscous organic phase while determining the loading capacity, the maximum loading of the extractant was determined using 5% Cyanex 272 by repeated contact method at The studies were carried out for the treatment of copper bleed electrolyte generated during the purification of impure anode copper in the electro refining plant. Of the different process routes investigated, partial decopperisation, crystallization, solvent extraction electrowinning route was found suitable to produce copper and nickel powder of required purity. LIX 84 and Cyanex 272 were used as extractants for copper and nickel separation. 25% LIX 84 was found suitable for complete extraction and separation of copper and nickel in the mixer settler unit. These solutions after separation could be used for metal powder by electrolysis or any other metal salt such as oxides/sulphates. Authors are thankful to Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, for giving permission to publish the paper.