Binary shell–core structured electro-catalysts have attracted great attention owing to their superior catalytic performance and low material costs with respect to those monometallic catalysts. A novel Pd decorated copper nanowires (Pd@CNWs) electro-catalyst has been fabricated through the facile hydrometallurgy approach. Pd shells with a thickness of 30–50 nm are uniformly deposited onto the as-prepared CNWs surface, in which ultra-long CNWs (with an average diameter and length of 100 ± 20 nm and 35 ± 5 μm) are used as the one dimensional skeleton as well as reduction agent. Pd@CNWs catalyst exhibits higher catalytic activity and better durability for the methanol electro-oxidation (MEO) in comparison with Pd–Cu. The Tafel analysis reveals that the first charge transfer is the rate-determining step of MEO on Pd@CNWs electrode. The overall MEO reaction orders on Pd@CNWs electrode for CH3OH (ca. 0.23) and OH− (ca. 0.22) reveal that the MEO mechanism maintains unchanged with increasing the CH3OH or OH− concentration at all of the Tafel ranges.For decades, tremendous attention has focused on the investigation of Pt catalyst in the belief that Pt is the most promising element as electrode catalyst used in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) Novel nanostructured Pd catalysts have aroused wide research interests in recent years and considerable efforts have been devoted to the development of nanostructured Pd with various novel morphologies Relative to other shaped copper nanoparticles, copper nanowires (CNWs) have shown great potential application in lithium ion batteries, electro-catalysts and solar cells owing to their good mechanical property, high electronic conductivity and high surface area In this work, a hydrothermal approach was applied to synthesize the ultra-long CNWs scaffolds in the presence of hydrazine (reducing agent) and EDA (capping agent) and then Pd decorated copper nanowires (Pd@CNWs) electro-catalysts were fabricated by easy and rapid hydrometallurgical approach. Pd shells with a controlled thickness were uniformly deposited onto the as-prepared CNWs scaffolds surface. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first study demonstrating the in situ displacement reaction synthesis of the novel Pd@CNWs electro-catalyst. The electro-catalytic performance of Pd@CNWs catalyst for the MEO was investigated, and the MEO reaction order for the CH The details of synthesis of ultra-long CNWs are similar to those reported in Refs. Fabrication of Pd@CNWs catalyst: To deposit Pd films onto the CNWs surface, a hydrometallurgical approach was applied to decorate the surfaces of CNWs. 100 mL aqueous solution containing a amount of PVP (0.01 M, molecule weight 35000) was deaerated by bubbling with nitrogen for 30 min. Then the as-synthesized 0.024 g CNWs were immersed into the mixed solution with ultrasonic treatment for 30 min. After that, 1 mL PdCl The microstructure and morphology of Pd@CNWs and PdCu catalysts were measured using an S-530 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, HITACHI) and a JEM 2100 transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL) equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray analysis system (EDX, Phoenix, EDAX International Corporation). Rint D/max2000 wide angle goniometer (Rigaku Co. Ltd.) system using Cu Kα source was employed to analyze XRD spectra of the catalysts at the 2θ extension from 20° to 90° with a step of 6°min Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and Chronoamperometric (CA) measurements were collected on a CHI660D electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua, China) at 25 °C. A Pt fail and saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was acted as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The fabrication process of working electrode was reported in the literature  In this work, CNWs is fabricated from Cu A possible growth mechanism of CNWs is proposed based on the previous research The Pd@CNWs catalysts are fabricated by a facile hydrometallurgical approach at room temperature. The reduction reaction of Cu substituted by Pd As can be seen from the TEM image of Pd–Cu catalyst in EDX line scanning and elemental mapping of Pd@CNWs composite are measured and shown in The Pd–Cu and Pd@CNWs catalysts were analyzed by XPS and the results are shown in Before the electro-catalytic performance analyses, the Pd@CNWs electrode are activated in acid media without methanol by using the cyclic voltammetry (CV). All mass specific current density in this study are defined as the blaze current normalized by the actual Pd loading. The catalytic activities of Pd@CNWs and Pd–Cu electrodes for the MEO are investigated in alkaline solution.  the transfer coefficient αn calculated from the Tafel slopes is about 0.248. This result reveals that the first charge transfer ( The effect of the KOH concentration on MEO on Pd@CNWs electrode is also investigated with various contents of KOH from 0.05 to 0.5 M The potential of the peak and the onset potential of MEO show a tinny negative shift. These results demonstrate that the OH The overall reaction orders (m) of CH Here C is the concentration of CH The linear relationship for log(i) vs. log( We further investigate the catalytic durability of Pd@CNWs and Pd–Cu catalysts by chronoamperometry ( In this study, a facile hydrothermal approach was carried out to synthesize ultra-long CNWS one-dimensional scaffolds (with an average diameter and length of 100 ± 20 nm and 35 ± 5 μm) and then a novel Pd decorated copper nanowires (Pd@CNWs) electro-catalyst was fabricated by in situ spontaneous displacement approach. Pd shells with a controlled thickness of about 40 nm fully deposited onto the CNWs bulk surface, in which ultra-long copper nanowires were used as the nanostructured skeleton and reduction agent. The inexpensive Pd@CNWs catalyst shows higher catalytic activity and better stability for the MEO than Pd–Cu catalyst. The Tafel analysis reveals that the first charge transfer ( This work is supported by the