An in-field remediation method of tons of Pb and Zn-rich ceramic waste based on Joule heating vitrification is presented. The progressive heating up to about 1850°C led to the complete melting of the waste material and the rapid cooling of the melt formed a monolithic glass of 55tons. The obtained glass was chemically and morphologically homogeneous and immobilized the heavy metals and non-volatile inorganic compounds. The occurrence of crystalline phases such as zircon and cordierite was observed in the lowermost part of the monolith due to the different cooling rate. Leaching tests showed that the vitrified monolith presented a high chemical resistance and metal ions were immobilized into the glass matrix.
                  The presented in-field vitrification process was highly effective in the remediation of tons of heavy metal-rich materials and can be exploited further for remediation of large amounts of soils and asbestos-based materials.The vitrification treatment by Joule effect is a thermal remediation process consisting in a progressive heating of the contaminated soil by high power currents to reach the melting temperature (see for instance, The vitrification treatment by Joule heating was initially developed by Pacific Northwest Laboratory (PNL) for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) ( In previous papers the authors presented the technological feasibility of the Joule heating vitrification on a pre-pilot scale to remediate kilograms of Pb-rich waste and asbestos containing materials ( Mineralogical analyses of uncontaminated soil, waste material and glasses obtained by the vitrification process were performed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). The analyses were performed by using a Philips PW 1710 diffractometer equipped with a graphite monochromator in the diffracted beam, using CuKα radiation, 40 The chemical composition of uncontaminated soil, waste material and the glasses obtained by the vitrification process was obtained by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a Philips PW 1480 spectrometer. The chemical data were normalized taking into account the content of volatile component (H Morphological analysis of the glasses was made by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Philips 515) working at 10 The mobility of heavy metals after the vitrification treatment was evaluated performing a leaching test. Sampling and leaching of the vitrified monolith were conducted accordingly to the procedures reported on the UNI 10802 ( The in-field scale vitrification plant consisted of four main parts ( a current generator of high power made up by a Scott transformer (three-phase/double single-phase); four identical graphite electrodes (150 a gas-effluent capture system; and a gas-effluent treatment system consisting of filtration and scrubber units. The four electrodes were placed at the corners of a square geometry (110 An uncontaminated soil and waste from ceramics industry were selected to perform the vitrification process at an in-field scale. The chemical and mineralogical composition of the soil and the waste was reported in The uncontaminated soil was selected for an appropriate chemical and mineralogical composition to develop the Joule heating process. The content of SiO The waste was a sludge of ceramics industry of an enamelling process of tiles and was characterized by the high occurrence of Pb (2.85%), Zr (2.98%) and Zn (0.75%) ( Pb and Zr were present as lead silicate (alamosite) and as zirconium silicate (zircon) respectively, whereas Zn occurred as dissolved element or within mineral phases in amounts lower than XRD sensitivity (1% by weight) but detectable by XRF ( The vitrification treatment by Joule heating in-field scale was performed in an off-site configuration. Thus, the selected waste was placed in a site consisting of an artificial embankment characterized by an uncontaminated soil ( The in-field vitrification process can be described by four main phases. The first phase was characterized by the electrical conduction into the soil. This phase was enabled by adding between the two pairs of electrodes of an electrically conductive path made of a mixture of uncontaminated soil and flakes of graphite ( The second phase was represented by a progressive decrease of the electrical resistance due to the formation of highly conductive melted zones. The third phase was characterized by an electrically stable phase where the temperature of the melt increased leading to a progressive heating and melting of the whole volume ( The fourth phase was represented by the cooling of the melted mass and the formation of a glassy monolith ( After the four steps of the process, the monolith occupied an area of about 200 The monolith appeared completely vitrified even if some microcrystalline zones were present in the lowermost part. In these zones the cooling occurred more slowly allowing the crystals to grow ( For analytical purposes, the monolith was sampled by core drilling in three zones as indicated in XRD analysis showed a broad pattern in the range 20–30° (2 Chemical data by XRF showed very similar concentrations in all glass samples collected at different depths from the surface ( SEM observations showed a glass matrix mostly not porous, with only a very low density of micro-vacuoles (about 20–30 The chemical and morphological data shown was macroscopically and microscopically homogeneous and contrary to what was observed on the pre-pilot scale ( The presence of zircon and cordierite crystals in the in-field produced glass should not represent a chemical weakness of the material but rather an improvement of the glass stability ( In-field scale Joule heating vitrification process is a suitable technology to remediate tons of contaminated soils by inorganic compounds and in particular heavy metals. The process based on Joule effect led to the progressive heating and melting at high temperature of the waste and, as a consequence of the cooling, to the solidification and vitrification of the melted mass. The produced glassy monolith immobilized heavy metals and inorganic contaminants. Mineralogical, morphological and chemical analyses showed a very homogenous glassy material. Leaching tests confirmed that the hazardous metals (Pb, Zn, and Zr) were immobilized within vitrified monolith suggesting a high durability and leaching resistance of the glass to the chemical weathering. The remediation was carried out in an off-site configuration, however the easy removal and handling of the electrode plant allows to remediate tons of materials also in-situ and on-site. The research was supported by the project “Tecnologie per il risanamento dei terreni inquinati” funded by