A biodegradable non-woven hyaluronic acid polymer scaffold (Hyaff® 11) was analysed in vitro as a carrier vehicle for differentiation and mineralization of rat bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC). BMSC were grown on Hyaff® 11 in a mineralizing medium in the presence/absence of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Osteoblastic differentiation was investigated by light and electron microscopy analysing the expression of osteogenic markers: calcium, alkaline phosphatase (AP), osteopontin (OP), bone sialoprotein (BSP) and collagen type I. We also measured proliferation, AP activity and mRNA expression of AP and osteocalcin (OC). Electron microscopy and Toluidine-blue staining demonstrated that bFGF accelerated (day 20 vs. day 40) and increased mineralization. With bFGF, calcium, OP and BSP were strongly enhanced at day 40, whereas AP decreased. Our in vitro results demonstrate that Hyaff® 11 is a useful vehicle for growth, differentiation and mineralization of rat BMSC, and that it permits bone development.Skeletal abnormalities, trauma and tumor bone resections all cause bone loss. Traditional methods used to repair skeletal defects include artificial implants or bone grafts Hyaluronic acid (HA)-based biodegradable polymers have been shown to provide successful cell scaffolds for tissue-engineered repair of rabbit bone and cartilage Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient ( The biomaterial used in the present study was a HA-based biodegradable polymer commercialized as Hyaff Bone marrow aspirates from inbred Fisher 344 rats femur (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA, USA) were diluted 1 BMSC were resuspended at the density of 0.5×10 Cell proliferation was determined by MTT mitochondrial reduction on days 5, 10, 20 and 40 Culture supernatants from each sample were collected on days 5, 10, 20 and 40. They were stored at −80°C until analysis. AP activity was measured using For ultrastructural evaluation, scaffolds were incubated in the presence and absence of cells (2×10 On day 40, scaffold-cell cultures of 2×10 Matrix protein analysis for osteopontin, bone sialoprotein and collagen type I was performed by immunostaining using the rabbit anti-sera LF123, LF120 and LF 67, respectively. Briefly, the anti-sera were used at a 1 Scaffold cultured cells (2×10 The MTT test, which was used to evaluate cell growth in three different cell concentrations, demonstrated that proliferation on Hyaff Toluedine blue stained semithin sections was analysed at 5, 10, 20, 40 days in the following conditions: (1) standard medium alone, (2) Dex+ As can be seen in Positivity for the osteopontin and bone sialoprotein matrix proteins, followed a pattern similar to von Kossa staining. In the presence of bFGF, these two matrix proteins were also expressed in the inner portion of the scaffolds. Conversely, collagen type I was mainly detectable around the mineralized zone. Samples at days 20 and 40 cultured in Dex+ RT-PCR was performed on scaffold cultured samples (2×10 Osteocalcin mRNA from cells cultured in Dex+ For large bone defects, several innovative bone repair procedures already exist, generally involving either the use of artificial implants or bone grafting In the present study, we analysed in vitro the commitment to mineralization of rat BMSC grown on non-woven Hyaff It is known that cell proliferation decreases when cells reach confluence and initiate their differentiation process Light and electron microscopy clearly demonstrated that after at least 20 days all the stages characteristic of the mineralization processes occurred. Addition of bFGF reduced the time taken to prime differentiation of BMSC into osteoblasts and osteocytes. This finding provides further confirmation of the importance of bFGF's role in the induction of the mineralization process The physicochemical characteristics of most polymers hamper in vitro cell penetration into many scaffolds Several parameters can influence the growth of cells on biomaterials as differences in structure, porosity, pore size and total surface available to the cells. Since Hyaff In conclusion, these in vitro data demonstrate that the association of osteoprogenitor cells with Hyaff The authors wish to thank Graziella Salmi and Luciano Pizzi for editorial and technical assistance and Robin M.T. Cooke for editing. The authors would like to thank Progetto Finalizzato MSTA II of the National Research Council for financial support.