In this paper, textural characterization of an activated carbon derived from carbonized coconut shell char obtained at carbonization temperature of 600°C for 2h by CO2 activation was investigated. The effects of activation temperature, activation time and flow rate of CO2 on the BET surface area, total volume, micropore volume and yield of activated carbons prepared were evaluated systematically. The results showed that: (i) enhancing activation temperature was favorable to the formation of pores, widening of pores and an increase in mesopores; (ii) increasing activation time was favorable to the formation of micropores and mesopores, and longer activation time would result in collapsing of pores; (iii) increasing flow rate of CO2 was favorable to the reactions of all active sites and formation of pores, further increasing flow rate of CO2 would lead carbon to burn out and was unfavorable to the formation of pores. The degree of surface roughness of activated carbon prepared was measured by the fractal dimension which was calculated by FHH (Frenkel–Halsey–Hill) theory. The fractal dimensions of activated carbons prepared were greater than 2.6, indicating the activated carbon samples prepared had very irregular structures, and agreed well with those of average micropore size.Because an activated carbon has well-developed pore structures, high internal surface area and good mechanical characteristics, which provide it with many useful properties, it has been employed in a wide number of applications on an industrial scale, including technologies for the purification of gases; the removal of organic pollutants from water and used as a catalyst/a catalyst support in the catalytic processes or electrode materials in electrochemical devices over the last few decades Although activated carbon was the first recognized absorbent and is still widely used in industry, the development of appropriate methods to make them and the understanding of their porous structure still continue. Despite the extensive use of activated carbon for the wastewater treatment, adsorption by activated carbon still remains an expensive process and this fact has prompted a growing interest into the production of low cost activated carbons. It is well known that activated carbons can be prepared from a variety of precursors with a high carbon content and low level of inorganic compounds. Various carbonaceous materials such as coal, lignite, nutshells, wood and peat are used in the production of commercial activated carbon. However, abundance and availability of agricultural by-products make them good sources of raw materials for activated carbons. Harvesting and processing of various agricultural crops result in considerable quantities agricultural by-products. Such agricultural by-products are usually inexpensive, for which the effective utilization has been desired. Many researches have been made efforts for preparing activated carbons from agricultural by-products such as aprico stones, sugarcane bagasse, nutshells, forest residues and tobacco stems In principle, the methods for preparing an activated carbon can be divided into two categories: physical activation and chemical activation. In the physical activation, a raw material is first carbonized and the carbonized material is secondary activated by steam or carbon dioxide, air or their mixtures. In the pyrolysis, the moisture and volatile matter are removed from the raw material. Then, in the gasification, both the porosity and specific surface area of the carbon are increased. Usually, carbonization temperature range between 400 and 850 Coconut shells used as raw materials to produce activated carbon in this study were obtained from Vietnam. The starting materials were manually chosen, cleaned with deionized water, dried at 110 Prior to use, coconut shells were crushed and sieved to obtain particles with sizes less than 2 30 Pore structures of sample were characterized by nitrogen adsorption at 77 It is well known that the most important property of an activated carbon is its adsorption capacity which is related to the specific surface area, pore volume and pore size distributions. Generally, the greater the surface area of the activated carbon, the larger is its adsorption capacity There are several critical parameters in the preparation of activated carbon that would affect its structure, one of which is activation temperature. One of the methods for estimating the type of pores present in a solid is by analyzing the isotherm curve. The N In accordance to the classification adopted by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) Pore-size distribution is the principal factor determining the adsorption characteristics of activated carbons. In pore size distribution (PSD) calculation, two important methods have been developed to describe the sorption and phase behavior of inhomogeneous fluids confined to porous materials in literature: computer simulation and density functional theory (DFT). DFT is a computational method that treats the intrinsic free energy of a system as a functional of the particle distribution function  The duration of the activation has a significant effect on the development of the carbon's porous networks. The time should just be enough to eliminate all the moisture and most of the volatile components in the precursor to cause pores to develop. Since the end of the volatile evolution marks the formation of the basic pore structure, activation should be limited up to that point. Longer durations cause enlargement of pores at the expense of the surface area  It was found in  N It was found in  As could be seen in The term fractal has been introduced by Mandelbrot The fractal dimension ( Activated carbons derived from carbonized coconut shell chars obtained at carbonization temperature of 600 It was indicated through the results of effects of activation temperature, activation time and CO The fractal dimension ( The Support of the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (grant number: 20050674009) and Science Research Foundations of Kunming University of Science and Technology (grant number: 14118011) were gratefully acknowledged.