The performance of rotary drill machines commonly used in open-pit mines is measured based on the rate of penetration (ROP) and the bit wear. This paper develops a novel performance evaluation technique to obtain optimal drill operating regime through machine vibration and coarseness index mapping. The vibration levels of blast-hole drilling machines in axial and lateral directions were determined using accelerometers placed at the mast. The mean particle size (d) and characteristic particle size distribution curves for the drilled hole were plotted using sieve analysis and Rosin Rammler diagram. ROP showed an increasing trend with Mean particle size (d) with a correlation of R2 = 0.61 and a decreasing trend with vibration for varied pulldown force and torque at a different rotational speed. A drill vibration index (DVI) is introduced as an indicator of vibration severity of the drill machine, and its relationship was studied with ROP and average mean particle size.A steep demand for coal production to meet the growing energy requirements has led to intense mining activities in India, particularly in the surface mines. Surface mines contribute close to 92% of the total coal production (650MT) and involve drilling, blasting, ore handling, and hauling as significant operations. Blast-hole drills used in open-pit coal mines play a primary role in overburden excavation. During rock-bit interaction in the process of drilling, the drill string undergoes severe vibration resulting in bit wear and ultimately leading to a lower rate of penetration (ROP). Hence, it is essential to evaluate drill machine performance in a given geological condition and propose appropriate measures for enhancing ROP. For evaluation of drill machine performance, it is useful to correlate ROP with vibration as well as drill cuttings obtained. Various researchers proposed a few models for drilling performance assessment in a given geological condition. However, very few have focused on drilling performance considering vibration and drill cuttings analysis along with machine operating parameters. Richard et al. (2004) and Reyes (2016) researched bit-rock interaction, including modes of vibrations, and reported that bit-rock interaction causes severe drill string vibration Reyes et al. (2015), has utilized the drill cuttings obtained while drilling to evaluate the penetration mechanism by relating the shape and size of cuttings to the fracturing mechanism Limited research work has been reported relating machine vibration and size of drill cuttings with that of the penetration rate. Pfleider and Blake (1953) correlated ROP with the size of drill cuttings and established a relationship suggesting that ROP increases with the size of drill cuttings Kahraman et al. (2000) developed a model to predict penetration rate using the drillability index for conical and spherical bit tooth in different rock formations as formulated below: Altindag (2004) considered the drill cutting parameters, i.e., coarseness index (CI), mean chip size (d) and specific surface area (SSA). Their investigation suggested that PR is directly correlated to CI, ‘d’ and it is inversely correlated to the SSA. A relationship between the PR and drill cutting parameters, was established using regression analysis as expressed below: The author concluded that energy transmission to drill bit is efficiently utilized in rock disintegration Yaneng et al. (2017) studied the relationship between mechanical specific energy and penetration rate, including, bit wear The research work relating drill performance with machine vibration are quite limited. An effort was also made for characterizing the machine performance using drill cuttings analysis. The drill cutting size analysis holds an important role in relation to machine vibration and penetration rate. This research involves monitoring of both machine vibration and analysis of drill cuttings during rotary drilling for evaluating their significance on ROP at a time, which is new. The present investigation also aimed at developing a suitable operating regime for enhanced drilling performance. Based on this objective, experiments were carried out in four steps. The initial step was the field investigation where vibration measurement of the blast-hole drill was measured based on the variation of operating parameters, namely rotational speed, pulldown force, and torque. These parameters are controllable parameters and play a primary role in disintegration rock during drilling operation. Drill cuttings obtained were collected for laboratory investigations and mean particle size (d) calculation. Correlation of mean particle size and operating parameters with the rate of penetration were studied to obtain drill vibration index (DVI) and optimum operating range. The scheme of experiments is depicted in The study lays emphasis on the effect of machine vibration on drill penetration rate. The drilling measurements were carried out in an open cast mine located on Central India. Parameters measured included pulldown pressure, rotational speed, drilled depth, and drilling time. Pulldown force and torque were obtained from the given operating parameters. The torque equation can be obtained as: In a rotary blast-hole drill, hydraulic or electric motors are the prime source for the generation of rotary motion at the drill head. The drill bit attached to the drill rod is rotated by the rotary head, which is pulled up and drawn by a feed mechanism powered by the hydraulic actuators. By controlling the pulldown force and the torque, the penetration rate of the drill machine is controlled. Under massive pulldown force applied on the bit, teeth of rotary drill bit penetrate the rock mass. The torque applied on the bit leads to the shearing of a rock mass. Drill cuttings generated during the drilling process are flushed out of borehole using compressed air, keeping hole clean. Its failure leads to an increase in air pressure, thus causing vibration and poor drill performance. The vibration of drill components also occurs due to resistance offered by rock surface during rock-bit interaction while drilling. Vibration measurements were made on a drill machine having a bit diameter of 311 mm. During each blast-hole drilling, vibration signal was recorded using the B&K Photon Geological and operating parameters significantly influence the drilling performance. While geological parameters are uncontrollable, the operating parameters can be controlled as per requirement. During a drilling operation, the disintegration of rock is a result of a combination of pulldown force, torque and the rotational speed on the bit. The force applied on the bit results in its penetration into the rock. During rock-bit interaction, resistance offered by the rock strata leads to the vibration of drilling components. Vibration in excess results into bit wear and hence inefficient energy utilization leading to poor drilling performance. During the present study, the net drilling time and the drill depth were recorded after each drilling. The drill depth was measured using the steel tape, and the time taken for drilling was measured using a stopwatch. The rate of penetration was calculated using Eq. On completion of blast-hole drilling, the drill cuttings deposited near the blast-hole were collected for laboratory analysis. The drill cuttings reveal how efficiently the power transmitted by the motor to the drill bit is being utilized in cutting. Size of drill cuttings is related to penetration rate and is of great importance in the estimation of penetration rate and also the machine vibration. In a drilling operation, the drill cuttings produced have a graded size. At the initiation of drilling during the rock-bit interaction, disintegration of rock occurs due to the combined effect of pulldown force and torque acting on the drill bit. As the drilling progresses down the hole, cuttings generated are removed through the passage between the drill rod and blast-hole wall by pneumatic flushing, ensuring proper penetration of bit into the rock. During the process of removal of drill cuttings, the coarser particles are also broken to fines. The finer chips are collected at the top of blast-hole, as shown in Drill cuttings accumulated near the blast-hole drilling were collected using a hollow cylinder by inserting it into the heap perpendicular to the surface of the pile to ensure that the drill cuttings represent both finer and coarser fractions from the top to the bottom. As shown in As explained earlier, vibration is a significant factor in determining drilling performance. Excess vibration results in failure of drill components and hence reduces the drilling performance. It is also hazardous to operators’ health and comfort. While drilling, the increase in RPM results in the increase in resistance of bit on the borehole wall. This increase in rpm and the bit resistance on the borehole wall leads to an increase in vibration. The drill cuttings collected from each borehole can be used as an indicator for evaluating how well the bit penetrated the rock and how efficiently energy got transmitted for optimum utilization of the bit. The drill cuttings can also be used in the estimation of vibration generation in blast-hole drill machine. In the present study, vibration data, drill depth, drill time, drill penetration rate, and drill cuttings for each hole were collected. The vibration data were collected using accelerometers. Two sensors were used and placed at the mast, one oriented to the axial direction and the other to the lateral direction. The signals were recorded by a data acquisition system. The raw vibration magnitude recorded by the vibration analyzer was studied using RMS (root mean square) method, which is represented by Eq. The signal was recorded during the entire drilling process at each hole which was then normalized for the period of 15 sec. The results obtained show the maximum acceleration of 0.07 m/sec To analyze vibration signals, Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was utilized as an effective way of computing the signal so obtained at different rpm ie, 80, 85, and 90 rpm. The processes decompose the discrete signal into different components of frequencies The drill cuttings collected from each blast-hole were analyzed using sieve analysis. The sieving process involved sieve of sizes (in mm): 3.35, 2.36, 1.17, 1.18, 0.85, 0.6, 0.42, 0.3, and 0.15. The weight percentage of each size fraction of cuttings was aggregated as per the ASTM standard under designation C 136-06 The weight of the fraction passing through sieve sizes was taken, and its corresponding cumulative weight retained was obtained. The cumulative weight retained versus sieve sizes (in mm) plot was drawn, as shown in The transition line drawn at 0.85 mm sieve size shows fine particles to its left and coarser particle towards its right. The area so obtained can be considered as to how the energy got dissipated in the generation of drill cuttings. The area under the curve obtained at 80 rpm shows the generation of more finer particles and loss of energy. While the energy utilization at 90 rpm is better as compared to 80 rpm and 85 rpm as it results in the generation of higher coarser particles. The drilling performance depends on the operating parameters, rock characteristics, and operator experience. The drilling performance improves with an increase in rpm and pulldown force as it causes a higher rate of penetration with a higher rate of coarser cuttings, as reported by the researchers Coarseness index, which is the sum of cumulative weight retained in percentage and an indicator of coarse particle generation characterization and size distribution was calculated The mean particle size or ‘d’ is defined as the average size of drill cuttings being generated in blast-hole drilling and is used as an indicator of drilling performance, i.e, rate of penetration (ROP). It is determined by using Rosin Rammler (RR) or Rossin-Rammler Sperling-Bennet (RRSB) graph, proposed from sieving analysis on powdered coal in 1933 R(d) = cumulative weight percentage retained d = mesh or particle size (mm) d n = particle size distribution parameter. The mean particle sizes obtained for different rotational speeds, i.e., 80, 85, and 90 rpm were 0.63 mm, 0.71 mm, and 1.04 mm, respectively. Similarly, the particle size was calculated for the rest of the samples obtained after each blast-hole drilling. The Rossin-Rammler plot obtained using the Matlab for the three samples at varying rotational speed of 80, 85, and 90 rpm is shown in Specific surface area (SSA) is the surface area per unit volume The ROP, as obtained during the rock drilling process, is correlated with the SSA, as shown in The ROP was found to be inversely proportional to SSA with an index of determination, R Based on the data collected during the drilling process, the parameters for drilling performance, i.e., ROP, vibration generated during rock drilling, and specific energy were determined at different operating parameters, i.e., rotation speed, pulldown force, and torque. The parameters for drilling performance were investigated by varying the operating parameters within a practical range to obtain the optimal condition. Rotary drilling is being done at three different rotational speeds of 80, 85, and 90 rpm by varying the pulldown force and the torque. Rate of penetration (ROP) is used as a primary indicator for drill performance and is controlled by operating parameters, i.e., pulldown force, torque, and rotational speed. The operating parameters are varied by the operator depending upon the rock strata encountered. Specific energy is considered as one of the key parameters to indicate the efficiency of drilling. Its accurate prediction is often difficult in field. Vibration, shocks, and friction encountered during the drilling process are the primary factors that may distort the measurements of specific energy. The most predictive way to study the trend of specific energy is to determine the motor power consumption (P = VI) required during the drilling process by monitoring the voltage (V) and current (I) signals. Specific energy and vibration increases as the drilling resistance increases. Specific energy plots with variation in pulldown force, torque, and rotational speed are shown in The energy required for rock breakage while drilling is a function of operating variables and vibration generated due to rock-bit interaction. Higher vibration generation due to uncontrolled operating parameters, bit wear, and grinding action (in place of cutting) while drilling leads to loss of energy. Shangxin et al. (2020) studied the relationship between specific energy and pulldown force at a different rotational speed. The results obtained showed a linear relationship between specific energy and pulldown force at varying rotational speed  The resultant vibration magnitude, while drilling, is obtained to identify a more accurate trend and also to obtain the optimal condition for the rock drilling. The resultant vibration can be expressed as: It is observed from the analysis that ROP is clearly influenced by the operating parameters i.e., rotational speed, pulldown force, and torque. Excess vibration generated due to rock-bit interaction also leads to a poor penetration rate. Choosing a proper operating range thus is crucial. The vibration of 0.1 g is considered unpleasant, while 0.5 g is intolerable and drill experience vibration upto 0.3 g A new term drill vibration index (DVI) is introduced here to define the vibration severity more precisely and to explain its relationship with the rate of penetration (ROP) to enhance the drill performance prediction. The drill vibration index can be obtained as: V.M = vibration magnitude (m/s V.M  This suggests that the machine penetration rate decreases with a higher drill vibration index. At the same time, with a decrease in DVI, the average size of drill cuttings particle increases with an increase in ROP. Therefore, it can be summarized that the blast-hole drill machine yielding higher drill vibration index is more likely to give poor performance. A systematic investigation was carried out with an intention to predict rotary drill performance by analyzing the machine vibration and drill cuttings with its key parameters, i.e., C.I, SSA, and d. These parameters were correlated with the rate of penetration to study the drill performance at varying pulldown force, torque, and rotational speed. The vibration generated during the rock drilling was measured and studied in relation with the penetration rate to obtain a drill vibration index and the optimal drill operating regime. The major conclusions drawn based on the investigations and analysis are as follows: The particle size of drill cutting is a good indicator of drill performance. Particle size of drilled rocks was found to increase with an increase in the rate of penetration. Mean particle sizes of 0.63 mm, 0.71 mm, and 1.04 mm were found for the three increasing rotational speed at 80, 85, and 90 rpm, respectively. The specific surface area obtained showed a decreasing trend with ROP having correlation of 0.66. The mean particle size (d) obtained, increases with increasing pulldown force and torque at varying rotational speed The generation of vibration during rotary blast-hole drilling along the axial direction was observed to be higher in comparison to the lateral direction. Higher vibration generation along axial direction was presumably due to the initial instability of drilling components during bit-rock interaction and inept control of operating variables by the operator during the drilling process. The maximum peak acceleration obtained was of the magnitude of 0.19 m/s Vibration generated showed a decreasing trend with an increase in pulldown force and torque at varying rotational speeds along with the corresponding increase in the rate of penetration. The average penetration rate varied from 0.82 to 0.95 m/min with resultant vibration magnitude from 0.05 to 0.17 m/s The drill vibration index (DVI) was found to vary from 0.50 to 1 with the average ROP ranging from 0.82 to 0.95 m/min. The drill machine with DVI = 1 or above is found to have poor performance with higher vibration and production of more fine drill cuttings.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The on-site investigation was carried in two large open-pit coal mines, located in Central India. Laboratory investigations were performed in Advanced Research Lab and Rock Excavation Lab, IIT(ISM) Dhanbad. Authors acknowledge the mine management for giving permissions and field support.