The recovery of Platinum Group Metals and Gold (PGM+Au) from the UG-2 reef of the Bushveld Complex is an interesting challenge when the selection and optimisation of the reagent suite is considered.
                  The UG-2 reef is characterised by two predominant gangue phases i.e. chromite and silicate, that have significantly different physical and chemical properties. A strategy needs to be devised to address concentrate grade that will reduce the recovery of gangue without significantly affecting the recovery of the valuable species.
                  Recovery of the valuable species is complicated by the fact that PGM+Au occurs as a variety of different minerals having varying chemical and physical properties. The operating strategy has to consider the characteristics of the valuable mineral species and maximise recovery while meeting stringent grade specifications.
                  Laboratory tests are conducted to illustrate the effect of the various flotation parameters. Applications of the findings on existing concentrators are discussed illustrating the need for a better understanding of the contribution of the various mechanisms occurring in the flotation cell. The paper demonstrates the significance of entrainment in the recovery of both valuable species and gangue species, and the need for a greater understanding of this non-selective sub-process on overall circuit performance.
                  This paper forms part of a postgraduate study through the University of Cape Town into the development of a mechanistic model for the entrainment process. Although much work has been done in this study of the effect of various other parameters on the flotation of UG-2 ore, this paper focuses on the effect of frother, depressant and water on the flotation results.In optimising a flotation plant the metallurgist has to consider the effect of various parameters on the recovery and grade of the precious metal. In some cases the scenario is complicated by the presence of a gangue phase that has severe consequences in the downstream processing of the flotation concentrate. The metallurgist is faced with the challenge of balancing the operating parameters so as to produce a high grade valuable mineral concentrate of low mass without compromising the concentrate with unacceptably high contaminant content. In so doing the metallurgist must consider the various sub-processes that occur in a flotation cell, and understand the effect of the various parameters on these sub-processes. The objective of this paper is to describe such a scenario in the production of Platinum Group Metal (PGM) concentrate from the UG-2 reef, a topic that is the focus of much development on the Bushveld Complex in South Africa. Laboratory tests are conducted to illustrate the effect of frother, depressant and solids concentration on the flotation results. Together with aeration rate and froth depth these parameters are commonly the most varied in the operation of a flotation concentrator. The findings of the testwork and the quantification of the effect of the parameters on the behaviour of the various species have been realised on existing operations in the optimisation of the concentrate grade and recovery. The UG-2 ore is a platinum-bearing chromitite ore that contributes a growing proportion of the Platinum Group Metal production from the Bushveld Igneous Complex in Northern South Africa ( The ore contains trace amounts of base metal sulphides, that, despite their low concentration, are of importance as they frequently occur is association with many of the PGM-bearing minerals. The copper (occurring primarily as chalcopyrite) and nickel (occurring primarily as pentlandite or pyrrhotite) grades of the ore are typically 0.005% and 0.025%, respectively. As illustrated in The conventional concentrator circuit is illustrated in There are a number of variations to this circuit including the cleaner cell configuration, the destination of the cleaner tailing stream and separate secondary processing of the chromite- and silicate-rich streams. Feed grades to the concentrator range from 4 Flotation of PGM A typical reagent suite for UG-2 flotation consists of an activator (CuSO It has been widely accepted that the process of flotation is a combination of a number of individual sub-processes. Simply, the process whereby solids and water are transferred from the pulp phase to the froth phase can be described by considering the sub-processes of true flotation and entrainment ( True flotation can be described as the selective chemical sub-process where hydrophobic minerals are attached to the bubbles rising through the pulp. Entrainment is described as a non-selective physical sub-process where solids and water is transferred to the froth in the bubble lamellae and bubble interstices. In assessing the results of flotation tests the metallurgist must consider the interaction of the various sub-processes and the effect of these processes on the response of the various minerals in the ore. The PGM Apart from recovery a major challenge in the processing of UG-2 is the chromite (FeCr The challenge facing the metallurgist is to produce consistent low chromite grade concentrate from feed grades that vary from as low as 25% to as high as 40%. The UG-2 ore is a particular challenge in that two predominant gangue phases with significantly different characteristics must be considered. The primary mechanism for the transfer of solids to the concentrate in concentrator processing very low concentrations of valuable mineral is the non-selective sub-process of entrainment. The situation is further complicated by the fact that it has been shown that certain of the silicate gangue phases are activated in alkali solutions ( The use of depressants is not necessarily the solution to increasing the grade of the concentrate as the depressants selectively depress the silicate gangue phase resulting in a significant increase in the chromite grade. This may also be a reason for the lower concentrate grades on some of the operations. Dilution of the concentrate with silicate may result in low PGM There is much opportunity in optimising the concentrator operations to increase PGM Two UG-2 ores were used in the test work and were chosen from different locations on the Bushveld Complex. The ores were crushed and then batch milled in a laboratory rod mill to 80%–75 All parameters were fixed about setpoints that are commonly used for conducting batch flotation tests on typical Platinum ores ( The tests were carried out in a Denver D12 “Sub-A” 2,3 Compressed air was supplied to the cell via a pressure regulator and a rotameter. The setting on the rotameter was kept constant at 10.9 The pulp was made up to a volume of 2100 The froth was scraped from the cell every 15 The flotation reagents were added at the required concentrations and conditioned for the required period as tabulated in The water soluble frother used was Dowfroth 200, a polypropylene glycol with a molecular weight of approximately 200. The standard frother concentration used for the tests was 50 Samples were analysed for PGM As the behaviour of reagent is not modelled and water is added to the flotation cell during the batch test, the concentration of reagent in the pulp is unknown after the first minute. For this reason we will consider the results for the first minutes only. The other results form part of the ongoing postgraduate study in the modelling of frother behaviour and entrainment. The solids concentration in the pulp was varied from 25% solids by mass to 45% solids by mass. Modelling exercises have indicated that effect of solids concentration is better expressed as grams per cubic centimeter of pulp. ( The effect of a change in solids concentration is illustrated in The increase in solids recovery is attributed to an increase in the entrainment of solids to the concentrate. This increase in entrained solids results in a decrease in the PGM The significance of the increase in solids recovery is evident in the decrease in the PGM The effect of frother on the mass of solids recovered to the concentrate for the first minute is illustrated in the The effect of frother on the PGM An increase in the frother dosage results in an increase in the recovery of PGM A similar increase in chromite and silica recovery is apparent with an increase in frother dosage. Frother dosage does however not result in selective recovery of either chromite or silica and no trend is apparent for the Cr An increase in depressant dosage results in a decrease in the solids recovery as is shown in Although the results did indicate a variation in the PGM It must be stressed that the PGM As would be expected, the change in depressant dosage does however have a significant effect on the PGM The depressant has therefore had a significant effect on the recovery of silicate. The depression of the silicate phase from the concentrate results in an increase in the Cr This observation has proven to be very significant in the optimisation of UG-2 concentrators. It has illustrated the importance of understanding the balance that is required between controlling the entrainment of solids and the subsequent need for gangue depression in order to achieve target PGM The trends observed in the results were used to quantify the magnitude of the response in the solids recovery, PGM The significant effect of solids concentration and frother concentration on the entrainment of solids to the concentrate, and the concomitant effect on the PGM The significance in the results is particularly important in understanding the effect of frother dosage on the recovery of chromite. A seemingly small increase in the frother dosage from 20 The typical response to such an increase in the mass transfer of gangue to the concentrate is the addition of depressant in an attempt to increase the grade of the final concentrate. As indicated from Testwork at various facilities has found that the use of depressant at high dosages results in a dispersant effect and this has found application in the production of high concentrate grades on UG-2 concentrators. The graph illustrated in This observation would imply that the opportunity exists to significantly increase the grade of the fast floating PGM Successful application of the high depressant dosages will require the optimisation of the reagent suite to maximise PGM Much success has been achieved in increasing the PGM The results also indicate that solids concentration and frother have a significant effect on the mass of gangue mineral reporting to the concentrate. Through a process of balancing the reagent dosage to the plants, operations have been successful in producing PGM A survey of the existing operations on the Bushveld Complex has found that frother dosage to the concentrators range from 13 These findings have been applied to existing operations and the data represented in The effect of pulp density on the solids recovery by entrainment has been found to be significant. Operations have tended to increase the pulp density in the rougher flotation cells without considering the consequences of such an increase. Some success has been achieved in reducing chromite grade of the final concentrate by reducing the solids concentration in the feed to the final cleaners. Unfortunately operators are concerned of potential recovery losses due to a reduction in the flotation residence time with the dilution of the feed to the cells. Solids concentration and frother dosage have a significant effect on the mass of gangue recovered by entrainment. This has an effect of increasing the mass flow through the circuit and potentially reducing the final concentrate grade. Much success has been achieved by optimising the dosage of frother and controlling the addition of water to the flotation circuit, and in so doing reducing the mass of gangue reporting to the concentrate. This has resulted in a reduction in the chromite grade to concentrate. Although depressant is being used with much success in the increase of the PGM It has been found that balancing of water, frother and depressant addition is critical in optimising a flotation concentrator. Selective addition of depressant can yield significantly higher concentrate grades without resulting in the loss in PGM The findings of this work have been significant and have reaffirmed the need for a better understanding of the entrainment mechanism and the effect of parameters such as solids concentration and frother dosage on the mass of pulp transferred to the froth phase.