Novel γ-alumina nanoparticles and MWCNTs were synthesized for the rapid removal of the noxious nickel (II) from the solvent phase. Hence this study investigated the ability of nano-sized particle in Ni (II) adsorption. The influential parameters including contact time (min), adsorbent dosage (g/L), pH and the initial concentration of Ni (II) were investigated and optimized using the batch adsorption study. The adsorption equilibrium and kinetic data were well fitted and found to be in good agreement with Langmuir and pseudo-second order kinetic model respectively and the maximum Ni (II) percentage removal using MWCNTs and novel γ-alumina nanoparticle was 87.65% and 99.41%, respectively under optimum conditions. The maximum removal of Ni (II) was observed at pH=10. Upon experimentation, it was observed on increasing the adsorbent dosage and initial concentration the amount of Ni (II) removal efficiency also increased. Finally, it can be concluded that the synthesized nanoparticles can be applied as the best adsorbent to remove the Ni (II) from aqueous solution.In recent decades, the water pollution has become one of the major environmental threats due to the release of the toxic and hazardous chemical from various activities Nickel (Ni) belongs to heavy metal groups and has various industrial applications such as mineral processing, electroplating, production of paints and batteries, manufacturing of sulfate and porcelain enameling Currently, the nano-sized materials are widely used as adsorbents for the rapid removal and fast adsorption of heavy metal, due to its wonderful characteristics such as high capacity, simple operation, and rapid adsorption process give the high potential to this material. Hence it is used as an effective adsorbent for heavy metal removal The aim of the present study was to compare the ability of MWCNTs and γ-alumina nanoparticle in Ni (II) ions adsorption from the solvent phase. The impact of various factors such as the contact time, adsorbent dosage, pH and initial concentration of Ni (II) ions were studied to determine the optimum condition. Finally, the adsorption isotherm and kinetic studies of Ni (II) ions onto the developed adsorbent were well investigated and evaluated. All the chemicals used in the present study were of analytical grade and were provided by Merck Co, Germany. The specific surface area of the MWCNTs and γ-alumina nanoparticle was determined using the BET surface analyzer (Gemini 2357, Micrometrics Instrument Corporation, USA). The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out by a Philips XL30 to study the surface morphological and topological properties of both adsorbents. The stock nickel solution of 1000 In addition, all experiments were repeated 3 times in order to increase the reliability, accuracy and precision of the study. The adsorption capacity (q  To investigate the effect of adsorbent dosage, the amount of each adsorbent was varied in the range of 0.05–0.3 To evaluate the effect of contact time and pH on the adsorbent ability for Ni (II) removal from the solvent phase, the experiments were conducted at different contact time in the range of 10–120  Adsorption of heavy metal by the various adsorbent is strongly dependent on the initial metal ion concentration. The effect of initial concentration of Ni (II) ion was studied by varying the Ni (II) ion concentrations from 15 to 75 For this study, 0.1 The equation of pseudo-second-order kinetic is as follow The k The intraparticle diffusion is calculated as following The variable and constant of each kinetic model were calculated and were presented in The isotherm studies were conducted to calculate the adsorption capacity of used adsorbents for Ni The equation of Langmuir isotherm model is shown as follows Another model which is used in this study is Freundlich model. The equation of this model is represented as below The Temkin model isotherm model is described as follows The BET model of isotherm is another model which it can be presented as follows The isotherms are further beneficial to compare the two adsorbents removal percentage because they are more informative. The slope and the intercept of linear plot obtained from each model were used to determine parameters related to the isotherm models and these parameters are presented in In this study, the ability of two nano-sized materials, i.e., multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and Gamma-alumina nanoparticle on Ni (II) ions adsorption efficiency were well studied and the impact of effective parameters i.e. contact time, pH, adsorbent dosage and initial Ni concentration were studied and following results were observed: It has been observed that these adsorbent are able to remove the Ni (II) efficiently and the maximum removal efficiency at the optimum condition were found to be 87.65% and 99.41% for (MWCNTs) and Gamma-alumina nanoparticle, respectively. The maximum removal efficiency was obtained at the alkaline pH i.e. 10. Also, it was observed that as the pH of the solution increases and the Ni (II) ion removal efficiency also increases. The effect of adsorbent dosage reveals the same trend as followed by the pH of the solution. The adsorption isotherm and kinetic studies showed that Langmuir isotherm and pseudo-second-order kinetic model can better describe the obtained data. Also, since this adsorbent has the large specific surface area, therefore can represent large adsorption capacity than other common and can be used effectively in pollutant removal. The authors would like to thank the laboratory staff of the Department of Environmental Health Engineering, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Iran, for their collaboration in this research. The author S. Agarwal would like to thank Global Excellence Fellowship (South Africa) for a PDRF. M. Asif appreciates the support of the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud University for the Prolific Research Group PRG-1437-31.