On the basis of a six-degree-of-freedom adjustable fracture reduction hexapod external fixator, a system which can be used for measuring axial and shear forces as well as torsion and bending moments in the fixator in vivo was developed. In a pilot study on 9 patients (7 fresh fractures and 2 osteotomies of the tibia), the load in the fixator during the healing process was measured after 2, 4, 8 and 12 weeks and at fixator removal. The measured values enabled both the type of fracture to be determined as well as the monitoring of the healing process. In well-reduced type A3 fractures small axial (direction of the bone axis) forces were found in the fixator. A2, B2 and C3 fractures showed distinct axial forces, which decreased during the healing process, according to an increasing load transfer over the bone. Bending moments in the fixator showed good correspondence with the clinical healing process, except in the case of a C3 fracture. A combination of bending moment and axial force proved to be particularly suitable to assess fracture healing. In transverse fractures, the well-known resorption phenomenon of bone in the fracture gap at approximately 4 weeks was detected by the system. Compared with other external fixator load measurements in vivo, the hexapod offers the advantage of being able to measure all forces and moments in the fixator separately and with a relatively simple mechanical arrangement. In our opinion, it will be possible to control fracture healing using this system, thereby minimizing radiation exposure from radiographs. Furthermore, the measurement system is a step towards the development of external fixator systems that enable automatic adjustments of the callus mechanical situation (“automatic dynamization”) and inform the patients about the optimal weight bearing of their extremity (“intelligent fixator”).Monitoring of the fracture healing process is routinely done by radiographic examinations which permit form and intensity of callus calcification to be determined. However, after primary demonstration of an exact reduction, the mechanical properties of the osteosynthesis are the main determinants for therapeutic decisions. Estimation of mechanical callus strength from radiological images depends largely on the expertise of the surgeon, but in some cases the identification of healing problems by radiological means is very difficult. A new system for in vivo three-dimensional load measurements during fracture healing in an external fixator is introduced in this study. It is based on a hexapod mechanism also known as parallel robot manipulator or Stewart platform. This mechanism has been well investigated in robotics and has been applied in position control applications, for example, in flight simulators for the three-dimensional positioning of the cockpit ( The goal was to construct a system for monitoring fracture healing by mechanical measurement and thus minimize radiation exposure. Therefore parameters which optimally describe an emerging callus had to be identified. Furthermore, it had to be shown that different fracture types in patients can be distinguished using the system. The hypothesis of the study was that conclusions drawn from the mechanical parameters measured are consistent with the decisions of the treating surgeons made on the basis of the corresponding routine radiographs. The system is based on a modified ring fixator. Instead of parallel interconnecting longitudinal bars, three pairs of ball joints are attached at the proximal and distal ring. The joints are connected by six linear actuator elements (“distractors”) in the form of circularly arranged triangles ( Force sensors (Burster, measuring range 1000 The peculiarity of the hexapod is based on the fact that the ball joints that connect the rings to the linear actuators or force sensor elements are not blocked. So bending, torsional or shear load transfer is theoretically not possible along these elements and there is exactly one load component (axial) carried and measured by each unit. Additionally, according to the theory of the hexapod kinematics, there is no interrelationship between the units and thus exactly six independent degrees of freedom are allowed. From the force values  In order to facilitate the evaluation of the quantities (i.e., by eliminating the direction), the shear forces The accuracy of the overall system, i.e., mechanical arrangement and software, was investigated. A typical hexapod configuration for the lower leg (symmetrical assembly, 150 Clinical measurements were performed on 9 patients ( In all cases, a fracture reduction had been performed with the hexapod mechanism ( The hexapod elements were mounted force free (controlled by measurement, hanging leg). The standard fixator rods were removed afterwards. The measuring hexapod took over the fixator load completely during the measurements, including inherent stresses of the bone-soft-tissue-fixator mounting. The measurements were performed 2, 4, 8 and 12 weeks after the trauma or the osteotomy. If the fixator remained longer than 12 weeks, a further measurement was made before removal of the fixator. An influence of the measurements on the healing process was excluded. Neither were fragment position and fixator assembly modified during the measurements, nor were the results of the measurements used for clinical decisions. Measurements were performed under axial and bending loads of the leg. The external axial force was measured with a one-degree-of-freedom vertical ground sensor positioned under the heel. For the application of axial loads (direction of the bone axis) the patient was instructed to stand relaxed with a stretched leg and to put weight on the heel, slowly increasing and decreasing the ground force. Three repetitions were performed. The total measuring period was 20 The patients were informed in detail (“informed consent”) and participated in very motivated manner in the sessions, which lasted about 2 The evaluations were performed with the Excel spread-sheet program (Microsoft). For the measurements under axial load, linear regression lines were computed with respect to the ground force. The regression coefficient (upward slope gradient) obtained describes the stiffness of the bone–fixator system. Each regression calculation included three load cycles (100 values, 20 The Linear relationships between ground force Axial fixator forces were small in A3 (transverse) fractures over the entire healing process ( In the case of the C3 (comminuted, The bending moment in the fixator under axial load of the leg also showed a clear dependence on the type of fracture ( In two cases (patients 1 and 7) a high bending stability of the fracture resulted already after 8 weeks. In cases 5 and 7 ( In contrast, in two cases (patients 3 and 4) a flattening of the curve was observed. In case 4 the highest measurement value of all patients at 12 weeks (9 A characteristic pattern showed the comminuted fracture (C3, patient 9). Here the fixator bending moment was in a low range over the entire healing process. In this case only the combination with the measuring curve of the axial force Measurements with the hexapod allow the determination of shear forces in the fixator. Values of the order of magnitude 1/20 of the axial load ( In 5 cases a bending load case was examined in addition to the axial load case ( Clinical in vivo applications of mechanical measurements in the process of the fracture healing have been published. Typically, the techniques used ( The characteristic of the hexapod (also known as “parallel robot mechanism”) is based on the fact that exactly one degree of freedom is carried and measured by each measurement unit. According to the theory of the hexapod kinematics no interrelation between the elements is given. So, there are six degrees of freedom in space on the one hand and six independent degrees of freedom load carrying/measuring elements on the other. A mathematical relationship is given between the linear force measurements in the hexapod fixator and the six load degrees of freedom (axial, shear, bending, torsional) in the Cartesian coordinate system. The fixator load situation is different from other fixators, where, e.g., in a ring fixator 3 rods are fixed on the rings in all degrees of freedom, summing up to 18 degrees of freedom and thus resulting in prestresses between the rods. Common clinical experience is that these stresses can be substantial. In the performed measurements a distribution between the applied limb load and the forces and moments in the fixator was determined. As a measure for the callus formation, it would be most interesting, to compute an “absolute fracture stiffness” ( The optimal measurement parameter was dependent on the type of the fracture. In transverse fractures (A3) the fixator bending moment was most predictive, whereas the fixator axial load gave nearly no relevant information. In contrast, in a comminuted fracture fixator axial load was found to be the only meaningful predictor. The evaluation of the healing process by means of a combination of the parameters bending moment and axial force in the fixator under axial load of the extremity was possible in all examined patients. So, the measurements suggest that two well-selected degrees of freedom are the minimum criteria necessary for the mechanical monitoring of fracture consolidation. The measurements agreed with the radiologically diagnosed stability and the treatment measures taken after 12 weeks (e.g., removal of the fixator, continuing treatment in the fixator, unprotected or protected weight bearing), which were accomplished without knowledge of the measurement results. It is interesting that the measured reduction of stability after 4 weeks in transverse osteotomies and transverse fractures can be explained by the results of experimental investigations of fracture gap movement in sheep. For fracture gap widths between 0.5 and 1 Bending measurements under external bending loads showed the course of callus stiffness, comparable to those under axial load. However, the former were less sensitive, e.g., the temporary instability in A3 fractures after 4 weeks was not apparent. Thus a conclusion of the study is that the latter is to be recommended for clinical practice. However, it is also possible that the mode of bending load application in the study was not optimal and a special load frame might improve the accuracy as well as the sensitivity of these measurements. A difference between earlier investigations with external fixators and the investigations with the hexapod fixator is given. Cases examined with the “Fraktometer” showed maximum gap widths of 5–6 In vivo interfragmentary movements by patients with ring and hexapod fixators have been documented and reported by Duda et al. ( After developing the measuring external fixator a pilot study in nine patients was carried out. The measured parameters resulted in curves in good agreement with the healing process. This leads to the conclusion that it will be possible to control fracture healing using a measurement fixator system, minimizing the use of radiographs with their radiation exposure. However, this has to be proven in further investigations. The future goal is the development of intelligent implants and external fixators, which automatically adjust load distribution in the callus according to the results of measurements (“automatic dynamization”) and thus optimize fracture healing. In addition, it can inform the patients about the optimal load of their extremity (“intelligent fixator”, The authors wish to thank the Biomechanics Section of the Technical University Hamburg-Harburg for help in manufacturing the sensor-elements and Mrs. Sarah Strametz for correcting the translation.