A new method for the determination of FeTotal and Cu is proposed. The method is based on the formation of the iron and copper complexes with 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA), the optimal conditions were found, using SSA 5.1gL−1 in the presence of ammonia 7.5gL−1 (pH=10). Under these conditions the selected analytical wavelengths were 488.5 and 423.5nm for the determination of iron and copper, respectively, by using the zero crossing approach. The detection and quantification limits were 0.02mgL−1 and 0.07mgL−1 for iron and 1.14mgL−1 and 3.80mgL−1 for copper. The proposed method was applied to the determination of both analytes in pregnant liquid solutions and the recovery was between 98% and 100% and in all cases the relative standard deviation was minor to 2%.There are many situations where the copper and iron concentration in aqueous solutions has to be determined quantitatively. The leaching solutions from hydrometallurgical processing of copper sulphides have a high concentration of several metallic sulphates ( A Shimadzu UV-PC 1603 spectrophotometer with 10 Into a 100 Into a 100 It is known that SSA forms a yellow complex with Fe(II) and Fe(III) in basic media. The spectral bands have the same shape and high and in both cases these spectra depend on iron concentration, this fact can be attributed to that both complexes have the same molar absorptivity (5201 The Cu(II) also forms complex with SSA at pH A pH study shows that, the SSA forms a red–violet complex with Fe(III) in acid media and a yellow complex with Fe(II) and Fe(III) in basic solutions. In the same condition was studied the formation of the Cu(II)-SSA complex. A pH The effect of SSA concentration on the formation of both complexes in presence of ammonia solution was carried out. An excess of SSA concentration does not modify the analytical signal. In order to have an excess of reagent, 6 In digital derivative spectrophotometry, is possible to use two ways. In the first way, the Δ In order to optimize the derivative order, between the first to the fourth derivative spectra of the solution, containing separately the respective complexes were recorded ( By using the first derivative of the spectrum, the smoothing factor was varied taking into account values, which are defined by defect depending on the Δ The first derivative spectrum of Fe Calibration curves (95% confidence limit) of the first derivative values obtained versus the respective analyte concentrations were obtained for both complexes. The detection limits and quantitation limits were obtained according to the criteria 3 A study of the effect of foreign ions on the simultaneous determination of 10 The application of the simultaneous determination of iron and copper in synthetic mixture with different iron/copper ratio was carried out. A good accuracy and repeatability was found, the method is applicable when copper is in major proportion. The recovery percentage was between 99.5% and 100.8%, for relationships of Cu/Fe among 50–1 and 4–1. The validation of the method was carried out by using a sample of the Quality Control Standard 19 The method was applied in real pregnant liquid solution (PLS) samples from a confidential source. The results for Cu; Fe The authors are grateful to the FONDECYT, project 1020692 for the financial support. C. Paipa thanks to the German Service for Academic Exchange (DAAD) for her doctoral fellowship.