An efficient halogen-free composite flame retardant (CFR) consisting of a brucite core and a thin SiO2 shell was synthesized via a facile nanoengineering route. The as-synthesized CFR was employed as a filler material to improve the mechanical performance and flame retardancy of EVA composite. In comparison with that of EVA/brucite and EVA/PM, the mechanical properties of EVA/CFR, especially the tensile strength (TS), presented a remarkable increase reaching at least a 25% increment. Meanwhile, with the same 50 wt% of fillers, the EVA/CFR formulation could achieve a limiting oxygen index (LOI) value of 34 (13% higher than that of EVA/PM blends) and UL-94 V-0 rating. Moreover, the heat release rate (HRR), peak heat release rate (PHRR), total heat released (THR), smoke production rate (SPR) and mass loss rate (MLR) were considerably reduced. Based on the results, the enhanced mechanism for the mechanical properties and flame resistance of CFR particles has been also proposed, which could be mainly ascribed to structural synergy between brucite core and SiO2 shell. Therefore, the nanoengineering of brucite@SiO2 might pave the way for the future development of a facile large-scale approach to brucite-based flame retardant materials.Recently, halogen-free flame retardants (HFFR) are extensively used in flame-retarding polymers due to their healthy and eco-friendly concerns Mineral filler (brucite, aluminum trihydroxide, etc) as one kind of HFFR has attracted considerable attentions Silica (SiO Our previous works indicated that the core/shell structured brucite@ammonium polyphosphate could clearly enhance the flame retarding efficiency by avoiding their phase separation The brucite powder (2500 The brucite@SiO For comparison, the physical mixture (PM) was prepared by mixing brucite and SiO To well disperse all the flame retardant (FR) particles into the EVA matrices, surface modification was carried out. Flame retardant particles (30% weight ratio to ethanol) were added into industrial grade ethanol (containing 4 wt% of water). Subsequently, the mixture was heated in a water bath for 1 h. Then the γ-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (AMEO) (3% weight ratio to FR) was feed into the reaction system, with vigorously stirring and refluxing for 2 h. The product was collected and washed with ethanol several times and then dried in a vacuum system at 50 °C for 12 h for subsequent blending. All three fillers were treated with the AMEO by the same process. The EVA/FR composites were prepared by melt mixing for 15 min at a temperature of 165 °C using an open mill as 200 g batches. The open mill has two exposed rotors running in a contra-rotating way to blend the surface-modified FR powders and EVA. Thereafter, sheets with 4, 3, and 1 mm thickness were obtained by compression molding under a pressure of 10 MPa at 155 °C for 30 min, respectively. The content of FR additives was varied from 0 to 60 wt%. The morphology of particles was carefully examined under field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Nova NanoSEM 450) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Tecnai G The UL-94 classification was carried out using a M607B type instrument (Qingdao Shanfang Instrument Co., Ltd., Shandong Province, China) on the specimens of 127 × 12.7 × 3 mm The morphologies and structures of the brucite and brucite@SiO The powder XRD patterns of brucite and CFR ( To evaluate the reinforcement of CFR particles in the EVA matrix, mechanical properties were measured by universal tensile testing machine. γ-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (AMEO) was employed as a coupling agent to prevent aggregation of FR particles in EVA matrix and improve compatibility between FR particles and EVA To further elucidate the dispersion behaviors of FR in EVA matrix, the cross sections of the three EVA/FR blends were examined by FESEM ( The core/shell nanostructured brucite@SiO To explore the intrinsic reasons for the enhancement of flame retardancy by nanoengineering of brucite@SiO The dynamic curves of THR ( As well known, the most significance of brucite FR is the smoke suppression owing to the formation of active MgO layers in fire The digital pictures for three control samples after cone test were shown in To study the flame retardant mechanism of CFR additive in EVA matrix, surface and interior microstructure of the char residue after complete combustion was investigated by FESEM ( The detailed mechanism on the synergistically enhanced flame resistance of the brucite@SiO In summary, a core/shell nanostructured brucite@SiO Hongchang Pang and other authors thank The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at