This work is aimed at quantifying mechanochemical effects in reactive solid–gas systems. It deals in particular with the kinetics of H2 absorption processes on a Mg2Ni/Ni composite under thermal and mechanical activation. In a first series of experiments, powders were exposed to H2 under static conditions for selected time intervals and successively subjected to mechanical treatment. In a second series, the latter was instead started in coincidence with the exposure of powders to H2. The effects of mechanical processing on the H2 absorption processes have been quantified via the accurate description of the absorption kinetics with suitable model curves. A tentative rationalization of experimental observations is proposed.The mechanical processing of powders has long been regarded as an advantageous method to enhance the chemical reactivity of solid phases Different reasons can be invoked to explain this situation. Among these, the gap between experimental investigations and theoretical as well as numerical studies seems to play a major role Within this framework, the present work proposes a possible methodological approach to adequately point out the above mentioned mechanochemical effects. The study has been focused on a solid–gas system and at least two main reasons justify such choice. First, the knowledge of gas phase statistical mechanics provides a unique possibility of connecting experimental observations with relatively simple fundamental aspects of the interaction between gas molecules and solid surfaces. Second, the interaction of gaseous phases with solids is currently under intense scrutiny for its relevant potential in the fields of environmental chemistry The experimental procedures applied are described in detail in the following section. Experimental trials were carried out on a Mg The obtained composite powders were then exposed to H Phase transformation and microstructural refinement processes were monitored by wide-angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods. A Rigaku DMax diffractometer equipped with a Cu-K The interaction of Mg Let us consider first the kinetic curve describing the H The slope The rate law described by Eq. The thickness The kinetic behavior of powders subjected to H The expression above is solution of the rate equation The change from a second-order to an exponential kinetics when static absorption conditions are followed by dynamic ones should be ascribed to the constant availability of freshly-opened surfaces during the course of mechanical processing According to the observations above, mechanical processing has therefore the role of fracturing the hydride layer hindering further absorption under static conditions. The H Based on such premises, the kinetic curve obtained under dynamic conditions must result from the superposition of the second-order and of the exponential kinetics. This prevents unfortunately the analytical description of the curve. However, an approximate description is still possible due to the fact that the process of fresh surface generation is initially remarkably faster than the formation of a hydride layer. Mechanical activation produces then initially an increase of the gas–solid interface area at a rate higher than the one of absorption processes. All this area is immediately available to the reaction with the gaseous phase, which then proceeds according to the second-order kinetics described by Eq. The first member on the right-hand side represents the contribution given by absorption processes involving fresh surfaces and gaseous molecules. The second member originates instead from the generation of reactive surfaces. It follows from Eq. The initial portion of the kinetic curve is satisfactorily reproduced by the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. It must be here noted that the total number The experimental findings collected in the present work demonstrate the feasibility of a detailed investigation of the chemical reactivity underlying the interaction of solid and gaseous phases. The results obtained specifically address a long-standing question in the field of mechanical activation, namely the extent of so-called mechanochemical effects. The experiments carried out to compare the H Under dynamic conditions, the start of mechanical activation and the onset of the H Financial support was given by the University of Sassari and the University of Cagliari.