Background
                  The conventional AO hook locking compression plate (LCP) (Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland) has only three holes for lateral fragments; therefore it is not suitable for use during the fixation of small-comminuted fragments in some cases. Recently, a novel hybrid hook LCP (TDM, Seoul, Korea) was developed to overcome this limitation. Here, we evaluated the clinical and radiologic outcomes of a novel hybrid hook LCP for Neer type V distal clavicle fractures compared to the outcomes of a conventional AO hook plate.
               
                  Methods
                  Seventy-eight consecutive patients who underwent hook LCP fixation for Neer type V distal clavicle fractures were included. The subjects were divided into 2 groups: the conventional AO hook LCP group and the novel hybrid hook LCP group. For clinical assessments, the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score, Korean shoulder score (KSS), and Constant score were recorded. The percentage modified coracoclavicular distance (MCCD %) was used for the evaluation of fracture reduction. Typical reported complications, such as secondary dislocation, implant failure or loosening, peri-implant fracture, acromion osteolysis, postoperative acromioclavicular joint arthrosis, non-union, or delayed union, were also analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  There were no differences in the clinical outcomes (ASES, KSS, and Constant scores) between the two groups. Bone union was achieved in a significantly shorter period in the hybrid hook LCP group (13.6±2.0weeks) than in the AO hook LCP group (17.5±4.8weeks, p
                     <0.001). Consequently, the time to implant removal was also significantly shorter in the hybrid hook LCP group (4.0±0.5months) than in the AO hook LCP group (5.4±1.1months, p
                     <0.001). The MCCD% showed no significant differences between the treatment groups. There was no statistically significant difference in the complication rate between the two groups; however, the hybrid hook LCP fixation resulted in a lower prevalence of hook-related complications.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The hybrid hook LCP fixation showed satisfactory clinical and radiologic outcomes in comparison with the AO hook LCP fixation. The hybrid hook LCP is useful for multiple screw fixation of inferior comminuted fragments in Neer type V distal clavicle fractures. The bone union was significantly shorter; thus, the time to implant removal was also significantly shorter.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III, Retrospective study.Distal clavicle fractures are rare, accounting for approximately 15–25% of all clavicle fractures Despite a delayed union or non-union rate up to 10%, satisfactory clinical outcomes following isolated locking plate osteosynthesis without additional coracoclavicular stabilization have been previously reported Although hook plate osteosynthesis results in various complications associated with the subacromial space positioning of the hook, this technique is an AC joint-spanning procedure that could be used to more effectively recreate coracoclavicular stability and thereby potentially lead to superior functional outcomes compared to isolated locking plate osteosynthesis Recently, a novel hybrid hook LCP (TDM, Seoul, Korea) was developed to overcome this limitation. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical and radiologic outcomes of the novel hybrid hook LCP for Neer type V distal clavicle fractures in comparison with the conventional AO hook plating. We hypothesized that the clinical outcomes between the plates would not differ, but that the conventional AO hook plating would exhibit higher non-union rates and increased coracoclavicular distances (CCDs) than the novel hybrid hook LCP. This study was approved by our institutional research ethics committee, and informed consent was obtained from the patients (DKUH 2018-05-010). We enrolled 78 consecutive patients who underwent open-reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with a hook LCP for Neer type V distal clavicle fractures at our institution from January 2011 to December 2017. Unstable distal clavicle fractures were clinically and radiologically diagnosed. The clinical diagnosis was based on an assessment of pain and tenderness occurring after frank injury. Preoperative radiological examinations included anteroposterior and cephalic tilt views taken with the shoulder fixed in the same position to minimize the impact of inconsistent posture in the interpretation of the radiographs. To confirm the definite fracture site, location of fracture fragments, and degree of comminution, three-dimensional computed tomography was performed on all patients preoperatively. Fracture patterns were classified after a review of the radiographs and computed tomography images of the patients. We employed a retrospective comparative cohort study design with the following inclusion criteria: acute and isolated Neer type V distal clavicle fracture; operative treatment using conventional AO hook LCP or hybrid hook LCP; minimal follow-up period of 12 months after surgery; history of painless and unrestricted shoulder function prior to trauma. The exclusion criteria were as follows: previous surgical history on the affected shoulder; concomitant fracture around the affected shoulder; operative treatment using locking plate osteosynthesis. The subjects were divided into 2 groups: the conventional AO hook LCP group and the novel hybrid hook LCP group. The conventional AO hook LCP was used in the first 56 cases, and the novel hybrid hook LCP was used in the final 22 consecutive cases. Data were collected to define patient characteristics, injury mechanism, time to surgery, and follow-up period ( All surgeries were performed under general anesthesia with the patient in the supine position and chest elevated at 30°. A 5–6 The same position, approach, and reduction were used for the conventional AO hook LCP fixation. After exposure and reduction of the superior fragments, and after a hook plate was positioned with 3.5 The affected arm was kept in a sling for six weeks after surgery. Pendulum, self-assisted circumduction, and gradual passive range of motion (ROM) exercises were started three days after the surgery, as tolerable. Active ROM exercises were started six weeks after surgery. After three months, the implant was removed if bone union was achieved; if not, implant removal was delayed until union was observed. If the patient experienced shoulder stiffness at the time of implant removal, brisement under general anesthesia was performed concomitantly. For clinical assessments, the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score, Korean shoulder score (KSS), and Constant score were recorded by the physician assistant at the final follow-up. For radiologic evaluations, anteroposterior views of both clavicles were taken regularly after surgery (at 3, 6, and 12 Percentage of modified coracoclavicular distance All radiologic measurements were analyzed by two independent examiners (K.H. and H.J.H.). The individual value was measured, after which the individual mean value was calculated. All radiographs were evaluated for the time period required for fracture consolidation and adverse events, including the typical reported complications of both procedures, such as secondary dislocation, infection, implant failure and loosening, peri-implant fracture, acromion osteolysis, postoperative acromioclavicular joint (ACJ) arthrosis, and non-union or delayed union ( To determine the normal distribution of the continuous data, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was performed. Continuous variables were analyzed using an independent The study included 24 women and 54 men, with ages ranging from 18 to 82 There were no differences in the ASES, KSS, and Constant scores between the two groups. The mean ASES scores were 90.2 The time for bone union was significantly shorter in the hybrid hook LCP group; the mean times for bone union were 17.5 There were no differences in the length of the lateral fragment between the two groups; the mean of the lateral fragment lengths were 9.7 There was no difference in the complication rates between the treatment groups; the number of overall complications was 32 (57.1%) and 10 (45.5%) in the AO hook LCP and hybrid hook LCP groups, respectively. There were no cases of nonunion; only two cases (3.6%) in the AO hook LCP group could not achieve bone union at six months after the surgery. There were no cases of infections; postoperative stiffness was reported in 15 (26.8%) and 6 (27.3%) patients in the AO hook LCP and hybrid hook LCP groups, respectively, although pendulum and self-assisted circumduction exercises were started on the first day after surgery. Brisement was performed in cases of stiffness during the implant removal operation. After brisement, all patients recovered full ROM at the final follow-up. There were no significant differences in the prevalence of subacromial erosion and posttraumatic ACJ arthrosis between the two groups, which, therefore, did not influence the clinical outcome measures. Subacromial erosion was observed in 14 (25.0%) and 3 (13.6%) cases in the AO hook LCP and hybrid hook LCP groups, respectively. Posttraumatic ACJ arthrosis was observed in 10 (17.9%) and 2 (9.0%) cases in the AO hook LCP and hybrid hook LCP groups, respectively. Three (5.4%) cases of peri-hardware fractures were observed in the AO hook LCP group. Revision surgery with long locking plate osteosynthesis was perform in two patients with peri-hardware fractures ( There are various surgical techniques that have been previously introduced, such as K-wire fixation, tension band wiring, locking plates, and hook plates According to the Neer classification of distal clavicle fractures, a Neer type II fracture is displaced secondary to a fracture medial to the coracoclavicular ligaments. Furthermore, a Neer type V fracture is comminuted with ligaments attached neither proximally nor distally, but to an inferior comminuted fragment Although hook plate osteosynthesis is an AC-joint-spanning procedure that could effectively restore coracoclavicular stability In a systematic review on type II fractures, 66 of 162 patients (40.7%) treated with hook plate osteosynthesis (HPO) experienced complications Few reports have been published on peri-hardware fractures at the medial end of the plate as a rare complication of the clavicular hook plate This study has several limitations. First, this was a non-randomized retrospective study. Second, the number of cases is very different in the two groups. Only 22 patients were included in the hybrid hook LCP fixation group. A small number of cases may have resulted in a type II error caused by low statistical power, although a retrospective power analysis determined that 16 patients were needed in each group to obtain a 10% difference between the groups, with an Although there have been several studies regarding hook LCP for Neer type II distal clavicle fractures, we believe this is the first study that reports the clinical and radiological outcomes of the novel hybrid hook LCP fixation for Neer type V distal clavicle fractures. The hybrid hook LCP fixation showed satisfactory clinical and radiologic outcomes in comparison with the AO hook LCP fixation. The hybrid hook LCP is beneficial for multiple screw fixation of inferior comminuted fragments in Neer type V distal clavicle fractures. The bone union was significantly shorter, therefore, the time to implant removal was also significantly shorter. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. This study was funded from S Seo, JS Yoo are the shoulder surgeons who did the surgery. K Heo, SJ Kim are designed and write this paper. JK Kim, HJ Ham gathered the data retrospectively.