Asymmetric membrane structure consisting thinner dense layer (decrease bulk diffusion resistance) and porous substrate (beneficial for the surface exchange) is an efficient approach to improve the hydrogen separation performance. Herein, the successfully prepared La5.5W0.6Mo0.4O11.25−δF0.05 (LWMF05) asymmetric membrane exhibited improved hydrogen permeability and enhanced stability compared to the symmetric membrane, which achieving a maximum values of 0.16 mL min−1 cm−2 at 975 °C. The hydrogen permeation performance through the LWMF05 asymmetric membrane were investigated in detailed. And the influences of the asymmetric structure on interfacial processes during hydrogen separation were discussed, which verifies the predominance of the asymmetric structure.Hydrogen is one of the most crucial industrial raw materials for fossil fuel processing, production of ammonia and metallurgy engineering, as well as the cleanest fuel to replace fossil fuels Up to now, perovskite oxides based on BaCeO In addition to the doping methods, the modification in membrane configurations is another effective strategy to optimize the membrane permeability by preparing an asymmetric membrane or hollow fiber membrane to reduce the membrane thickness As reported by other researchers, the asymmetric membrane exhibited improved permeability indeed. For instance, Bredesen’s group produced an asymmetric hydrogen permeable membranes with a dual-phase dense layer of 70 wt% La The powders of La The phase structure of the material is of vital importance to the performance the membranes. Herein, we detected the phase structure of the sintered LWMF05 asymmetric membrane by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technology using a PANalytical Xpert powder X-ray diffractometer. The asymmetric structure and microstructures of the sintered LWMF05 membrane were observed relying on a Hitachi SU 8220 scanning electron microscopy (SEM). And elemental distribution in the membrane was measured by EDXS (Horiba, X-Max The hydrogen permeability of the disk-shaped LWMF05 asymmetric membrane had been tested using a homemade corundum-quartz reactor as illustrated in The XRD spectra of the sintered LWMF05 asymmetric membrane were given in The microstructures of the LWMF05 asymmetrical membrane cross section were confirmed using scanning electron microscope (SEM). As shown in As depicted in Moreover, the atmospheres on both sides of the asymmetric membrane were exchanged to test the influence of porous substrate on the hydrogen permeability of membrane. Compared with FP-LWMF05 membrane, the SP-LWMF05 membrane shows a significant enhancement in hydrogen permeation fluxes below 900 °C but a similar improvement above 900 °C as shown in  We had periodically exchanged the measurement atmosphere of the LWMF05 asymmetric membrane at 900 °C. As shown in The membrane stability is significant in the hydrogen separation process for practical applications. In order to evaluate the stability of LWMF05 asymmetric membrane, long-term hydrogen permeation test at 900 °C and 950 °C were investigated. As displayed in Subsequently, the samples of asymmetric membrane before and after the hydrogen permeation measurement were obtained by XRD and SEM techniques, respectively. La The authors declare no competing financial interest. The Authors thank the financial support from the