While silver-loaded catheters are widely used to prevent early-onset catheter-related infections [1], long term antimicrobial protection of indwelling catheters remains to be achieved [2] and antiseptic functionalization of coatings often impairs their hemocompatibility characteristics. Therefore, this work aimed to capitalize on the antimicrobial properties of silver nanoparticles, incorporated in anticoagulant poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-heparin hydrogel coatings [3] on thermoplastic polyurethane materials. For prolonged antimicrobial activity, the silver-containing starPEG-heparin hydrogel layers were shielded with silver-free hydrogel layers of otherwise similar composition. The resulting multi-layered gel coatings showed long term antiseptic efficacy against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus epidermidis strains in vitro, and similarly performed well when incubated with freshly drawn human whole blood with respect to hemolysis, platelet activation and plasmatic coagulation. The introduced hydrogel multilayer system thus offers a promising combination of hemocompatibility and long-term antiseptic capacity to meet an important clinical need.Bacterial infections related to indwelling medical devices rank as the fifth-leading cause of hospital patients death in the US A common strategy for sustained Ag The use of silver-loaded hydrogel coatings for central venous catheters dates back to 1998 Herein, we present a new concept to address these challenges. A recently introduced star-shaped poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-heparin hydrogel Biohybrid starPEG-heparin gels were prepared using amino functionalized four-armed starPEG and EDC-s-NHS activated heparin as previously described Different TPU surface modification techniques were evaluated to ensure stable grafting of starPEG-heparin hydrogels to TPU substrates. TPU was either treated with ammonia plasma (MicroSys apparatus by Roth&Rau, Wüstenbrand, Germany; treatment time: 10 s, power: 600 W, ammonia gas flow: 15 standard cubic centimeter per minute, pressure: 7 × 10 The thickness of the swollen starPEG-heparin hydrogels on planar TPU substrates was approx. 50–100 μm and the heparin content was approx. 0.3 mg heparin per cm Hydrogels were modified with AgNPs by immersion into acetate buffer containing AgNO Multi-layered hydrogels were prepared by vacuum drying TPU-bound AgNP-loaded hydrogels at room temperature. Subsequently, a reaction mixture of starPEG and heparin was applied to the dried gel layer and covered with Sigmacote After silver functionalization of starPEG-heparin hydrogels, the amount of AgNO Silver-loaded hydrogels were analyzed by XPS (Kratos Analytical, England) and compared to AgNO The release of the silver was monitored using acetate buffer as release medium. Gels were incubated in 5 ml acetate buffer and subsequently the whole release medium was collected at defined time points (2 and 6 h), replaced with the same volume of fresh solution and analyzed by AAS. The rheological properties of silver-functionalized gels were determined by plate–plate rheometry (ARES LN2, TA Instruments, Germany). Freestanding gel discs were functionalized with 0, 800, and 4000 ppm silver concentration. Measurements of storage moduli were determined at a frequency range of 10 To visualize the AgNPs, hydrogel samples were subjected to dehydration in increasing ethanol concentrations, air-dried, and analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (NEON40, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Oberkochen, Germany). The antimicrobial activity of the silver-modified hydrogels was determined by a zone of inhibition (ZOI) assay. For the assay, Müller Hinton agar (Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany) plates were prepared following the manufacturer instructions and stored at 4 °C until use. Overnight cultures of Hydrogel samples were incubated with whole blood using in house designed incubation chambers as described elsewhere Material induced hemolysis of red blood cells was evaluated by measuring the formation of cyanmethemoglobin at 450 nm with reference wavelength 490 nm against the initial plasma as a blank. For this, 20 μl citrate plasma was mixed with 200 μl Drabkin solution (Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany). A mixture of 100 μl whole blood in 900 μl distilled water served as reference of 10% hemolysis and serial dilutions thereof were made as standards. Commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) were used to characterize blood reactions including formation of prothrombin fragment 1+2 (F1+2; Enzygnost F1+2, Siemens Healthcare, Marburg, Germany) and complement activation (C5a; Enzygnost C5a micro, DRG Diagnostica, Marburg, Germany). For flow cytometry, cells were stained with phycoerythrin labeled anti CD11b (4 μL per 20 μL blood; clone ICRF44, Biozol, Eching, Germany) and PerCPCy5-labeled CD41a (4 μl per 20 μl blood; BD Biosciences, California, USA). To avoid cell activation during the 30 min staining time, 0.1% NaN Sample surfaces were rinsed blood-free with PBS for SEM investigation, samples were extensively washed with PBS to remove traces of blood, fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde in PBS (Serva Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) for 1 h, dehydrated in increasing ethanol concentrations and air dried. Before SEM inspection (SEM XL 30 FEG, FEI-Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands), samples were gold sputter coated (SCD 050, BAL-TEC, Schalksmühle, Germany). The effect of soluble silver nitrate on hemocompatibility parameters was evaluated by adding aqueous solutions of AgNO Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation unless stated otherwise. Group comparison was performed by one way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using student t-test. Hydrogel immobilization to TPU substrates requires modification of the TPU surface to increase the number of available reactive groups for the substrate-gel coupling reaction. Different TPU surface modification techniques were evaluated, amongst them oxygen and ammonia plasma and electron beam treatment in nitrogen atmosphere and under air conditions. Electron beam treatment of TPU induced an increase in O/C ratio as detected by XPS (data not shown). The C1s peak of the TPU can be deconvoluted into three different binding energies at 285.0 eV (aliphatic compounds, C–H), 286.5 eV (ether, –C–O–C) and 289.5 eV (carboxyl, –C Rheometry measurements did not reveal a significant change in gel storage modulus between silver-functionalized hydrogels and non-functionalized native gels ( Alexa-labeled single-layer hydrogels grafted to TPU were analyzed by cLSM in xy- and z-scans for coating thickness and coating homogeneity, respectively. Coating thicknesses of 16–34 μm were detected for single starPEG-heparin hydrogel layers on TPU substrates. Silver hydrogel coatings were further equipped with an additional gel layer to enable modulation of release profiles and the materials biocompatibility. To this end, the silver hydrogel coatings were shielded with a second silver-free layer that acts as a physiological barrier. In detail, still available COOH and NH The silver uptake to hydrogels incubated with a solution of 1000 and 1500 ppm AgNO The inhibition zone assay was used for single-layered hydrogel coatings loaded with 0, 800, and 4000 ppm AgNO Whole blood incubation assay was performed for single layered hydrogel coatings loaded with 0, 800, and 4000 ppm AgNO Single-layered hydrogel coatings loaded with 800 ppm AgNO The activation of plasmatic coagulation was significantly lower for the ML-4000 gel compared to both SL-800 and SL-4000 being in the range of unloaded SL-0 gels ( We likewise observed increased platelet activation measured as platelet–granulocyte conjugate formation The inflammatory response measured as complement fragment C5a in blood after material incubation was low for all hydrogel coatings tested, increased inflammatory response in critical range was only found for soluble 4000 ppm AgNO Granulocyte activation was not increased for silver loaded gels compared to unloaded gels. Adhesion of granulocytes to the samples (characterized by SEM-pictures) is outlined in the inset of Combining antimicrobial and anticoagulant properties within biomaterial coatings defines a practically important challenge of current research. With the reported approach, we were able to merge two previously established principles, namely the antimicrobial properties of AgNPs and the anticoagulant potential of heparin-containing biohybrid hydrogels within a multifunctional biomaterial. Silver functionalization of hydrogels was successfully performed resulting in a coating that shows a dose-dependent uptake and release of ionic silver to act antimicrobially. By this, a coating system of tunable silver supply is established that enables localized and surface-mediated delivery of bioactive molecules. Since the uptake process consists of an exchange of the counter ions of the heparin sulfate groups (Na The antimicrobial effect of the silver loaded gel coatings is caused by Ag We herein report on starPEG-heparin hydrogel coatings loaded with different silver concentrations. Silver hydrogel coatings with a stiffness of 2.6 kPa have a calculated mesh size of 12 nm that enables entrapment of AgNPs inside the gel network. In long-term inhibition assays we observed a dose-dependent coating derived antiseptic activity correlating to the uploaded silver amount. The observed inhibition curves follow a steep decrease with abrupt termination after 2 days for low rate functionalized silver gels and 5–6 days for 4000 ppm gels. Adverse effects of silver nanoparticles on We likewise observed increased platelet activation on single-layered silver hydrogels (SL-800, SL-4000) compared to both the unloaded gel coatings (SL-0) and initial values. SL-4000 gels also showed highest prothrombin levels. We calculated the amount of released AgNO Micrographs of SL-4000 showed a high spreading degree of adherent granulocytes with concomitant platelet adhesion and fibrin deposition. Single layered samples induced coagulation activation and hemolysis of 2–3%, most probably through surface-bound silver that is associated with AgNPs. Considering the poor hemocompatibility given by the single-layer coating, an advanced system was developed to provide both antimicrobial and hemocompatible capacities. For this, a second silver-free layer was deposited on top of the silver hydrogels. This was achieved by carbodiimide chemistry, linking carboxyl and amine groups of multilayer gel components. Multilayer coating strategies are widely used to fine-tune the supply of bioactives through the multilayer architecture. Phospholipid polymers and polyelectrolytes rank among multilayer systems to adjust release kinetics of drugs such as antibiotics The multilayer system presented here meets two indispensable requirements given by blood contacting antiseptic surfaces. The introduction of a second gel layer to act as a diffusion barrier served to adapt silver release kinetics and additionally enabled to overcome observed adverse procoagulant effects of single-layer gels. The multilayer sample (ML-4000) achieved similar inhibition zones to SL-4000 over the whole time period for both bacterial strains tested, with an even prolonged effect for the Hemocompatibility parameters were significantly diminished for the ML-4000 gels regarding hemolysis and coagulation parameters being in the range of initials and silver free gel coatings. The multi-layered hydrogels not only serve to create a gradient of bioactive substances, but also provides a physical barrier at the cell-coating boundary to prevent unfavorable cell and enzyme activation and subsequent undesired host responses ( Multilayered silver-functionalized starPEG-heparin hydrogels combining antiseptic and hemocompatible properties have been developed as a versatile surface coating to fight the infection of blood contacting medical products such as central venous catheters. The introduced multilayer architecture was demonstrated to balance hemocompatibility and antiseptic efficacy. Specifically, a silver-free starPEG-heparin layer on top of an AgNP containing starPEG-heparin layer resulted in a hemocompatible material with durable antimicrobial functionality. Addressing a persisting problem of medical devices in cardiology, the explored starPEG-heparin multilayer concept can obviously be used in a variety of additional applications that require the long-term release of bioactives to be combined with excellent hemocompatibility. We thank Monique Marx (preparation of surfaces and hemocompatibility assays) and Martina Franke (gold evaporation) for technical assistance. We furthermore gratefully acknowledge contributions by Dr. Heike Hund (ITM, TU Dresden) and Dr. Petr Formanek (IPF Dresden) for performing AAS and SEM analyses, respectively. We thank in particular Dr. Mirko Nitschke for surface plasma treatments, XPS measurements and the related scientific discussions. We are thankful for the contributions of Dr. Elke Feese, Catharina Hippius and Stephan Saum (all BASF-SE) for scientific discussions. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at