In this investigation the use of a pulsed perforated plate extraction column is considered for the recovery of sulphuric acid from copper tank house electrolyte bleed using a solvent extraction process based on tris(2-ethylhexyl)amine, TEHA. The hydrodynamic and mass transfer performance of the extraction column is presented and forms the basis for scale up. The results of the pilot plant experiments have demonstrated the viability of operating the acid recovery process using a pulsed perforated plate column.Many hydrometallurgical processes produce large amounts of acid waste. This is illustrated by the copper S/X–E/W process which produces a bleed from the electrolysis tank house in the form of a concentrated sulphuric acid stream. Currently, the bleed stream is necessary to remove impurities such as iron that decreases the efficiency of the electrowinning process. However, this comes at a high financial cost due to large quantities of make-up sulphuric acid required. In order to reduce acid cost, a process has been developed at The University of Melbourne for the recovery of sulphuric acid from copper tank house bleed liquor. This process was developed jointly with Zeneca Specialties (UK), and Gunpowder Copper. The recovery process is based on solvent extraction and is described in detail by Gottliebsen et al. The process involves contacting the bleed stream with an organic solvent which contains a tertiary amine extractant, tris(2-ethylhexyl)amine (TEHA). The TEHA selectively extracts the sulphuric acid from the bleed stream, leaving iron and other impurities. The reaction between TEHA and sulphuric acid can be described by two equations. The first, represented by The second reaction, represented by The loaded organic solvent is then contacted with pure water at an elevated temperature which strips the solvent of acid and produces a pure sulphuric acid stream which can be recycled back into other parts of the copper process. The stripping reaction is simply the reverse of This process requires a large number of stages and so is ideal for column operation. The type of column chosen for the pilot plant tests was a pulsed perforated plate column. The main advantages of a pulsed perforated plate column are its high efficiency, simple operation and capacity for high throughput while maintaining a high dispersed phase flow rate (up to 10 or 15 times that of the continuous phase). The pulsed perforated plate column also has the economic advantages of low capital cost, reduced solvent inventory and it requires less ground space compared to mixer settlers In the present work the TEHA extraction system with isotridecanol as the modifier and Shellsol 2046 as the diluent was used. Hold-up and mass transfer measurements of the extraction and stripping processes were performed. The measurements were used to determine the efficiency of the column, a parameter that determines the size of the column required for a typical acid bleed stream. This work can provide fundamental data for the design and scale-up of the pulsed perforated plate column used in hydrometallurgical processes. Hold-up and flooding velocity are important hydrodynamic parameters in the design and scale-up of pulsed perforated plate column. A number of approaches have been proposed for the prediction of hold-up and flooding point in pulsed perforated plate columns. Thornton The impact of axial dispersion on the performance of liquid–liquid extraction columns has been recognized for some decades and many models have been proposed on this subject. Several new models, such as the population balance model In liquid–liquid extraction columns, axial dispersion takes the form of backmixing, particularly of the continuous phase, and of forward dispersion of droplets due to the differing velocities and mass transfer rates of the various drop sizes. Of these, continuous-phase backmixing is of major importance as it reduces the driving force for mass transfer. For the pulsed perforated plate column, it is generally agreed that the dispersed phase backmixing coefficient, For the mixer settler regime, For the emulsion regime, The number of overall transfer units per stage, The main column section was a 1.0 m precision bore glass tube with an internal diameter of 0.0725 m enclosing a stack of 16 perforated plates. The coalescence section comprised of a glass tube with a 0.1 m nominal i.d. between two 0.075 and 0.1 m glass converters. On top of this was a 0.25 m long glass T-piece of 0.076 m nominal i.d. with a 0.025 m i.d. outlet for the dispersed phase. The aqueous phase distributor of 9.5 mm diameter S.S. tube was located approximately 50 mm above the top plate. At the base, a 0.075 to 0.1 m glass converter and a stainless steel S.S., conical adapter enclosed the S.S dispersed phase distributor. The conical adapter was fitted with the continuous phase outlet of 9.5 mm diameter and was mounted on the piston type pulsing unit, which was supported on a heavy base plate anchored firmly to the concrete floor. The dispersed phase distributor was constructed from a 40 mm long ×75 mm o.d. S.S. tube. The top of this tube was closed by a nozzle plate containing 44×2.64 mm The S.S. perforated plates, each drilled with holes of 3.2 mm in diameter on a 6-mm triangular pitch, were assembled in a stack, spaced 50 mm apart by means of three 3.2 mm o.d. S.S. tie rods covered with 6.4-mm spacer sleeves located on a 56.5-mm triangular pitch, as shown in The dispersed phase used in all the column experiments contained 43% w/w tris(2-ethylhexyl)amine TEHA, 25% w/w isotridecanol and 32% w/w Shellsol 2046 (Shell Australia) which acted as the extractant, modifier and diluent, respectively. There were two aqueous phases used in the column experiments. These were the industrial bleed solution (containing 173 g/l sulphuric acid, 37 g/l Cu and 2 g/l Fe) for the extraction runs and tap water for the stripping runs. The holdup and mass transfer experiments were performed at pulsation frequencies of between 0.83 and 2.13 Hz and pulse amplitudes of between 1.0 cm and 1.4 cm. For each mass transfer run the column was first filled with the aqueous phase. This was either industrial acid bleed or water for the extraction or stripping runs, respectively. The pulse amplitude and the pulsation frequency was determined first and then the continuous and dispersed phase flow rates were set. The column was allowed to run for at least five times the residence time of the continuous phase. Samples of both outlet phases (continuous and dispersed) were taken at 10-min intervals and were later analysed for acid concentration. At the end of each mass transfer run the dispersed phase holdup was measured by the shutdown technique The range of operating parameters covered in hold up and mass transfer experiments are summarized in The dispersed phase holdup is used primarily to determine the column diameter required for a given service. It also has a significant effect on the mass transfer behavior within the column The results for both the extraction and stripping mass transfer experiments are summarized in The number of overall transfer units Extraction: Stripping:  The results in  The hydrodynamic experiments indicate that the Thornton correlation can be used to correlate the holdup in pulse perforated plate column with the present system. Mass transfer efficiency increases with the pulsation intensity in the experimental range and an increased dispersed phase viscosity result in lower mass transfer efficiency. The results of the pilot plant experiment have demonstrated the viability of operating the acid recovery process in a pulsed perforated plate column. pulsation amplitude, m pulsation frequency, Hz compartment height, m number of overall transfer units per stage based on continuous phase flow ratio= characteristic velocity, m/s superficial velocity of continuous phase, m/s superficial velocity of dispersed phase, m/s slip velocity, m/s holdup of dispersed phase backflow coefficient interfacial tension, mN/m viscosity, Pa S density difference, kg/m density of continuous phase, kg/m continuous phase dispersed phase flooding Support from the Australian Research Council and Zeneca Specialties (UK) for their funding of this project is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank the advanced Mineral Products Special Research Centre (AMPC) for their support and use of equipment and Gunpowder Copper for their supply of chemicals. The total number of stages and height of the column required for an industrial scale column for both extraction and stripping can be determined from For the extraction process, the inlet and outlet aqueous acid concentrations were taken as 172.5 and 45 g/l, respectively. The initial organic concentration was assumed to be around 2% w/w (16.5 g/l). An For the stripping process, the inlet and outlet organic concentrations were taken as 90 and 16 g/l, respectively. An initial aqueous acid concentration was taken as 0 g/l. An The diameter of column required for a flow rate of 1 m The calculated diameters assuming the continuous phase velocities of MT4 (