A sequence with three stages was optimized as a primary treatment for wastewaters from a fish canning industry of northern Portugal. Sedimentation tests were assessed at different times. The removal of a high fraction (75%) of oil and grease (O&G) and of some (48%) total suspended solids (TSS) occurred after a settling time of 1.5h. Coagulant dosage and pH value were optimized in the coagulation/flocculation treatment using several organic and inorganic coagulants. Best removal efficiencies (99.2% O&G, 85.8% TSS and 25.2% dissolved organic carbon (DOC)) were reached using 400mg/L of FeCl3 at raw pH wastewater. DAF was also tested, optimizing chamber pressure and recycle ratio. Removals of 94% for O&G and 43% for TSS were achieved. The coupling of the latter two processes was also investigated, but no improvement of the previous results was observed. The best approach proved to be a decantation process followed by coagulation/flocculation treatment.Portugal is the largest fish consumer per capita in the European Union (EU) and third worldwide. Fish consumption in Portugal (55.6 Similar to most processing industries, fish processing produces large volumes of wastewater, which contains especially organic contaminants, salts and oils dispersed therein Primary wastewater treatment involves the removal of suspended solids by physical or physicochemical processes. Natural sedimentation may be assisted by the addition of coagulants and/or flocculants or carried out by centrifugation. This step also includes neutralization, stripping and removal of oil and grease by flotation. Different processes have been described in the literature for the treatment of wastewaters with high oil and grease content, but the most commonly used are: chemical destabilization The principle of chemical destabilization of stable oil emulsions consists on canceling the energy barrier that exists between the oil droplets. This is attained by the addition of chemical compounds that neutralize the electric charge responsible by the repulsion of the droplets. The destabilized droplets are then agglomerated by coalescence or flocculation and, after that, separated by decantation, dissolved air flotation (DAF), centrifugation or filtration. The three neutralizing agents commonly used are metal salt However, despite these techniques generally lead to interesting results, sometimes the characteristics of the treated effluent do not comply with the legal standards for discharge. To overcome these difficulties, dissolved air flotation (DAF) is sometimes a good solution. With DAF low density particles in suspension are brought to the surface of the liquid and removed, obtaining a clarified liquid. The suspended particles are carried to the surface by several microbubbles formed by the release of recycled water with dissolved air at high pressure into a flotation cell, at atmospheric pressure, that contains the wastewater to be treated This work aims to optimize the primary treatment of a fish canning industry wastewater by sedimentation, coagulation–flocculation and flotation treatment processes. The treatment efficiencies were assessed in terms of total suspended solids (TSS), dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and oil and grease (O&G) removals. Two organic coagulants were provided by Rivaz Química, S.A.: RIPOL 070, a diester sulfosuccinate in propane – 1,2 diol solution, with 50–100% of sodium dioctil sulfosuccinate and 10–25% of 1,2-propanediol and RIFLOC 1815, a polyamine aqueous solution, with 25–50% of 1,2-ethanediamine polymer with (chloromethyl) oxirane and N-methylmethanamine and 18% approx. of aluminum polychloride. Solutions of five inorganic coagulants were supplied by Quimitécnica S.A. and were used without further purification: aluminum sulfate (Al The wastewater was obtained from a fish canning company located at northern Portugal that works mainly with sardines and mackerel and uses about 20% of public water supply fundamentally to the production process and 80% of well water for washing and cleaning. Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater The pH was measured using a selective electrode (Hanna Instruments HI 1230) and a pH meter (Hanna instruments HI 8424) and the conductivity at 20 Anions were measured by ion chromatography (Dionex ICS-2100) using a Dionex Ionpac (column AS 11-HC 4×250 First, to complement the screening pre-treatment at the plant, a natural sedimentation test was made, where the effluent was left in quiescence in graduated cylinders for different time periods: 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 A standard jar test apparatus (Jar tester JLT6, VELP Scientifica) was employed for the coagulation–flocculation tests. Five different inorganic salts (Al The flotation unit consisted of a pressure retention chamber connected to an air compressor and a flotation cell of 1 The performance of the flotation system depends on the air/solids ( The fish canning industries wastewaters are known to have a large variability depending on the type of fish that they are processing, on the additives that they use, on the contribution of the different industrial effluents that are being generated into the factory, etc. So, a wastewater from a fish canning plant of northern Portugal was characterized through the collection and analysis of multiple samples over a certain period of time, in order to get relevant information about its variability. The results obtained during the sedimentation experiments showed that the formation of three different zones occurred: a floating solids layer, the clarified liquid (80% of total volume) and a bottom layer of settleable solids. The clarified liquid was then characterized in terms of TSS, DOC and O&G for each sedimentation time, giving the removal efficiencies presented in Similar TSS removal efficiencies (49%) from fish canning industries effluents of Rio de Janeiro state were achieved by Aguiar and Sant’Anna The clarified liquid, after 1.5 The coagulant dosage necessary for wastewater treatment by coagulation/flocculation depends on the wastewaters characteristics Other authors׳ results show that the optimal coagulant and the respective optimal dosage depend on the properties of the wastewater to be treated. The results from this study are compared with other ones from the literature in In the second step, it was proceeded to the study of pH solution influence on the treatment in a range of 5.0–9.0, adopting the optimal concentrations determined in the previous phase. However, these studies were no longer performed for the less efficient coagulants (organic coagulant RIPOL 070 and inorganic salt CaCl Looking at all the obtained results, it can be concluded that, as it was suspected, the best removals were achieved with inorganic salts ( The results obtained for O&G removal efficiencies are comparable to the ones obtained by Ríos et al. Fish canning wastewater pre-treatment was also studied by dissolved air flotation (DAF) after the sedimentation step. First, it was evaluated the influence of pressure variation in this treatment. For that, a pressure between 3.5–6 To explain the performance of the flotation system, the air to solids ( The treatment of some oily synthetic wastewaters using DAF technique was already studied by Hanafy and Nabih Several works in literature Thus, first 400 This way, it was found that the best method for removal of suspended matter from fish canning industries wastewaters is a decantation process for 1.5 However, the dissolved air flotation process combined with a previous stage of coagulation/flocculation showed to be a good solution for the treatment of cutting oil/water emulsion, allowing a noticeable improvement of the treatment effectiveness Sedimentation, coagulation/flocculation and dissolved air flotation treatment processes were tested for primary treatment sequence of fish canning industrial wastewaters. Several parameters (sedimentation time, coagulant type and dosage, pH, chamber pressure and recycle ratio) were optimized to obtain maximum removal efficiencies. The best treatment system to remove the suspended solids of the wastewater in study was found to be a sedimentation step followed by coagulation/flocculation. Sedimentation for 1.5 This work is partially supported by