Lithium–sulfur batteries have the theoretical energy density of up to 2600 Wh/kg, though its commercialization is limited by high material cost and poor cyclic performance. In this work, we show that sepiolite-sulfur is a high-capacity, high-rate performance, and low-cost cathode material for lithium–sulfur batteries. Sepiolite is a porous mineral with specific structure, outstanding physical and chemical adsorption characteristics, and excellent ion exchange capability, making it an ideal matrix material for lithium–sulfur batteries. It is shown that the first specific discharge capacity of sepiolite-sulfur cathode is about 1436 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C current rate, and it remains as high as 901 mAh g−1 after 300 cycles. Under 1 C current density, the first discharge capacity is 1206 mAh g−1, and maintains a high value of 601 mAh g−1 after 500 cycles. The raw materials are abundant and low cost, and the manufacturing process is simple and scalable, making it promising for the commercialization of lithium–sulfur batteries.Sepiolite Lithium–sulfur batteries We speculated that sepiolite could be an excellent matrix and absorbing material for lithium–sulfur batteries due to its ion transmission channel and large pore volume. Indeed, we obtained high capacity and excellent cycling and rate performance of lithium–sulfur batteries by using the synergistic effect of natural porous fiber structure and strong absorptivity of sepiolite, which effectively restrained the polysulfide dissolution and thus improved the conversion efficiency of positive electrode active material. The first specific discharge capacity is about 1436 mAh g Sepiolite powders used in this work were bought from a mineral processing factory in Liuyang county, Hunan Province, China. They were then screened through a 200-mesh sieve before mixed with sulfur (S), and the weight ratio of sepiolite/S is controlled at 3/2 by gravimetric method. Finally the mixed powders were heated under vacuum at 100 °C for 3 h. The structure and composition of the sepiolite were examined by using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/max-2400) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Bruker S4-P10VER). The morphologies before and after the sulfur injection were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Tecnai G2 F20) with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The specific surface area and pore size distribution were measured according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method, respectively. Infrared spectroscopy (IR, Perkin–Elmer Spectrum One spectrophotometer) was applied to verify the structures of sepiolite before and after the sulfur injection, using KBr pellets prepared with a pressed-disk technique (0.8 mg sample + 200 mg KBr). Positive electrodes comprised of 70 wt% sepiolite/S composite, 20 wt% acetylene black and 10 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride binders were homogeneously mixed in an N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent under continuous magnetic stirring for 3 h, and then the slurry was coated uniformly on an aluminum foil. The electrodes were dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 12 h. 2016 type coin cells were assembled in an argon-filled glove box, where lithium metal was used as a counter electrode and polypropylene membrane was used as the separator. The electrolyte was 1 M lithium bis (tri-fluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) dissolved in a 1:1 volume ratio mixture of 1,3-dioxolane and dimethoxy ethane. Electrochemical charge–discharge and cyclic performances were measured at room temperature using a BTS-5V3A battery test system (Neware, Shenzhen, China), with the potential range from 3.0 to 1.0 V (vs. Li/Li The images of sepiolite mineral and powders bought from the factory are shown in The morphology of sepiolite was further examined by SEM and TEM. From N The cycling performance and Coulombic efficiency of the sepiolite/S cathode over 300 cycles at a rate of 0.2 C (with 1 C = 1675 mA g  The charge–discharge curves at different cycles for sepiolite/S cathode at 1 C are shown in  The experimental EIS data were fitted using the Multiple Electrochemical Impedance Spectra Parameterization (MEISP+) software based on the planar finite length diffusion with general boundary conditions model, as shown in In conclusion, the sepiolite/S composite material was prepared by using natural sepiolite and sulfur with simple vacuum heat treatment. The sepiolite/S cathode shows excellent capacity, cyclic and rate performance, with first specific discharge capacity about 1436 mAh g This work was supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at