The effectiveness of wheat straw fine to ultra-fine grindings at pilot scale was studied. The produced powders were characterised by their particle-size distribution (laser diffraction), crystallinity (WAXS) and enzymatic degradability (Trichoderma reesei enzymatic cocktail). A large range of wheat-straw powders was produced: from coarse (median particle size ∼800μm) to fine particles (∼50μm) using sieve-based grindings, then ultra-fine particles ∼20μm by jet milling and ∼10μm by ball milling. The wheat straw degradability was enhanced by the decrease of particle size until a limit: ∼100μm, up to 36% total carbohydrate and 40% glucose hydrolysis yields. Ball milling samples overcame this limit up to 46% total carbohydrate and 72% glucose yields as a consequence of cellulose crystallinity reduction (from 22% to 13%). Ball milling appeared to be an effective pretreatment with similar glucose yield and superior carbohydrate yield compared to steam explosion pretreatment.Lignocellulosic biomass is a potential material for bioethanol production, methanisation, combustion, chemicals and composite-material production. It is composed of a cellulose network embedded in a hemicellulose/lignin matrix. Hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces between cellulose chains result in a crystalline structure. In the case of wheat straw, the hemicelluloses are mainly composed of xylan chains substituted with arabinose units. Lignin is a complex polymer of (Enzymatic) hydrolysis is one of the first steps of bioconversions (e.g. 2nd generation bioethanol or biogas productions). This essential step is considered as a limiting stage for biomass conversion ( Substrate characteristics affecting enzymatic degradation of biomass have been largely reviewed. Cellulose has been held as the main factor responsible for biomass recalcitrance due to its degree of crystallinity ( Several pretreatments (alkaline, acid, oxidative, solvent, physical, thermal etc.) have been developed in order to alter these biomass properties allowing it to be more accessible to enzymes ( The degree of polymerisation, crystallinity degree, porosity and specific surface are potentially altered by grinding processes, depending on the grinding conditions, intensity and/or type (breaking mechanism). Specifically, final particle size can vary greatly depending on type and conditions of grinding. Consequently, reduction of particle size improved the degradabilities of different biomasses ( There is a need to understand the effects of particle size and other structural changes produced by different grinding modes, especially at pilot-scale and on untreated biomass as substrates. Since grinding can affect hydrolysis, it is interesting to assess both technical feasibility and impact of smaller particle size reducing methods (fine, <100 In this study, we developed wheat straw grinding processes in pilot scale by means of cutting milling, centrifugal and impact grinding, and two potentially ultra-fine grindings: ball milling and air-jet milling. We further investigated how these different grinding modes impacted particle size, cellulose crystallinity and saccharification and compared results to with steam-exploded wheat straw (SE-WS). Wheat straw ( The grinding experiments carried out in the present work were performed in a multistep diagram. The sample preparations and grinding principles are summarised in Particle size distributions were determined from 0.02 to 2000 Wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) diffractograms were recorded from 20 The digestibilities of samples were determined according the automated method described by All statistical analyses were carried out using OriginPro 7.5 (OriginLab Corporation) and Matlab R2006a (The MathWorks, Inc.). Results are reported as their replicate means The results of this study are presented in four parts. In the first one, wheat straw powders produced by these different grinding processes are characterised by their particle size. The second part presents the effects of grinding processes and conditions on enzymatic hydrolysis kinetics; and third, their effects on the hydrolysis extent. The fourth part concerns the measurements on crystallinity to help understanding the previously presented results. Finally, the discussion section expresses the general effects of grinding on biomass characteristics and its effects on degradation. Wheat straw was composed of cellulose 32.0 Cellulose was the major component of wheat straw followed by hemicellulose and lignin. Wheat straw hemicelluloses (arabinoxylans) were mainly linear (xylan chain) with few ramifications by the arabinose substitutions (0.15 ratio arabinose:xylose). The ramification “level” of SE-WS arabinoxylans was comparable with initial wheat straw (0.17 arabinose:xylose) while the hemicellulosic content was strongly reduced. The main effect of steam explosion process of wheat straw was the solubilisation and extraction of 92% of original hemicelluloses (SE-WS content Median particle size and span of particle size distribution of samples prepared by grinding operations and steam explosion are presented in The first step of grinding experiments, CM2mm (760 Comparing one-step processing which started with harvested wheat straw, steam explosion produced finer particles than CM2mm but with a wider particle size distribution (span Generally, as the sieve size used was smaller, the particle size was also reduced ( In contrast, impact grinding was not affected by the sieve size as described, median particle size of IG0.3mm was similar (107 In summary, these sieve-based grindings were more efficient when feeding materials were lower sized, with smaller sieve holes, and with minimum air aspiration. Nevertheless, the best compromise must be found with the best operating conditions considering not only final particle size but also technical feasibility. Ball and jet millings were effective methods to produce ultra-fine wheat straw samples. Their particle size reduction and span of particle size distributions are presented in Ball milling experiments were carried out over two periods (0–120 Jet milling produced a wheat straw powder which was equivalent to 192 Representative samples were enzymatically hydrolysed using a reference fungal enzymatic cocktail for 4, 24 and 48 Generally, the patterns of reducing sugar release were changed as an effect of grinding intensity: the initial rate (0–4 The subsequent experiments of enzymatic hydrolysis were carried out for 48 The releases of reducing sugars and glucose from wheat straw samples produced by sieve-based grindings ( The release of glucose ( In summary, considering sieve-based grindings only, the release of glucose and reducing sugars was mostly ruled by the particle size enhancing the enzymatic release (from 4% to 36% and from 6% to 34% hydrolysis yields of theoretical reducing sugar and glucose maximum potentials, respectively) until a size threshold below which no further release was obtained (∼270 The effects of ball milling and jet milling on enzymatic degradability were different ( Surprisingly, jet milling appeared not to favour the enzymatic degradability of wheat straw. The reducing sugar release from jet milled wheat straw was 1.2 Taking into account the group III of similar reducing sugar release discussed in Section A threshold of glucose release was also observed (0.6 The releases of carbohydrates from SE-WS were the highest of all samples: 2.6 The relative crystallinities ( The %Crys of SE-WS was higher (51%) than the initial wheat straw and also than wheat straw ground by rapid methods (20%) ( Wheat straw cellulose was not affected by the rapid grindings studied. Jet milling, which is a widely used process in pharmaceutical domain, was already verified not to affect cellulose crystallinity of Avicel (intact MCC reduced from 44 to 16 The effects of grinding on wheat straw enzymatic accessibility can be explained by (1) the increase of the surface area and (2) the macromolecular destructuration. The reduction of particle size favoured the contact between the enzymes with the substrate (increasing initial rates) and revealed new zones which contained initially inaccessible polymers in coarse particles (increasing final hydrolysis yields). Structural changes at the macromolecular level obtained using ball milling, i.e. reduction on cellulose crystallinity, allowed to overcome the threshold with an increase of the release of carbohydrates up to ∼10-folds. The “behaviour” of degradability positively related with particle size reduction down to a size limit was due to the absence of changes in macromolecules. Specifically, rapid-grindings did not change cellulose structure probably because wheat straw cellulose is naturally poorly crystalline thus less rigid and breakable. Our findings are in agreement with switch grass grinding: below 841 Sieve-based grindings and jet milling are still process of interest in biomass treatment by their ability to increase wheat straw digestibility and mostly by their rapidity in size reducing. Jet milling was specifically very effective in producing ultra-fine biomass which can be profitable for other applications such as compactation (tablets) or powder combustion. Ball milling was the only grinding method able to allow significant changes in macromolecular structure, therefore increasing wheat straw accessibility to enzymes. Nevertheless, other changes such as hemicellulose depolymerisation were observed throughout the whole ball milling period. The removal of lignin and/or hemicellulose have been considered to enhance both rate and yield of hydrolysis by either revealing cellulose to enzymes or by avoiding lignins to bind enzymes (diminishing their effectiveness) ( Our results on decrease of crystallinity and improvement of enzymatic accessibility owing to the action of ball milling are in agreement with those reported for other biomasses ground by laboratory (vibratory or planetary) ball millings ( The lignocellulosic structure of wheat straw was strongly altered by steam explosion. We verified that steam explosion affected wheat straw by reducing particle size, removing mainly hemicelluloses and increasing its relative crystallinity; also, some changes in lignin structure were indirectly observed. Since relative crystallinity was increased, one could expect that cellulose would be more difficult to be hydrolysed. In contrast, it seems that the hemicellulosic removal favoured the access of enzymes to cellulose chains increasing consequently the glucose release. The overall increase of glucose release shows that the effect of reducing crystallinity was minor compared to the positive effect of the hemicellulosic removal. The later has been already described to be the major effect of steam explosion on biomass allowing to higher hydrolysis yields (as reviewed by Contrary to steam explosion, grinding preserves wheat straw hemicellulose content; consequently ball milling allowed its enzymatic solubilisation. Therefore, due to the ability to enhance carbohydrate (cellulose Grinding modes appeared to play a determinant role in final characteristics of ground wheat straw. The effect of particle size reduction was decoupled from the effect of internal changes in the lignocellulosic structure. The degradability of wheat straw was enhanced by the decrease of particle size until a limit. This was only overcome when the internal structure of wheat straw particles was altered. Ball milling disrupted partially the crystalline structure of cellulose. Ball milling appeared to be an effective pretreatment of wheat straw increasing its degradability with similar glucose yield and superior total carbohydrate yield to steam explosion pretreatment. L. Saulnier (INRA, Nantes – France) is greatly thanked for allowing GLC analysis of the starting materials. Y. Mellerin, A. Putois, G. Maraval and M. Chaurand are also acknowledged for technical assistance. Bruno Pontoire (UMR BIA Nantes) is thanked for performing X-ray measurements. This study was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 