It was found that, in copper electrolyte, the combination of As(V) and Sb(V) can form arsenato antimonic acid (AAAc) and, the reactions of AAAc with As(III), Sb(III), and Bi(III) can produce the precipitates of arsenato antimonates. During copper electrorefining, the As, Sb, and Bi deposited into the anode slime from the electrolyte are dominant in the forms of arsenato antimonates. It is extremely difficult to separate pure arsenato antimonates from copper anode slimes, while it is easy to synthesize arsenato antimonates using H2O2 to oxidize As(III) and Sb(III) in copper refining electrolyte. The composition and structure of the arsenato antimonates were determined with chemical analysis, IR and XRD techniques. The characteristic bands in the IR spectra of arsenato antimonates are δ of As–OH and Sb–OH at 1126.8 cm−1, ν
                     as of As–OH at 1029.7 cm−1, ν
                     as of As–OX(X=As, Sb) at 819.5 cm−1, ν
                     as of Sb–OH at 618.4 cm−1, ν
                     as of Sb–OY(Y=As, Sb) at 507.2 cm−1, and ν
                     as of Sb–OBi at 470 cm−1.
                  The arsenato antimonates form irregular masses of amorphous structure because there are many OH groups in AAAc, the OH groups bond with As(III), Sb(III), and Bi(III) at random, which makes the arsenato antimonates formed in copper refining electrolyte have no fixed ratios for As/Sb/Bi. The formation of the arsenato antimonates can be expressed as follows:
                        
                           
                              aH3AsO4
                              +
                              bH[Sb(OH)6]+
                              cMeO
                              +
                              →Me
                                 c
                              As
                                 a
                              Sb
                                 b
                              O(3a+5b+c/2+1)H(a+5b−2c+2)·xH2O+
                              cH+
                              +(a
                              +
                              b
                              +
                              c
                              /2−1−
                              x)H2O, where Me=As(III), Sb(III) and Bi(III); a
                              ≥1, b
                              ≥1, c
                              ≤(3a
                              +
                              b)Since copper electrorefining was applied commercially, the formation and composition of anode slimes have been studied ( Besides arsenates, kupferglimmer (Cu It was known as early as the middle of 1900s that the glassy copolymers of arsenato phosphate can be obtained by melting a mixture of NaH The compositions of the experimental samples were determined by chemical method and inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy (ICP) with a PS-6 PLASMA SPECTROVAC, BAIRD (USA). The valence of the elements was determined by chemical method ( It is well known that the solubilities of antimonic acid and antimonates are very low in acidic solution, but the concentration of antimony is singularly high in the mother liquor of CuSO From It was interesting that when the concentration of H As shown in  The IR spectrum of the precipitate formed by adding SbCl There are As–O–Sb, Sb–O–Sb bonds formed among As(V), Sb(V), and Sb(III) in the precipitate, which confirmed that the precipitates formed in the mother liquor are arsenato antimonates. To confirm the precipitates of arsenato antimonates can form in copper refining electrolyte, synthetic and industrial copper refining electrolytes were used. Hydrochloric and sulfuric acids, hydrogen peroxide solution (30 vol.%), CuSO The electrolytes synthesized in the laboratory contained 34–36 g/L Cu, 180–185 g/L free H The Sb(III) and Bi(III) added in the electrolytes were respectively prepared by dissolving metallic antimony and bismuth in concentrated sulfuric acid and diluting with water. As The electrolytes listed in Experiments indicated that the precipitates of As, Sb and Bi formed in copper refining electrolytes are not arsenates but antimonates and arsenato antimonates because there is no precipitate without Sb(V) in the electrolyte, which can be used to explain why the adsorbent containing Sb(V) has a good affinity for As(V), As(III), Sb(III), and Bi in copper refining electrolyte ( Experiments found that the composition of arsenato antimonates depends on not only the composition of the electrolyte but also the speed of arsenato antimonates formation. When the As(III) and Sb(III) were oxidized at the same time, the arsenato antimonates formed in the electrolyte as soon as the oxidant was added, and more As(III) and Sb(III) contained in the arsenato antimonates. If As(III) was first oxidized to As(V), then when Sb(III) and Bi(III) were added in, it took about 1 week for the precipitates to appear in the electrolyte after the oxidant was added to oxidize the Sb(III).  Although it is extremely difficult to separate pure arsenato antimonates from copper anode slimes, when hydrogen peroxide solution was added to copper refining electrolyte (H  The XRD patterns of the materials associated with copper electrorefining are shown in Arsenato antimonates have no fixed composition and cannot form crystalline products; even the arsenato antimonates formed in liberator cells are amorphous ( The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 50274075).