The fluidized bed drying of powdered materials was studied with a focus on the modifications of the agglomerate population as a result of abrasion and fragmentation. A number of test were carried out in a Lexan® lab-scale fluidised bed with different granular materials, namely a pharmaceutical powder supplied by Novartis-Farma S.p.A., wheat bran, and a molecular sieve 13X, selected to effectively surrogate powders of interest in various industrial applications such as pharmaceuticals pills and adsorption pellets manufacture. The process was monitored to correlate the temperature and the flow rate of the fluidising gas, the temperature and the moisture level in the bed, the qualitative fluidisation patterns. Experimental results were further worked out to highlight the effects of inlet air temperature and gas velocity on process thermal efficiency. Bed material was characterized to assess the modifications of the population of agglomerates as a function of the operating conditions.Wet granulation is a unit operation frequently used in a number of industrial applications, from food to pharmaceutical industries. Larger granules of primary particles are commonly produced by high-shear granulation mixers wherein wetted powder particles are mixed, agglomerated, and densified under the action of shear imposed by impellers. Wet granulation can be seen as a combination of several series/parallel processes as defined by Iveson et al.    The recognition of the role played by granulator design and granulation conditions on the attributes of the produced granules has been extensively addressed in the literature Granulation phase is often followed by a drying stage carried out in gas-solid fluidized beds operated as continuous or batch devices Despite the long history of research on fluidized bed drying of wet materials The present study addresses the fluidized bed drying of powdered materials. The attention was focused on both the characterization of the population of agglomerates as a function of the operating conditions and the thermal efficiency of the process. The experimental tests were carried out in a Lexan® lab-scale fluidised bed to assess the modifications of the population of agglomerates as a function of the operating conditions. Data were processed to correlate the temperature and the flow rate of the fluidising gas, the temperature and the moisture level in the bed, and the qualitative fluidisation patterns. The analysis of the effects of inlet air temperature and gas velocity on thermal efficiency was also proposed to provide energy savings and optimum processing conditions. The dryer fluidised bed apparatus used for the tests is represented in The lab-scale fluidization column was made of Lexan® and was of two sections: a conical fluidisation chamber (ID The gas-drying feeding system consisted of a mass flow controller and of a 2.5 Several diagnostic devices were used to continuously measure the pressure at the bottom of the bed, the temperature profile along the plant and the humidity of the exhaust gas stream. Pressure was measured by means of a Druck resistive pressure transducer (mod. PDCR130). Temperature was measured by means of T-type thermocouples. Gas relative humidity was measured by means of a Hanna-Instruments hygrometer (mod. HI8064). Uncertainties of pressure, temperature and moisture measurements are evaluated as 0.05%, 0.25% and 1.5%, respectively. All signals were logged on a data acquisition unit consisting of a PC equipped with a data acquisition board (NI-ATI-MIO16X). Three granular materials were investigated: a pharmaceutical powder (PP) supplied by Novartis-Farma S.p.A., wheat bran (WB), and a molecular sieve 13X (ZX). Solids inventory was 0.2 A minimum required level (20%) in tests carried out on PP and WB (as required in most pharmaceuticals manufacture); its final value ( At the end of each run, fluidising gas was shut off and solids in fluidised bed were collected. Solids were characterized in terms of granular size distribution by means of a Malvern Instruments laser-light-particle-size analyser. Measured data were worked out to correlate temperature and superficial gas velocity of the fluidising gas, drying time, Sauter mean diameter (  For a set value of for a set value of Tests carried out with WB solids (data not reported) were characterized by behaviour similar to those observed during tests carried out with PP.   For a fixed value of For a fixed value of Tests carried out with WB solids (data not reported) were characterized by behaviour similar to those observed during tests carried out with PP.  The drying time and the Sauter mean diameter measured during runs carried out with PP under the operating conditions tested are reported in the ( Increasing for any value of No significant variation from the above reported trends were obtained analysing data observed during tests carried out with WB solids. Humidity at final time and Sauter mean diameter registered during runs carried out with ZX are reported in the ( The thermal efficiency of the drying process was assessed, according to the definition given by The energy transferred to the wet material between the beginning and the end of the tests may be expressed as the sum of the energy associated to the water phase change and to the bed temperature change: A simplification of Eq. Taking into account Eqs. The thermal efficiency of a drying process is expressed according the Eq.  In order to account for the different findings recorded, some comments are deserved. With respect to the Increasing With respect to the The observed behaviour is probably due to several concurrent phenomena. An increase in one or both The fluidised bed drying of powdered materials was successfully carried out in a lab-scale unit. Agglomerates of pharmaceutical powders, wheat bran, and molecular sieve 13X - solids selected as benchmarks for pharmaceutical pills and adsorption pellets manufacture industry - were investigated. The drying process was characterized in terms of modifications of the population of agglomerates, drying time and residual humidity as a function of the operating conditions. The maps of the main features (drying time, residual humidity, Sauter mean diameter, and thermal efficiency) of the investigated systems in the phase space (superficial gas velocity, drying gas inlet temperature) pointed out several conditions that deserve further investigations. bed cross-sectional area, m fluidising gas specific heat, KJ/(kg solids specific heat, KJ/(kg holes diameter, m Sauter mean diameter, μm latent heat of water evaporation, KJ/kg bed height, m mass flow rate of water due to phase change, kg/s total pressure, Pa liquid water vapour pressure, Pa relative humidity of the outlet gas stream, % residual humidity value, % fluidising gas density, kg/m density of the solids, kg/m temperature of the solids bed, °C temperature of the fluidizing gas, °C standard state temperature, °C superficial gas velocity, m/s water vapour molar fraction, −