Shear-induced failures in uniaxial compression and Hertzian contact damage of Ti3AlC2 fabricated by a solid–liquid reaction synthesis were investigated, and shear strength was evaluated using double notched samples and punch hole tests respectively. Compressive strength of 749 MPa and the slip angle of 38° between the slip plane and the loading direction were measured when the applied load was parallel to the hot-pressing direction of the material; whereas the compressive strength of 841 MPa and the angle of 26° were obtained when the applied load was perpendicular to the hot-pressing direction. The shear strength obtained using double-notched sample was 96 MPa and that from punch-shear test was 138 MPa, respectively. SEM fractographs of specimens failed in shear and compression tests indicated a combination of intergranular and transgranular fracture and also an evidence of friction in the slip plane during compression failure process. Punch-shear test was developed and confirmed to be a simple and feasible method for determining the shear strength of layered machinable ceramics.The layered ternary ceramic Ti It was noticed that shear-induced failures were the main failure forms of “312” material like Ti In the present study, shear strength of Ti The Ti In compressive tests, the critical shear stress on the slip plane, The shear strength was measured by using double-notched specimen (DNS) under uniaxial compressive load. The specimens were electrical-discharge machined and the surfaces were diamond-polished; the configuration is schematically shown in In order to enhance the efficiency and reliability of tests and to simplify sample preparation process for shear tests, a punch-shear test was developed in this study. This simple technique is demonstrated to be valid and convenient for determining the shear strength of the “312” materials. Thin plate specimen with thickness of 0.3–0.4 mm was used for the punch-shear test. There is no strict requirement for the size and shape of the thin plate specimen but the minimum width should be above two times of the diameter of the punch hole. The plate specimen is fixed between two 10 mm thick steel fixtures having a through hole that allows a punch bar with a fit diameter to move through without friction. In this work, the diameter of the punch bar was 2.99 mm and the diameter of the hole was 3 mm, and the loading rate of 0.5 mm/min was applied using universal testing machine. Shear strength Hertzian indentations were made using a Si It was found that, when the compressive load was parallel to the hot-pressing direction of the material (group A), the slip angle was mostly ∼38° and the mean compressive strength measured was 749±77 MPa; when the compressive load was perpendicular to the hot-pressing direction of the material (group B), the slip angle was ∼26° and the mean compressive strength measured was 841±40 MPa. The mean values of shear and compressive stresses on the slip plane for the two groups of samples were obtained based on Group A: Group B: The difference between the measured strength in the two directions was due to the anisotropic microstructure of this layered ceramic. Although qualitative relation between shear strength and the critical shear stress in compressive test was known, determining the shear strength accurately using compressive test was difficult because the friction coefficient was unknown. For Ti Average shear strength in six specimens, 96±22 MPa, was obtained in the tests using double-notched samples. It confirmed that the shear strength was much lower than the critical shear stress in compressive test. The failed samples in this shear test were always integral, not separated into two pieces after unloading, so the shear-induced crack was examined by SEM. The SEM observation indicates that the large grains crossing the slip plane have substantial contribution to shear resistance. The results obtained from the punch-shear tests show less scatter in the measured shear strength. The punched hole showed perfect shape without crack branching and the shear stress at the boundary of punched disk was considered uniform. The disc and holes in the tested Ti  The above experimental results indicate that shear strength is the lowest one, compared to the tensile, compressive, and bending strength of Ti  Shear slip failure in uniaxial compressive test was confirmed in Ti The average critical shear stress on the slip plane in compressive tests of Ti Plastic indent on the surface and half-circle crack along the principal shearing band in the indented Ti Punch-shear test, using a ratio of This work was supported by the National Outstanding Young Scientist Foundation (No. 50125204 for Y. Bao and No.59925208 for Y. Zhou), National Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 50232040, and “The Hundred-Talent Program” of Chinese Academy of Sciences for Y. Bao and “863″ program in China.