In this study, the effects of operating variables and sluice geometry on the separation performance of pinched sluices were investigated. Tests were carried out on a closed circuit experimental setup under varying feed flow rate, splitter position, feed % solids and slope angle conditions. Seven pinched sluices of different geometry were manufactured and tested in the study. An artificial mixture of magnetite and quartz was used as the test material. Results showed that splitter position controlled the amount of solids taken into concentrate, hence, recovery and grade. An increase in feed flow rate deteriorated the performance. Within the range studied, deck slope and feed % solids did not show significant correlation with performance criteria. However, it was found that underflow thickening ratio increased with decreasing deck slope and feed % solids. For high flow rates, larger sluices had better performance. Increasing pinch angle of sluice had an adverse effect on the performance, particularly at high flow rate range. The effect of sluice length on the performance was found to be insignificant.During the last three decades, the use of gravity concentration processes has been increased due to increasing energy and reagent costs and environmental restrictions ( Since the separation efficiency of pinched sluices in a single stage is low, multi-stage operation is necessary to obtain a satisfactory separation. This, in turn, requires a sound understanding of their performance. From the technical point of view, an improved knowledge of how the separation occurs on this simplest gravity separation device could lead to the development of higher efficiency and capacity devices of the same nature, and provide an insight to the other flowing water film separators, e.g., spirals, in which more complex mechanisms are involved. Such knowledge could also be useful for more efficient operation of Reichert cones. With these objectives, a study was carried out to study the effects of main operating and geometrical (design) variables on the performance of pinched sluices. This paper presents the experimental data and statistical analysis. The characterization of flow over a pinched sluice is the subject of another paper ( Slurry containing 50–65% solids is evenly fed to the V-shaped inclined surface of a pinched sluice from the top. As it flows down, pulp height increases due to narrowing. While traveling over the sluice, heavy and light minerals stratify and eventually leave it in roughly segregated layers, which are then separated into two streams by flow splitters. It is widely accepted that stratification occurs as a result of differential settling and interstitial trickling mechanisms ( The main operating parameters are feed flow rate, % solids in feed, sluice angle and splitter position. Splitter position is the most important operating variable, since it has a direct control over the amount of slurry going into the concentrate, hence, recovery and grade. It was claimed that splitter design could also have some effect on the performance (  Although there exist pinched sluices of different geometry in use, there is no detailed study presenting their effects on performance. In this study, the effects of main operating variables consisting of feed flow rate, feed % solids, slope of the sluice deck and splitter position, together with sluice geometry on the performance of pinched sluices, were investigated within the range of industrial application. The aim was to define the significance of these variables in order to improve the performance of these gravity separators. The data would also be useful in analyzing particle movement in flowing water films. For the investigation of the effects of operating parameters, experimental conditions were selected so as to cover industrial ranges. They are presented in Tests to investigate the effects of sluice geometry were carried out with a feed of 60% solids by wt at 17° slope angle. Feed flow rate ranges for different sluices are given in Sluice No. I was used in the tests for investigating the effects of operating parameters. All the dimensions of Sluice Nos. II and III were 1.5 and 2 times larger than Sluice I, respectively. This facilitated investigating the effects of proportionally enlarging sluice dimensions. Sluice Nos. I, IV and V had the same feed end width and pinch angle. Their lengths and discharge end widths were different. Data from these sluices provided a basis to study the effects of length. Sluice Nos. I, VI and VII had the same feed and discharge end width. Their pinch angles were different. Therefore, sluices with larger pinch angle had a shorter length. The effect of pinch angle was examined comparing the performance of these sluices. Tests were carried out on a closed circuit experimental setup. A schematic view of the setup and splitter arrangement is shown in The pulp prepared at predetermined conditions was pumped to the T-shaped feed distributor at the top of the sluice and fed uniformly to the sluice. During initial tests, the stability of the system was tested feeding a standard sluice with water only, and slurries containing solids up to 70% by weight. It was found that it had reasonable reproducibility in terms of flow rates and % solids of products. At the discharge end, the flow was divided into underflow (concentrate) and overflow (tailings) by using an adjustable splitter. Products were sampled simultaneously by using a sampling device located on the splitter. The flow rate was controlled by an adjustable valve located between the mixing tank and the pump. Flow rates were measured by using sampling cans and timing with a chronometer. The upper piece of the splitter had the same direction and angle as the sluice itself, and splitter position was measured as the distance between the sluice lip and the splitter ( Solid contents of the products were determined by measuring wet and dry weights of the samples. Magnetite and quartz in the products were separated by magnetic separation. Performance criteria used for evaluating the experimental results were upgrading ratio (UGR), recovery ( Upgrading ratio and underflow thickening ratio were calculated using Separation efficiency was calculated using The effects of splitter position on solids recovery, recovery, upgrading ratio and separation efficiency are presented for different solid flow rates in Although each deck slope produced a different set of performance criteria, the trend among them is not easily discernible. Results of typical test data showing the effect of slope angle are presented in The relationship between feed flow rate and recovery is shown in Similar to the effect of slope angle, feed % solids did not exhibit any clear effect on any of the performance criteria within the experimental range. However, these two variables seem to have an effect on underflow thickening ratio. As shown in Significance of the effect of operating variables on the performance criteria was statistically tested. The results of statistical analysis are presented in Each performance criterion was fitted to a multiple linear regression equation. The significance of each coefficient of the equation was evaluated by using Student's Although all the operating variables individually had statistically significant correlation with upgrading ratio, the resultant multiple linear regression equation had a poor fit with Feed % solids, slope angle and feed flow rate provided statistically significant correlation with underflow thickening ratio at 95% confidence level. However, the effect of flow rate became nonsignificant at 99% confidence level. Since some of the linear regression equations gave poor correlations with the performance criteria, the use of nonlinear functions to define the relationship between dependent and independent variables was also tested using a residual analysis technique. However, this did not provide substantial improvement. Results obtained with sluices having proportionally increased dimensions are shown in The performances of sluice Nos. I, IV and V, which had variable lengths, were similar. For a fixed feed end width and pinch angle, increasing sluice length from 74 to 90 cm did not affect the performance significantly ( Results obtained using sluices with 7°, 10° and 14° pinch angles are shown in Results confirmed that splitter position is the dominant operating variable controlling the amount of solids going into concentrate, which has a direct influence on recovery and grade. It was also found that small changes in splitter position could significantly change the performance. Despite large variations in operating conditions, splitter position showed significant correlation with the performance criteria, including recovery and grade. Sharp and generally linear decrease of upgrading ratio with splitter position indicates the existence of a thin layer of concentrated heavy minerals. This thin layer contains 40–60% of the heavy minerals. The rest are distributed within the layer above with concentration decreasing exponentially towards the slurry surface. For example, three superficial slices with approximately the same solid flow rate, created by changing splitter position in one test, contained 14.5%, 4.7% and 3.1% magnetite on average. The second most significant operating variable affecting performance was feed flow rate of solids. It had significant adverse effect on recovery, but its effect on upgrading ratio was not apparent in statistical analysis. Feed flow rate increases pulp height and, up to some degree, velocity at the discharge end of a pinched sluice. These in turn have an impact on free fall trajectory of slurry leaving the device. Therefore, separation of the same proportion of concentrate at different flow rates requires adjustment of splitter position. If the same solid recoveries could be obtained under different flow rates, this would reflect the effects of flow rate on performance, eliminating the interaction due to splitter position. However, collection of such data is difficult since it requires prior knowledge of interaction between the two. Instead, the existing data are classified into three solid recovery classes and presented in It was reported that turbulence eddies, which could be harmful to stratification, could only be suppressed by operating pinched sluices at high feed % solids ( The statistical analysis did not indicate any reasonable correlation between slope angle and performance criteria, but graphical presentation of data shows that the performance at each angle differs from the others in terms of all the performance criteria, and there exists a vague optimum slope angle range of 15–17° for large splitter positions. This is in line with the previous findings that sluice angle had an impact on the performance of industrial practice ( Operating conditions could influence the UTR, but this is not a direct measure of sluice performance. Its value is important for the design of pinched sluice circuits and Reichert cones, where several stages of concentration are needed to obtain an acceptable grade for final concentrate. Therefore, the effects of operating variables on UTR were also studied. The data show that UTR decreases with increase in feed % solids and slope angle. These results are in conformity with the findings of Despite the close control of operating variables, the empirical linear models defining the relationships between operating variables and performance criteria failed to provide a satisfactory fit to experimental data. Inclusion of some nonlinear functions in the models did not provide any improvement. It may be argued that some deviations could be due to the sharp edged splitter used in the tests being very sensitive to changes in flow conditions. It is known that rounded splitters have lower sensitivity to the fluctuations in flow rates ( One of the main objectives for studying the effects of sluice geometry was to develop sluices with higher capacity. One approach to this type of problem is to look at the process from the point of view of stratification kinetics. Since this process is dependent on surface area rather than volume, the initial hypothesis was that capacity might be increased by extending the surface area of the sluices. Therefore, flow rates tested on a particular sluice are expressed as flow rate/unit area in Increased surface area was achieved in a number of ways. One way was to increase the length while keeping feed width and pinched angle constant. These constraints increased discharge end width from 3.4 to 7.4, for a length increase creating 7.5% larger surface area. These modifications did not provide any significant improvement in performance. It may be argued that the increase in surface area was too small to make a difference, or kinetics of stratification is so fast that it reaches its maximum even with the retention time provided by the smallest sluice. The validity of these arguments requires more data. In contrast, tests with proportionally larger sluices provided better performance at similar flow rates, i.e., lower flow rate/unit area for larger sluices. Even the highest flow rate tested on larger sluices did not produce any inferior performance compared to the smallest sluice. However, it should be noted that feed flow rates to larger sluices could not be increased so as to obtain the same flow rate/unit area of the smallest sluice due to the limitations of the experimental setup. It is believed that improved performance at similar flow rates is due to decreased sidewall effects and more quiescent flow conditions observed in larger sluices. Nevertheless, the limited data indicate that larger sluices have a potential for improving both performance and capacity. It was also found that increasing pinched angle deteriorates the performance. The sluices used in these tests had constant feed and discharge end width. Increased pinched angle resulted in shorter and lower surface area sluices. These modifications are expected to increase the velocity of flowing film and, hence, turbulence. Compared to the other sluices, additional surface waves were observed during these tests, showing increased tendency to form eddies and disturb stratification. It may be suggested that combined effects of these factors resulted in the deterioration of performance.  Splitter position was the dominant variable controlling both recovery and grade. Increasing flow rate deteriorated the performance, implying that quiescent flow conditions were favorable. Feed % solids did not have significant effect on recovery and grade within the range of 50–65% solids by weight. Although each slope angle produced a different set of performance criteria, its effect could not be directly correlated. The proportionally larger sluices performed better particularly at high flow rates. Increasing pinched angle from 7° to 14°, deteriorated performance at high flow rates. Increasing length of sluice did not have any significant effect on recovery and upgrading ratio. The authors would like to thank The Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey for the financial support through the Project No. YBAG 0069.