The role of arsenic in the homogeneous precipitation of impurities arsenic, antimony and bismuth in copper electrolyte was studied. Experiments found that though the formation of arsenato antimonates is one of the control-steps in the homogeneous precipitation and antimony is absolutely necessarily for arsenato antimonates formation, arsenic played an important role for the homogeneous precipitation as well. Arsenic (V) is not only a reactant of arsenato antimonates formation but also an oxidant of Sb(III) oxidation. Arsenic (V) can oxidize antimony from Sb(III) to Sb(V) in copper electrolyte. If the concentration of arsenic (V) is over 6g/L and the mole ratio of As(III)/As(V) is less than 0.09, the oxidation can be taken place at room temperature, and the equilibrium value of the φ
                     As(V)/As(III) is about 0.606 in the electrolyte. Under these conditions, the precipitation rate of antimony from the electrolyte can be reached over 97%. Arsenic (III) can promote arsenato antimonates formation and depress floating slimes formation simultaneously. The higher the arsenic (III) concentration is, the easier the formation of arsenato antimonates will be. If arsenic (III) is lack, the copper electrolyte is prone to be over oxidized, which will result in the formation of floating slimes. Floating slimes and arsenato antimonates have a similar chemical composition. To distinguish arsenato antimonates from floating slimes, the most effective way was thermal decomposition.In copper electrorefining, the impurities of arsenic, antimony and bismuth are dissolved along with copper from the anode to the electrolyte. If no electrolyte is bled from the electrorefining circuit, the impurities would gradually accumulate in the electrolyte, which would result in a variety of intolerable problems, such as contamination of the cathodes and passivation of the anodes. Therefore, a number of methods have been proposed for the purification of copper electrolyte besides the typical treatment, such as prevention the supersaturation of arsenic, antimony and bismuth in copper electrolyte with stannic acid ( It is well known that a part of the impurities arsenic, antimony and bismuth dissolved from the anode can spontaneously precipitate from the electrolyte to the anode slimes during copper electrorefining and the volume of the copper electrolyte withdrawn to be purified per ton cathode (VPTC) is diverse in different copper refineries. Even in the same refinery with the same anode, the VPTC value is not the same under different electrorefining conditions ( It was found that the homogeneous co-precipitation of impurities arsenic, antimony and bismuth in copper electrolyte is dominant in the forms of arsenato antimonates ( To properly understand the role of arsenic in the formation of arsenato antimonates, synthetic and industrial copper refining electrolytes were used. Sulfuric acid, hydrogen peroxide solution (30 The electrolytes used in the experiments contained the basic components: 34–36 The Sb(III) and Bi(III) added into the electrolytes were respectively prepared by dissolving metallic antimony and bismuth in concentrated sulfuric acid and diluting with water. As The composition of experimental samples was determined by inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy (ICP) with a PS-6 PLASMA SPECTROVAC, BAIRD (USA). The valence of elements was determined by standard chemical methods ( It is well known that antimony and arsenic dissolve electrochemically from copper anodes as trivalent ions and then are oxidized to pentavalent ions by the air (O To properly understand the role of arsenic in the oxidation of antimony from Sb(III) to Sb(V), the prepared Sb(III) and/or Bi(III) were first added into the synthetic copper electrolytes under stirring at above 65 From In order to differentiate the precipitates formed in the aged 4#, 5#, 6#, 7# and 8# electrolytes from those formed in the aged 1#, 2# and 3# electrolytes, after filtration the precipitates were washed with dilute sulfuric acid and distilled water respectively, and then dried at 60 The IR spectrum of the precipitate formed in the 4# electrolyte is shown in From reactions ( Under normal conditions, it is difficult for arsenic (V) to oxidize antimony from Sb(III) to Sb(V) because the difference of the standard electrode potentials The relationship between the As(III)/As(V) mole ratio and the antimony concentration in the aged electrolytes was given in It was found that, by heating the aged 6# electrolyte at 85 Above experimental results indicate that the oxidation of antimony from Sb(IIII) to Sb(V) by As(V) depends on not only the concentration of As(V) but also on the mole ratio of As(III)/As(V) and the temperature of copper electrolyte. Thus it can be seen that the oxidation of antimony from Sb(IIII) to Sb(V) during copper electrorefining can follow the indirect oxidation mechanism, namely the oxidation of arsenic from As(III) to As(V) by the air (O During test it was found that by adding sufficient hydrogen peroxide solution into the aged 3# electrolytes (listed in The hydrolyzation of AAAc(1:1) is harmful for cathode copper quality as the essential component of the hydrolyzates is antimony (V) which has a good adsorbability for the impurities arsenic, antimony and bismuth in copper electrolyte ( To confirm that the formation of floating slimes is caused by the hydrolyzation of AAAc(1:1) in copper electrolyte, the industrial electrolyte was placed in a beaker with cover under stirring and external polarization in a thermostatic water bath. Maintaining the temperature at about 65 Commercial operations found that when arsenic concentration was below 5 Although floating slimes are by-products of copper electrorefining, and a lot of floating slimes formed in copper electrolyte might not be encountered for several years under normal conditions because arsenic (III) is generated constantly during copper electrorefining, which not only avoids the copper electrolyte over oxidation but also speeds-up the formation of arsenato antimonates. However, in 1987 and 1988, this was occurred two times in Guixi Smelter copper electrorefining cells. The floating slimes not only floated on the surface of the cells but also suspended in the electrolyte, and a lot of knots were formed on the surface of the cathodes ( The floating slimes and the arsenato antimonates formed in copper electrolytes both contain As(V), As(III), Sb(V), Sb(III) and Bi(III), and they are both white amorphous precipitates and have no fixed composition ( Thermal decomposition is one of the most effective ways used to distinguish the amorphous solids. Although floating slimes are the hydrolyzed products of AAAc(1:1), their TG/DTG curves are not the same, in Moreover, the positions and the shapes of the third stage are different among the three TG/DTG curves. In Arsenic (V) and arsenic (III) are both important for the formation of arsenato antimonates in copper electrolyte. When the arsenic (V) concentration is over 6 The authors acknowledge financial support from the