The SHS process can be used to produce composites in two ways: in-situ and ex-situ. In the case of ex-situ, SHS products such as porous skeletons, ingots, powders, and nanopowders can be used as components of composites. The possibility of obtaining ceramic and ceramic-metal composites in-situ in one step is the main advantage of the SHS process. With one-step synthesis of the composite, the SHS process can be applied for the synthesis of dispersed phase or matrix phase, or both phases simultaneously.The SHS process can be used to produce composites in two ways: (1) for the preliminary synthesis of components of composites with subsequent use for the manufacture of the composites by traditional technologies (ex situ); (2) for one-step synthesis of the composites from initial reagents by realization of the SHS process (in situ). In the case of ex situ, SHS products such as porous skeletons, ingots, powders, and nanopowders can be used as components of composites. Application of such products may be justified either they facilitates the unique properties of composites or products are much cheaper compare with commercial one. For example, the performance of the process of SHS in vacuum in ISMAN, Chernogolovka, Russia, allowed researchers to obtain a porous ceramic skeleton of TiC, which was then infiltrated with the melt of high-temperature nickel alloy and formed a composite, the high-temperature strength of which was 2.5 times higher than the nickel alloy, whereas the skeleton, obtained by conventional sintering from a powder of TiC, was destroyed when impregnated with the alloy. Nanopowders, for which industrial production is not yet developed, are offered on the market at a very high price, and SHS nanopowders can be quite competitive as fillers in the manufacture of various types of composites. The possibility of obtaining ceramic and ceramic-metal composites in situ in one step is the main advantage of the SHS process. SHS process significantly increases the productivity and efficiency of manufacturing composites compare with an industrial techniques: solid-phase sintering of mixtures or liquid-phase reinforcing metallic matrix or matrix metal infiltration directly to the porous skeleton. Rapid achievement of very high temperatures (on the order of 3000°C) and rapid cooling of combustion product allows sintering of hard-to-sinter ceramic powders, prevents the dissociation of the synthesized phases, and allows you to retain and use metastable phases in the composite, which is also an advantage of the process of SHS because it enables you to obtain composites that are impossible to obtain by traditional methods. High gradients of temperatures and concentrations facilitate the impregnation of finely dispersed ceramic phase even with nonwetted liquid phase through the implementation of the thermocapillary effect. One-step obtaining of composites by the SHS method provides intimate contact and good adhesion between the composite phases, as these phases are not introduced from the outside with inevitably contaminated surfaces, but are formed directly in the body of the composite and have a fresh, clean surface. The SHS process can be carried out in the mode of layer-by-layer combustion or in the mode of volumetric thermal explosion at different heating methods, which also allows you to vary the composition and structure of the composite. With one-step synthesis of the composite, the SHS process can be applied for the synthesis of dispersed phase or matrix phase, or both phases simultaneously. Relevant examples are composites of TiC-Ni, SD-NiAl, TiC-Al Fundamental studies on the application of the SHS process for the one-step production of composites were carried out in ISMAN headed by Merzhanov and Borovinskaya, where the main in situ technologies of SHS composites were developed [ In Moscow SHS Center, Russia, SHS pressing has been used to obtain a significant number of ceramic and ceramic-metal composites from double, triple, and quadruple SHS systems, including the use of mechanically activated charge, for use as multicomponent targets for PVD-technologies of nanostructured coatings, as electrode materials for electric-spark alloying technology, as well as the diamond-bearing tool materials [ Other types of the force SHS consolidation for production of composites were developed in the US (SHS rolling and SHS impact die forging) and Japan (SHS with hot isostatic pressing). In Samara SHS Center, Russia, in China and India, considerable attention is paid to developing ceramic-aluminum composites, primarily TiC-Al and TiB