Laboratory studies have been conducted for dissolution of potassium from glauconitic sandstone in diluted hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulphuric acid at different temperatures. The dissolution of potassium was analysed with different kinetic models. The dissolution of potassium follows a mixed control model embodying chemical control model at the initial stages of dissolution and diffusion control model at the later stages of dissolution for all the three lixiviants. The activation energy for dissolution of potassium in hydrochloric acid varies from 79.03 to 99.41 kJ/mol, whereas in nitric acid and sulphuric acid, it varies from 56.93 to 95.18 and 37.43 to 56.24 kJ/mol, respectively.In India, there is not a single commercially exploitable conventional source of potash such as sylvite, carnalite, kainite, polyhalite, etc. In many other countries deficient in conventional deposit of potash, the use of non-traditional sources to fulfill their potash requirements (including its by products) has been reported,    The aim of this investigation is to study the mechanism of potassium dissolution from glauconitic sandstone with diluted hydrochloric, nitric and sulphuric acids. The activation energies are also calculated for dissolution mechanism. Glauconitic sandstone samples was collected from Majhgawan potash belt located in the Satna district of Madhya Pradesh. The colour of this sample is pale greenish yellow and the specific gravity is 2.63. The chemical analysis of this sample is shown in The glauconitic sandstone sample was crushed and ground to −152 μm and classified into four different size fractions and then chemical analysis of each size fraction was carried out. For the present tests, particle range of −152 to +125 μm was used. Deionized distilled water and reagent grade chemicals were used in all the experiments. The leaching tests were carried out in a Pyrex glass reactor partially immersed in a heated water bath and temperature was controlled within ±1 K. Stirring of the pulp was achieved by using Teflon impeller driven by a variable speed motor. The reactor was fitted with a thermometer, shaft stirrer and a reflux condenser. The leaching tests were conducted in a glass reactor at a constant temperature fixed anywhere in the range of 348–378 K (398 K for sulphuric acid). A total of 200 ml of acid of known concentration was taken in the reactor and the reactor was heated to the desired temperature. A known weight (5 g) of glauconitic sandstone sample of −152 to +125 μm particle size range was placed in a test tube and preheated in the water bath. The preheated sample was then charged into the reactor. The pulp was stirred for various leaching time. After completion of each experiment, the reactor was transferred to a water tub to cool down the pregnant slurry below 323 K. The leaching liquid was filtered and potassium analysis was carried out by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer. The experimental programme was devised to investigate the dissolution kinetics of potassium from glauconitic sandstone in diluted hydrochloric, nitric and sulphuric acids at different temperatures. The results were analysed with different kinetic models to determine the reaction mechanism. The activation energies of the reactions were calculated. To know the dissolution mechanism of potassium from glauconitic sandstone, the experiments were carried out at different temperatures (348–378 K) with 6.0 M hydrochloric acid concentration for different leaching times. The experiments were conducted at a fixed stirring speed (450 rpm) to get the maximum dissolution rate where the fluid boundary layer has reached minimum thickness. The other important parameters such as pulp density and particle size were kept constant. The results obtained have been plotted in A plot of 1−(1− Now, it is clear from Here, the values of After confirming the reaction mechanism of dissolution of potassium from glauconitic sandstone, now the values of The activation energy is calculated using the Arrhenius equation, which is represented as: To determine the activation energy at various stages of dissolution, the values of ln The kinetic data obtained in For this purpose, the values of −ln(1− The values of activation energy was also determined from the values of reaction rate constant ( To know the dissolution mechanism of potassium from glauconitic sandstone in nitric acid, the experiments were conducted at different temperatures ranging from 348 to 378 K with 6.0 M nitric acid. The results obtained are shown in The results were analysed by using the mixed control model given in To determine the value of activation energy at various stages of dissolution, the values of The plots of ln The data obtained in To determine the dissolution mechanism for potassium from glauconitic sandstone in diluted sulphuric acid, the leaching tests were conducted in the temperature range of 348–393 K with 6.0 M sulphuric acid. The results obtained have been plotted in After confirming the reaction mechanism of the potassium dissolution from glauconitic sandstone, the values of For this, the Arrhenius equation was used The results obtained in The dissolution rate of potassium is different for the three acids (HCl, H On the basis of present investigations following conclusions have been drawn. 1. The dissolution of potassium from glauconitic sandstone with diluted (6.0 M) hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulphuric acid follows a mixed kinetic model embodying chemical control during initial stages and diffusion control during the later stages. 2. The activation energies calculated for chemical control, diffusion control and mixed control model at the different stages of leaching with hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulphuric acid are 81.57, 79.03, 99.41; 62.77, 56.93, 95.18; and 41.31, 37.43, 56.24 kJ/mol, respectively.