Bicarbonate, ubiquitous in natural and waste waters is an important factor regulating the rate and efficiency of pollutant separation and transformation. For example, it can form complexes with U(VI) in the aqueous phase and at the solid-water interface. In this work, we investigated the effect of bicarbonate on the aging of nanoscale zero-valent (nZVI) in the context of U(VI) reduction and removal from wastewater. For fresh nZVI, over 99% aqueous uranium was separated in less than 10 min, of which 83% was reduced from U(VI) to U(IV). When nZVI was aged in water, its activity for U(VI) sequestration and reduction was significantly reduced. Batch experiments showed that for nZVI aged in the presence of 10 mM bicarbonate, only 20.3% uranium was reduced to U(IV) after 6 h reactions. Characterizations of the iron nanoparticles with spherical aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (Cs-STEM) suggest that in fresh nZVI, uranium was concentrated at the nanoparticle center; whereas in nZVI aged in bicarbonate, uranium was largely deposited on the outer surface of the nanoparticles. Furthermore, aged nZVI without bicarbonate contained more lepidocrocite (γ-FeOOH) while aged nZVI in the presence of bicarbonate had more magnetite/maghemite (Fe3O4/γ-Fe2O3). This could be attributed to the formation of carbonate green rust and pH buffer effect of 
                        
                     . Primary mechanisms for U(VI) removal with nZVI include reduction, sorption and/or precipitation. Results demonstrate that bicarbonate alter the aging products of nZVI, and reduces the separation efficiency and reduction capability for uranium removal.Nanoscale zerovalent iron (nZVI) has attracted increasing attentions as a cost-effective agent for removal of pollutants, particularly heavy metals from wastewater ( Bicarbonate is ubiquitous and often present relatively high concentration in both natural and wastewaters (e.g., ground water, uranium tailings wastewater), and frequently participate in multiple reactions with both dissolved (e.g., chelation) and solid substance (e.g., precipitation) ( Feasibility of U(VI) removal with nZVI has been reported previously ( Fresh nZVI was synthesized by reduction of ferric chloride (FeCl Batch experiments were conducted to investigate the reactivity of the iron nanoparticles (fresh nZVI, aged nZVI To determine the reductive capacity of iron (oxyhydr)oxides, a carbonate (0.1 M NaHCO The fresh and aged nZVIs before and after the reactions with U(VI) solution were harvested for X-ray analyses and microscopic characterizations. A spherical aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope (Cs-STEM, FEI Titan G Moreover, the solid/surface compositions of nZVIs were analyzed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Shimadzu PH1500C) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 Advance). The XPS spectra were recorded using a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD spectrometer employing a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source (hυ = 1486.6 eV). The acquired binding energies were calibrated using the C 1s peak at 284.9 eV. Shirley background corrections and a Gaussian-Lorentzian peak shape were used to fit iron and uranium spectra by XPSPEAK 41 software. And the relative abundance of each valent species of Fe and U were quantified from the respective peak areas (  XRD patterns of fresh nZVI reveal the crystalline structural evolution (  As nZVI was aged in DI solution (nZVI When nZVI was aged in bicarbonate solution (nZVI As shown in  In uranium solution, the high reducing capacity of fresh nZVI for uranium removal suggested that electrochemical corrosion of Fe(0) is the main driving force (  The Cs-STEM-XEDS elemental mappings, the overlay of U Lα mappings and HAADF images provided direct evidence on the spatial distribution of U, Fe and O, more importantly, illustrated distinctive patterns of uranium distributions in the different nanostructures. The U Lα mapping (  We further employed the XPS technique to identify the valence states of Fe and U on the surface of spent nanoparticles (  Previous studies about the effect of bicarbonate on nZVI for uranium removal only focused on the chelating reactions between bicarbonate and U(VI) ( In this work we investigated the effect of bicarbonate on nZVI aging, compared the efficiencies of uranium sorption and reduction by fresh nZVI, nZVI aged with and without bicarbonate (nZVI Financial supports from the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at