A novel technique was developed to extract lithium from lepidolite.
                  The lepidolite was pre-roasted at a high temperature with water steam atmosphere for defluorination. Then the defluorinated lepidolite was leached in a lime–milk autoclave. Various parameters including the defluorination percentage of lepidolite, milling time, temperature, time, lime-to-defluorinated lepidolite ratio, and liquid-to-solid ratio in the leaching process were optimized. The lithium extraction efficiency can reach 98.9% under the optimal conditions. The purity of the lithium carbonate obtained can be up to 99.9%.Lithium is the lightest known metal and has been widely utilized for many commercial lithium products due to its fascinating electrochemical reactivity as well as other unique properties. Lithium compounds and minerals have attracted much attention for their applications in ceramics, glass, aluminum, lubrication industries, and pharmaceuticals ( Most lithium products are currently produced from brine sources. Compared with brines, lithium extraction from spodumene, lepidolite, and other solid lithium minerals is not costly effective ( In order to overcome these drawbacks, an autoclave method for the production of lithium carbonate from lepidolite has been proposed as an alternative. But the temperature in the autoclave is normally more than 200 To solve these problems, a novel technique was developed to extract lithium from lepidolite in this paper. The lepidolite was pre-roasted at 860 The lepidolite in this study was provided by Jiangxi Province (China). The lepidolite was first crushed in a jaw crusher, then ground in a ball mill and screened to 100% < Lepidolite was heated in an electric tube furnace with water steam atmosphere for defluorination. The defluorination temperature is from 840 to 880 The defluorinated lepidolite (DL) was then ground by a vertical planetary ball mill at a rotation speed of 160 The lime–milk and DL was charged in the autoclave which was then sealed and heated at 5 Lithium was analyzed by atomic absorption (AAS, TAS-990, Beijing Purkinje General Instrument Co., Ltd) in all the experiments. Computerized X-ray diffraction equipment (XRD, Rint-2000, Rigaku Co., Ltd) was used to identify the components of the raw ore, DL, and the leached residue. The specific surface area of the ores was determined by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller nitrogen–helium absorption method (BET,V-Sorb 2800P, Gold APP Instruments Co., Ltd) while the particle size of the ore was determined using particle-size analyzer(Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments Co., Ltd). The fluorine contents in the samples were determined by fluorine ion selective electrode. In order to evaluate the experimental error, each experiment was replicated and the result was the mean value of three experiments. Defluorination percentage of lepidolite is shown in The XRD patterns of the defluorinated lepidolite at 860 The mechanism of defluorination was as follows: H To find the optimal condition for the lime–milk leaching of DL in autoclave, the effect of different variables on the lithium extraction efficiency was evaluated. The effect of milling time on the lithium extraction efficiency of DL was studied from 0 to 120 The effect of defluorination percentage of lepidolite on the lithium extraction efficiency was studied. The defluorination experiments were carried out at 860 The defluorination process will be performed at 860 In order to investigate the effect of leaching temperature on the lithium extraction, a series of leaching experiments were performed from 130 to 170 To study the effect of leaching time on the lithium extraction, experiments were conducted on conditions of lime-to-DL ratio 1, L/S 4, temperature 150 The effect of lime-to-DL mass ratio on lithium extraction efficiency was investigated from 0.8 to 1.2. Conditions of the autoclave leaching were as follows: leaching time 60 The liquid-to-solid ratio on the lithium extraction efficiency was investigated from 3 to 5. Experimental conditions of the autoclave leaching were as follows: lime-to-DL 1, leaching time 60 To study the effect of stirring speed on the lithium extraction efficiency, experiments were conducted on conditions of lime-to-DL ratio 1, L/S 4, leaching time 60  Na When 97.5% (mass fraction) of the solution was evaporated, 85% of lithium was crystallized as LiOH·H The water-washed lithium carbonate product contained more than 98% of Li  The crystallized LiOH was dissolved again with distilled water to obtain LiOH solution of 1.2  An improved method including defluorination followed by lime–milk leaching was employed to extract lithium from lepidolite. The results indicate that the defluorination percentage of lepidolite, milling time, lime-to-DL ratio, leaching temperature and time will affect the lithium extraction. The optimum operating parameters with a lithium extraction efficiency of 98.9% were established as follows: defluorination temperature 860