Ash management in fluidized bed combustion systems means keeping the particle size distribution of the bed inventory in a given range. A dynamic particle population balancing model was developed for this purpose. It was successfully applied to a refuse-derived fuel fired combustor and a coal-fired circulating fluidized bed combustor. Both were large-scale commercial units. The model uses the concept of the attrited ash particle size distribution which represents the particle size distribution of the attrited ash including the generated fines and replaces the consideration of the particle attrition in the model calculations. The model offers the possibility to gain additional information about the particle size distributions and the solids mass flows at any location of the fluidized bed system. In addition, the model provides information about the dynamic behavior of the plant and about mean residence times of particle size classes in the plant.
                  Uncertainties about the ash formation characteristics of fuels make the management of the bed inventory a very important issue. In this context the population balancing model is used to predict the plant behavior under various operating conditions. The results of the calculations carried out give useful information about the possibilities to manage the ash inventory of such a plant. It could be shown that the recirculation of a fine fraction of the bottom drain solids is a very effective method to manage the particle size distribution of the bed inventory. The calculation results further reveal that the mean residence time of particles is strongly dependent on their size.cross sectional area, m offset of fines in the separation efficiency function, see Eq. solids volume concentration, – solids volume concentration at the upper end of the dense bottom zone, – solids volume concentration at heights above the transport disengaging height (TDH), – particle diameter, m mean particle diameter, m correction factor, see Eq. solids circulation rate, kg/m height above gas distributor, m height of dense bottom zone, m elutriation rate, see Eq. mass flow of attrited ash, kg/s mass flow of coarse ash, kg/s total mass of solids circulating in the fluidized bed system, kg mass of solids in the dense bottom bed, kg mass flow of solids entering the gas cyclone(s), kg/s mass flow of fine ash, kg/s mass flow of fly ash, kg/s mass flow of sand, kg/s mass of solids inside the combustion chamber, kg/s mass flow of solids drawn off from the dense bottom zone of the riser, kg/s mass flow of externally recycled ash and/or additionally fed sand, kg/s mass of solids in the upper dilute zone, kg mass flow of the overflow of the cyclone(s), kg/s mass flow of solids entering the combustion chamber from the return-leg, kg mass of solids in the upper dilute zone, kg pressure at the exit of the combustion chamber Pa pressure, Pa cumulative mass fraction, – separation efficiency, – reduced separation efficiency, see Eq. turnover time of solids in the circulating fluidized bed system, s superficial gas velocity, m/s terminal velocity, m/s dynamic gas viscosity, Pa decay constant, see Eq. gas density, kg/m solid density, kg/m In the field of fluidized bed combustion with high thermal capacities, circulating fluidized beds have in most applications decisive economical advantages over bubbling fluidized beds. High gas flow rates allow higher fuel feed rates per unit bed area, good fuel mixing, burn out and heat transfer to internal and external heat exchangers, where installed. This enables circulating fluidized bed combustors (CFBC) to have higher capacities with better overall efficiencies. Since the 1980s, the capacity of circulating fluidized bed combustors experienced an enormous increase Compared to the fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) process, the CFBC technology has much different requirements on the properties of the bed material. The solids inventory of a circulating fluidized bed combustor is governed amongst others, by the ash formation characteristics of the fuel utilized. The particle size distribution of the bed inventory is governed by a multitude of influencing factors. Among others, the most important are the ash formation characteristics of the fuel, other solids fed into the combustion chamber, e.g. additional inert material, recycled ash or sorbent material and transport, classification and comminution processes occurring in the CFB combustion system. The fuel fed into the combustion chamber devolatilizes and undergoes primary fragmentation Since the processes discussed above cannot be influenced, the bed inventory has to be managed by means of feeding of inerts as additional bed material, crushing and recirculation of bed material withdrawn from the bottom zone, constructive changes to the plant design, e.g. by means of enhancing the separation efficiency of the gas cyclone. Comprehensive work on the design of cyclones operated under the conditions found in circulating fluidized bed combustors, which was mainly focused on the inlet design and the formation and flow of the strand formed there, has been carried out by Muschelknautz and his group at the University Stuttgart (e.g. The new design turned out to be extremely efficient: the 50% value of the cumulative mass distribution of the circulating particles went down from 180 As discussed in detail above, the particle inventory is governed by a complex combination of ash formation, classification and comminution processes during the combustion of the fuel and the mean residence time of the ash particles in the system, making the management and the prediction of the particles inventory in such a plant a complex task. In order to gain additional information about the PSDs and mass flows at various places inside the plant and to forecast the impact of actions to control the particle inventory, a simulation tool has been developed. This model, discussed in detail in The possibilities for sampling and measurements on an industrial scale circulating fluidized bed combustor are in general very limited, due to the limited accessibility and due to safety precautions. Other parameters, e.g. the circulating solids mass flow mentioned above, are extremely difficult to measure. The value of the simulation in this case is that it can be used to obtain additional information about the process which cannot be measured directly. For the operation of a circulating fluidized bed the particle size distribution is of major interest. It affects for example the vertical solids distribution and the pressure profile, the externally circulating solids mass flux, the heat transfer bed/wall and in an external heat exchanger (EHE), the loss of bed material through the cyclone overflow and the state of fluidization in the bottom bed. An exemplary sketch of a circulating fluidized bed combustion system consisting of combustion chamber, cyclone, external heat exchanger and radiation and convection boiler is shown in Depending on the particle size, solids fractions are elutriated from the dense bottom zone into the upper dilute zone of the combustion chamber and entrained into the gas cyclone, where they undergo a further classification. Very fine particles leave the system through the cyclone overflow. The separated solids are transported from the cyclone underflow via the return-leg, either directly into the combustion chamber or into the external heat exchanger and from there into the combustion chamber. To maintain the pressure drop at a constant level, solids are withdrawn from the dense bottom zone of the combustion chamber. The drained material is sieved into a coarse and fine fraction. Part of the fine fraction is recycled to the combustion chamber via a bed material silo. In addition to the fuel ash and the recycled ash, further solids (e.g. additional inert or sorbent materials) may be fed into the system which are subjected to the same processes as the ash. To model the complex interactions of comminution, transport and classification processed, a 1-dimensional population balance model was developed that calculates the effects which are decisive for the particle inventory of a circulating fluidized bed combustor. The model is discussed in detail in The model is divided into several sub-modules, which are calculated sequentially in a pipe-and-filter architecture The combustion chamber is separated into a dense bottom zone and an upper dilute zone. The dense bottom zone is modeled as a bubbling fluidized bed according to an approach of Werther and Wein The mass of a particle fraction The mass flow The simulation tool uses for the modeling of the solids separation in the gas cyclone the Muschelknautz model, summarized in The mass flow The mass of solids inside the cyclone is neglected, for the other parts of the system it is assumed that the solids holdup is constant, i.e. that the total outflow is equal to the total inflow at each time step. An exact population balance in the combustion system requires a consideration of the attrition effects occurring mainly in the bottom zone of the combustion chamber and in the cyclone. This has been done in the detailed model described in To be strict, the AAPSD is only valid for the type of fuel and the operating conditions the AAPSD was calculated for. However, although attrition effects cannot be neglected for particle population balancing models for CFBC processes, the change in the particle sizes due to attrition has only a slight effect to the total PSD in the main plant components. In addition, a change in the operation of a plant has only a limited effect on the residence time of particles in the fluidized bed system and on the extent of attrition the particles are subjected to. However, a comparison of the predictions for various operating conditions obtained with the AAPSD based population balance model with those from the PAPSD based model taking account of attrition effects gave a good agreement for the particle size distributions and solids mass flows The model presented in Section The first plant in the focus of this work is a 83 For the production of the refuse-derived fuel (RDF) utilized in the combustion plant for the co-generation of electrical power and steam for district heating, household waste of the city of Neumünster and surrounding communities is processed in a mechanical–biological pretreatment plant. The aim of the process is to select materials with a high heating value and to prepare the waste for the utilization in the combustion plant. The waste is crushed and sieved and a mineral fraction is removed by a density separation. Ferrous and non-ferrous metals are separated by magnetic and electro-magnetic separation. The organic fraction is subjected to a composting process. The produced refuse-derived fuel mass flow is roughly 103,000 In a simplified sketch of the Neumünster plant in The mass flow of sand, fine and coarse ash and of the fly ash was calculated from the loading of the trucks, delivering the sand or picking up the ashes for disposal. No samples of the ultra fine ash (uf) passing the multi-cyclone overflow could be taken, because this ash fraction is collected in the flue gas cleaning, together with a multitude of reactants, introduced into the flue gas stream for absorption purposes. However, the particle size distribution of the ultra fine ash was estimated from the separation efficiency of the multi-cyclone, based on an inflow particle size distribution with a RRSB distribution, having a mean diameter From The second plant is a coal-fired co-generation plant located in mid-west Germany in the town of Duisburg. It has a total thermal power of 252  The measured mass flows of the solids streams are summarized in A first calculation was carried out with operating conditions identical to the conditions currently found at the Neumünster plant, i.e. a fine ash recycle rate of 840 A measure of the quality of the fluid dynamic models is the accuracy of the mapping of the conditions found in the technical plant. The model-based determination of the solids circulation rate allows us an estimation of the mean turnover time From the 1343 The pressure drop over the height of the combustion chamber is known from the operating data of the plant. In A feature of a dynamic particle population simulation tool is that it yields the mean residence time of individual particle size classes in the system. Another advantage of the simulation is that it can be used to assess the impact of changes of the operating conditions on the bed inventory and its PSD. To study the plant behavior the operating conditions listed in Case R0, shown in The particle size distributions in the dense bottom zone of the combustion chamber calculated for the different operating setups are compared in Taking case R0s as a starting point and increasing the recycling mass flow of the fine fraction, one can observe that the PSD in the dense bottom zone becomes increasingly finer (R840As, R1260As and R3360As). It can further be seen that the usage of a sieve with finer mesh size (compare R840As and R840Bs) in the ash recycle loop has no significant influence on the PSD in the dense bottom zone of the combustion chamber. On a secondary abscissa the terminal velocity corresponding to the particle diameter on the primary abscissa is given. For the calculation of the terminal velocity a solids density of The changes to the particle size distribution in the dense bottom zone have far-ranging consequences for the fluid dynamics of the circulating fluidized bed combustor. First of all, a higher fraction of elutriable material leads to a higher rate of elutriation from the dense bottom zone to the upper dilute zone. As a result, the holdup of the solids shifts from the dense bottom zone to the upper dilute zone of the combustion chamber. The bed material drained from the combustion chamber and the fly ash were analyzed on their particle size distributions. The mass flows of the ashes were taken from the operating data. With balances in analogy to Eqs. The AAPSD is very similar to the PSD in the cyclone overflow with the exception of an additional 10% of coarser material. The particle size distribution of the sample taken from the top of the combustion chamber is (in the range of measuring accuracy) equal to the PSD in the external heat exchanger, whereas the PSD of the sample taken from the middle of the combustion chamber is roughly equal to the particle size distribution in the bottom zone of the combustion chamber. As in the Neumünster case the terminal velocities of the particle sizes are given on the secondary abscissa. The operating velocity of 6.2 The simulation was started with sand as initial bed material and the AAPSD as feed material. The calculated steady state particle size distributions are also depicted in The dynamic behavior of the Duisburg plant is much different from the Neumünster plant, as it can be seen in the development of the mean particle diameters in  A dynamic particle population balancing model was applied to a refuse-derived fuel fired circulating fluidized bed combustor operated by the Stadtwerke Neumünster GmbH in Neumünster in north Germany and to a coal-fired circulating fluidized bed combustor operated by Stadtwerke Duisburg AG in Duisburg in mid-west Germany. The Neumünster is equipped with one primary cyclone and one external heat exchanger, whereas the Duisburg plant has two primary cyclones, two secondary cyclones (which are not in operation anymore) and two external heat exchanger. In both plants ash is withdrawn from the bottom zone of the combustion chamber, but only in the Neumünster plant a fine ash fraction sieved from the bottom drain is recycled into the combustion chamber. In addition sand is fed into the combustion chamber of the Neumünster plant. In the Duisburg plant limestone, which is fed into the combustion chamber for The simulation tool used for the calculation of the particle population in the two plants uses the concept of the attrited ash particle size distribution (AAPSD). This particle size distribution represents the PSD of the attrited ash including the generated fines and replaces the consideration of the ash particle comminution in the circulating fluidized bed system in the model calculation. In general, many locations inside a combustion plant are difficult to access, safety precautions have to be taken and measurements at industrial scale plants are very difficult. The model offers the possibility to gain additional information about the particle size distributions and the solids mass flows at different locations inside such a plant. In addition, the model provides information about the dynamic behavior of the plant and about residence times of particle size classes in the plant. The operation of a circulating fluidized bed combustor (CFBC) is dependent on a proper particle size distribution of the bed inventory. Especially in the refuse-derived fuel fired plant the uncertainty about the ash formation characteristics of fuel makes the management of the bed inventory a very important issue. In this context the population balancing model is used to predict the plant behavior under various operating conditions. The results of the calculations carried out give useful information about the possibilities to manage the ash inventory of such a plant. By simulating a variety of operating conditions it could be shown that the recirculation of a fine fraction of the bottom drain solids is a very effective method to influence the PSD of the bed inventory. A high recirculation mass flow leads to a distinctly finer particle size distribution in the dense bottom zone of the combustion chamber, leading to a shift of bed material from the dense bottom zone to the upper dilute zone of the combustion chamber and to a higher entrainment of solids from the combustion chamber to the gas cyclone, boosting the solids circulation rate. The calculations reveal that the residence time of particles is strongly dependent on their particle size. Especially in the case of the coal-fired Duisburg plant very large differences between the different size classes appear. On the one hand particles with sizes smaller than 100 The help of the staff of both, the Neumünster plant and the Duisburg plant during the measurement campaigns and with supplying operating data is gratefully acknowledged. One of the authors (K. Redemann) would like to thank Stadtwerke Neumünster GmbH for financial support.