The separation achieved through flotation is dependent on the selective attachment of mineral particles to bubble surfaces. However, the majority of solids collected have been attributed to unattached particles. This is due to the release of attached particles from bubble surfaces due to bursting on the top of the froth and coalescence within the froth. The unattached particles move and disperse axially and radially through the interconnected network of liquid channels within the froth, known as Plateau borders. A model has been developed using previous work on the bulk drainage of liquid through froths in addition to a velocity profile equation describing the local variation in liquid velocity over the Plateau border cross-section. These descriptions of the liquid flow on two separate scales are combined with realistic froth structures to form a mathematical description of the liquid flow through the froth which has been used to simulate unattached particle motion. The results have been validated through the replication of liquid and particle froth drainage experiments. This validation confirmed the power law relationship between particle dispersion and apparent liquid drainage velocity. The model was then used to extend experimental results to show the effect of particle size and density on dispersion.The selective attachment of mineral particles to bubble surfaces within a flotation pulp is based on mineral hydrophobicity. However, liquid entrained from the pulp by the upward motion of the froth leads to the presence of unattached particles, both hydrophobic and hydrophilic in nature, within the froth. Additional unattached, hydrophobic, material is introduced to the froth during coalescence events within the froth and bubble bursting on the top surface of the froth. It has been shown that the majority of material (approximately 80–90%) collected in flotation to the concentrate can be attributed to unattached particles ( Unattached particles are found within the interconnected network of liquid channels, known as Plateau borders, located between the bubbles of a froth. The recovery of unattached particles from the froth is strongly linked to that of the liquid, as demonstrated by Froth-based flotation models such as The axial dispersion of unattached particles through the froth has two components; a combination of gravity and the liquid velocity profile in individual Plateau borders, and the different path lengths that particles travel to reach the same point in the froth. This work combines descriptions of the liquid flow through a froth on both the bulk and the Plateau border scales in order to predict completely the dispersion of unattached particles. These simulations are used to calculate axial dispersion coefficients for use in the existing flotation models, so that particle properties are taken into account. A froth is a structured 3-phase system in which discreet gas bubbles are surrounded by a continuous liquid phase that contains the solids. The structural elements are the lamellae, Plateau borders and vertices. Bubbles in the froth are separated by thin liquid layers, known as lamellae. The lamellae form only a very small proportion of the total liquid volume in the froth. Most of the liquid in a froth is in the Plateau borders. These are significantly larger liquid channels, formed where three lamellae come together, always at 120°. Four Plateau borders met in a vertex, always at the tetrahedral angle, and so form an interconnected network throughout the froth. The liquid in the froth flows through the network of Plateau borders and vertices. By assuming that the liquid fraction of the froth is low and that the surface tension is constant, the froth can be approximated as a minimum surface area structure with surfaces separating bubble volumes. Because dispersion is determined by flow and geometric effects in the Plateau borders, their dimensions and orientation throughout the froth is required. This can be obtained using simulated foam structures. A periodic, random, 3-dimensional Voronoi tessellation is topologically similar to foam and is used as a starting geometric structure for foam simulations ( The A bulk foam drainage equation was first presented by A force balance applied to the simulated foam structure yields an equation that defines the volumetric flowrate in any individual Plateau border, The local flowrate and dimension of individual Plateau borders was found by segmenting the foam structure and iteratively balancing the flows around each segment by adjusting the Plateau border area. The solution is constrained by keeping the Plateau borders areas into and out of a vertex the same, i.e. assuming negligible pressure losses across vertices.  The foam structure and flow calculations described above give the average local liquid velocity and dimensions of the Plateau borders. In this section the velocity profile across the Plateau border will be included. The velocity profile across the Plateau border is a result of a lack of mobility of the liquid–gas interface. If the interface is assumed to be immobile, liquid at the interface will move at the same speed as the bubbles, while liquid in the centre of the Plateau border will move downwards relative to the bubbles. While surfactants contribute to making the interface immobile, in flotation froths this immobility is largely a result of particles attached to the interface. Particles are subjected to a wide range of liquid velocities in the Plateau border due to the velocity profile and their relative size, causing dispersion in the direction of overall flow. This has previously been termed The shape of the Plateau border cross-section can be visualised as the area in between three touching cylinders, so that the radius of curvature of the interface and the maximum linear dimension of the Plateau border are the same. This unusual shape complicates the estimation of the velocity profile. The liquid velocity at all points in the froth can now be estimated by combining the 3-dimensional foam structure simulation, the bulk flow velocities in and dimensions of the Plateau borders, and the velocity profile. This allows the effect of the liquid motion on the motion of particles of different sizes to be predicted. The net velocity of the unattached particle along a Plateau border is a result of two components. The first component is due to the balance between the gravitational and drag forces acting on the particle, the second is due to the liquid motion. We will assume that the particles are spherical, with a circular area projection. The first velocity component is a result of the balance of gravity and drag, and is calculated as the axial component of the particle terminal settling velocity, calculated according to Stoke's Law. It is assumed that the force resultant from this balance acts equally over the particle's circular projection. The local angle of each Plateau border segment is known from the structural simulations. The second component of the particle velocity is due to the liquid velocity and is calculated as the area integral of the liquid velocity distribution across the particle area projection. This will vary with position in the Plateau border; particles closer to the centre will experience higher liquid velocities that those closer to the walls. Further, the particle diameter limits the positions that it can occupy in the Plateau border, and also therefore the range of velocities that it experiences. Smaller particles can occupy positions close to the Plateau border corners, where the liquid velocity is practically zero, while larger particles are excluded from these regions. Similarly, a very small particle in the centre of the Plateau border will experience the maximum liquid velocity, while a larger particle will experience a lower average liquid velocity.  A statistical approach is used to predict the dispersion coefficients. The behaviour of a large number of particles is predicted and the results combined for the population. Particles are randomly allocated initial positions over the cross-section of a single Plateau border to simulate the release of a pulse of unattached particles into the froth, as if by coalescence in the froth or from a surface bursting event. The velocity of each particle is calculated as detailed above, and the motion tracked over sequential time steps. Vertices are assumed to be fully mixed; particles entering a vertex leave in proportion to the liquid flow out of the vertex into each Plateau border and are randomly distributed across the Plateau border into which they move. The simulation results are three-dimensional, time-dependent coordinates describing the position of each particle in the froth. An example is shown graphically in The simulations allow the effect of particle and foam properties to be investigated, and can then be interpreted to calculate both the axial and radial froth dispersion coefficients. The axial dispersion coefficient is estimated from time-dependent particle concentrations in narrow, horizontal bands across the simulated froth. This corresponds to one-dimensional diffusion of a plane source. The Plateau border dispersion coefficient is estimated by fitting the simulation results to the diffusion equation (  Dispersion coefficients estimated from simulations that replicate all the Greater radial mixing reduces the dispersion coefficient. The relatively minor under-prediction of the axial dispersion coefficient is therefore most likely as a result of the assumption of complete mixing in the vertices. A significantly more detailed and complex vertex model that describes the movement of particles into different flow lines is required to eliminate this minor deviation. The simulated prediction of the dispersion behaviour of particles is considered accurate enough for use in determining the relative effects of particle size and density. Simulations are useful, as the effect of these particle properties on axial dispersion is experimentally difficult, and has not been reported. Further, the experiments possible are constrained by the interaction between the liquid flowrate through the foam and the liquid content, while simulations allow all conditions to be investigated.  At very small particle sizes, the dispersion coefficient is equal to that of the liquid. For neutrally buoyant particles, as the particle size increases, the dispersion coefficient decreases, as the range of liquid velocities experienced decreases (cf.  It is of interest to note that the geometric component of the axial dispersion coefficient is significant. This can be estimated by comparing the coefficient values for the smallest and largest neutrally buoyant particles, since, for the largest particles, there is no variation in velocity. In The vast majority of particles entering a flotation concentrate are not attached to bubbles. These particles were either entrained into the froth from the pulp or, due to coalescence and bursting, were released from the lamellae into the Plateau borders. The motion of these particles is therefore of great importance, so that it can be manipulated to optimise the separation achieved. Dispersion is a key element that determines the particle motion. An axial dispersion coefficient is used to quantify the motion of unattached particles. Previously, a single estimated coefficient has been used for all particle sizes and liquid velocities. This study has aimed at improving that estimate by developing a complete froth model that includes the geometric layout of the channel network, the Plateau border dimensions and orientations, and the velocity profile. The approach was validated by comparison with experimentally measured results and found to very accurately predict reality. The simulated foam was subsequently used to predict the dispersion of particles of different sizes and densities. The axial dispersion coefficient was found to change significantly as a result of particle size and density. This has important implications for mineral flotation, where minerals frequently are density differentiated. Further, the importance of narrow sizing can be assessed. The coefficient also depended strongly on the liquid velocity. The geometric contribution to the axial dispersion coefficient is significant and independent of the bubble size. The authors would like to thank Professor Andy Kraynik for assisting with the froth structures used in this work.