In this paper, the narrow size and spherical shape of boron carbide nanoparticles are synthesized by milling, purification and then the classification of nanoparticles by sedimentation method. In addition, the fractal behavior of particles is studied during synthesizing systematically and a fractal equation is proposed for prediction of nanopowders size distribution plots. Milling of particles is conducted in a stirred attrition mill for different times, and hydrochloric acid is used for solvent purification and then sedimentation process is conducted. The size of particles is measured by laser particle size (LPS) analyzer. For studying particles morphology, scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM, TEM) are used. The crystal size of nanoparticles is calculated by X-ray diffraction (XRD). LPS results reveal that after 110 h milling time, nanoparticles with an average diameter of 90 nm are produced. SEM images show that the final nanoparticles have equiaxed shape with iron impurity less than 1.7 wt. % after acid washing. XRD results demonstrate that the crystalline size of boron carbide (B4C) particles after 110 h of milling reduces from 220 to 57 nm. The fractal analysis shows that particles size distribution curves of finer particles can be predicted by proposed fractal modeling better in contrast to larger particles.Nanoparticles indicate useful properties in electrical, optical and chemical characteristics because of the high surface area. Ceramic nanoparticles, which mostly consist of oxides, nitrides or carbides, have attracted much attention. Carbide ceramics such as B There are different applications for B Several methods for synthesizing of B High energy ball milling is a capable method for producing a wide range of advanced materials such as nanocomposite and nanostructured materials [ To the best of our knowledge, there is very limited research on milling and production of B On the other hand, the comminuting mechanism of nanoparticles during milling is not well understood yet and very limited equation and modeling were used to predict the girding behavior of nanoparticles. Fractal modeling is a very useful method for studying of grinding of a particle in the micrometric range [ The optimization, characterization, and modeling of stirred media milling for the preparation of nanoparticles with specific properties of B The commercial boron carbide powder used for the milling process originally had an average particle size of 0.7 μm. Williamson-Hall method [  As shown in Abrasion that is caused by shear stress and particles with a size close to that of the initial particles are produced. Cleavage that occurs when intense compression stresses are slowly applied to a particle so fragments sizes are smaller than that of initial particles. Fracture is another mechanism that is the result of rapidly impact stress and fragments distribution are between 20 and 70 vol % of the initial particle size. Propagation of defects such as cracks results in a fracture. Propagation cracks depend on the size of the flaw, its position in the particle and its orientation with respect to the loading axis, but the average particle diameter (D) is influenced by fracture toughness (K (i) By increasing the milling time, the finer particles are produced which are sustainable for agglomeration which reduces the breakage rate. Moreover, the ethanol is evaporated during wet milling and its performance is reduced significantly so this type of agglomeration could be related to local drilling and dry milling at the end of each milling step. (ii) The viscosity of the slurry during milling increased with increasing particle volume, which prevents further breakage of particles. (iii) By increasing the particle number in milling media, the efficiency of the mill decreased, because the particles obtained lower energy or stress (σ The factors that affect crushing powders are powder shape, the resistance of particle to breakage such as their hardness and toughness, adhesion characterization of the particle which results in agglomerating, the viscosity of the slurry, the roughness of milling media and ability of the powders to be trapped among the milling balls [   After 110 h milling in the wet media mill, the slurry was dispersed in an ethanol solvent and ultrasonic vibration was used for homogeneous dispersion of nanoparticles. The sedimentation in a large tube, which was controlled by the time of the process, was used in the final step. To collect the small size nanoparticles, slurry settled down for 5 h. The large particles sediment gradually, while smaller particles were still floating in the solution. The ethanol was removed slowly and the smallest floating nanoparticles in the top section of the product were collected. The aforementioned process was repeated on the remaining part of the particles. Sedimentation is based on Stokes' law, according to which the settling velocity of particles in a viscous medium under the gravity force depends on particle size and the viscosity of the medium. Stokes' law, however, is only valid for particles of solely spherical shape, while the metal powders used in industry consist of particles of the most varied shapes [ In which V (m/s) is the velocity, d (m) is particle size, g is gravity (m/s A closer look at single particles by TEM is shown in     For studying of particles breakage mechanisms during milling, fractal equation (Eq.  The power– law version of Eq. By substituting these parameters in Eq. With Eq. Here, we studied the milling, purification, and sedimentation of B Nano-sized B Moreover, the scanning electron microscopy images revealed that the original powders are platelike whereas the milled particles for 110 h have equiaxed morphology. The smallest nanoparticle size (50 nm) could be achieved using a by comminution and sedimentation process. Furthermore, the purified nanoparticles with low Fe impurity were purified by acid washing. The crystal size calculated from XRD results showed that the average crystallite size of B Financial support from Iranian Nanotechnology initiative (