Oncogenic osteomalacia, which is characterized by renal phosphate wasting, low serum 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D, and osteomalacia, is caused by mesenchymal neoplasms that are termed phosphaturic mesenchymal tumors (PMTs). As PMTs are usually small and lack specific histological features, the pathological identification of PMTs is difficult. Dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) is an acidic phosphoprotein expressed in mineralized tissues including bone, tooth, and hypertrophic cartilage. Increased expression of DMP1 gene in PMTs has been reported by using differential cDNA screening. In the present study, DMP1 expression in PMTs and other soft tissue tumors was analyzed immunohistochemically to verify its utility in the differential diagnosis of PMTs. Anti-DMP1 polyclonal antibody was raised against the C-terminal sequence of DMP1. Three cases with PMTs and 11 other soft tissue tumors (two malignant hemangiopericytomas, three solitary fibrous tumors, three synovial sarcomas, and three malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors) were analyzed for DMP1 expression. DMP1 expression was observed in all of the three cases with PMTs, but never found in other soft tissue tumors examined. DMP1 was detected in the extracellular matrix with myxomatous features or around capillary vessels, and in dystrophic calcified sites. Paranuclear DMP1 staining in the tumor cells was also observed. These findings indicate that DMP1 immunohistochemistry is a useful tool for identifying PMTs.Oncogenic osteomalacia is a hypophosphatemic disease, which is characterized by renal phosphate wasting, low serum 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D, and osteomalacia, and is caused by neoplasms. Dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) is an acidic phosphoprotein originally identified from a rat incisor cDNA library. Recently, increased expression of Three patients with oncogenic osteomalacia were included in the present study. One patient was a 54-year-old woman who was admitted to Osaka University Hospital complaining of bone pain and muscle weakness. She showed typical features of hypophosphatemic osteomalacia and had a small intradermal tumor in her left hip. The clinical courses of the other two patients have been described elsewhere. Peptide C sequence encoding DMP1 residues (DAYHNKPIGDQDDND) shared the C-termini of human, bovine, rat, and mouse DMP1s ( To characterize the anti-DMP1 (peptide C) antibody, recombinant rat DMP1 Human and rat normal bone samples were used as positive controls. Bone samples were demineralized in buffered 10% EDTA for 7 days at 4°C with agitation after formalin fixation. After the processing, the bone samples were rinsed and paraffin-embedded. Immunoperoxidase procedures (ABC method) with anti-DMP1 (peptide C) and other antibodies were performed on the paraffin-embedded sections. Procedures of antigen retrieval, dilution, and supplier for each primary antibody are listed in Anti-DMP1 (peptide C) sera showed specific reaction to DMP1 peptide C by dot blot assay (data not shown). However, affinity purification of the antibody on peptide C columns was performed prior to its use as an immunoblot reagent. The antibody reacted to 130 kDa recombinant rat DMP1–glutathion-S-transferase (GST) fusion protein and 100 kDa recombinant rat DMP1 protein, in which GST protein had been removed by the digestion with PreScisson Protease (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA), whereas preimmune sera showed no reaction ( Histologically, all three PMTs contained primitive-appearing stromal cells, variably prominent vessels ( The immunohistochemical profiles of PMTs and other soft tissue tumors are listed in From the analysis of gene expression profiles, the modulation of several genes in PMT has been reported, such as DMP1 expression is restricted to bone, tooth, and hypertrophic cartilage in non-neoplastic tissues, and is supposed to relate to the mineralization process. Specificity of the anti-DMP1 (peptide C) polyclonal antibody used in the present study was demonstrated by the immunoblotting and immunohistochemical analyses. First, the immunoblotting showed a single band at the expected size. Second, the present immunohistochemistry showed the pericellular DMP1 immunoreactivities of osteocytes, which is compatible with our previous observation using the antibody against the N-terminus of rat DMP1. Strong DMP1 expression was observed in PMTs of all three cases, whereas other 11 soft tissue tumors never showed DMP1 expression. All of the PMTs showed positive staining for both CD34 and factor XIIIa, whereas two malignant hemangiopericytomas and three solitary fibrous tumors were positive for CD34 and/or factor XIIIa, showing that PMTs could not be differentiated from other soft tissue tumors using these antibodies. Although PMTs were composed of heterogeneous tissues, which contained primitive-appearing stromal cells, variably prominent vessels, cartilaginous or myxomatous areas, dystrophic calcification, and microcystic changes, DMP1 was constantly detected in PMTs, indicating that DMP1 is a valuable pathological marker for PMTs. The amount of tissues from resected PMTs is typically limited in these small tumors, and therefore the diagnostic presence of ossification and bony matrix may not always be identified. In such cases, positive immunoreactivity for DMP1 in the small surgical specimens would also help in making a decision for the subsequent treatment strategy such as the confirmation of the safety margin. Furthermore, the extracellular deposition of DMP1 in PMTs will indicate the former presence of the tumors even after the tumor cells are partially denatured or have disappeared. DMP1 accumulation in PMT was observed in the extracellular matrix as granular deposits, as well as in the tumor cells as paranuclear deposits. Under ultrastructural observation, the tumor cells of PMT were separated by an intercellular matrix containing numerous matrix granules showing early dystrophic calcification. Besides the diagnostic utility of DMP1 for PMTs, its essential role in oncogenic osteomalacia is still unknown. Among the proteins over-expressed in PMT, FGF-23 has been discussed in association with the clinical symptoms of oncogenic osteomalacia. FGF-23 induced hypophosphatemia with increased renal phosphate clearance. In conclusion, DMP1 expression determined by immunohistochemistry could be used for the differential diagnosis of PMTs from other soft tissue tumors. This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid 13671898 and 15591930 from the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture of Japan, and the 21st Century COE Program.