The application of thermophilic bacteria to the production of hydrogen (H2) from a cellulosic biomass has captured attention of engineering researchers. Thermotoga neapolitana is considered as a potential hydrogen producer because of its ability to be used for the direct H2 fermentation from raw cellulose, but its H2 yield is not high. In this study, three chemical pretreatment methods with an ionic liquid, acid and alkali, respectively, were tested on cellulose to enhance the cellulose conversion of this strain into H2. Batch cultivations were carried out to investigate the influence of the chemical pretreatment methods on H2 production under non-sterile conditions. The highest H2 concentration in the headspace obtained from the ionic liquid-pretreated cellulose was 36.1% (v/v) with ethanol as an anti-solvent. This was clearly higher than that from the acid- and alkali-pretreated celluloses (22–24%). Cultivation with cellulose pretreated with the ionic liquid at a concentration of 10% combining with N2 sparging showed the maximum cumulative H2 yield of 1280mLH2/L culture. This value is approximately 10-fold higher than that of raw cellulose (122mLH2/L culture). The H2 yield obtained from fermentation with ionic liquid-pretreated cellulose was 2.2molH2/mol glucose equivalents. The results showed that the pretreatment of cellulose using an ionic liquid has considerable potential for improving the direct conversion of cellulosic substrates into H2 by bacteria.Hydrogen (H Pretreatment is an important tool for practical cellulosic bioconversion processes, because it has great potential for improving the efficiency and lowering of cost. Many pretreatment methods have been studied for improving the rate of enzymatic hydrolysis and increasing yields of fermentable sugars from cellulose. They can be physical, chemical or a combination of these two processes. Physical methods include comminution, steam explosion and hydrothermolysis  In this study, we enhanced the H  Microcrystalline cellulose (20–100 The amount of H The glucose produced in the liquid medium was enzymatically measured using a Glucose E-Kit (BMI Company, Korea). The amounts of cellulose and total soluble carbohydrates were determined by the anthrone method at 630 The protein concentration was used as a parameter to estimate the bacterial growth and was measured by the Bradford method with bovine serum albumin as a standard The dissolution and swelling of cellulose are two important phenomena occurring in cellulose pretreatment. Their common features from the physicochemical point of view are that the intermolecular forces between the macromolecules are overcome by stronger interactions leading to the loosening or eliminating the cellulose supramolecular structure. The processes of both swelling and dissolution serve the purpose of enhancing the accessibility of the hydroxyl groups for subsequent reactions. The swelling, not the dissolution, is the important phenomenon in the pretreatment of cellulose with NaOH. This process easily occurs in various regions of the cellulose and affects the crystalline regions by breaking down the intermolecular bonds between the polymer chains Various concentrations of NaOH were used to treat cellulose at 80 Acids can hydrolyse cellulose by the cleavage of glycosidic bonds between the two anhydroglucose units in the cellulose polymer chains. This cleavage of the β-l,4-glycosidic bond is catalyzed by the H Cellulose pretreated by an ionic liquid was tested in the enzymatic hydrolysis of pure cellulases from With various cellulose-dissolving ratios in IL which is called cellulose dissolubility in IL and calculated by the mass of cellulose divided by the mass of ionic liquid, amorphous cellulose shows different changes in molecular structure after precipitation from the IL solution by the addition of water, an anti-solvent In our previous research on H In cellulose hydrolysis, cellulases first absorb on the cellulose surface, partially stripping the individual polymer chains from the crystalline structure and then cleaving the glycoside bonds In our data, H The conversion of cellulose into H The H Utilization of cellulosic material in H An important contribution of our study is the suggestion of a new method for pretreatment process of cellulosic biomass. Because IL can efficiently dissolve cellulose, a direct and quick cellulose separation from cellulosic biomass to use as feedstock for biological processes might be developed. Pretreatment of cellulosic biomass using IL shows more preeminent features than ordinary chemical pretreatment methods using acids or bases. It is a simple, quick and “green” process with fewer pretreating steps and shorter pretreating time. Compared with acid- and base-pretreatment methods, IL pretreatment does not contain the system corrosion, byproduct inhibition from sugar degradation and environmental toxication. The pretreated cellulose from IL pretreatment is easily obtained for using in biological conversion without neutralization. Another important advantage of this pretreatment process is that IL can be recovered for subsequent utilizations. At this time, the commercial price of ILs is not so cheap because ILs are very new chemicals. However, with many such practical properties above, the price of ILs will not be a barrier for application in practical cellulose conversion processes in the near future. As illustrated in the manuscript, the proposed cellulose pretreatment process possesses many technical outstanding characteristics. Thus, the pretreatment method is strongly believed to be very cost-effective and environmental benign. In our attempts to improve the cellulose utilization for H This Research was supported by the Hydrogen Energy R&D Center, one of the 21st Century Frontier R&D Programs, funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Korea.