We examined the role of mineral spatial distribution and flow velocity in determining magnesite dissolution rates at different spatial scales. One scale is the column scale of a few to tens of centimeters where dissolution rates are measured. Another is the “local” in situ scale defined as approximately 0.1mm. The experiments used two columns with the same bulk concentration but different spatial distributions of magnesite. In the “Mixed” column, magnesite was evenly distributed spatially within a quartz sand matrix across the whole column, while in the “One-zone” column, magnesite was distributed in one zone in the middle of the column. The two columns were flushed with the same inlet acidic solution (pH 4.0) under flow velocities varying from 0.18 to 36m/d. Columns of different lengths (22, 10, and 5cm) were run to understand the role of length scales. Reactive transport modeling was used to infer local-scale and column-scale dissolution rates.
                  Under the acidic-solution flushing conditions used in this study, local in situ dissolution rates vary by orders of magnitude over a length scale of a few to tens of centimeters. Column-scale rates under different conditions vary between 6.40×10−12 and 1.02×10−9
                     mol/m2/s. The distribution of local-scale rates, which collectively determine the column-scale rates, depend on flow velocity, column length scale, and mineral distribution. A two orders of magnitude difference in flow velocity results in more than two orders of magnitude difference in the column-scale rates. Under the same conditions of flow velocity and mineral distribution, column-scale rates are higher in short columns and are lower in long columns. Mineral spatial distribution made a maximum difference of 14% in the medium-flow velocity regime where the reaction kinetics of the system operates under mixed-control conditions. Under such mixed-control conditions, the larger difference between the two columns in their spatial variation of pH and saturation state lead to a larger difference in the spatial distribution of local dissolution rates and therefore column-scale rates. In contrast, under slow-flow velocity conditions, the system is mostly at equilibrium without much spatial variation, i.e., the regime of local equilibrium. Under fast-flow velocity conditions, the system is kinetically controlled, the local aqueous geochemistry is everywhere similar to the inlet condition, and is also relatively uniform. Under these two conditions, there is almost no difference between the two columns. Column-scale rates were best understood in terms of the Damkohler number (DaI) that quantifies the relative dominance of advection and dissolution processes. The observations in this study lead us to surmise that rates of weathering and other natural processes may be similarly affected by chemical heterogeneity in natural systems under conditions where reaction rate and flow rate are comparable.Mineral dissolution and precipitation reactions influence many chemical and physical phenomena in earth and environmental sciences ( A variety of factors have been proposed to explain the discrepancies between laboratory and field rates. These include the differences in the surface area of fresh and weathered minerals ( Recent studies have also attributed laboratory-field rate discrepancies to the variation in conditions under which weathering occurs ( Physical heterogeneities have long been known to affect flow and transport processes ( The effect of flow and transport on mineral reaction rates has been discussed in the context of transport- versus surface-controlled reaction kinetics ( The goal of this work is to understand and to quantify the role of mineral spatial distribution and flow velocity in determining the magnesite dissolution rate measured at different spatial scales. One scale we consider is the column scale, i.e., the spatial scale of a few to tens of centimeters where dissolution rates are measured. Another scale is the spatial scale of approximately 0.1 Magnesite is chosen because it is a carbonate mineral and has been extensively studied in well-mixed batch reactors ( We modeled the reactions using a Transition State Theory (TST) based rate law: Here In this work, effluent magnesium concentrations from column experiments were used to determine overall integrated dissolution rates at the column scale. Reactive transport modeling was used to match column experimental effluent data and to infer local “in situ” rates in each grid block. The magnesite was a natural sample in a private collection obtained from Mongolia. X-ray diffraction analysis of the sample indicated that magnesite is the only detectable crystalline phase. Consistent with this, bulk analysis using inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) revealed 28.3 Two columns with different spatial distributions of magnesite were used in this study, as shown in Experiments were run with 2.5-cm diameter glass chromatography columns (Omnifit) of varying length (22, 10, and 5 The experiments were operated at room temperature (∼22 In the column experiments, in addition to the magnesite dissolution as the kinetically controlled reaction, other aqueous speciation reactions also occur. These aqueous speciation reactions occur instantaneously in comparison to mineral dissolution. The species involved include Mg The governing mass conservation equations for the reactive transport system were written for the total concentrations of primary species. As an example, the reactive transport equation for the total concentration of primary species Mg(II) is the following: The mass conservation equations were solved using CrunchFlow, a reactive transport code widely used for many different applications in (bio)geochemical processes in subsurface ( The effluent aqueous concentration data were used as constraints in the model to determine the kinetic rate constants for magnesite dissolution by trial and error ( In After matching the data, the model-calculated concentrations of all the pertinent species at different times and locations were used to calculate the local-scale dissolution rates as described in the next section. The local in situ dissolution rates The steady-state column-scale reaction rate Here The effect of mineral spatial distribution on column-scale rates is quantified using the relative ratio Here To illustrate the effect of magnesite spatial distribution on transport and dissolution, Based on the fit to the effluent Mg concentration, In the One-zone column, because all magnesite grains are clustered together, magnesite dissolution rates are non-zero only in the middle 10–11  To understand the difference, In the high flow velocity of 36 To illustrate the differences between the dissolution rates under all flow velocity conditions,  The ratio of the column-scale rates between the two columns ( To understand the effects of column length on rates at different spatial scales, The column-scale rates for the 5  To understand the controlling parameters that affect the column-scale dissolution rates, we define the dimensionless Damkohler number This number compares the relative significance of reaction and advection at the column scale. The characteristic time scale for advection is the residence time of fluid in the column, defined as The logarithms of the column-scale rates under all conditions as a function of Here For the experimental conditions overall, the column-scale dissolution rates vary from about 6.40 In this work, we found that column-scale rates measured under different conditions vary between 6.40 The importance of flow velocity and length scale (or fluid residence time) has been discussed before by many others with respect to natural geochemical rates ( Column-scale rate data were best understood in terms of the Damkohler number that quantifies the relative dominance of advection and dissolution processes. This dimensionless number should be useful in understanding why field rates tend to be slower than laboratory rates ( Although the effects of mineral distribution explored in this study are relatively small (maximum of 14%), this does not mean heterogeneity is in general unimportant in natural systems. Here we focus on the layered distribution with the main flow direction perpendicular to the layers, which does not allow for fluid flow to bypass the layers. As such, this case represents scenarios similar to chemical weathering conditions where water flows down into porous horizontally-layered media to form soils. In effect this work represents the scenario that would lead to the lowest impacts of chemical heterogeneity. However, many soils (and other dissolving porous rock systems) also have heterogeneities that are aligned along flow lines. For example, the flow can be parallel to the layered mineral structure and some layers can have lower permeability than others by orders of magnitude ( By quantifying the dissolution rates in well-controlled column experiments under a series of flow velocity, length scale, and mineral spatial distribution conditions, this paper helps explain the observations of laboratory-field rate discrepancies because natural systems experience various flow and mineral distribution conditions at different length scales. In field studies, weathering rates are typically inferred from profiles of mineral concentrations or effluent concentrations at different depth or position along flow paths ( This work is supported by start-up funds for Li Li through the Penn State Institutes of Energy and the Environment (PSIEE), the Penn State Laboratory for Isotopes and Minerals in the Environment, and the Penn State Earth and Environmental Systems Institute. S.L.B. cites support from DOE Office of Basic Energy Sciences DE FG02 05ER15675. We acknowledge two anonymous reviewers for their careful and insightful comments that have significantly improved the paper.