“Minerals Bioprocessing IV Conference”, the fourth in the series of conferences on minerals bioprocessing organised under the aegis of the Engineering Foundation, USA, was held at Stockholm from August 15 to 20, 1999. The preceding conferences were held in 1991 (Santa Barbara, CA), 1994 (Snowbird, UT) and 1996 (Big Sky, MT) and brought together personnel from academia, industry and research institutions actively engaged in investigating bacterial processes across a range of disciplines. The growing importance of biotechnology in geochemical processes cannot be overemphasized. Adopting a bioprocessing route to mineral beneficiation, metal extraction and waste management has attractive benefits such as lower cost and energy requirements, environmental acceptability and operational flexibility. Bioprocessing has emerged in recent years as a frontier and interdisciplinary area with tremendous potential as a futuristic technology, which is environmentally benign. In the latest edition of the bioprocessing conference series, over 40 delegates from 12 countries participated and the deliberations covered aspects of biobeneficiation, bioleaching, bioremediation, and biosurface modification in addition to application of electrochemical and spectroscopic techniques in bioprocessing. As in the earlier conferences, there was a good blend of participants representing industry, teaching and research establishments. The conference programme was developed together with Prof. K.A. Natarajan and Prof. P. Somasundaran, and the editors are indebted to them. The editors also express their sincere gratitude to The Swedish Foundation for International Cooperation in Research and Higher Education (STINT), Knutsbergsstiftelsen, Boliden Mineral, Luossavaara–Kiirunavaara (LKAB) and Riddarhyttan Resources for the generous financial and hospitality support extended in organising this conference. Several people have contributed to the successful conduct of the conference and we wish to thank them all as well as the session chairmen. We are grateful to the anonymous referees for their timely help in reviewing all the manuscripts. Elsevier Science Publishers are thanked for bringing out the conference proceedings as a special issue of the International Journal of Mineral Processing.