Undetected faults in heavy earth moving machinery (HEMM) are associated with unwanted failures. Dragline is an HEMM used in coal mining for removal of overburden and dumping it into de-coaled area. Failure of dragline contributed to total downtime of 4955 h in 28-month (2014–16) period and 50% of these downtimes were contributed by its drag system alone. The symptoms those exceeded threshold limit in the drag system during this period was 438, which led to 185 faults and subsequently 16 failures. Therefore, an attempt has been made for real-time fault diagnosis of drag system to analyse the faults by establishing causal relationships between cause, symptom and fault using Bayesian Network (BN). The new set of observed evidences (e.g., symptoms) obtained through built-in sensors or visual inspection during working of dragline can be updated in the BN model. Thereafter fault inference is used to identify the fault, and categorise the degraded and catastrophic faults. Simultaneously the change in probability values of the causes are recorded for the given symptoms. The conflict between the set of observed evidences was detected, and the correctness of the model was validated through conflict analysis. Appropriate condition-based predictive maintenance action can be undertaken by the maintenance engineer for eliminating these faults.The occurrence of faults in heavy earth moving machinery (HEMM) is usually detected through suitable sensors, visual inspection, or expert’s opinion. Unmanaged faults can lead to failure. Moreover, unplanned maintenance strategy increases the possibility of failure and downtime losses, which reduces the reliability and availability of the HEMMs Before the system failure, it undergoes through three basic stages (e.g., cause, symptom, and fault) that reduces the performance of the system For fault diagnosis, it is preferred to use classification methods such as support vector machine In literature, data-driven BN approaches use either a two-layer configuration or a multi-layer configuration depending on the fault diagnosis. The two-layer BN model is used for the fault detection and diagnosis of variable air volume terminals using causal relationship between symptom and fault Dragline is a capital intensive equipment, and the hourly downtime of the considered dragline can lead to loss of USD 3279 Therefore, in this paper, a three-layer BN model is proposed for fault diagnosis of the drag system using historical cause, symptom, and fault data collected through logbook, sensor and visual inspection. The fault diagnosis of the drag system is performed through observed set of evidence of dragline. The conditional probability table (CPT) of the BN is then updated based on observed evidence, and fault inferences are drawn. The results of fault inference of the BN will be helpful to categorise the faults, their fault types and identifying probable root causes so that predictive maintenance can be undertaken. Finally, the BN model is validated using conflict analysis. Draglines are deployed in surface coal mines for stripping overburden. The 24/96 walking dragline having bucket capacity 24 m Dragline consists of electrical, mechanical, and hydraulic components and sub-components. Inside the machine house, four basic motion systems are used such as drag, hoist, swing, and propel system. All motions are powered by direct current motors fed from adjustable armature voltage generators. Each motor is associated with a generator known as a motor-generator (M−G) set. The generators power the drag and walk motors; the required motion being selected by the operator. An annunciate panel in the operator's cab offers visual and audible warning for the occurrence of unwanted conditions. Moreover, limit switches are provided on the drag and hoist drums to prevent over-winding of the ropes and damage to the boom head. There is a provision for at least two full turns of rope on each drum before the rope is subjected to any load The drag system of the dragline is mounted on the rotating frame inside the house of the dragline. The drum of the drag system is powered by two electric motors having force ventilated direct current motors 1300 HP, 475 V, 700 rpm which drives a balanced double-helical gear through flexible couplings that moves the bucket horizontally forward and backward connected through the drag ropes. The coupling is an internally flexible device that joins the drive motors to the relevant gearboxes. A pinion at the end of the helical gear shaft meshes with the gear attached to the drum. The drag motors spin at high speed and this helps in reducing the speed of drum through the gearbox. The drag drum closest to the front of the machine house is used to hold the drag ropes when reeling in and paying out while the rope known as hoist rope going out the top of the house which connects to the hoist drum. The parking brakes on each motor of the drag system prevent and control the movement of the drag function. The overview of the basic outer look structure of the drag system and the lower and upper threshold limit values of certain parameters are depicted in The sequence of occurrence of the failure in the drag system is interlinked to its cause, symptom, and fault as presented in For instance, bearing and bolt failure in the drag system occurs mainly due to improper control or insufficient lubrication, as well as heavy radial and axial stresses due to shaft deflection, inadequate mounting, alignment, or foundation. Such stresses may lead to vibrations and thereby increased wear and tear For the development of three-layer BN model, the cause, symptom and fault data was collected through logbook, sensor and visual inspection of the drag system. The collected data was converted into categorical data. The categorical data are then fed into the Netica software and the causal relationships between the nodes are established. The prior probability of each node in the BN model is calculated. During dragline operation when the evidence of one or more symptoms is observed to cross the threshold limit, it can be fed to the BN model formulated based on historical data and the CPT will be updated. The evidence of symptoms can be identified either through the sensor feedback or visual inspection by the operator. Based on the prior probability and likelihood of observed evidence, the posterior probability of fault is defined. In order to understand the process of fault occurrence, let the prior probability of fault be When a specific fault having When a specific fault having 0 < ( When a specific fault having When the set of (e.g.,evidences (e.g. symptoms) are observed, update the BN model to identify the most probable causes. The description of the BN model and the preventive maintenance action plan is shown in The BN is used for building large, multi-layer complex relationships between various nodes of the complex system In the construction of the BN model, when the number of variable increase the Bayesian reasoning process exponentially increased. In order to solve the complexity of calculation of joint probability distribution, there are three independence assumptions are considered The joint probability distribution for a given BN model can be calculated as given in Eq. where With the help of joint probability distribution, the occurrence of the fault i.e., F Further calculating the joint probability of occurrence of fault In the case study of the drag system of dragline, 16-node BN is considered having cause, symptom, and fault nodes, X= ( Model validation gives the significant aspect to the real-time fault diagnosis methodology because it provides reasonable confidence to diagnostic results The general conflict measure is given in Eq. The negative value of the conflict ( In the case study, the historical cause, symptom, fault and failure data of a dragline was collected from a surface coal mine located in Northern India. Data have been collected from 9th May 2014 to 22nd September 2016 for a dragline starting from its commissioning till 7267:30 EHMR when any one symptom or more symptoms cross the threshold limit. For some parameters, the threshold limit values are already defined and inbuilt in the sensor based on material, insulation type, safety parameters used during the manufacturing of machine (e.g., current feedback, voltage feedback, temperature feedback, lubrication level) and their threshold limit values are shown in The fault inference is a process of drawing conclusions based on the available set of evidence and its direction of reasoning. The fault inference model is constructed on the CPT based on the prior knowledge (prior probability) with the subsequent update when the new evidence is observed The estimation of CPT in the BN, as depicted in The real-time diagnosis of the fault to prepare the preventive maintenance policy for the specific fault, faults are categorised into two types: degraded fault and catastrophic fault. The degraded fault occurs slowly due to gradual deterioration of the component of the system and preventive maintenance can be performed with minimal downtime Generally, the larger the difference between the posterior probability of the fault when the evidence is observed ( When EHMR was 46:00 h (see When EHMR was 326:45 h (see When EHMR was 938:15 h (see Similarly, maintenance action is taken when the symptom(s) exceeds the threshold limit for each possible occurrence of the fault. It is concluded that when the posterior probability of the fault is decreased or unchanged e.g., The causal relationship between various nodes of BN has been analysed in this section. In fault inference whenever a set of evidence is observed, the occurrence probability of the faults is calculated and the most probable fault is then identified. For example, the occurrence probability of fault can be estimated, whenever the symptom vibration and unwanted sound exceed the threshold limit (VUS = 1) and all other symptoms are within the threshold limit value (Case 1, refer Similarly, when two symptoms simultaneously cross the threshold limit are analysed. In Case 2, there were two symptoms, such as current feedback (CF) and temperature feedback (TF) that crossed the threshold limit and remaining four symptoms were within the threshold limit (Case 2, see In Case 3, there are two symptoms, vibration and unwanted sound (VUS) and temperature feedback (TF) that crossed the threshold limit which can be obtained through senor feedback and rest four symptoms are within their threshold limits (Case 3, refer In Case 4, there are three symptoms, current feedback (CF), and temperature feedback (TF), and sparking (Sp) that crossed the threshold limit observed through sensor feedback and visual inspection and other three symptoms were within their threshold limits (Case 4, refer Therefore this study can be used as a guiding tool to the maintenance staff to identify the most responsible cause(s) after one or two steps, thus reducing the downtime of the dragline. This paper has discussed the fault diagnosis of the dragline system to improve its productivity. Fault diagnosis can reduce the frequency of failure and downtimes and improve the reliability and availability of the capital-intensive HEMMs. The fault diagnosis of the drag system through the BN model is expected to be a guiding tool for better maintenance management of the sophisticated draglines. The fault inference obtained through the observed symptoms in the drag system has been explained to provide more information about the fault and to identify the types of faults so that recurrence of failure in dragline can be prevented. Moreover, the identified most probable root causes, those are responsible for the occurrence of symptoms, will facilitate appropriate CBM action. Therefore, real-time fault diagnosis of the drag system through the set of observed evidences can predict the fault, fault types and is expected to assist the maintenance engineer to eliminate the fault through the CBM. The presence of conflict between the set of observed evidences is detected using conflict analysis. Conflict analysis also helped in validating the BN model. Further, the application of this methodology can be extended to the remaining three motion systems such as hoist, swing, and propel systems of dragline for increasing its availability and productivity. In this paper, the historical data of drag system was collected for cause, symptom and fault as hard evidences, i.e. precise state whether the symptom was within the threshold limit value or beyond the threshold limit value for a certain node was known with certainty at a given moment and were then analysed by the BN. For future analysis of the drag system, the soft evidence such as the statistical distributions of the nodes can be incorporated in the BN model for deeper understanding of faults, which in turn help in preparing a suitable maintenance strategy for minimising failure and downtimes of the dragline. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thankfully acknowledge the cooperation of the mine management during data collection. The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous reviewers whose constructive comments were very helpful for strengthening the presentation of this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: