Background
                  Femoral head fractures with subchondral impaction and cartilage loss are difficult to treat successfully. Although multiple surgical management options have been described, no one technique has proven superior, particularly in the young high-demand population.
               
                  Technique
                  A femoral head reduction osteoplasty was performed following a surgical dislocation of the hip. A peripherally based wedge of bone was resected off the damaged central third of the head followed by reduction and fixation of the remaining fragments. This technique resulted in a smaller yet congruent femoral head.
               
                  Methods
                  A healthy 40-year old labourer sustained a traumatic crush injury while at work, resulting in a left femoral head fracture dislocation with an associated posterior wall acetabular fracture. Significant femoral head impaction and cartilage loss limited the treatment options.
               
                  Results
                  Intraoperative reduction and postoperative imaging demonstrated near anatomic reconstruction of femoral head with a congruent hip joint. Superiorly at the level of resection, the medial–lateral diameter was reduced by 5–6mm (approximately 12–15% the diameter of the original head) by the osteoplasty. At five years, Harris Hip Score was 86, Oxford Hip Score 36, and UCLA score 89. Hip abductor strength was full, range of motion near normal, and the patient ambulated without antalgia. Radiographs demonstrate a congruent joint and patchy avascular necrosis without collapse. The patient maintained full employment as a labourer.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Femoral head reduction osteoplasty is a viable option that may produce durable intermediate-term results for complex femoral head fracture with superior impaction and chondral damage.
                  Level of Evidence: Level V.Fractures of the femoral head are uncommon injuries and are among the most challenging traumatic injuries to treat successfully. This is due to a number of factors including the complicated anatomy of the hip joint and the high-energy nature of the injury, making anatomic reconstruction difficult if not impossible. Furthermore, a number of surgical options are available – primary or delayed excision, ORIF, prosthetic replacement, partial resurfacing, and hip arthrodesis – without any one demonstrating proven superiority The decision to excise fracture fragments or perform open reduction and internal fixation remains controversial. In particular, the best course of action is unclear when anatomic reconstruction is not possible given the amount of comminution and cartilage injury, yet fragment excision of large weight bearing portions of the femoral head would lead to poor results. Although prosthetic replacement is an increasingly popular alternative in this context, it remains a poor choice for the young, high-demand population. Therefore, novel strategies are warranted to best tailor the patient's treatment plan and improve outcomes. This article describes one such alternative: femoral head reduction osteoplasty for a complex fracture, illustrating the case of a patient who had a durable outcome at 5 years. The fracture dislocation was reduced in the emergency department under conscious sedation(Figs. 1 and 2). An evaluation under anaesthesia demonstrated instability. Therefore, surgical management was chosen. A posterior approach with a trochanteric flip osteotomy as described by Ganz was performed Upon completion of this exposure, the head was easily dislocated ( After releasing its attachment to the ligamentum teres, the medial fragment was reduced to the intact lateral head and held with reduction forceps. An inferior flap of periosteum and capsule remained attached to the medial fragment ( Reduction of the main two fragments allowed the head to be used as a template to piece together the remaining chondral fragments within the damaged central area ( An oscillating saw was used to resect the impacted cartilage-free area (approximately 15–20%) in the superior aspect of the femoral head. Care was made to minimise the amount of bone removed ( Following the lateral head osteoplasty, minimal reshaping of the medial fragment was likewise performed utilising the saw and a rasp. The two head fragments were then reduced. This yielded a slightly ovoid reconstructed head with a near anatomic reduction along the osteotomised surfaces ( Next, 3.5 A retrospective chart review of one patient who presented to our institution was performed via the electronic health record (Epic Systems Corporation, Wisconsin, USA). The patient was a healthy 40-year-old male stonemason who was raising the gable of a house when the work crew lost hold of the structure, which fell onto the patient. Upon extrication, he complained of severe pain with a deformity of his left hip and an inability to bear any weight. On presentation, the patient was found to have an isolated orthopaedic injury to his left hip. Anterior-posterior (AP) pelvis and left hip films ( A closed reduction under sedation in the trauma bay obtained a concentric reduction of the hip and a repeat CT scan confirmed a well-aligned head. However, the medial fragment constituted approximately 25–35% of the head diameter, the intact lateral segment demonstrated severe marginal impaction, and multiple osteochondral fragments were identified in the hip joint. The following morning, he underwent open reduction internal fixation with a femoral head reduction osteoplasty as described above. There were no perioperative complications. The hospital course was uneventful and he was discharged to a rehabilitation center on postoperative day three. He remained non-weight bearing, maintained posterior hip precautions and utilised a hip abduction brace. Postoperative imaging demonstrated near anatomic reconstruction of the femoral head with a congruent hip joint ( The post-operative course was complicated by a pulmonary embolism. At six months, he reported mild pain in the trochanteric area, but occasionally in the groin with a catching sensation. He had returned to stone mason work. Range of motion was symmetrical without crepitus, clicking, or signs of instability. At five years, he reported symptoms of intermittent instability. He continued in fulltime stonemason work with regular heavy lifting. His hip range of motion was 135° flexion, 15° internal rotation (contralateral 25°), 45° external rotation (symmetric), and extension of 25°. His abductor strength was 5/5 and he walked without a limp. His Harris Hip Score was 86, Oxford Hip Score 36, and UCLA score 89. An AP pelvis ( Femoral head fractures often occur in conjunction with a dislocation of the hip In a large meta-analysis of 453 femoral head fractures, Giannoudis et al found that overall results, regardless of fracture type or treatment, were good to excellent in 54.1% of cases (39.8% and 14.3%, respectively) With respect to surgical approaches, the Smith-Peterson has traditionally been preferred In the present case, an anatomic reconstruction with standard techniques was not possible. Certainly, disimpaction and grafting of the depressed portion of the head was a consideration and has been recommended Alternatively, some have reported success with local resurfacing utilising the HemiCAP System (Arthrosurface, Franklin, MA, USA) A femoral head reduction osteoplasty should be considered in certain cases. Fragment excision New insights into the understanding and treatment of intra-articular hip pathology have led to novel, safer surgical techniques about the hip. Specifically, our understanding of the vascular supply of the femoral head has provided the technical and biologic opportunity for intra-articular procedures utilising the surgical dislocation technique While our adult patient also had resection of a portion of the central third of his femoral head, to our knowledge, this is the first description in the literature of a femoral head osteoplasty in the context of fracture. Unlike the osteotomies described above or past papers, which recommended simple fragment excision (leaving a noncongruent head), in our patient the fractured femoral head was reshaped by resecting bone from its intact side and a smaller but congruent head created, making this a unique procedure. A femoral head reduction osteoplasty can be a viable option for certain cases of femoral head fracture. Surgical hip dislocation respects the femoral head blood supply and allows for intracapsular techniques. While the amount of tolerable resection before joint incongruity becomes clinically relevant is unknown, at nearly five years our patient had minimal complaints and continued to perform heavy labour. Each author certifies that he has no commercial associations (e.g., consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, patent/licensing arrangements, etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article.