The present study investigates the dissolution kinetics of tetrahedrite in aqueous alkaline sodium sulphide solutions. Effect of reaction temperature, mineral particle size, sodium sulphide and sodium hydroxide concentrations on antimony and arsenic dissolution rate from tetrahedrite were studied. It was found that the rate of reaction increases with increase in reaction temperature, sodium sulphide concentration, and sodium hydroxide concentration and with decrease in mineral particle size. The kinetic study indicates that the rate of tetrahedrite leaching in the lixiviant under selected conditions is chemically controlled through the particle surface reaction. The estimated activation energies were found to be 81kJ/mol and 75kJ/mol, respectively, for antimony and arsenic dissolution from tetrahedrite, which are in agreement with the values of activation energies reported for the chemically controlled reaction process.Tetrahedrite (Cu It has been documented that in acidic oxidative leaching of tetrahedrite mineral, e.g. in acidified ferric chloride solutions, copper and iron enter into solution, while antimony is partially precipitated as a compound with the composition similar to the mineral tripuhyite (FeSbO The heterogeneous fluid–solid reaction systems have a number of applications in chemical and hydrometallurgical processes. Many studies have been conducted on these types of reactions and a lot of mathematical models have been proposed and developed ( Besides, during the leaching process, dissolution rate decreases with time and it is directly dependent on the activation energy. Recently, Similarly, In addition, alkaline sulphide leaching of copper–antimony–arsenic sulphide minerals has been extensively studied and documented in the literatures ( The tetrahedrite used in this investigation was prepared from the tetrahedrite crystals bought from Gregory, Bottley & Lloyd Company, United Kingdom, which originated from Casapalca, Huarochiri, Departamento Lima, Peru, containing mainly sharp tetrahedrite crystals accompanied by an excellent brilliance and striation growth of sphalerite and partially covered by quarts. The tetrahedrite mineral was crushed, ground and sieved into the following size fractions: − X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was used to characterise the tetrahedrite mineral using a Siemens D5000 automatic diffractometer equipped with a continuous scanning device. CuKα radiation of 40 The leaching experiments were conducted in batch-wise mode in a four-necked round bottomed glass reactor which was stirred mechanically with a paddle stirrer at 600 The effect of reaction temperature on the rate of antimony and arsenic dissolution from tetrahedrite at different reaction times are plotted in If the rate of the reaction is controlled by diffusion through the product layer, the integrated rate equation is described as follows: When surface chemical reaction is rate controlling, the kinetics may be correlated graphically using Eq. Application of Eq. A process may be regarded either as diffusion rate controlled through the porous layer when the activation energy of the process is from 4 to 12 The effect of particle size on the leaching of antimony and arsenic from tetrahedrite mineral was studied using three particle sizes (− Antimony and arsenic form complex compounds with sulphide ions, therefore, the influence of sodium sulphide concentration on tetrahedrite leaching is an important parameter to investigate. When tetrahedrite is leached in alkaline sulphide solution, a variety of reaction products may result. This includes chalcocite (Cu Leaching tests were conducted to investigate the effect of varying the initial concentration of sodium sulphide in the range of 100–250 Therefore, the apparent reaction order for dissolving antimony and arsenic from tetrahedrite by the lixiviant was estimated to be approximately equal to 2, which implies that both elements reacted similarly with the lixiviant as should be expected since they were present in the same mineral.  The dissolution kinetics of tetrahedrite in aqueous alkaline sulphide solution was investigated. It was found that the rate of reaction increases with increase in reaction temperature, sodium sulphide concentration, and sodium hydroxide concentration and with decrease in mineral particle size. The kinetic study indicates that the rate of tetrahedrite leaching in the lixiviant under selected conditions is chemically controlled through the particle surface reaction. The activation energies were found to be 81 The authors would like to thankfully acknowledge the financial support from