A paucity of published studies and clinical recommendations are available regarding ankle fracture and its association with vascular injury, likely because of the lower incidence relative to the more commonly seen popliteal artery injury after knee dislocation. In the present case report, we describe a previously healthy patient who experienced a pilon type ankle fracture (AO 43C2) with fibular and syndesmotic involvement, followed by a subacute presentation of vascular ischemia weeks after the initial injury and repair, ultimately leading to a major amputation. The failure to identify an occult, vascular injury can have devastating consequences. Guidelines regarding the identification and management of displaced ankle fracture-associated vascular injury, drawing evidence from other traumatic injury complexes, could improve the clinical outcomes. We aim to raise awareness of the association of vascular embarrassment secondary to ankle fracture by proposing a clinical practice algorithm to aid clinicians in recognizing traumatic vascular injury at the earliest and most treatable stage.With respect to knee dislocation and subluxation, the rate of amputation has been as great as 86% when the diagnosis and treatment of vascular injury has been delayed 6 to 8 hours A 39-year-old house painter sustained an open pilon fracture after falling from a 10-ft ladder with the foot trapped between the rungs. All of the patient's care occurred at another institution, and our involvement was based on consultation and a review of the clinical course. The initial radiographs ( On postoperative day 15, the patient underwent routine evaluation in the outpatient setting, and mild edema, palpable DPA and PTA pulses, a normal capillary refill, and no cyanosis or mottling or discoloration of the digits was noted. The motor and sensory functions were intact. On postoperative day 19, the patient experienced increased pain and had developed cyanosis of the left hallux ( Arterial duplex ultrasonography confirmed occlusion of the bypass graft secondary to recurrent thrombosis of the recipient outflow DPA. Thereafter, supportive therapy continued until the forefoot ischemia had stabilized and demonstrated anatomic demarcation, after which a transmetatarsal amputation was performed. The transmetatarsal amputation stump subsequently dehisced. After local wound care with adjunct hyperbaric oxygen and negative pressure wound therapies, the wound had failed to heal and ultimately required a below-the-knee amputation. The natural history of vascular injury associated with joint dislocation has been well-documented with regard to knee dislocation and popliteal artery thrombosis but is less well understood for ankle fractures The early identification and prompt treatment of the musculoskeletal injury and the vascular insult will improve the chance of successful revascularization and reduce associated major amputation. However, identifying vascular compromise in the presence of ligamentous and bony injury and the ensuing soft tissue edema will not always be easy. Awareness of the potential for vascular injury and the prudent use of the available, highly sensitive, vascular imaging modalities requisite for the early identification and successful management of these injuries. In the present case, a 39-year-old male had experienced a pilon fracture of his left ankle that had resulted in latent vascular compromise manifesting weeks after the initial injury. Subsequent vascular reconstructive efforts failed, and transtibial amputation was ultimately required. We suggest clinical guidelines for a vascular surveillance protocol to use after ankle fracture (