A novel process was conducted with experiments which separated and recovered metal values such as Co, Mn, Ni and Li from the cathode active materials of the lithium-ion secondary batteries. A leaching efficiency of more than 99% of Co, Mn, Ni and Li could be achieved with a 4 M hydrochloric acid solution, 80 °C leaching temperature, 1 hour leaching time and 0.02 gml−1 solid-to-liquid ratio. For the recovery process of the mixture, firstly the Mn in the leaching liquor was selectively reacted and nearly completed with a KMnO4 reagent, the Mn was recovered as MnO2 and manganese hydroxide. Secondly, the Ni in the leaching liquor was selectively extracted and nearly completed with dimethylglyoxime. Thirdly, the aqueous solution in addition to the 1 M sodium hydroxide solution to reach pH=11 allowed the selective precipitation of the cobalt hydroxide. The remaining Li in the aqueous solution was readily recovered as Li2CO3 precipitated by the addition of a saturated Na2CO3 solution. The purity of the recovery powder of lithium, manganese, cobalt and nickel was 96.97, 98.23, 96.94 and 97.43 wt.%, respectively.Lithium primary batteries have been available on the market for about 25 years, while lithium-ion secondary batteries or storage batteries have less than 10 years of commercial development ( Up until now, most of the research works in the chemical process cannot fulfill the complete separation of each metal value from the cathode materials. Thus, it is important to develop a simple and environmentally acceptable recycling process to recover as much of the valuable metals as possible. Experiments of leaching Co, Mn, Ni and Li contained in the cathode material of the batteries have been conducted on dissolving in acid solution, neutralization, precipitation, oxidation reduction and filtering, and various separation procedures using different oxidizing reagents, etc. The amount of oxidizing reagent, temperature, etc. was also investigated in the recovery material process of the mixture. During the recovery process, a cathode active material of LiCoO The experimental procedure consisted of a leaching process for each cathode active material and a recovery material process for the mixture. An experiment was conducted to determine the optimum leaching efficiency of each cathode active material as indicated in The experimental procedure of the leached and recovery process for the mixture was indicated in To obtain the optimum conditions for the leaching of cathode active materials of LiCoO   A leaching process using a mixture of LiCoO The recovery material process includes sedimentation reaction, precipitate of manganese, nickel, cobalt and lithium. The recovery material, i.e., valuable metal is selectively precipitated in its stable hydroxide form as a function of the pH value, according to its value as a solubility product. Sodium hydroxide solution (1 M) is added to the 4 M HCl leach liquor until the pH reaches a certain value. The manganese in the leach liquor processes a redox reaction selectively and is nearly complete with a potassium permanganate reagent in the following: The effect on the precipitation of manganese is investigated for a given set of experimental variables, such as pH value, molar ratio of Mn It is noted that potassium permanganate reagent should be input drop by drop to hydrochloric acid leach liquor after changing the pH value by adding 1 M NaOH. The separation of Ni from the leach liquor after the recovery of Mn is performed by employing a dimethylglyoxime reagent (C Cobalt, which is recovered after the separation of nickel as leach liquor ([Co(NH After the recovery of Co, the leach liquor is treated with a saturated solution of sodium carbonate to precipitate Li as lithium carbonate. Since the solubility of lithium carbonate in an aqueous solution is inversely proportional to its temperature, e.g., A purity analysis of the recovery materials is conducted by using an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer, after dissolving weighted powder (about 1 g) in a concentrated hydrochloric acid solution at 90 °C for 30 min and diluting it to an appropriate concentration with distilled water at room temperature. The purity of the recovery metal values of lithium, manganese, cobalt and nickel in this experiment is indicated in  Based on the experiment of the leaching process, the optimum leaching conditions are chosen to be 4 M hydrochloric acid concentration, 80 °C leaching temperature, 1 hour leaching time and 0.02 gml Based on the recovery material process, it is possible to recover the metal values of the cathode active material from the lithium-ion secondary batteries as follows: the optimum operating conditions of Mn precipitation are determined as the molar ratio of Mn the optimum operating conditions for the separation of Ni are determined as the pH value to be 9 and the molar ratio of dimethylglyoxime to [Ni(NH cobalt which is recovered after the separation of Ni as leach liquor ([Co(NH the recovery of lithium as Li The experimental results show that the purity of the recovery powder of lithium, manganese, cobalt and nickel is 96.97, 98.23, 96.94 and 97.43 wt.%, respectively.