ZnS has high theoretical capacity (962.3 mAh·g−1) and low discharge platform. However, it has poor electrical conductivity and cycling performance for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). In this study, a natural mineral of ZnS doped with iron called marmatite was discovered. Results indicated that this natural marmatite has a structure similar to that of the ZnS of the Td2-F4-3m space group and also has low discharge platform (<1 V). Compared with pristine, the natural marmatite has superior electrochemical stability (After 1000 cycles at a current density of 2000 mA g−1, a capacity of 651 mAh·g−1 with a reversible capacity retention rate of 94% remained.) and higher capacity (1009 mAh·g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1). These results indicated that the natural marmatite exhibits high capacity and excellent cycle performance, demonstrating unique potential for next-generation LIBs.With the development of plug-in electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid EVs (PHEVs), the capacity requirement for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) is increasing [ Iron is a metallic element that has low resistivity and many free electrons. The number of free electrons of the material increases when it is incorporated into the crystal lattice of the anode material. It is often utilized as a doping component for improving the electronic conductivity and electrochemical performance of the anode materials of LIBs. Currently, iron-doped anode materials, such as iron-doped LiCoPO Iron-doped ZnS, called marmatite, is widely found in nature. Its structure is similar to that of pure ZnS, and it belongs to the equiaxed crystal system with the Td2-F4-3m space group. It has a semi-metallic luster that appears transparent to nearly opaque. Marmatite darkens with an increase in the iron ion content in the crystal lattice, turning black or dark brown when the content reaches approximately 20%. Marmatite is distributed worldwide and is mainly used as a raw material for refining zinc metal. In this study, the application of natural marmatite as a potential anode material for LIBs was investigated. Natural marmatite was found to exhibit an impressive electrochemical performance for LIBs. Natural pure sphalerite (ZnS) and marmatite ore were obtained from Huangshaping Limited Corporation, China. Highly purified ZnS and marmatite (Fe-doped ZnS) powders were obtained by crushing, grinding, centrifugation, and drying. A high-shearing homogenizer was used to decrease powder size to ultrafine. In the first step, natural pure minerals were broken three times, and the sphalerite and gangue minerals were separated according to color difference to obtain massive high-purity ZnS. Subsequently, a large amount of high-purity minerals and distilled water were mixed to form a 67% concentration slurry into the ceramic tank for ball milling. After 5 h of ball milling, distilled water was again added to dilute the slurry to a concentration of approximately 5%. The diluted slurry was transferred to a homogenizer for a further reduction in particle size, and after 6 h, it was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm to obtain approximately 200 nm of minerals. Finally, the sample was dried to obtain a high-purity powder as active material for LIBs. An electrochemical test was conducted by assembling a coin-type 2016 half-cell. For preparing the electrodes, the active material, carboxymethyl cellulose, and super P were mixed at a weight ratio of 8:1:1 with deionized water as solvent. The mixture was stirred for 12 h, uniformly painted on the surface of copper foil, and dried at 70 °C for 12 h in a vacuum oven to obtain the electrodes. The mass loading of the active materials was about 0.8–1.1  mg cm The structures of the prepared natural ZnS and Fe-doped ZnS powders were measured with an X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD, Bruker D8 diffractometer with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation and wavelength of 1.5406 Å). Raman tests were performed to study the microstructure of the materials (Renishaw inVia, UK) using (He–Ne laser) X-rays at a range of 50–800 cm  The XPS results of Fe-doped ZnS in The SEM and TEM images of Fe-doped ZnS and ZnS are shown in  The CV curves of ZnS are shown in The electrochemical performances of natural Fe-doped ZnS and ZnS are shown in  For a further investigation of the cycle stability of the Fe-doped ZnS and ZnS electrodes, the CV curves when the batteries fiinshed the 1st, 200th, and 1000th cycles at a current density of 2000 mA g CV was measured between 0.01 and 3.0 V at various scan rates from 0.1 mV s In this study, natural, pure, nanosheet sphalerite (ZnS), and marmatite (Fe-doped ZnS) were obtained via mineral purification and first used as anode material for LIBs. According to electrochemical measurement, both showed a low discharge platform (<1 V). However, Fe-doped ZnS demonstrated superior electrochemical stability, higher capacity, and preferable initial Coulombic efficiency compared with the ZnS electrode. This finding can be mainly attributed to iron doping. The Fe-doped ZnS electrode displayed a high initial discharge capacity (1009 mAh·g There are no conflicts to declare. This work was financially supported by