The capability of Extended tanh–coth, sine–cosine and Exp-Function methods as alternative approaches to obtain the analytic solution of different types of applied differential equations in engineering mathematics has been revealed. In this study, the generalized nonlinear Schrödinger (GNLS) equation is solved by three different methods. To obtain the single-soliton solutions for the equation, the Extended tanh–coth and sine–cosine methods are used. Furthermore, for this nonlinear evolution equation the Exp-Function method is applied to derive various travelling wave solution. Results show that while the first two procedures easily provide a concise solution, the Exp-Function method provides a powerful mathematical means for solving nonlinear evolution equations in mathematical physics.The nonlinear partial differential equations (NPDEs) are widely used to describe many important phenomena and dynamic processes in physics, chemistry, biology, fluid dynamics, plasma, optical fibers and other areas of engineering. Many efforts have been made to study NPDEs. One of the most exciting advances of nonlinear science and theoretical physics has been a development of methods that look for exact solutions for nonlinear evolution equations. The availability of symbolic computations such as Therefore, exact solution methods of nonlinear evolution equations have become more and more important resulting in methods like Variation Iteration Method In this paper, we propose Extended tanh–coth, sine–cosine and Exp-Function methods to obtain an exact single-soliton and travelling wave solutions of the generalized nonlinear Schrödinger (GNLS) equation with a source. In order to illustrate the effectiveness and convenience of these methods, we consider the GNLS equation in the form The GNLS equation Furthermore, the GNLS equation enjoys many remarkable properties (e.g., bright and dark soliton solutions, Lax pair, Liouvile integrability, inverse scattering transformation, conservation laws, Backlund transformation, etc.). The rest of this paper is as follows: in Sections We now describe the tanh method for a given partial differential equation. This method was defined by Malfliet Wazwaz first considered a general form of nonlinear equation: To find the travelling wave solution of Eq. If all terms of the resulting ODE contain derivatives in Introducing a new independent variable: Introduce the ansatz and then solution of tanh method: Extended tanh method: To determine the parameter Having these determined parameters, taking into account that in most cases these parameters are positive, by using The travelling wave solutions of many nonlinear ODEs and PDEs from soliton theory (and elsewhere) can be expressed as polynomials of hyperbolic or elliptic functions. For instance, the bell-shaped sech-solutions and kink-shaped tanh-solutions model wave phenomena in fluid dynamics, plasmas, elastic media, electrical circuits, optical fibers, chemical reactions, and bio-genetics. Wazwaz has summarized the main steps of using sine–cosine method, as listed below: Introducing the wave variables If all terms of the resulting ODE contain derivatives of By virtue of this solution, the anstaz is introduced as: After substituting Eq. The Exp-Function method was first proposed by Wu and He in 2006 In this section, for a given PDE, we commence by looking for an Exp-Function type solution of the following form in terms of exp( Alternatively, we can also assume that the solution can be expressed in this form: By differentiating of Eq. The following important remarks have been made on the Exp-Function method in The expression of the Exp-Function is more general than the sinh-function and the tanh-function, so we can find solutions that are more general in the Exp-Function method. Using Although the Exp-Function method can be employed in both the direct way and the sub-equation way, direct use of this method is suggested, not only for its convenience, but because applying Exp-Function in the sub-equation way may lead to losing some information and solutions. The Exp-Function method is more convenient and effective than the Extended Fan sub-equation method. With regard to the fact that each method of solving differential equations gives the answer in a particular form, depending on the initial and boundary conditions, there would be a better method for a particular differential equation. For example, for a problem with exponential function initial condition, using Exp-Function method is preferred. Once the best method of solution is determined, the results can be classified in distinct collections so that the components of each collection recover each other. A collection which satisfies the initial and boundary conditions, is an exact solution of the equation. The aim of this paper is to employ, for the first time, Extended tanh, sine–cosine and Exp-Function methods for solving the generalized nonlinear Schrödinger (GNLS) equation with a source not considering the initial and boundary conditions. To study the exact travelling wave solutions of the GNLS, Eq. Integrating Eq. Our main purpose is to solve Eq. Substituting Eq. The above equations are cumbersome to solve. Using a modern computer algebra system, say Case 1: Case 2: Case 3: Case 4: Substituting Eqs. In this section, the sine–cosine method is applied to the GNLS equation solution. Substituting Eqs. Combining Eqs. In addition, using Eqs. In this section, the Exp-Function method is applied to solve the GNLS equation. To determine the values of Similarly, to determine values of According to case 1, Eq. Solving this system of algebraic equations, using   As mentioned above, the values of       As mentioned above, the values of   Cases 3.1 and 3.2 are the same as case 2.4 and case 2.2, respectively. Therefore, we conclude that Eq. In this case we consider  Substituting Eq.  Substituting Eq.  Finally, we consider We rewrite Eq. In this study, Extended tanh-function, sine–cosine and Exp-Function methods were applied in order to find the exact solutions of the generalized nonlinear Schrödinger (GNLS) equation with a source. The first two procedures can be considered as simple methods for solving some of nonlinear partial differential equations without resort to any symbolic computation and the obtained results are very concise. On the other hand, it can be concluded that, in comparison with the other methods, the Exp-Function method is a very powerful and effective technique in finding the exact solutions for a wide range of problems. All the presented cases in this paper have shown that the results of the last method are not strongly dependant on the chosen values of The next attempts of authors are to focus on solution and physical description of PDEs with various initial and boundary conditions using advanced and exact procedures like Extended tanh–coth, Sine–cosine and Exp-Function methods and eventually to compare their results.