We reviewed 49 patients following plate osteosynthesis of humeral shaft fractures. There were no complications as a result of surgery. Union occurred in 47 patients (96%) at a mean of 9 weeks. Two patients required secondary procedures to achieve union. All patients had full range of motion in the elbow and shoulder joints following union.
                  In the light of the popularisation of intramedullary nailing techniques in the last decade, with recognised complications of iatrogenic radial nerve injury, inadequate rotational stabilisation, non-union and shoulder impingement, we advocate plating of humeral shaft fractures as the surgical treatment of choice.The ideal management of closed fractures of the humeral shaft continues to be debatable. Non-surgical treatment has recognised morbidity with non union rates of up to 12% and loss of shoulder and elbow movement from prolonged immobilisation. In our unit, all methods of conservative and operative treatment have been used in the past, based on individual factors. The senior author preferentially used nailing techniques in the early 1990s. However, critical review revealed less than optimal outcome. Between 1990 and 2000, 52 humeral shaft fractures fitting our inclusion criteria were treated in this trauma unit by open reduction and plate osteosynthesis. The complete records of 49 patients were available for review and these made up the study group. For inclusion, the fracture was required to be non-pathological, less than 6 weeks old at time of surgery, and to be located at least 5 There were 30 males and 19 females with a mean age of 33 years (range 17–72). The mechanism of injury and fracture types (as determined by the AO classification and descriptive classification), are tabulated in Under general anaesthesia, the fracture was plated through an anterolateral approach in nine cases and a posterior approach in 40 cases, at a mean of 3 days post injury (range 0–28 days). A broad 4.5 Outcome parameters of time to union, return to normal activities, and shoulder and elbow function were assessed by clinical and radiological records. Union was defined as the presence of bridging callus in both cortices as seen on two perpendicular views in a fully functional arm. Range of motion of shoulder and elbow were measured using a goniometer at the time of union. Thirty-four patients had an isolated humeral shaft fracture. The remainder of the group has multiple injuries with a mean Injury Severity Score of 22. The commonest associated injury was a head injury in seven patients. Twelve patients (24%) had radial nerve neuropraxia on presentation or evolving in the first 24 One patient had a traction injury to his left upper limb sustained by entanglement in farm machinery, resulting in a compound Grade 1V humeral shaft fracture with a brachial plexus injury. The fracture was temporarily stabilised with an external fixator until good aseptic soft tissue cover was achieved. At 4 weeks, the fixator was removed and secondary plating and bone grafting was performed through an anterolateral approach. Solid bony union occurred 14 weeks later. There were four other Gustilo grade 1 puncture wounds. Forty-seven fractures (96%) were radiologically healed by 14 weeks following surgery, with a mean time to union of 9 weeks ( At the time of union, all patients had full range of motion of their shoulder. Elbow extension was minimally restricted in eight patients, all of whom had an anterolateral surgical approach. Full elbow extension was achieved on further follow-up several weeks later. Forty-four patients returned to their former occupation and sporting activities within 4 months from the time of injury. The remaining five had prolonged rehabilitation as a result of their radial nerve and brachial plexus injuries. There were no metalwork failures or removals in the long term. Our union rate of 96% at 14 weeks following plate osteosynthesis does not differ from previous experience in the literature. The success of intramedullary nailing techniques for lower limb fractures in the 1980s provoked interest in their humeral equivalent. The reported advantages included minimal surgical invasion, avoidance of fracture exposure (preserving vascularity and reducing risk of infection), and reamed autogenous graft material at the fracture site. Early reports were promising. Dissatisfaction with shoulder function led to the concept of retrograde nailing. There are several biomechanical and operative considerations which argue against the nail as a suitable construct for the humerus. Mechanical stresses differ from the lower limb. The primary stress in the weight-bearing tibia or femur is a “bending” force which is better withstood with a centrally placed nail than an eccentrically placed plate. In the humerus the primary stress is a “torsional” or rotational force. The intramedullary nail, in particular the slotted design, withstands rotational force poorly. Several operative considerations also must be acknowledged. Reaming of humeral fractures is often hazardous if segmentation or butterfly fragments exist, as rotation of unstable fragments may induce radial nerve injury. Nail insertion into a tight or unreamed canal can also predispose to fracture comminution, distraction and radial nerve neuropraxia. Clinically, the literature supports plate osteosynthesis for humeral shaft fractures with union rates of 93–100%. There are few direct comparative studies in the last 10 years to compare the results of plating and nailing. Several retrospective reports draw conflicting conclusions but often had small heterogenous patient groups and used several different designs of nails. Our experience with plating contrasted favourably with our previous results with the Russell–Taylor nail. The advantage of early mobilisation supports surgical stabilisation of humeral shaft fractures in principle. We believe the literature supports plate osteosynthesis as both the safest and biomechanically superior method of fixation for the acute diaphyseal fracture. The precise role of the intramedullary nail is yet to be defined. Over the past decade, the literature attention almost exclusively addresses new nail designs and their outcome. This trend for “innovation” must be evaluated against the background of traditional methods which have served well in the past. At present, we believe open reduction and compression plating remain the treatment of choice for non-pathological humeral shaft fractures that require operative intervention.