No definitive treatment algorithm exists regarding the optimal treatment for displaced proximal humerus fractures. Factors affecting decision making include facture type, bone quality, metaphyseal comminution, risk of head osteonecrosis, joint congruity, and patient functional demands. With good bone quality, percutaneous fixation is appropriate for 2-part fractures without metaphyseal comminution and select 3-part and 4-part valgus-impacted fractures with preserved medial hinge. Open reduction internal fixation is appropriate for displaced fractures with joint congruity. Hemiarthroplasty is preferred in head-splitting large impaction fractures or a devascularized head. Many displaced 4-part fractures are treated with open reduction and internal fixation, despite the risk of avascular necrosis in younger patients in whom implantation of a prosthesis is undesirable. This article reviews indications and surgical techniques to maximize successful outcomes of proximal humerus fracture treatment.Proximal humerus fractures are the third most common fragility fracture after hip and distal radius fractures. No definitive consensus regarding the optimal treatment for displaced proximal humerus fractures has been established. Fracture configuration and patient-specific factors guide surgical decision making. Eighty percent of proximal humerus fractures are nondisplaced or minimally displaced, stable, and can successfully be treated nonoperatively. The most commonly accepted classification system is the Neer classification, which is based on description of the 4 parts of the proximal humerus by Codman. The 4 classic fragments are as follows: (1) head, (2) lesser tuberosity (LT), (3) greater tuberosity (GT), and (4) diaphysis. Neer's The risk of AVN of the humeral head is related to the degree of vascular disruption and displacement of the fracture fragments. The risk of osteonecrosis varies from approximately 10% for 2-part fractures, 25% for valgus-impacted 4-part fractures, 50% for 4-part fractures ( Proper assessment of fracture anatomy is key to planning surgical intervention. Female gender and age are independent risk factors for poor bone quality, compromising stable fixation with open reduction internal fixation (ORIF). One study suggested that cortical thickness >4 mm is a good predictor of the ability to perform ridged fixation. Percutaneous approaches offer a minimally invasive option with less surgical dissection, less potential scarring, and preservation of the soft tissues about the fracture site. This approach minimizes the stripping of the soft tissue from fracture fragments. This procedure is not universally applicable to all fractures, but in selected cases, provides a viable alternative. Surgical neck fractures, some 3-part fractures, and valgus-impacted 4-part fractures are amenable to percutaneous fixation. Factors that favor attempted percutaneous approach include good bone stock, intact medial calcar hinge, substantial noncomminuted tuberosity fragments, a stable reduction under fluoroscopy after pinning, and a reliable cooperative patient who will return for pin removal. Valgus-impacted 4-part fractures ( Percutaneous treatment of selected proximal humeral fractures results in predictable union and good clinical results with a low rate of complications. Keener et al ORIF is a joint-preserving procedure restoring normal anatomy. Open surgery provides visualization of fracture fragments, potentially simplifying the reduction and fixation procedure. Despite this, reduction and fixation should always be performed with the assistance of fluoroscopic guidance, as the rotator cuff and periosteal attachments should be left intact. These soft tissues preclude direct visualization of the fragments and joint surface. Therefore, to some extent, the reduction is always indirect. Soft tissue stripping is also contraindicated because this increases the risk of blood supply disruption and subsequent AVN. Transosseous sutures or rotator cuff suture fixation can augment the plating construct. Plating with fixed angle constructs provides superior biomechanical pullout strength and torsional resistance, Nearly any displaced fracture can be treated with ORIF using locked plating. Exceptions include fractures which are nonreconstructable due to significant comminution, articular split or impaction, or severe osteopenia where stable fixation is jeopardized. In young patients with a jeopardized head ( Reduction of the head fragment to the shaft can be difficult and is critical to prevent postoperative loss of reduction. A varus position, <120° neck-shaft angle, tends to loose reduction postoperatively compared with anatomic or valgus reductions. Position of the plate and screw length are critical to a successful outcome. Plates that are positioned within 5 mm of the GT will result in impingement with abduction. Proximal locking screws should not penetrate the subchondral bone. We routinely undersize our proximal locking screws by 5-8 mm to allow for fracture subsidence during healing without screw cutout. After completion of fixation, live fluorography ensures no head screw has penetrated the joint. Finally, the rotator cuff tensioning sutures should be tied and a figure of 8 lateral tension suture can be placed from subscapularis to infraspinatus tendons to neutralize the forces of the anterior and posterior rotator cuff. Pitfalls of ORIF with locked plating are numerous and include: (1) disruption of the blood supply to the fragments because of overly aggressive exposure, periosteal striping, or medial neck retractor placement. (2) Malreduction of the head into a varus position or without inferomedial calcar support ( Outcomes after proximal humerus fracture ORIF with locked plating are variable. There have been numerous reports of high complication rates, with nearly 20% reoperation rates citing reasons like screw cutout, osteonecrosis, and loss of reduction. A systematic review Proximal humeral hemiarthroplasty provides immediate stability in fractures that are not amenable to fixation and removes the concern of future head osteonecrosis. Importantly, results after hemiarthroplasty rely heavily on tuberosity healing and a functional rotator cuff. Disadvantages include a high rate of tuberosity complications Humeral head hemiarthroplasty is a good option for patients with articular incongruity from a head split ( Hemiarthroplasty for proximal humerus fracture requires restoration of head height, version, and anatomic tuberosity fixation for a successful outcome. Stem retroversion should match anatomic version, which is usually 30° relative to the forearm or 20° relative to the epicondylar axis at the elbow. The importance of anatomic tuberosity fixation and bone grafting cannot be over emphasized. Combinations of vertical and horizontal transosseous suture or wire fixation should be performed with attention to anatomic reduction ( Postoperative care and the advancement of activity depend on the security of the tuberosity fixation at the time of surgery and radiographic evidence of initial tuberosity consolidation or nonmigration. Typically, active-assisted motion is then begun at 6 weeks and resistance exercises started at 12 weeks. The outcomes from hemiarthroplasty of the proximal humerus are imperfect and heterogeneous. Elderly patients >70 years old with nonreconstructable fractures are good candidates for reverse total shoulder arthroplasty compared with hemiarthroplasty. Reverse shoulder arthroplasty for fracture is indicated in elderly patients with nonreconstructable fractures and with risk factors for poor results with hemiarthroplasty: (1) age >75 years, (2) tuberosity comminution or significant osteopenia, (3) previous rotator cuff tear or cuff deficiency, (4) inability to follow immobilization and rehabilitation instructions. Contraindications include younger active patients, active infection, or axillary nerve injury. It is critical to assess the function of the axillary nerve and deltoid muscle before attempting a reverse shoulder arthroplasty. The surgical approach is similar to hemiarthroplasty because prosthesis height and GT fixation are important. Resection of the supraspinatus tendon is usually required to limit cuff tension after implantation. The LT may be excised and the subscapularis unrepaired without risk of dislocation, Tuberosity fixation is achieved with 2-4 cerclage sutures or wires ( The outcomes from reverse shoulder arthroplasty for fracture are encouraging with predictable pain relief and partial restoration of function. Comparing the outcome of reverse shoulder arthroplasty with hemiarthroplasty in matched cohorts, Young et al Complications are common when treating fractures with reverse prostheses. They include tuberosity nonunion, 35%; periprosthetic heterotopic ossification, 75%; temporary nerve palsies, 5%-10%; baseplate notching, 25%-75%; and dislocation, <5%. Long-term outcomes of reverse shoulder arthroplasty seem to progressively deteriorate. Implant survivorship progressively diminishes after 6 years postoperatively, Proximal humerus fracture care is challenging, and it is important to consider all options. For each surgical option, patient selection is paramount for optimizing outcomes. As a general principle, we try to fix displaced fractures because we feel that anatomic healing provides better and more consistent outcomes than arthroplasty. In determining treatment strategies, it is important to consider the key factors: facture type, bone quality, integrity of the medial calcar, tuberosity comminution, risk of AVN of humeral head, joint congruity, and functional demands of the patient. Percutaneous fixation is a good strategy for patients with good bone stock and a preserved medial calcar. These are generally 2-part surgical neck fractures, some 3-part fractures, and 4-part valgus-impacted fractures. ORIF with locking plates is good for patients with good-quality bone, have displaced fractures, 2-part surgical neck fractures with comminuted medial calcar, displaced 3- and 4-part fractures, and even head-splitting fractures in young patients <45 years old in an attempt at head salvage. Hemiarthroplasty is a good choice in most head-splitting fractures, or significant head impaction fractures or in osteoporotic nonreconstructable 4-part fractures and fracture dislocations, or when the head is devoid of vascularity. The young patient with a devascularized or incongruous head presents a surgical conundrum, and controversy exists regarding optimal management. Recreating humeral head height, version, and restoring tuberosity position, and, therefore, cuff function, is critical during any fixation strategy and especially during hemiarthroplasty. Elderly patients with osteopenia and nonreconstructable fractures are good candidates for reverse total shoulder replacement because good outcomes are more predictable than hemiarthroplasty, which is fraught with tuberosity complications resulting in a rotator cuff deficient shoulder.