Polymeric microparticles that may be used in rapid prototyping processes typically are produced by either polymerization processes or cryogenic grinding in impact mills at liquid nitrogen temperature (−196°C) or by dry grinding at solid carbon dioxide temperature (−78°C). Within this account an alternative approach for the production of polymer particles is presented. It is shown that wet grinding of polymers in a stirred media mill and organic solvents (ethanol, hexane) at reduced temperatures down to −80°C is a suitable method to produce polymer particles of mean diameter smaller than 5μm with narrow particle size distribution. Results are presented for wet grinding of polystyrene (PS) and polyetheretherketone (PEEK). The influence of the mechanical properties of the polymers under consideration and the influence of the process parameters, namely stress energy, process time and especially temperature and solvent viscosity are addressed. Remarkably, we found in case of PEEK that the mean diameter is one order of magnitude smaller than the zone of plastic deformation estimated from fracture toughness and yield stress.Production of micron-sized plastic or visco-elastic particles is known to be a costly and energy-intensive process For the comminution of polymers typically cutting mills or rotor impact mills as well as jet mills are applied where the feed is pre-cooled using liquid nitrogen or solid carbon dioxide Within this account wet grinding at low temperature will be addressed as an alternative approach to obtain micron-sized polymer particles. From our point of view stirred media mills might be advantageous in comparison to impact mills, especially due to the higher stress numbers that may be realized in stirred media mills. Polystyrene (PS) (Carl Roth) of a particle size fraction of 250 Wet grinding experiments have been performed using a batch laboratory stirred media mill PE075 (Netzsch). A mass fraction of approximately 6.5 to 7% of milling material has been used throughout this study. The stress intensity has been varied by changing the grinding bead size and stirrer speed. As grinding media Yttria-stabilized ZrO Particle size distributions of the suspensions have been obtained by laser diffraction particle sizing using a Mastersizer 2000/Hydro 2000 Moreover, the polymer feed materials have been characterized by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a DSC8000 (Perkin Elmer) at a heating rate of 20 Moreover, the polymer feed materials have been characterized by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a DSC8000 (Perkin Elmer) at a heating rate of 20 According to Kwade According to Becker et al. All stress energies SE The stress number SN, defined by Eq. The breakage behavior of brittle particles is not markedly influenced by temperature Viscous energy dissipation and the related formation of crazes is one of the reasons why polymers typically are harder to break than brittle inorganic materials. From the physical point of view the formation of crazes represents an increase of the fracture toughness K Besides temperature the mechanical properties of the particles are influenced by their size, too. It is an open question what minimum particle size may be obtained by comminution methods. For brittle materials different mechanisms involved have been discussed. Brittle materials will become more ductile with decreasing particle size For viscous and plastic material behaviour the above mentioned mechanism do not apply. In the case of polymers the extension of the plastic zone δ K The fracture thoughness of polymers is in the range of 1 to 10 The effect of stress energy SE (all data mentioned below refer to SE The product particle size is expected to depend on the overall mass specific energy E The product particle size is expected to depend on the overall mass specific energy E In our experiments the stress numbers SN when using grinding beads of diameters 1.25 From an economical point of view the optimal stress energy to achieve a certain particle size in the product decreases with decreasing mean particle size even in the nanometer range Besides experiments at ambient temperature the influence of stress energy was studied at a temperature of approximately − Smaller product particles may be obtained for shorter grinding times with decreasing process temperature: the grinding material becomes more brittle with decreasing temperature due to the increase in the modulus of elasticity and a decrease in fracture toughness. Mean particle size of PS product particles obtained for process times of 945 to 1515 The effect of temperature at constant stress conditions is summarized in relative velocity of grinding beads number density of grinding beads For τ/τ In ethanol systems similar final product particle sizes are obtained at − In order to study the influence of solvent viscosity during grinding of polystyrene (PS) an experiment in an ethanol–glycerol mixture has been performed. A solvent viscosity of 20 The influence of process parameters on the grinding behavior of polyetheretherketone (PEEK) was studied as a second example. Whereas (amorphous) polystyrene is quite brittle (typical breakage elongation ε In contrast to the experiments with polystyrene, however, only minor changes in product particle size have been observed during the first 100 to 200 For the grinding experiment presented in Wet grinding of polymer particles in ethanol and hexane, respectively, at moderately reduced temperatures was studied. We show that polystyrene (PS) and polyetheretherketone (PEEK) particles can be produced in stirred media mills. In comparison to impact or cutting mills smaller product particles below 5 For a polystyrene feed powder of x Remarkably, our approach is even applicable to materials of high fracture toughness and large breakage elongations like the semi-crystalline thermoplast PEEK. The obtained particles sizes are one order of magnitude smaller than the viscous zone width according to Dugdale. Therefore, wet milling should be studied in future systematically for other polymers relevant to e.g. rapid prototyping applications. The effect of process parameters on grinding performance has been evaluated: reduced temperatures lead to smaller particles which are obtained at shorter process times compared to grinding at ambient temperature. Low process temperatures and high stress energies have to be applied in order to obtain particles smaller than 10 The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at  concentration of the product suspension grinding media diameter Young's modulus Young's modulus of grinding media mass specific energy Young's modulus of milling material fracture toughness number density of grinding beads volume density distribution cumulative volume distribution energy transfer coefficient stress intensity actual stress energy transferred in the process stress number Stokes number of grinding media critical Stokes number of grinding media process time glass transition temperature relative velocity of grinding beads stirrer tip speed diameter of product particles volume averaged mean particle size extension of the plastic zone volume fraction of the grinding beads within the grinding chamber heat of fusion packing density viscosity grinding bead density yield stress characteristic time of bead-bead collision momentum response time The authors thank Dipl.-Ing. Stefan Romeis and Dr. Cornelia Damm for fruitful discussions. This study has been supported by