The shear behavior and mechanisms of clean and filled rough joints under direct shear tests were comparatively studied using experimental and numerical approaches. Concrete was used for casting laboratory specimens with different roughness joint surface profiles, and clay was used as an infill material. In addition, a modified shear box genesis method was employed to reproduce the shear behavior of clean and clay-filled joints under different normal stress by two dimensional Particle Flow Code (PFC2D). The results show that as the normal stress increases, the shear stress increases, and the normal displacement decreases. Due to the presence of clay, the shear strength and the normal displacement of the clean joint are larger than those of the clay-filled joints, and the influence of the joint roughness on the shear stress is significantly reduced. The mechanism of the joint roughness on the shear stress and shear dilatancy mode during the shear process becomes more complicated. Furthermore, according to the bond fracture mode in the numerical shear tests, it can be concluded that the cracks of the clean joints are mainly caused by parallel-bonded shear cracks and parallel-bonded tensile cracks at an asperity, but for filled joints, the cracks are mainly caused by smooth-jointed shear cracks between block and filling, and parallel-bonded tensile cracks between the filling particles.Rock masses present in nature are generally characterized by discontinuities such as joints, fractures and other planes of weakness that reduce their strength and stiffness In recent years, several researchers have conducted laboratory tests on the influence of a specific type of infill material on the joint shear behavior. Papaliangas The rapid progress of computer technology has provided new approaches for studying the mechanism and microscopic problem of rock mechanics Due to the complexity of the mechanisms involved in joint shearing, current studies are still in need of further improvement. Therefore, the effect of the infill material, The joint roughness coefficient, Clay is widely distributed in Xiangtan city, China, which is a loose soil-like material. For the laboratory tests, clay was collected as the infill materials. First, a 100 g of collected clay was dried at an oven controlled temperature of 45 °C for two weeks. By measuring the mass of the clay before and after drying, it was obtained that the moisture content of the clay ((mass of water/mass of dry clay) * 100)) is 15%. Second, spread the clay evenly on the joint surface before the shear test. To study the shear behavior of discontinuities filled with clay fillers, a series of physical and numerical direct shear tests were performed. In PFC The infill thickness to be tested is 3 mm, which is at the same magnitude as the average asperity amplitude of the joint profile. This thickness is chosen because it will determine the interaction between the joint surface and infill material. If the thickness of the infill material is too far below the asperity amplitude, the shear strength of the joint will be dominated by the interface between the wall rock. If the thickness of the infill material is too higher than the asperity amplitude, the shear strength is only relevant to the infill material First, two dismantled metal molds of 100 mm × 62 mm × 62 mm without upper and lower covers made of a 3 mm thick steel plate and a numerical control machine were used to cut the Two uniaxial compression tests were first carried out on cubic specimens. The tests were performed using a RYL-600 computer controlling rock mechanics shear rheometer ( Direct shear tests on clean joints and filled joints were also performed using a RYL-600 computer controlling rock mechanics shear rheometer. In the direct shear apparatus, the upper pressing plate can move vertically and horizontally, and the lower box is fixed (as shown in There are two conventional methods to simulate the behavior of joints in PFC. The first is to remove the bonds between the circular bodies along the joint surface, which was adopted by Park and Song Material vessel generation: Three polygons are incorporated into the PFC model to generate upper, middle and lower blocks ( Initial assembly generation: Assemblies of randomly placed particles are generated and the upper, middle and lower vessels are filled separately ( Parallel bond installation:Parallel bonds are installed at contacts between the particles (blue lines in Application of smooth joints: Smooth joints are applied at the interface of the block and infill material (red lines in Servo: The material vessels are first deleted, and then lower shear boxes and upper shear boxes are generated. The lower shear box consists of a bottom wall, left lower wall, right lower wall and right extent wall. The upper shear box consists of a top wall, left upper wall, left lower wall and left extent wall. In addition, two retaining walls were created on the two sides of the infill material. To reduce the influence of friction on the shear results, the shear box was created with frictionless walls. The model is cycled until the wall-based measured horizontal and vertical stresses are close to the prescribed stress (a user-defined tolerance), and the average unbalanced force ratio, aratio, is less than or equal to 1e−6 Recognition and elimination of floating particles: The floating particles will affect the stress transfer and slow the computational efficiency, hence, identification and elimination of floating particles is necessary. Balls are identified that have less than 2 active contacts and they are grouped together in a group named floaters (red particles in Shear box tests on filled joints are conducted using PFC The micro-parameters in this study were confirmed using the following method Numerical direct shear tests on various roughness clean joints and clay-filled joints under different normal stress are carried out, and the results are compared against laboratory tests.  Comparing A comparison between the peak shear stress versus normal stress of the numerical and physical experiments is presented in To investigate the effect of the roughness of the joint on the shear strength and dilation, numerical direct shear tests and physical direct shear tests on various rough For clay-filled joints ( To further illustrate the effect of the roughness on the shear stress, the results of the comparison between the peaks shear strength of the numerical tests and physical tests are presented in   To further investigate the ability of the numerical model to reproduce the shear behavior of clean joints and clay filled joints, the results of the numerical and experimental methods were compared. Shearing failure models of experimental and numerical shear tests on various roughnesses of clean joints and clay filled joints under normal stresses of 1 MPa are shown in For clean rough joints ( Asperity interference is usually significant for shear behavior for clean joints, but for clay filled joints, the effect of asperity interference is generally reduced. Shearing failure models of experimental and numerical shear tests on various roughnesses of clay filled joints under normal stresses of 1 MPa are shown in Compared with physical tests, the advantage of the numerical tests is that it can observe and trace the crack propagation during shearing. The curves of the shear stress, normal displacement and cumulative crack number versus shear displacement and corresponding asperity degradation models during the shearing process for clean joints with standard  Comparing the above two numerical direct shear test results, it can be seen that both test processes can be divided into three stages, and the shear stress reaches a maximum value at a shear displacement of 4 mm. However, when the shear displacement exceeds 4 mm, there are different trends in the shear stresses. In the first test, the shear stress increases slightly after a shear displacement of 4 mm, but in the second test, the shear stress decreases as the shear continues to icrease. There are many differences between the two shear tests for the normal displacement. For direct shear on the clean joint, the normal displacement decreases first at the initial shear displacement and then increases until the shear displacement exceeds 12 mm, subsequently decreasing, which indicates that the entire shear process suffered from shear contraction at first, then shear dilatation later, and shear contraction again at the last part. For direct shear on the clay filled joint, the normal displacement slightly increases at the initial stage and then continues to decrease until the end of the shear test, which indicates that the shear contraction dominates the whole shear test. The cumulative crack number of the clean joints increases rapidly in the last stage, and the increased cracks are mainly caused by the parallel-bonded shear cracks and parallel-bonded tensile cracks at an asperity. The cumulative crack number of the clay filled joint increases rapidly in the mid stage, and the increased cracks are mainly caused by the smooth-jointed shear cracks between the block and filling and the parallel-bonded tensile cracks between the filling particles. A series of experimental and numerical direct shear tests on clean and filled rough joints under different normal stress was carried out to investigate the shear mechanisms and asperity degradation. In this paper, the shear stress, normal displacement and failure modes of the two methods were compared. From the test results, the following conclusions can be obtained. To overcome the removal of the bond method, the rougher joint surface and smooth joint model were directly inserted into the bonded model, causing particle interlocking problems. A modified shear box genesis method was employed to generate a filled joint model. The results of this study clearly show that this method has the ability to reproduce the shear behavior of clean and filled joints. As the normal stress increases, the shear stress increases, and the normal displacement decreases. The relationship between the shear stress and JRC is not clear because the shear stress is not only controlled by the roughness, but also related to the contact area. The shear strength of the clean joint is larger than the shear strength of the clay-filled joints, because the clay reduces the friction between the joint surfaces and thus reduces the shear stress, which leads to the specimen being more likely to experience slip failure. For clean joints, the shear process is dominated by shear dilatancy; for clay-filled joints, shear contraction dominates the entire shearing process due to the clay compression leading to a reduction in the infill thickness under normal stress. For the clean joint, the stress concentration increased at the asperity, and more tensile cracks were observed as the normal stress increased, but the normal stress had little effect on the production of cracks in the filled joint. For clean planar joints, the shearing mechanism for both the numerical and experimental tests was asperity surface wear. For clean rough joints, the asperity surface wears only take place on 2–3 key asperities. The effect of asperity interference is usually significant for the shear behavior of clean joints, but for clay filled joints, the effect of asperity interference is generally reduced. Compared with the physical tests, the advantage of the numerical tests is that it can observe and trace the crack propagation during shearing. From the numerical direct shear test on a clean joint and filled joint with standard  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The research described in this paper was financially supported by joint Ph.D. program of “double first rate” construction disciplines of