The kinetics and products from the pressure oxidation of a chalcopyrite concentrate are compared under a range of reaction conditions promoted by various companies. The reaction conditions compared in this article, Part I, are referred to as the Phelps Dodge-Placer Dome and Activox® processes. The medium temperature processing of the concentrate will be reported in Part II.
                  Experiments were conducted with the same concentrate over a temperature range of 108–220 °C with different salt and acid additions to compare the kinetics and recovery of copper, the speciation of sulfur and the deportment of iron-containing and other phases in the leach residues. The aim was to improve understanding of the mechanism and practical issues for the competing processes and to provide background knowledge often not available in the public domain.
                  The chalcopyrite concentrate was found by Quantitative X-ray Diffraction (QXRD) analysis to contain about 80% chalcopyrite, 10% quartz, 6% pyrite and 2.5% talc and 1.5% clinochlore. It was demonstrated that greater than 94% of the copper could be extracted from the concentrate using either the Phelps Dodge-Placer Dome or Activox® process within 30 min. The extraction of the residual copper was strongly influenced by the presence of elemental sulfur.
                  About 80–90% oxidation of sulfide to elemental sulfur occurred at 108 °C and was enhanced by the presence of the chloride ion. Above 180 °C there was complete oxidation to sulfate. However, in the presence of added chloride ion the rate of sulfate formation decreased.
                  QXRD was employed to examine the leach residues. Iron was leached and re-precipitated forming a number of different phases depending upon the process temperature, acidity and salinity. At low temperature, in the presence of chloride, akaganéite was formed together with an uncharacterised amorphous hydrated iron oxide. Hematite formation was favoured at temperatures ≥150 °C, low acidity and low salinity; basic ferric sulfate formed at high temperature (220 °C), high acidity and low salinity. Goethite formation was favoured at ≤150 °C by low acidity and low salinity. Jarosite was formed at all temperatures under conditions of moderate to high acidity and its formation was enhanced in the presence of sodium ions.
                  Several basic copper salts including atacamite (Cu2(OH)3Cl) and antlerite (CuSO4·2Cu(OH)2) were precipitated at 108 °C at low acidity, typically at pH >2.8. Atacamite formed initially when the sulfate concentration was low but dissolved and the copper was re-precipitated to form antlerite as the sulfate (and copper) concentrations increased.High temperature (200–230 °C) acid pressure oxidation leaching of metal sulfides was first commercialized in the 1950's. However, the more recent commercial success of medium temperature pressure oxidation of zinc sulfide concentrates and high temperature pressure oxidation of refractory gold ores and concentrates has contributed to renewed interest in the total oxidative leaching of copper sulfides, especially chalcopyrite. An early overview of the role of pressure oxidation in treating refractory gold ores was given by Historically copper sulfides have been smelted, however, since the early 1990's a number of prospective leaching processes have been successfully demonstrated at the pilot plant scale. An excellent review describing these and related processes is given by Nowadays the commercial leaching of chalcopyrite is also a reality. Phelps Dodge has employed high temperature pressure oxidation, albeit at pilot scale, since 2003 for the processing of chalcopyrite concentrate at the Bagdad mine in Arizona. The start-up, operation and optimization of this facility were reported by The hydrometallurgical processes that have been developed for the pressure leaching of chalcopyrite can be classified into low, medium and high temperature regimes. Low temperature processes employ ultra-fine grinding to enhance the leaching kinetics and give high conversions of sulfide to elemental sulfur. Medium temperature processes utilize fine grinding, higher temperatures, typically 140–150 °C, but require the addition of specific reagents to minimise wetting of the chalcopyrite surface by molten sulfur that would otherwise slow the leaching kinetics. Again, moderate to high conversions of sulfide to sulfur can be obtained and the leach residues are generally quite stable, having low sulfate content. At high temperatures, 200–230 °C, leaching kinetics are rapid, however, the entire sulfide content is converted to sulfate leading to substantially higher oxygen consumption and producing higher free acid levels. The adoption of such processes has been slow due to the economic strength of the smelting process, that includes heavy capital investment, the availability of markets for sulfuric acid, until recently, few environmental pressures to minimise sulfur dioxide output, the recovery of energy from smelter gases and a lower electricity requirement for the electrorefining of blister copper than hydrometallurgical processes require for copper electrowinning. Factors that would tend to favour hydrometallurgical treatment include location near to a mine site, a nearby source of process water, for the processing of “dirty” concentrates, the use of acid by-product for heap bioleaching or the leaching of oxide ores, and for the conversion of an existing plant from the treatment of oxide to sulfide ores. Other key factors to the selection of a sulfide leach process have been discussed in detail elsewhere ( A number of distinctly different processes have been developed and patented by various commercial companies which give limited disclosure of the technical knowledge. One of these, referred to as the Phelps Dodge-Placer Dome process, was the first to be commercially applied to the processing of chalcopyrite concentrate at the Bagdad mine. Other prominent methodologies available include the Anglo American Company-University of British Columbia (Anglo/UBC), Cominco Engineering Services Limited (CESL), Dynatec, nitrogen-species catalyzed (NSC) and Activox® processes. The primary aims of this study were to: Compare the effectiveness of the various processes in terms of leaching kinetics and reagent consumption, with the same ore sample. Determine the effects of changing process water salinity and chloride ion upon the kinetics, mechanism and products of reaction. Characterise and quantify the materials present in the leach residue. Part I of this work compares the results of tests conducted at high temperature, with total sulfur oxidation; and at low temperature, below the melting point of sulfur, with little sulfur oxidation. Subsequently, Part II will compare test work conducted at medium temperature, where sulfur is molten, with a variety of additives designed to disperse the sulfur and enhance copper recovery. A chalcopyrite concentrate (as-received) was lightly ground and dry screened to produce − All experiments were conducted using a Parr 1 gal. (U.S.) 4551 M model vertical reactor constructed from Grade 3 titanium and controlled to within ± The system was then heated under a blanket of nitrogen to the required temperature, oxygen injected on a continuous basis to maintain the target oxygen partial pressure and the reaction continued for periods varying between 90 and 240 min. Samples taken at regular intervals were filtered though 0.45 μm membranes, the primary filtrate collected and the solution density determined. The solids were washed thoroughly with de-ionised water, dried overnight at 70 °C and lightly ground. Both the liquor and solid samples were submitted for analysis by ICP-AES for the elements Cu, Fe, S, Si, Mg, Al, Ca and Na. The residues were analyzed after fusion at 900–1000 °C with the Sigma Chemicals 12:22 lithium borate flux and dissolution. When elemental sulfur was present in the residue, sulfur analyses were performed using a LabFit CS-2000 analyzer with electrical furnace heated to 1400 °C. The acidity of the filtrate samples was determined after dilution, adjustment of the Eh to > Solid sub-samples were weighed with the addition of 10% fluorite (internal standard) and lightly milled using either a SPEX 8000 ball mill or a McCrone micronizing mill prior to submission for XRD measurement. XRD traces of the ground samples were obtained on a Philips Xpert diffractometer, using the following acquisition conditions: Co Kα radiation, 5–120°2 Quantitative X-ray Diffraction (QXRD) analysis of the concentrate employed in the present study indicates that the material consists of 79.8% chalcopyrite (CuFeS A summary of early developments in the high temperature oxidation of refractory gold ores and concentrates, where the gold is usually locked up in pyrite and arsenopyrite, and including references to the Sherritt test work that took place in the 1980's, has been presented by As a result of early studies on refractory gold concentrates, pressure oxidation circuits were commissioned by Placer Dome at the Porgera and Campbell mine sites and both are still operating today. A pressure oxidation circuit was also operated at the Getchell property ( Other gold producers have employed pressure oxidation technology to oxidise gold-bearing pyrite. Refractory ore from Barrick Gold's Goldstrike property is currently pre-treated in an autoclave whilst ore from the Mercur mine, now decommissioned and closed, was also processed under alkaline oxidation conditions. Despite concentrate from Barrick's El Indio mine having been successfully treated at the bench scale, no scale-up occurred. Newmont operate autoclaves at both the Twin Creeks and Lone Tree operations in Nevada, and Lihir Gold treat their refractory ore at 210 °C ( The pressure oxidation facility from the Getchell property was purchased by First Quantum Minerals for the oxidation a gold-bearing copper ore at the Kansanshi operation. It was due to be commissioned in the final quarter of 2006. The leach circuit is designed to operate at 210 °C with a residence time of 1.7 h ( The use of total pressure oxidation for the treatment of chalcopyrite concentrates by Phelps Dodge dates back to 1999 and following continuous testing, Phelps Dodge and Placer Dome entered into a Technology Development Agreement related to further development, commercialization, use and potential licensing of the technology to other parties ( The reaction of chalcopyrite (and pyrite) at high temperature (180–230 °C) converts sulfide sulfur entirely to sulfate and proceeds via typical reactions: For pyrite, similar equations can be formulated with direct oxidation given as: The majority of the ferric sulfate is hydrolysed at these temperatures to form hematite, hydronium jarosite or basic ferric sulfate depending upon the free acidity according to the following reactions: The inter-conversion of iron-containing residues at low acidities is given by: When monovalent alkali cations are present jarosite analogues may form via reactions such as: Similar reactions with Ag The extraction of copper from a chalcopyrite concentrate (10% w/w pulp) at high temperature (180–220 °C) is shown in The formation of soluble sulfur species ( Residual copper levels of up to 0.5% were found in the final residues when the reaction temperature was 200 °C or greater. However, as there was no residual chalcopyrite detected by XRD, it is possible that a small amount of copper was adsorbed onto and/or incorporated into, the hematite that formed. Future studies will investigate using SEM-based techniques whether this is the case. A treatment process for the extraction of copper from hematite residue has been patented ( According to the chemistry of the system, the solubilisation of sulfur is primarily represented as the species CuSO The free acid concentrations calculated according to Eq. The extraction of iron at high temperatures (and in the absence of chloride ions) was not significant with the bulk of the iron being precipitated as hematite. Also, as noted by previous investigators (e.g. Increasing the pulp density from 10 to 20% w/w caused the initial rate of reaction to decrease ( When 15 g/L chloride was added as sodium chloride the initial rate of extraction was greatly enhanced. The extraction of copper after 10 min was 94% compared with 56% in the absence of sodium chloride ( Despite the rapid initial reaction rate, the final copper extraction with added sodium chloride was suppressed relative to that obtained with a 10% w/w pulp density feed. The extent of suppression decreased between 10 and 90 min and indicated the slow release of residual copper into solution. The form of the residual copper is unclear as the presence of chalcopyrite was barely detectable in the XRD pattern after 20 min (see The maximum free acidities for 10% w/w and 20% w/w pulp densities were At 220 °C, the extraction of iron to the leach solution was greater at higher pulp density. In addition, the iron concentration increased from 1.5 g/L to 4.8 g/L between pulp densities of 10% and 20%, respectively. The former concentration is similar to that for the Bagdad plant ( An increase in the particle size of the feed from The effect of increasing chloride content on the conversion of sulfide to sulfate during pressure oxidation at lower temperatures has been documented by The conversion of sulfide to elemental sulfur at 220 °C in the presence of added sodium chloride was determined using the analytical and QXRD data and the results compared with no sodium chloride addition in Increasing the sodium chloride concentration has been reported to decrease the oxidation rate of elemental sulfur at 200 °C ( In the absence of chloride, small amounts of sulfur were also produced during the reactions conducted at 180 °C and 190 °C but these traces were rapidly oxidised. The low temperature processes encompass those for which the temperature is below or just above the melting point of sulfur. Leaching kinetics are slow below the melting point of sulfur due to the formation of a passivating layer of metal-deficient polysulfide and/or elemental sulfur. Efforts to develop a suitable low temperature process have focused upon ways of activating the chalcopyrite surface and enhancement of the leach. Sherritt developed a low temperature pressure leach (110 °C) in the mid-1960's that involved using a high oxygen partial pressure, a fine grind to The activation methods investigated in the 1970's involved thermal, mechanical and hydrometallurgical pre-treatment processes. Of these, the most relevant to current technology was mechanical activation involving ultra-fine grinding to reduce particle size, increase the surface area and produce defects in the crystal structure that might allow the material to be more readily leached. Even now, the impact of mechano-chemistry on the hydrometallurgy of sulfide ores continues to be a vibrant area of study ( A discussion of the pioneering mechanical activation work by Gerlach and Pawlek is presented by The combination of ultra-fine grinding (to 5–15 μm) and low temperature (100–110 °C) are the cornerstones of the ACTIVOX® process ( With the proven success of the ACTIVOX® process ( The chemistry of chalcopyrite oxidation at low temperatures is more complex since a large fraction of the sulfide is oxidised to elemental sulfur. Typical reactions that take into account the production of sulfur include: Hydrolysis to form (hydronium) jarosite occurs via Eq. Loss of copper from solution in the presence of sufficient sulfate can result in the formation of antlerite ( Most of the iron precipitates as goethite (α-FeOOH) or, in the presence of chloride ions, the related mineral akaganéite (β-FeOOH) which incorporates a small amount of chloride into its structure, unless alkali ions are added, resulting in the preferred formation of jarosite. Depending upon the mineralogy of the concentrates and reaction conditions, the conversion of sulfide to elemental sulfur varies between 40 and 80% ( The extraction of copper from the chalcopyrite concentrate under Activox® conditions was successful in all instances where 10 g/L chloride ion was added to the system. The extraction data do, however, indicate that a significant amount of copper remains in some residues and this corresponded with the formation of basic copper salts (see When no acid was present initially, there was an induction period of approximately 30 min until a small amount of acid had been generated and significant leaching of the copper occurred ( With no or low acid addition the final residue produced in the presence of chloride ion contained no detectable chalcopyrite. It was also found that during the early stages of the reaction, the basic copper chloride atacamite, Cu Re-leaching of the residues with a weakly acidic solution of pH 1.5–2.0 was sufficient to dissolve the antlerite to give a copper-containing solution and a washed residue containing 0.8% copper. This corresponded to an overall copper extraction of 96%. The nature of the basic copper salts is expected to be critical if re-leach solutions are to be subsequently processed by electrowinning. If the chloride content of the salts is minimized, by the addition of sulfuric acid, the potential for the production of chlorine gas in the cell room is reduced. Furthermore this allows chloride to be recycled to the leach circuit and reduces any top-up requirement. Acid addition should, however, be kept to a minimum to optimise the amount of copper precipitated. Not surprisingly, the antlerite and atacamite phases did not form when the initial acid concentration was increased to 50 g/L, resulting in a final copper extraction of over 94% after just 30 min of leaching. Since the final leach residue in this instance contained a trace of un-reacted chalcopyrite, it appears that sulfur formation affected the extraction of the last fraction of copper. Measurements indicated that a liquor pH of 1.5 was sufficient to keep all of the copper in solution. Even when a high initial acid addition, 50 g/L, was employed, the free acid concentration dropped significantly, to about 5 g/L, during the first 15 min of the reaction. This was consistent with the preferential formation of sodium jarosite over hydrated iron oxides (e.g. akaganéite) as confirmed by the QXRD data (see The extraction of iron was generally low ( The calculated conversions of sulfide to elemental sulfur and sulfate under Activox® conditions are presented in A large number of XRD patterns were obtained in the present study to characterise the leach residues formed. As it is not feasible to reproduce all the results here, selected examples of QXRD analyses are presented. High temperature processing effectively leached chalcopyrite, pyrite and the small amount of the clay mineral clinochlore that were present in the chalcopyrite concentrate. Quartz and talc were essentially un-leached. The dominant mineral phase formed was hematite, and the conversion of sulfide to sulfate and dissolution of copper meant that the quartz composition in the residues increased. The changing mineral compositions during the Phelps Dodge-Placer Dome-type reactions at 220 °C when a pulp density of 20% was employed are shown in While hematite was exclusively the final iron-containing product formed at low pulp density (10%) over the temperature range 180–220 °C, jarosite was also formed at higher pulp density and in the presence of sodium ions ( When the pulp density was increased to 20%, chalcopyrite (and pyrite) persisted in the leach residues for longer ( The main effect of sodium chloride addition was to slow the oxidation of sulfur to sulfuric acid (and perhaps to promote the formation of sulfur over other oxidised sulfur species). This meant that the free acidity did not exceed a value of 80 g/L until after 60 min reaction time. Until this time sulfur was present in the leach residue in significant amounts ( Most Activox® residues were produced under conditions of low initial and on-going acidity with the pH of the liquors generally being above 3.0 and often close to 4.0. Furthermore, the concentration of sulfate was low initially and slowly increased as leaching occurred. As discussed previously, such conditions were conducive to the formation of basic copper salts and several were identified from XRD including atacamite, antlerite and in one instance, a trace of brochantite (Cu In the presence of 10 g/L chloride ion, it was previously noted that there is an induction period, during which iron is released, before copper begins to appear in solution at significant levels. The XRD data suggest that during this period a large proportion of the chalcopyrite is converted to a covellite-like phase. The peaks could be well-produced by Rietveld analysis using a covellite (CuS) crystal structure ( The addition of a small amount of acid at the beginning of the reaction favoured the formation of jarosite over goethite ( With the initial addition of 50 g/L sulfuric acid and 20 g/L chloride ion as sodium chloride a significant proportion of the iron-containing residue, particularly in the early samples, was again either non-crystalline or poorly crystalline ( The inclusion of akaganéite into the Rietveld analysis not only improved the calculated fit but also the agreement between the calculated iron content and analysis. Employing the structure FeO During the reaction the intensity of the hump at 40–42° 2 However, this reaction was not strongly favoured, despite the relatively high sodium and sulfate concentrations, because the free acidity level was quite low, typically 6–8 g/L. More acid must be added to the system or the extent of sulfur oxidation increased, to improve jarosite formation. This would then be expected to enhance the settling characteristics of the residue. In contrast with higher temperature processes, both the pyrite and clinochlore components of the chalcopyrite concentrate reacted slowly under Activox® conditions. This reduced the oxygen requirement for leaching, suggesting that concentrates with higher pyrite content would be more economically treated by this process. In the presence of 10 g/L chloride ion, it was previously noted that there is an induction period, during which iron is released, before copper begins to appear in solution at significant levels ( The hydrothermal enrichment of chalcopyrite under various conditions has been reported by several other groups ( Recently A selection of pressure oxidation leaching conditions has been evaluated with a chalcopyrite concentrate. Specifically, the Activox® and Phelps Dodge-Placer Dome process conditions have been investigated at temperatures of 108 °C and ranging between 180 °C to 220 °C, and in the presence of sodium chloride. At low temperature, copper extractions were optimised by fine grinding, and additions of sulfuric acid and chloride ion. Copper extractions of over 94% were achieved over time periods ranging between 10 and 30 min — though at lower temperatures, extraction of the residual copper took substantially longer. This was thought to be due to passivation of the chalcopyrite surfaces by metal-deficient polysulfide and/or sulfur. Overall, the chalcopyrite concentrate proved relatively easy to leach and the choice of process would depend upon a combination of factors such as the (1) cost of oxygen, (2) cost of ultra-fine grinding if required, (3) cost and availability of neutralising agents for acid or use of spent acid (e.g. heap leaching), (4) cost and availability of electricity, (5) availability of suitable process water, (6) method for copper recovery (SX-EW versus direct EW of copper re-leach solution) and (7) characteristics of the leach residue (e.g. settling, stability). Changing the process conditions was found to have a significant impact upon (1) the conversion of sulfide to sulfur and/or sulfate and therefore the oxygen requirement, (2) the phases found in the leach residue and (3) the production of basic copper salts. The oxidation of sulfide to elemental sulfur was typically, 80–90% at low temperature whereas at temperatures of 180 °C and above, sulfate was exclusively produced. In the presence of added sodium chloride, however, the oxidation of sulfur to sulfate was slower, enabling sulfur to be detected in leach residues produced at 220 °C. This could be detrimental when acid by-product is needed, residues are required to be treated to recover gold and silver, or when direct EW is necessary. At high temperatures and when low pulp density pulps were processed, hematite was the dominant phase in the leach residue. Increasing the process acidity by increasing the pulp density favoured the production of other iron-containing phases such as (hydronium) jarosite and basic ferric sulfate. The addition of sodium ions stabilised natrojarosite production. While changes to the process water had a significant effect upon the composition of the leach residue it caused only minor variations in the final copper extraction. However, a significant change to the initial leaching rate was noted when sodium chloride was present. Basic copper salts were produced under Activox® conditions in the presence of added chloride ions. When the sulfate level was low, atacamite was precipitated, whereas when sufficient sulfate was added or generated during leaching, antlerite was formed. Maintaining a low acidity also promoted the formation of goethite whereas an increase in acidity and the addition of sodium chloride favoured jarosite production, as well as keeping the copper in solution. Amorphous iron precipitates were also generated though these would be expected to have a negative impact upon solid–liquid separation. This work was funded by CSIRO Minerals and the Parker Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgical Solutions. The authors also wish to thank the analytical team, Milan Chovancek, Darren Atheis and Mike O'Shea for providing the analytical data for this study. Furthermore, Phan Khanh is acknowledged for the acquisition of the XRD data. Goutam Das and Matthew Jeffery are also thanked for useful comments on this manuscript.