The rheology of paste or thickened tailings, which are mineral tailings treated with polymers and subsequently dewatered, is complex and time-dependent. The complex rheological behavior is exacerbated by the permanent change in rheology that occurs when the mixture is exposed to shearing (e.g. in pumps and pipes), primarily through breakdown and restructuring of the aggregates of particles that comprise the dispersed phase. While the effects of shearing on structural changes of aggregates in a dilute suspension are reasonably well characterized, the relationship in more concentrated suspensions treated with polymer flocculants is not well understood. In the present study, a custom-built, concentric cylinder shearing apparatus is used to shear a large volume of flocculant-dosed (thickened) kaolinite suspension. The evolution of the particle size distribution (PSD) and vane yield stress were monitored as a function of shear energy input. Size distributions were obtained using the Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement (FBRM) technique. Concentrated suspensions were prepared using two different anionic polymers and at two suspension pH values to evaluate the effect of polymer structure and water chemistry on changes in the vane yield stress and aggregate size. Changes in both measured parameters correlated directly with shear energy input. During shearing, a large population of smaller aggregates, in the 10–100 μm size range, is generated. Aggregate size reduction occurs in concert with structural changes; together, they dictate the value of the equilibrium (fully-sheared) yield stress. At pH 7, the aggregates were able to restructure due to edge-edge associations between kaolinite particles. This phenomenon was not observed at pH 8.5, resulting in an equilibrium yield stress ∼1/3 the value of that measured at pH 7. The chemical composition of the polymer flocculants did not affect the yield stress or aggregate size over the shear energy input range studied here.The mining industry produces millions of tonnes of fluid fine tailings annually, and this is expected to increase with rising demand for precious minerals ( Kaolinite represents one of the most predominant clay types encountered in mineral tailings and is often used in model studies due to its well characterized chemistry and morphology ( The most commonly used polymer flocculants for destabilizing mineral tailings are high molecular mass anionic polyacrylamides (PAM A), which are favored due to the high initial settling rates (ISR) achieved at relatively low dose and cost ( The resulting flocculated aggregates are highly porous, thus entrapping water, and require further compaction to increase the overall solids loadings of the tailings.  Further complicating the issue is the resulting rheology of the flocculated suspension. The rheological behavior of flocculant-dosed clay suspensions is strongly affected by the degree of flocculation, water chemistry, and clay surface physico-chemical properties ( Only very few studies of the effect of shearing on concentrated suspensions of flocculant-dosed tailings are available in the literature. To the authors’ knowledge, there is no study in the literature that examines the underlying mechanisms of shear-induced rheology degradation – specifically the relationship between aggregate structure and yield stress as a function of shear energy to which the suspension is exposed. The objective of the present study is therefore to examine how the shearing of highly concentrated, polymer flocculant-dosed kaolinite suspensions decreases aggregate size due to fragmentation, thus affecting both aggregate structure and suspension yield stress. There are some studies that describe the effects of shear on aggregate structure, and others that report the effect of shear on flocculated suspension rheology. However, there appears to be no study that links the two phenomena for flocculant-dosed suspensions, especially at high solids-loadings. In the present study the two main parameters, aggregate size and suspension yield stress, are measured as a function of shear energy input. A model tailings suspension composed of kaolinite is used because of such suspensions are well characterized and exhibit highly reproducible rheological behavior that has been shown to be similar to that of industrial fine tailings ( Rather than describing the experimental procedures in detail, a flow chart showing the major steps is shown in Each test required the preparation of a dilute, 8% solids (by mass) kaolinite suspension. The suspension was concentrated to 41% solids by mass using a combination of polymer flocculant and a gravity filtration apparatus. Roughly 620 cm A mass of 305 g of kaolinite (Kentucky Tennessee Clay Co.) with a mean primary particle size of 1.2 μm and an inherent density of 2560 kg/m The two polymers used in the present study were obtained from CIBA Chemicals. Magnafloc® 1011 is a ‘very high’ molecular mass PAM A of 30% charge and unknown chemical composition and Magnafloc® LT27AG, is an ‘ultra-high’ molecular mass PAM A of known chemical composition, poly(acrylamide-co-acrylate), and medium charge density. Polymer stock solutions (10 g/L) were prepared by stirring 1.0 g of polymer solid with 100 mL of deionized water at 60 RPM for 12 h (overnight). A pitched-blade impeller, 5 cm in diameter, was placed roughly 5 mm from the base of beaker that was 7.5 cm in diameter. The beaker was covered with Parafilm M® during stirring to minimize evaporation. Fresh 1 g/L feed solutions were prepared daily by mixing 10 mL of 10 g/L stock solution with 90 mL of deionized water, followed by 30 min of stirring at 200 RPM. Polymer stock solutions were stored in a cool, dark location and discarded after two days. Kaolinite clay suspensions were prepared as per Section A concentrated, paste-like suspension was prepared by dewatering the flocculant-dosed kaolinite suspension. Due to the dramatic increase in suspension rheology with increasing solids volume fraction, the target suspension concentration was 41 ± 1% solids (by mass), which is 21 ± 1% by volume. A Buchner funnel was fitted with a 1 mm stainless steel mesh bowl and a 5 μm industrial filter paper to dewater the large aggregates. The Buchner funnel was 20 cm in diameter and the stainless steel mesh bowl was fitted such that the base of the bowl did not come in contact with the bottom of the Buchner funnel. In a 4 L container, 3.5 L of dilute clay suspension was prepared as outlined in Section A custom-designed concentric cylinder shearing apparatus was fabricated for this program. It is shown in Shear rate and shearing time were combined in a single parameter, i.e. shear energy input. Shearing times were varied from 10 s to 10 min at 120 RPM to test a broad range of energy input values. Shear energy input was calculated using ( Vane yield stress measurements were conducted using a six-bladed FL100 vane (D = 22 mm, H = 16 mm) attachment on a Haake Viscotester 550. The vane was rotated at very low angular velocity (0.0075 rad/s) and the maximum measured torque value was used to calculate the vane yield stress ( The sheared sample was first gently poured from the concentric cylinder shearing apparatus into a 300 mL beaker. Three vane yield stress measurements were taken from each concentrated suspension and averaged, for both the initial and sheared samples. The vane placement was staggered within the sample to provide three separate measurements and a more representative averaged yield stress value. As part of this study, numerous methods were used to directly measure the size distributions of the concentrated suspensions using FBRM. Unfortunately, most methods did not provide representative, reproducible results, often because of probe tip fouling and/or multiple scattering of the reflected laser light from the FBRM probe. Fouling could be delayed with intense mixing; however this affected aggregate size, thus producing a highly time-dependent measurement. A rapid dilution method was developed to prevent fouling and minimize the amount of shearing energy (and hence aggregate size reduction) imparted to the suspension. The rapid dilution technique allowed reasonable estimates of the aggregate size distribution in the concentrated suspension, as will be discussed in Section The following procedure was developed in order to produce a dilute, homogenous system with minimal shear energy input prior to measurement: 420 mL of deionized water, adjusted to have the same pH as the suspension, was stirred at 350 RPM with the FBRM probe placed at a 45° angle and 3 cm from the base of a 500 mL beaker. Roughly 80 cm The rapid dilution procedure took less than 20 s. The first chord length distribution obtained with the FBRM after The rapid dilution technique, described above, was used to obtain chord length distributions with the FBRM. The dilution/homogenization process was tracked using the volume-number (or cube-weighted) chord length, This volume-number mean chord length was selected as it is more appropriate for larger particles ( Following homogenization, the suspension reaches a dynamic steady state where Initial, unsheared properties of the concentrated suspensions tested during the present study are shown in The frequency distributions of the unsheared suspensions were monomodal with chord lengths ranging from 10 to 1000 µm and a mode of ∼400 μm, as shown in As shown in The highest rate of fragmentation occurs between E = 0 and E = 200 kJ/m As shown in As mentioned previously, and shown in To demonstrate how aggregate restructuring leads to an apparent solids volume fraction reduction, which in turn causes the suspension yield stress to decrease, we apply aggregate fractal dimension data from Eq. It should be noted that the point of this exercise was show that the two measured parameters (aggregate size and suspension yield stress) can be directly related by considering the effect of aggregate structural changes that occur during shearing. In other words, the reduction in Profiles of In As shown in As shown in Once E > 500 kJ/m A cost-effective, time-efficient and reproducible method of studying rheology degradation has been developed and tested. This method avoids the use of a pipe loop while also avoiding the pitfalls typically associated with concentric cylinder rheometry when studying high yield stress fluids. As well, we present a fundamental mechanism for the yield stress reduction (shear degradation) of flocculant-dosed tailings suspensions with two common polymer flocculants used internationally in the mining and mineral processing industries. The decrease in yield stress is related to the reduced apparent solids volume fraction of the suspension, which is caused by aggregate fragmentation and compaction upon shearing. After significant shear energy input, a substantial population of fragments that are 1–100 μm in size is established, which dominates the rheological behavior of the suspension. The surface potential of kaolinite particles, which is altered with pH, influences fragment structure causing changes to the equilibrium yield stress. At pH values near the IEP of the edge surface, relatively shear-resistant and porous aggregates (compared to a higher pH suspension) dramatically augment the equilibrium (fully-sheared) yield stress of the suspension. Finally, the use of the thoroughly specified mixing and shearing conditions presented in this study will facilitate the future investigation of the effects of polymer type and suspension chemistry on (a) the structure of the aggregates ( The authors would like to thank the Institute for Oil Sands Innovation (IOSI) for providing the primary source of funding for this project and for access to the FBRM. We are grateful also for the guidance of Q. Liu (IOSI Director) and A. Dunmola (Industrial project sponsor). Additional research funding and infrastructure was provided through the support of the NSERC Industrial Research Chair in Pipeline Transport Processes (held by RS Sanders). The contributions of Canada’s Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and the Industrial Sponsors (Canadian Natural Resources Limited, CNOOC-Nexen Inc., Saskatchewan Research Council’s Pipe Flow Technology Centre™, Shell Canada Energy, Suncor Energy, Syncrude Canada Ltd., Total SA, Teck Resources Ltd., and Paterson & Cooke Consulting Engineering Ltd.) are recognized with gratitude.