In this paper, 3 kinds of hydrophobic deep eutectic solvents were screened out for gold recovery due to their low viscosity, which were constructed by ionic liquids: [N3333]Br, [N4444]Br and [N8881]Br and N-hexanoic acid. Anion exchange mechanism during the extraction process was proposed through the combination of UV–vis and FT-IR. Subsequently, the extraction behaviors under different conditions, such as: salinity (NaCl/NaBr), acidity and Au(III) concentration were investigated and discussed. N8881-Br-acid showed the best extraction ability: it showed the 96.8% extraction efficiency on 1 mM Au(III) solution, compared with N4444-Br-acid (around 93% on 0.6 mM) and N3333-Br-acid (around 91% on 0.6 mM). Besides that, the N8881-Br-acid showed the better salinity resistance among 3 DESs. The extracted Au(III) in the DESs phase was easily and completely stripped by applying 1 mL 0.1 g/mL NaBH4, and each extraction ability maintained after 5 turns of extraction cycle experiments. Since the excellent behaviors showed in the multi-metal selective extraction and extraction cycle experiments, the N8881-Br-acid was regarded as the most potential system for gold recovery from HCl medium. Furthermore, its operating conditions combination: operating temperature and vibration time were optimized to 19 °C and 13 min by applying response surface methodology (RSM). Under optimized conditions combination and given A/O = 1:1, the complete extraction procedure only needs two theoretical stages with a tiny amount (~5%) of Au(III) left, which is indicated by drawing Mccabe-Thiele diagram.Nowadays, gold has been widely applied in chemistry, commercial investments, high-tech manufacturing and so on ( Novel extractants with high extraction ability and easy functionalization, were discovered and applied, such as: functional ionic liquids. Since the first industrial process involving ionic liquids was announced in 2003, the potential of ionic liquids is beginning to be recognized ( However, the method of hydrophobic DES preparation showed us a novel idea to solve the above problems. Deep eutectic solvents are a class of mixture composed by the HBA (hydrogen bond acceptor) and HBD (hydrogen bond donor) ( So, in this paper, the prospects and extraction behavior of hydrophobic DESs based on quaternary ammonium salts for gold recovery were discussed. The quaternary ammonium salts with short alkyl chain: [N The tetra-ethyl-ammonium bromide (TEAB, A.R.), tetra-propyl-ammonium bromide (TPAB, A.R.), octyl-trimethyl-ammonium bromide (A.R.) were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Beijing Co., Ltd., (Beijing China). Decanoic acid (A.R.), n-Hexyl alcohol (A.R.), 1-hexanol (A.R.), glycerol (A.R.), 1-propyl alcohol (A.R.), Ethylene glycol (A.R.), were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Beijing Co., Ltd., (Beijing China). MnCl Quaternary ammonium salts as HBA was mixed with HBD reagents (decanoic acid, 1-propyl alcohol, ethylene glycol, glycerol, 1-hexanol, N-hexanoic acid (molar ratio = 1:1)). Then the mixtures were heated up to 90 °C and stirred for 60 min until formation of a homogenous transparent phase. Then, the synthesized DESs were cooled and stored under the room temperature. Take influence factors part for example, 1 mL of Au(III) chloride solution (concentration varies from 0.2 to 1.4 mM) and 1 mM*1 mL of DESs (diluted by n-hexanoic acid) were mixed together at room temperature (25 °C). The samples were centrifuged for 10 min after 30 min mechanical vibration to make sure the status of the clear biphasic phases. The concentration of Au(III) remaining in water was determined by flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS). Extraction efficiency (E%) was applied to quantify the ability that DESs combined with Au(III). The value could be calculated using Eq. (1): A central-composite-designed Response surface methodology (RSM-CCD) was employed to optimize the comprehensive effects including temperature (A: 0–50 °C) and vibration time (B: 10–20 min) on gold extraction yield (Y The whole optimization experiments were conducted with the fixed concentration of Au(III) solution (197 mg/L), DES (1 mM) and the ratio of A/O (1:1). The analysis of the statistics was based on the Design Expert software (Version 8.0.6). The second-order equation obtained and model analysis were shown in RSM optimization part. 5 hydrophilic low alkyl chain quaternary ammonium ionic liquids: [N In order to investigate the extraction ability and behaviors of DES composed by different alkyl chain length and avoid the effects of the structures brought by different HBDs, N All the 3 DESs were showing a certain ability to extract Au(III) from aqueous phase. In order to investigate the interaction between AuCl Then, the FT-IR spectra was used to confirm that if the structures of DESs changed before and after extraction. It was found that, strong non-planar rocking vibration absorption peaks of –OH showed around 933.02 (a symbol of di-polymer status because of the inter-molecule hydrogen bonds) in Since the anion exchange mechanism was proved, following experimental conditions including concentration of Au(III), salinity and HCl were applied to investigate their gold extraction abilities. Besides, vibrating time was fixed at 30 min, and the operating temperature is based on room temperature (25 °C). The concentration of DESs was fixed at 1 mM with the concentration of Au(III) varying. The extraction ability increases with the length of alkyl chains increases, shown in All the gold extraction abilities of 3 DESs could maintain at maximum when the pH = 2. It showed the monotonous decreasing trends when the amount of HCl increased, shown in In summary, during extraction process, the N High efficiency gold separation from waste electrical and electronic equipment is one of the most important factors to evaluate the applicability of the DESs in hydrometallurgy. Multi-metal solution includes 1 mM of Mg(II), Al(III), Mn(II), Co(II), Cu(II), Au(III), Ce(III) and Ni(II). 1 mM of the 3 DES were added to the 1 mL multi-metal solutions respectively. One-step reduction method by adopting NaBH Owing to the excellent ability of N Both the operating temperature and vibration time have significant effects on the extraction efficiency. Accordingly, the two factors level was set at: 0, 25 and 50 °C; 10, 15 and 20 min. The goal was set at 192 mg/L, according to the average value calculated by the previous experiments. Details of ANOVA were shown in Fig. S2, giving a 3D response surface plots by using DesignExpert.V10.0.7 software was shown in The Au(III) extraction distribution isotherm and the McCabe–Thiele diagram obtained are showing in Three hydrophobic DES with low viscosity were screened out, constructed by [N The authors declare no competing financial interests. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at