The aim of the study was to determine the effect of soaking in an ascorbic acid (5 g/L) and citric acid (5 g/L) solution and modified atmosphere packaging on glucosinolate (GLS) levels in a coleslaw mix stored for 12 days at 4 °C. Samples were packaged under modified atmosphere consisting of 5/10/85, 20/25/55, 50/30/20, 70/30/0% of O2/CO2/N2, as well as air. The in-pack gas levels, the glucosinolate contents (GLS) and the in vitro cytotoxicity of the glucosinolate extract toward human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) were determined. The pre-treatment caused a significant decrease in the contents of aliphatic glucosinolates. During storage, following an initial increase, GLS decreased. After the storage period, the level of aliphatic glucosinolates in the coleslaw mix was 17%–34% lower than in the salad prior to pretreatment, though indole glucosinolates were 21%–152% higher. The 5/10/85% of O2/CO2/N2 atmosphere in packaging of the coleslaw mix resulted in the highest of GLS levels.Numerous epidemiological studies have indicated a correlation between the potential for reducing the risk of certain cancers (such as breast, cervical, prostate, lung or colon cancer) and the increased consumption of vegetables from the During minimal processing the raw material is subjected to pretreatment, one of the objectives of which is to reduce the contamination level. Our earlier studies have shown that an alternative to use of chlorine is to soak the coleslaw mix in a solution of ascorbic and citric acids (data unpublished). However, this process may contribute to a reduction in GLSs in the raw material. Glucosinolates and some of their hydrolysis products are water-soluble and will be leached into the water. The amount lost depends on the type of vegetable, the treatment time, the vegetable–to–water ratio and also on the type of GLS ( The shelf life of a coleslaw mixes may be extended with modified atmosphere packaging. An atmosphere containing 1%–5% oxygen and 5%–10% carbon dioxide (the balance being nitrogen) is the most commonly recommended variant for vegetables ( There is a limited amount of literature data on the effects of minimal processing, including the use of modified atmosphere, on changes in levels of glucosinolates in minimally processed vegetables. The results are not always consistent and they suggest that there are effects of both atmosphere and the raw material on the amount of glucosinolates in the tissue. The literature data also show that de novo synthesis of glucosinolates during storage can occur ( The aim of our experiments was to determine the effect of pretreatment and atmosphere composition and storage time on changes in GLS in coleslaw mix. The dry coleslaw mix consisted of 80% shredded white cabbage cv. Galaxy F1 and 20% carrot cv. Perfekcja. The vegetables came from a farm located near Poznań, Poland. After harvest, the raw materials were stored for 1 week at 1 °C. The cabbage was prepared by removing the outer leaves and coring the heads using a sharp knife. The carrots were hand-peeled. The vegetables were then washed in tap water and dried with absorbent paper. After drying, the vegetables were shredded mechanically–the cabbage with a Nagema HU-1 (Dresden, Germany) and the carrot with a Robot Coupe CL 50 Ultra device (Vincennes, France). The shredded cabbage and carrot were mixed in an 80%:20% ratio (w/w) to produce the dry coleslaw mix. The antimicrobial treatment involved immersing the coleslaw for 5 min, with agitation, in a solution 5 g/L ascorbic acid and 5 g/L citric acid. Following pretreatment, adherent water was removed using a manual vegetable spinner (Zepter, Viersen, Germany). The shredded material was weighed out in 200 g portions and placed on 205 × 160 × 60 mm polypropylene trays with an oxygen transmission rate of 7–8 cm The concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide inside the packages were monitored using an Oxybaby gas analyzer by Witt-Gasetechnik (Witten, Germany). GLS was extracted from the material according to the official EU method The MCF-7 breast cancer cells (ECACC, UK) were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) supplemented with 1 g/L fetal bovine serum (Gibco Invitrogen Corporation, Grand Island, USA), 1 g/L nonessential amino acids (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and 50 mg/L−1gentamycin (Gibco Invitrogen Corporation, Grand Island, USA). The cells were seeded at an initial density of 2.5 × 10 The results were analyzed by two-way analysis of variance using a least significant difference multicomparison test to determine statistically significant differences at P = 0.05. The analysis was conducted using Statistica version 9.1 software (Tulsa, USA). All measurements were performed in triplicate. In samples packaged in air or under the atmospheres with 20/25/55; 50/30/20, 70/30/0% of O In samples packaged in a modified atmosphere containing 25% or 30% CO The decrease in O The GLS level in the fresh coleslaw was 33.10 mg/100 g fresh weight. A total of 6 glucosinolates were identified, two aliphatic (sinigrin and glucoiberin) and 4 indole (glucobrassicin, 4-hydroxyglucobrassicin, 4-methoxyglucobrassicin and neoglucobrassicin). The dominant glucosinolates were sinigrin (34%), glucoiberin (32%) and glucobrassicin (19%). In fresh coleslaw not subjected to the pretreatment, aliphatic glucosinolates accounted for 65% of all glucosinolates ( The pretreatment (5 min soaking in a solution of ascorbic and citric acids) caused a 20% reduction of the contents of aliphatic glucosinolates, with a 26% decrease in glucoiberin and a 14% of sinigrin levels ( In the pretreatment samples, a significant increase was also seen in the contents of indole glucosinolates, particularly glucobrassicin ( In the initial period of storage of the coleslaw mix, a significant increase was found in the levels of the investigated compounds. The greatest increase was recorded in samples packaged in a modified atmosphere with a CO Further storage caused a decrease in GLS in the samples. Considerable losses of sinigrin and an increase in glucobrassicin during storage contributed to changes in the profile of these compounds in the salads after 12 days of storage. The dominant glucosinolate was glucobrassicin, whose content in samples packaged in the air and in the atmosphere of 5/10/85, 20/25/5%O After the storage period, the contents of aliphatic glucosinolates in the coleslaw mix were 17%−34% lower than in the salad prior to pretreatment. In the case of indole glucosinolates, they were 21%–152% higher. The total GLS was 38%, 23–27% and 10% higher in the samples packaged under the modified atmospheres with 5/10/85% O  A decrease in the levels of aliphatic glucosinolates, and an increase in indole glucosinolates, was found in turnips stored for 10 days under passive and active modified atmospheres by We observed in our experiments a marked increase in the content of glucoiberin (in some samples up to day 9 of storage), particularly at the elevated levels of CO  Glucosinolate extracts from coleslaw reduced proliferation of the MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. Literature data show that the cytotoxic activity of brassica vegetables towards cancer cells is caused by glucosinolate degradation products, mainly derivatives of glucobrassicin: indole-3-carbinol and bis(3′-indolyl)methane. These compounds modulate multiple responses in cancer cell lines through several pathways: kinase inhibition, endoplasmic reticulum stress or mitochondrial effect inducing apoptosis ( Changes in levels of GLS in coleslaw mix during storage were significantly affected by the composition of the atmosphere used in packaging. High levels (25% or 30%) of carbon dioxide in the initial stages of storage seems to be a factor promoting de novo synthesis of GLS. However, in the final period of storage (after 12 days), coleslaw mix samples packaged in the atmosphere with high CO This study was financially supported by the