The protocol for the enzymatic deinking of laser printed waste papers on a laboratory scale using cellulase (C) and hemicellulase (H) of Aspergillus niger (Amano) was developed as an effective method for paper recycling. A maximum deinking efficiency of almost 73% by the enzyme combination of C:H was obtained using the deinking conditions of pulping consistency of 1.0% (w/v) with the pulping time of 1.0min, temperature of 50°C, pH=3.5, agitation rate of 60rpm, pulp concentration of 4% (w/v), concentration of each enzyme of 2.5U/g air dried pulp and the enzyme ratio of 1:1. The deinking efficiency was further enhanced to 95% using the optimized flotation system consisting of pH=6.0, Tween 80 of concentration 0.5% (w/w), working air flow rate of 10.0L/min and temperature of 45°C. The deinked papers were found to exhibit properties comparable to the commercial papers suggesting the effectiveness of the enzymatic process developed.The demand for papers continues to be strong despite the general believe that advancement in information technology and computerization would result in a paperless global society. Malaysia needs to double its capacity in paper production if the country is to achieve the state of self-sufficiency by the year 2010. However, one of the major obstacles faced by the paper making industries in Malaysia is the lack of raw materials and therefore, most of the papers products consumed in the country are imported, worth about of US$0.70 billion in the year 2000 with an annual increment of 10% (Malaysian Pulp and Paper Manufacturer Association, MPPMA). Thus, the search for new sources of fibers for paper making becomes important in ensuring the survival of the country’s paper industries in the near future. Although, new fibers have been considered particularly from non-wood lignocellulolytic materials such as oil palm trunks fibers and kenaf fibers (a species of Three commercially available enzyme powders used in the work were gifts from Amano Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd. (Nagoya, Japan) comprising of lipase F-AP 15 (L) [23750 Cellulase activity was determined by the method described by Batch deinking process involved the preparation of pulp, enzymatic hydrolysis stage and flotation system. The pulp from the laser printed office waste papers used in the deinking process was prepared by disintegration to obtain 2% (w/w) pulp consistency for 4 After the enzymatic hydrolysis, the hydrolysed paper was subjected to the flotation process. The flotation process was carried in a 600-ml vertically tubular flotation cell of diameter 3.2 Deinking efficiency was expressed based on the brightness of the paper. The handsheets were prepared based on the method by the Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (TAPPI), TAPPI Test Method T218 om91 for reflectance testing of pulp (Buchner Funnel Procedure). Handsheets were conditioned under controlled conditions as described in TAPPI Test Methods (TAPPI T402) before the deinked papers were evaluated for its brightness. The paper brightness (%) was determined by the method of TAPPI T452 (Brightness of pulp, paper and paper Board) (directional Reflectance at 457 The control experiment was also performed using enzymes, which were heat inactivated at 100 The tensile strength of the deinked papers was determined based on the TAPPI T494 test method (Model LLOYD), while the tear index was determined based on the internal resistance of the handsheet using the Electronic tearing tester (Model Protear (Thwing Albert, USA)) as described in the method of TAPPI T414. The bursting strength of the handsheet was determined based on the method of TAPPI T403 procedure using the bursting strength tester, Model 3720 (Lesson Industrial Corporation, Ltd., Taiwan).  Pulping consistency refers to the amount of papers used in the pulping process which will determine the size of microfibrils; higher pulping consistency resulted higher or rougher fibre sizes and texture. The deinking efficiency dropped with increasing pulping consistency. The maximum deinking efficiency was obtained with the pulp consistency of 1–2% with the efficiency of about 62%. Higher pulping consistency may not be suitable due to lower surface area for enzymatic action. Using the pulping consistency of 2%, the pulping time was varied and it was found that the pulping time in the range of 1–3 The maximum deinking efficiency of 69.8% was obtained at 50 The optimum pH for cellulase and hemicellulase were 2.5 and 4.5, respectively. However, the optimum pH of the enzyme mixture for pulp hydrolysis was 3.5 with the deinking efficiency of 72.1% compared to other pH (significant level, Agitation is performed for several purposes such as dispersion and mixing of enzyme preparations in the reaction system, enhancement of enzyme contact with the pulp and prevention of toner accumulation on the surfaces of the paper fibers. While excessive agitation resulted detrimental effect, continuous mixing at lower agitation rate improved the brightness of the pulp ( The pulp concentration effect was examined in the range of 3–5% (w/v) and the results obtained indicated that the maximum deinking efficiency was obtained using the pulp concentration of 4% with the deinking efficiency of 72.8%. The deinking efficiency decreased to about 67.9% at the pulp concentration of 4.5%, which could be related to the substrate inhibition or enzyme inadequacy for higher substrate. The selection of the optimal enzyme concentration is important since excessive enzymes may be corrosive to the fibers and thus affected the strength of the paper and its quality. There was no significant difference in deinking efficiency in the range of 70–73% with the enzyme concentration in the range of 5–25 The effect of enzyme ratios indicates the importance of one enzyme to another in the enzyme mixture. The use of equal ratio of C:H enzyme concentration of 1:1 (2.5 One of the factors that determines the deinking efficiency or the brightness of the handsheets is the ability of the ink particles to be removed effectively and prevent redeposition onto the fiber surfaces. After the enzymatic action, the fiber surfaces are heavily clouded by the toner particles and during the flotation process, the toner particles readily adheres to the air bubbles, which will then be lifted to the top of the tubular flotation cell. The toner is then removed from the flotation cell by the liquid overflow, leaving the clear white pulp. In order to ensure effective toner removal, optimum conditions for the flotation process must be achieved. The presence of surfactant forms an important component of flotation system, which helps the toner to form agglomerates by altering the hydrophobicity of the agglomerates and can be lifted by the air bubbles as the air flows through the fibers (  The authors thank Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation, Malaysia for providing the research grant under the IRPA programme (09-02-05-2166 EA 004). The work forms a part of the Master of Science thesis of Mr. Lee C.K.