Here, solutions with 0.185mM of the herbicide diuron of pH 3.0 have been treated by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) like electrochemical oxidation with electrogenerated H2O2 (EO-H2O2), electro-Fenton (EF) and UVA photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) or solar PEF (SPEF). Trials were performed in stirred tank reactors of 100mL and in a recirculation flow plant of 2.5L using a filter-press reactor with a Pt or boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and an air-diffusion cathode for H2O2 electrogeneration. Oxidant hydroxyl radicals were formed from water oxidation at the anode and/or in the bulk from Fenton’s reaction between added Fe2+ and generated H2O2. In both systems, the relative oxidation ability of the EAOPs increased in the sequence EO-H2O2
                     <EF<PEF or SPEF. The two latter processes were more powerful due to the photolysis of intermediates by UV radiation. In the stirred tank reactor, the PEF treatment with BDD was the most potent method, yielding 93% mineralization after 360min at 100mAcm−2. In the flow plant, the SPEF process attained a maximum mineralization of 70% at 100mAcm−2. Lower current densities slightly reduced the mineralization degree in SPEF, enhancing the current efficiency and dropping the energy consumption. The diuron decay always obeyed a pseudo-first-order kinetics, with a much greater apparent rate constant in EF and SPEF compared to EO-H2O2. Oxalic and oxamic acids were detected as final carboxylic acids. Ammonium and chloride ions were also released, the latter ion being partially converted into chlorate and perchlorate ions at the BDD surface.Recently, several electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) are being developed for water remediation ( Good efficiencies for H The most popular EAOP is anodic oxidation or electrochemical oxidation (EO), where organics are oxidized at high current by physisorbed M( The best anode known for EO is the BDD thin film ( The oxidation ability of EO-H In photoelectro-Fenton (PEF), the solution is irradiated with artificial UVA light ( Our group has demonstrated that in EF, PEF and SPEF, aromatics are more quickly destroyed by Phenylurea herbicides are applied to the pre- and post-emergence control of weeds in many crops and also on roads and railways. Among phenylureas, diuron (3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea, see chemical structure in This paper aims to study the comparative mineralization of a 0.185 Reagent grade diuron (>98% purity) from Sigma–Aldrich was used as received. Anhydrous sodium sulfate, ferrous sulfate heptahydrate and oxalic and oxamic acids were of analytical grade from Merck and Fluka. Solutions degraded in stirred tank reactors were prepared with high-purity water obtained from a Millipore Milli-Q system (resistivity The electrolytic trials at laboratory scale were conducted in open, undivided and cylindrical tank reactors containing a 100 Treatments with a 2.5 Before the use of both electrolytic systems, the electrodes were polarized in 0.05 The solution pH was measured on a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. The samples withdrawn from electrolyzed solutions were neutralized at pH 7–8 to quench the degradation process and filtered with 0.45 In the flow plant, the energy consumption per unit DOC mass (EC The diuron removal was followed by reversed-phase HPLC with a Waters 600 LC fitted with a Waters Spherisorb ODS 2 5 To check the oxidation ability of the EAOPs regarding diuron and the influence of anode materials, 100  The influence of Despite the positive effect of increasing Since the above study showed the superiority of the BDD/air-diffusion cell to destroy the herbicide in all the treatments, the processes were scaled-up to a 2.5  The MCE values depicted in The effect of The aforementioned findings indicate a very difficult mineralization of diuron solutions by EAOPs with BDD due to the formation of highly recalcitrant products. For the more potent SPEF process, low The kinetics of the reaction between diuron and generated hydroxyl radicals (BDD( The oxidation of diuron with hydroxyl radicals leads to demethylated derivatives like 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1-methylurea, 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)urea and 3,4-dichloroaniline ( The solutions treated in the flow plant were also analyzed by ion chromatography to determine the released inorganic ions. Its initial N was expected to be converted into NO It has been demonstrated that 100 The authors acknowledge funding from MICINN (