The proximal humerus fracture (PHF) is the third most common fracture in the elderly (after hip and wrist fractures) and is increasingly prevalent. While frequently the result of a low-energy fall from standing height in the elderly, PHFs may also occur in younger patients from high-velocity trauma, which more often result in displacement and associated dislocation. Generally, for the young, every effort is made to preserve the patient’s native bone and achieve anatomic reduction and stable fixation of the fracture fragments. Fixation options following reduction include transosseous sutures, percutaneous pins, fixed-angle plates, and intramedullary (IM) nails. Although it should not occur frequently, humeral hemiarthroplasty (HHA) may be indicated for a young patient if the head fragment is completely devascularized and free from all capsular attachments. Unfortunately, surgeons have not been able to reproduce the results obtained by Charles Neer; A great deal of confusion persists regarding the surgical treatment of PHFs in younger patients. Questions that still lack clear answers include: When must a PHF be considered displaced and undergo surgery? Which humeral heads will progress to osteonecrosis (ON)? Which devices should be used to fix those fractures? Who will benefit from a shoulder replacement? How can outcomes be maximized? Does the kind of prosthesis used matter? The purpose of this paper therefore is: (1) to review some common strategic pitfalls in the management of PHFs; (2) to review the different treatment methods and devices available—arthroplasty included—with their limitations; and (3) to report our center’s experience with ORIF and arthroplasty for PHFs and the recent improvements and innovations introduced in our practice. Because of the great forces needed to fracture the stout bone of the proximal humerus in younger patients, other potential life-threatening injuries must be diagnosed and managed. Regarding the PHF, at least 5 parameters are frequently misjudged during treatment decision making: (1) the fracture’s displacement; (2) the potential for humeral head ON; (3) the degree of osteopenia and fracture comminution; (4) the importance of greater tuberosity (GT) reduction; and (5) the internal rotation of the diaphyseal (shaft) fragment. Orthogonal radiographs and a computed tomography (CT) scan with 3-dimensional (3-D) reconstructions help identify the fracture pattern, associated comminution, and degree of osteopenia, and are therefore crucial in choosing the best treatment method. Determining whether or not the individual fractured bone segments are displaced to a significant degree can be difficult. Seventy-five years ago, Codman was the first to propose a PHF classification based on 4 main displaced fragments: (1) the humeral head; (2) the GT; (3) the lesser tuberosity (LT); and (4) the diaphysis. Although the reproducibility of the Neer-Codman classification has been questioned, it remains in our practice the most useful tool in the decision making process. Over- or under-estimating the potential for humeral head ON after a PHF are both common errors that may lead the surgeon to an inappropriate surgical treatment. As shown in Underestimating osteopenia is another common mistake, even with a young patient, and specifically with women in their fifties. It can lead to futile fixation attempts that are destined to fail with inevitable nonunions or malunions of tuberosity fragments and/or humeral head ON. Poor bone quality can cause “cut-out” of pins and screws and can increase the technical difficulty of HHA. Age and gender are risk factors for osteopenia, which can also be anticipated from standard radiographs by evaluating 3 parameters: (1) the density of the head fragment, (2) the comminution of the tuberosity fragments, and (3) the measured thickness of the diaphyseal cortical bone. Although age should always be taken into consideration, operative flexibility is essential, allowing changes in surgical strategy according to intraoperative findings. Thus, fixation that is inadequate secondary to poor bone quality may be salvaged by HHA under one anesthetic. Well-planned secondary and tertiary strategies—with the availability at the outset of the necessary instruments—diminish the consequences of strategic error. Underestimating GT importance and displacement is probably the worst error that can be made in the treatment of PHFs. Because of the pulling vectors of the 3 muscles attached to the GT, the displacement of this bone fragment is always posterior. Failure to reduce the GT leads to dramatically poor outcomes with no good salvage options. In our view, the GT is the key piece of the puzzle in 4-part proximal humerus fractures for at least 3 reasons: (1) an anatomical one: the GT is the guide to correct reduction of the native or prosthetic head; (2) a biological one: reduction of the GT not only provides a stable platform for the humeral head, but also contributes to its revascularization; and (3) a functional one: the external-rotator muscles attached on this small bone fragment are key muscles in the shoulder’s function. Based on our experience from revision cases, the GT is often neglected or poorly reattached for at least 4 reasons: (1) it is difficult to visualize, reduce, and fix a bone fragment that is posteriorly displaced through an anterior (deltopectoral) approach; (2) the fragment is often thin and comminuted and cannot be fixed with hardware; (3) surgeons often believe that the anatomic location of the GT is posterior whereas it is in fact Not reducing anatomically and reattaching the GT is the equivalent of not repairing a massive rotator cuff tear involving the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor: not surprisingly, this gives poor functional results. For good functional results, it is critical to restore the horizontal force couples applied to the proximal humerus. Leaving the GT posteriorly displaced definitively compromises the horizontal balance of the shoulder, affecting active external rotation as well as forward elevation. As shown in Following most shoulder injuries, patients tend to hold their arm close to their body, with the forearm against the abdomen. Because this “position of comfort” is also a practical one, surgeons have tended to keep patients in it regardless of the fracture type and treatment used. What is often forgotten is that this position brings the humeral shaft into almost 90° of internal rotation relative to the other proximal fragments. Whether treated operatively or nonoperatively, leaving the humerus to heal in that position clearly disturbs the above-mentioned horizontal force couple’s normal balance. Furthermore, if a rotatory malunion does ultimately occur at the level of the surgical neck, the bicipital groove is disturbed significantly. This makes the already-convoluted path of the long head of the biceps even more irregular, with a higher risk of bicipital irritation and associated pain. Worse, if the GT is also fractured, it would be further displaced by immobilization in internal rotation. Immobilizing the shoulder in neutral rotation reduces the chance of the above complications, and more appreciation is needed among surgeons of its multiple benefits. Many devices have been proposed with variable success for the surgical fixation of displaced PHFs. Transosseous suture fixation with sutures and suture anchors can be an ideal treatment for isolated displaced tuberosity fractures, but it is not recommended in isolation for the treatment of 3- and 4-part fractures. Percutaneous pinning or screw fixation of PHFs is an option for young patients with excellent bone quality, with the advantage of less periosteal stripping, reliable union rates, and a low incidence of ON. Fixation methods include cannulated screws or threaded Kirschner wires that have medial calcar purchase greater than 2 cm below the neck fracture. The threaded wires must be bent and cut below the skin to prevent any secondary displacement. Before concluding the surgery, the shoulder is put through a range of motion under fluoroscopy to ensure the construct’s stability. Surgeons should not persist with a percutaneous approach when the proximal humerus fracture proves irreducible or unstable; conversion to an alternative fixation method is necessary. Complications with this method remain frequent and include displacement and malunion because of construct instability, pin migration, pin infection, nerve injury, and development of glenohumeral osteoarthritis. Plate fixation has come back to the forefront because of the advent of fixed-angled plate technology. Although an anterolateral approach has been described, While the improved biomechanical properties of fixed-angle plates have contributed to the expansion of the indications for ORIF, complication rates remain relatively high. Intramedullary (IM) nails have the benefit of limited soft-tissue dissection and blood loss and the theoretical biomechanical advantage of reducing the bending-moment lever arm on the implant. Many other problems and complications encountered with existing proximal humeral nails have led to their current poor reputation. Excessively long or oversized nails can lead to distraction and surgical-neck nonunion. Screw back-out has also been a significant complication with existing IM devices (reported at a rate of 10-24%). Shoulder arthroplasty for fractures in younger patients, although rarely indicated, is sometimes necessary. Humeral hemiarthroplasty must be performed, even in younger patients, when the chances of humeral head survival are clearly slim and/or when bone quality is poor with little support for the head. This can be due to comminuted head splitting fractures, fracture-dislocations, and impression fractures with >40% of articular surface involvement. Humeral hemiarthroplasty for PHFs in young patients is technically demanding, and several studies have shown that it has a relatively high risk of complications. It must anatomically restore pre-fracture anatomy to optimize clinical function as well as prosthetic longevity. Our surgical management of PHFs in younger patients has improved dramatically in recent years by moving in the following 5 directions: (1) use of either a superior, trans-deltoid approach or a percutaneous approach for IM nailing; (2) use of a new locked IM nail based on GT-based fixation; (3) use of a fracture prosthesis in cases of humeral head devascularization; (4) use of an improved suture fixation technique—the Nice double-suture knot Poor surgical approach selection complicates access to the fracture’s fragments, resulting in unnecessary soft-tissue dissection, while making revision surgery frustrating. Preserving the deltoid and identifying and protecting the axillary nerve are fundamental requirements in shoulder surgery. For 2-part surgical neck fractures or “easy” 3-part fractures, we use a percutaneous superior approach placed anterior to the AC joint. As for HHA for higher-grade PHFs, we most often use the deltopectoral approach, which is the so-called “highway to the shoulder” and possibly the less aggressive approach. The trans-deltoid approach is also part of our armamentarium, however, as it has a useful role to play; most importantly, it provides easier access to the GT fragment (“the key piece of the puzzle”) and a direct path into the humeral canal. We perform IM nail fixation of 3- and 4-part displaced PHFs through the anterosuperior trans-deltoid approach using fluoroscopic control. To limit the extension down the deltoid and preserve the axillary nerve, an anteroposterior saber-shaped incision is made along Langer’s lines. This superior trans-deltoid approach does not violate any of the fracture fragments’ blood supply, and it greatly facilitates the reduction and fixation of the GT fragment. Surgical detachment of the anterior deltoid must be meticulously repaired, as deltoid deficiency, either from detachment or loss of innervation, is a “surgical disaster” with few solutions. To strengthen our repair, when detaching the anterior deltoid and coracoacromial ligament, we include a wafer of bone from the anterior acromion, which is later reattached using transosseous sutures. Almost all existing plates and nails have been designed to mainly fix the humeral head, whereas the main challenge is actually not in fixing the humeral head but reducing and fixing both tuberosities, most importantly the GT. Currently available plates and nails do not effectively counteract the deforming forces of the external and internal rotators on the GT and LT, respectively ( Since 2008, the senior author (PB) has treated patients with displaced PHFs using the Aequalis™ locked IM nail when the humeral head segment was deemed viable. Twenty-three patients (13 women and 10 men) with an average age of 61 years were evaluated with subjective questionnaires, physical examination, and plain radiographs with a mean follow-up of 13 months. There were five 2-part (surgical neck), eight 3-part, and ten 4-part fractures. At the latest follow-up, average active elevation was 146° (range, 90-160°), external rotation was 32° (range, 0-60°), and internal rotation was to the 3 Most available proximal humeral prostheses are too bulky to permit anatomic placement of the tuberosities and only allow for a small interface between the GT and the shaft, the critical zone for sound tuberosity healing. Because bony union with metal is unlikely, such implants often leave the GT ununited and at risk of redisplacement. Consequently, we have developed a low-profile fracture prosthesis, containing a reduced volume of metal. This allows the unaltered tuberosities to be reduced anatomically, and it allows more bone graft to be placed around the implant’s “metaphysis,” promoting tuberosity healing. As for “fins” or other projections from the prosthesis, these should help, not hinder, tuberosity fixation, and the fins of some prostheses are often positioned where the GT belongs. Finally, our fracture prosthesis has a roughened lateral aspect for greater primary bone stability, but its medial surface is left smooth to avoid damage to the tuberosity cerclage sutures. A series of 30 patients (18 women and 12 men), treated with a fracture prosthesis for the treatment of displaced or dislocated PHFs, were reviewed by 2 independent observers with a 2-year minimum follow-up (mean, 45 months; range, 24-48). The average age at surgery was 66 years (range, 39-86). There were 25 displaced 4-part fractures and 5 fracture-dislocations. The same implant (Aequalis™ fracture-prosthesis) and standardized technique of tuberosity fixation were used for all patients. The above-mentioned jig was used for prosthesis positioning in height and retroversion. A cancellous bone block harvested from the humeral head was incorporated in the prosthesis for all patients. Tuberosity fixation was performed using a previously described technique, with 4 horizontal cerclages and 2 vertical tension-band sutures. The overall functional results showed an average active anterior elevation of 136° (range, 70-180°), external rotation of 34° (range, 0-60°), and an internal rotation to the level of L3 (range, buttock-T7). The average absolute Constant score was 68 (range, 42-95) and 93% (range, 54-130%) when adjusted for age and gender. The Constant score was better for men and for patients under 75 years old. Radiographically, 4 patients (13%) had GT migration and final malposition. At follow-up, all patients but one were very satisfied or satisfied ( In recent years, we have been using a double suture with a sliding, self-stabilizing knot for tuberosity fixation. As addressed above, despite being the most common position of immobilization, internal rotation (with the forearm against the abdomen) places undue tension on the GT’s fixation ( Thus, to optimize the chances of anatomic union after all PHFs, we prescribe 3-4 weeks of immobilization in neutral rotation—the Displaced PHFs in young adults can be very challenging to manage surgically. Treatment options depend on fracture anatomy, bone quality, risk of ON, and surgeon’s comfort level. The GT is the cornerstone of the fracture puzzle; successful clinical outcome is dependent upon its reduction and healing. Generally, ORIF is recommended for young patients with good bone quality. Recent advances in tuberosity suture fixation and IM nail technology have expanded the use of both in our practice. Humeral hemiarthroplasty is indicated when the chances of humeral head survival are clearly compromised (as with head dislocation and devitalization) and/or when the bone quality is poor with little support for the head. Although rarely indicated, HHA in young patients must perfectly restore pre-fracture anatomy to optimize clinical function and prosthetic longevity. As part of preoperative planning, the surgeon must be able to switch to an alternative fixation system intraoperatively if the initial system proves inadequate. Postoperative immobilization in neutral rotation is encouraged. One author declares a financial relationship with a commercial entity related to the subject of this article. No outside funding or grants were received that assisted this study.