Periprosthetic acetabular fracture is a rare complication after total hip arthroplasty (THA). However, we have treated 2 patients with acute postoperative acetabular discontinuity that occurred 2 and 3 weeks after primary THA. Both fractures were in elderly osteoporotic female patients with minimal trauma and may have developed from unrecognized intraoperative fractures. Pelvic stability was restored with acetabular revision using medial morselized bone grafting and a cemented reconstruction cage. This report demonstrates that early postoperative periprosthetic acetabular discontinuity after THA is a risk in elderly patients with severe osteoporosis and that salvage of acetabular fixation can be achieved with cemented cage reconstruction and medial morselized bone grafting.Compared with periprosthetic femur fractures after total hip arthroplasty (THA), periprosthetic acetabular fractures are relatively uncommon Acetabular discontinuity is included in THA bone defect classification systems and typically represents a periprosthetic acetabular fracture usually resulting from severe bone loss due to osteolysis, prior surgery, or infection without trauma. Results of revision THA for acetabular discontinuity have generally been poor, although a number of techniques including dual plating, cages, and allografting have been used in an effort to achieve bony union We have treated 2 patients in whom periprosthetic acetabular discontinuity fractures occurred acutely, that is, within a time frame of 2 to 3 weeks after THA. Both patients were elderly women with severe osteoporosis. Their THAs were successfully salvaged with acetabular revision using a cemented cage technique with medial morselized bone grafting. A sedentary 85-year-old woman with coronary heart disease, prior right THA, and severe arthritis of both knees and left hip complained of left hip pain and required a walker for ambulation. Radiographs demonstrated joint space narrowing, cyst formation, osteoporosis, and mild protrusio of the left hip. The patient was treated with hybrid left THA. Severe osteoporosis was noted during surgery. The acetabulum was reamed medially to the floor of the acetabulum; and a small (2 cm) defect in the medial wall was identified, which was filled with morselized bone graft from the acetabular reamings. The peripheral rim remained intact and was considered suitable for cementless fixation. A peripherally widened cementless acetabular component (Interfit; Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN) that was 1.5 mm larger at the rim than the largest reamer used, and a cemented femoral stem (Spectron, Smith and Nephew, Memphis, Tenn) were implanted. No intraoperative fractures were identified, and the cup was fixed with 2 superiorly directed screws ( FUrgent revision left THA was performed. The acetabular cup was loose and easily removed. The periprosthetic fracture consisted of a transverse fracture with acetabular discontinuity and a large medial defect. The medial defect was filled with morselized allograft. The acetabulum was reconstructed using a cemented Contour reconstruction cage (Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN). Eighteen months after revision THA, the patient has no hip pain, but continues to have bilateral arthritic knee pain and ambulates with a walker. Radiographs demonstrate stable position of the hip reconstruction ( An 86-year-old woman underwent cementless THA for osteoarthritis using a Trilogy acetabular cup with screw fixation and VerSys Fiber Metal Taper femoral component (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). No complications were noted during surgery. Three weeks after surgery while at a skilled care facility, the patient started experiencing severe pain in the right hip after she had been “dropped” from a standing to a sitting position during a transfer with assistance. Radiographs showed protrusio of the right acetabulum and a right THA with pelvic discontinuity. Surgical revision of the acetabular component was undertaken. The femoral component was well fixed and retained. The acetabular cup was loose and easily removed. The periprosthetic acetabular fracture consisted of a large medial defect with discontinuity and a transverse fracture. The medial defect was filled with morselized corticocancellous allograft. A cemented Contour reconstruction cage (Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN) was then used to gain fixation to the ilium and ischium. At 6 month of follow-up, the patient has no hip pain; and radiographs demonstrate stable position of the reconstruction without evidence of cage migration. Factors that can contribute to periprosthetic acetabular fracture after THA include intraoperative trauma to the bone from reaming and impaction of implants, osteoporosis, and postoperative trauma resulting from falls. Peterson and Lewallen Sharkey et al Patients with osteoporosis often do not develop osteoarthritis. The pattern of arthritis with medial joint space narrowing and protrusio illustrated in case 1 is more typical of inflammatory arthritis than osteoarthritis and may indicate that lack of medial bony support also contributed to the risk of discontinuity fracture. Both of the patients in this report had an unstable periprosthetic acetabular discontinuity fracture pattern. Although the treatment of acetabular discontinuity secondary to gradual bone loss after THA has generally been poor, stable fixation was achieved; and there was evidence of bone healing at 3 months after revision in both of our patients. There are several factors that likely contributed to the ability to salvage acetabular fixation in our cases and differentiate these patients from those with acetabular discontinuity due to gradual bone loss after prior THA. Although some bone was lost as a result of fracture comminution and osteoporosis, the fractures occurred in well-vascularized bone that had not been devascularized from multiple prior surgeries, infection, or osteolysis. Cement fixation is effective in osteoporotic bone In summary, this report demonstrates that early postoperative periprosthetic acetabular discontinuity after THA is a risk in elderly patients with severe osteoporosis. However, salvage of acetabular fixation can be achieved with a cemented cage reconstruction and medial morselized bone grafting. Conflict of Interest Statement