 Surveying originated many centuries ago (most likely around 1400 It was not, however, until much later—the eighteenth century—that significant advances in surveying techniques began to occur. The need for more accurate nautical maps for navigation may have provided the initial impetus, but the necessity for better delineation of property boundaries as the value of property increased, as well as the construction of canals and railroads and, later, highways, also contributed to the development of new surveying techniques. The twentieth century has seen rapid and major improvements in surveying techniques, largely as a result of military requirements during the two World Wars and two “conflicts” (Korea and Vietnam) and of the space program. Modern surveying techniques include the use of electronic measuring devices, lasers, aerial photogrammetry, satellites, and computers, to name a few. It is important to differentiate between plane surveying and geodetic surveying. In Inasmuch as plane surveying is much simpler than geodetic surveying, local surveying is generally done under the concept of plane surveying (i.e., a “flat earth”). Geodetic surveying is required for surveys over larger areas (such as a state or country). In the United States, the unit for measuring distance has long been the If distances are measured in feet, a bounded area can be computed in If distances are measured in feet, an associated volume could be computed in Angular measurement is commonly determined in units of Surveying measurement and computation must be accurate. Land is often bought and sold for thousands of dollars per acre. It is the surveyor's job to determine the area of land, and any inaccuracies can be costly to the buyer or seller. Similarly, landowners may be compensated for earth being removed from their property for use in nearby highway construction on the basis of so much money per cubic yard of earth removed. Again, it is the surveyor's job to determine the volume of earth removed, and inaccuracies can be costly. Inaccuracies occur in surveying measurements as a result of errors and mistakes. An A Surveyors should always strive to minimize errors and avoid mistakes by concentrating on the job at hand, exercising care, using good judgement, and checking and rechecking whenever possible. Although some individuals have, in the past, become surveyors through the “school of hard knocks,” becoming a professional surveyor today generally requires some higher education as well as practical experience. The necessary higher education is often obtained as part of a baccalaureate engineering program, notably in civil engineering. An alternative is completion of a 2-year associate degree program emphasizing surveying. To perform surveying and be in responsible charge, a person is required by the states to be a registered (licensed) land surveyor. Registration (licensing) is carried out by the states. Although specific requirements vary somewhat from one state to another, the requirements generally involve satisfactory education, experience (under the supervision of a registered land surveyor), and good character. Some surveyors are self-employed; others work for surveying companies, engineering consulting companies, construction companies, and the like. Also, surveyors are employed by various government agencies, such as the Coast and Geodetic Survey and highway departments. Surveying is a good career choice for individuals who are seeking a challenge, are willing to work hard, and enjoy being out-of-doors. Perhaps the most basic operation in surveying is the measurement of As related in Horizontal distances can be determined in a variety of ways. Some common means are pacing, stadia, taping, and electronic measurement.    To begin with, as discussed previously, in measuring the distance between two points, either the measurement is made along a horizontal line between the points or the measurement is made along an inclined line between the points, with the horizontal distance computed and recorded. If a measurement is being made along a straight, horizontal surface, it is no problem to keep the tape horizontal, since it can be stretched tightly along the horizontal surface. For other situations, one can achieve horizontal alignment of the tape, at least approximately, by using a plumb bob at one or both ends of the tape and stretching the tape tightly. Another point to consider is that the tape must be stretched in a straight line between the end points of the line. Although this would appear to be a simple matter, it can be difficult in some cases, such as in measuring distances through heavy underbrush. One must also exercise care when measuring distances longer than a single tape length. When this occurs, temporary points must be marked as successive end points of the tape are encountered, and each such marking presents an opportunity to incur error. If extremely accurate measurement must be done by taping, it may be necessary to compute corrections for various phenomena and apply them to a measured length to obtain the correct length. For example, a given tape may be slightly too short or too long as a result of imperfect manufacture, wear, and so on. Obviously, a distance measured with a tape that is too short or too long will give an erroneous value. In addition, a measured distance is subject to error caused by expansion and contraction of the tape as a result of change in temperature. Error in measurement also results when the tape is pulled either too tightly or not tightly enough. Finally, error in measurement occurs if the tape sags when it is supported only at its end points. In each of these cases, the actual amount of error in a measured value is ordinarily quite small and is often neglected. However, if extremely accurate measurement is required, formulas are available for computing corrections for each case, and the total correction can be applied to the measured distance to determine the correct value. More recently developed devices for measuring distances are known as In the first EDM devices, the “signal” was a light beam. Subsequently, high-frequency microwaves and lasers were used. More recent advances have made the devices smaller, lighter, easier to use, and capable of giving a direct readout of the distance. EDM devices can be used to measure very long distances while giving extraordinarily accurate results—of the order of 50 Another basic operation performed in surveying is the measurement of In some cases, vertical measurements can be made in the same manner as horizontal ones. For example, the height of a building might be found by stretching a tape from the roof to the ground. Often, however, this kind of direct measurement of vertical distance is not feasible because the end points are not located directly above and below one another. This is true, for example, in determining the difference in elevation between two ground points at different locations on the earth's surface. Differences in elevation can be evaluated by a procedure known as Differential leveling is carried out using two devices: a level and a level rod. The basic element of a level is a telescope that can be adjusted so that it is always aligned in a level plane with its line of sight along a level line. It is mounted on a tripod when in use. A level rod is simply a rod that is calibrated for easy viewing and reading through the level's telescope. Examples of levels and a level rod are given in To begin the leveling procedure, a level rod is held vertically over a point of known elevation (a bench mark). With a level set up and properly leveled, a sighting is made on the rod and a reading made. This reading is known as a backsight; and when it is added to the elevation of the bench mark, the sum gives the height of the instrument (i.e., the telescope). The level rod is then moved to a point the elevation of which is desired, a sighting is made on the rod, and a reading made. This reading is known as a foresight; subtracting it from the height of the instrument gives the ground elevation where the rod was held. The preceding describes the standard procedure for determining the elevation of a second point, given the elevation of a first point. This procedure can be repeated (taking a backsight on the point the elevation of which was just determined) as many times as necessary to obtain elevations of additional points. A check for accuracy is commonly made by continuing levels so as to finish on the starting point. The elevation of the starting point as computed from running the levels should, of course, be the same as its beginning (known) elevation. Other methods of determining elevations include stadia and the use of EDM devices (see  The instrument used in surveying for measuring angles, bearings, and azimuths is known as a Like levels, transits have a telescope that can be adjusted so it is aligned in a level plane; hence, transits can be used to run levels. Transits are far more than leveling devices, however. A transit's telescope can be rotated upward and downward to enable surveyors to evaluate angles in a vertical plane as determined from a circular scale. Transits have another circular scale that makes it possible to measure angles in a horizontal plane. Also, transits have a compass needle and associated scale, which allow evaluation of magnetic bearings and azimuths. The transit shown in An example of a Another means of indicating the direction of a line is by use of Bearings are evaluated by reading a compass needle that rests on a pivot in a recessed well in the horizontal plate of a transit. To determine the bearing of a line, the transit is set up over one end of the line and a sighting is taken along the line. The compass needle is then allowed to swing back and forth until it comes to rest. At this point, the needle is pointing toward north and the telescope is pointing in the direction of the line. The value of the bearing is read where the end of the needle intersects the associated circular scale. Bearing determinations are subject to error as a result of what is known as Another problem encountered with bearings is known as A final means of indicating the direction of a line is by use of  Field surveying involved in traversing is essentially the measurement of lengths and directions, in accord with procedures related in For closed traverses, there is an excellent scheme for checking the accuracy of field measurements made. The first step is to compute latitudes and departures for all traverse boundary lines. The If a latitude and departure analysis indicates unsatisfactory results, field measurements should be checked. If results are deemed to be acceptable, the survey can be “balanced” by adjusting latitudes and departures to force them to sum to zero. From adjusted latitudes and departures, revised values of lengths and bearings of all lines can be computed.  As suggested by its name, triangulation involves setting up a system of overlapping triangles covering an area under consideration. By measuring a number of angles and sides of these triangles, one can compute precise locations of successive points by trigonometric means. Upon occasion, more angles than sides are measured because it is sometimes easier and more expedient to measure angles than distances over large areas. (This was particularly true before the advent of EDM devices.) To attain the high accuracy desired in triangulation, it is, of course, necessary that measurements of angles and distances be made with extreme care. As one means of securing the required accuracy, measurements are sometimes made at night to avoid certain atmospheric conditions that occur during sunlight hours and cause problems in sighting long distances through a telescope. A great deal of surveying is done for the purpose of preparing maps for certain areas or plats of property. Topographic maps show, in addition to natural and artificial features of the land, relief (variation of elevation of the earth's surface). They are widely used in engineering work. Anyone needing a map or plat of an area should be aware of the fact that many maps are readily available at nominal cost. The U.S. Geological Survey has large-scale topographic maps covering virtually all of the United States. State highway departments are good sources of state, county, and other maps. County offices contain thousands of plats, which are a matter of public record. If, however, a map or plat of a specific area is not available for a given purpose or need, a surveyor may be employed to collect necessary field data and prepare the required map or plat. The first step in preparing a map is to establish some kind of horizontal control. This can be done by traversing ( Another step is to locate and plot any significant “details,” that is, important points or features on the earth's surface. Whereas maps of single lots might show houses, driveways, power poles, and individual trees, maps of larger areas would probably not feasibly show such detail. As indicated previously, topographic maps indicate ground relief. This is most commonly done using contour lines. A To draw contour lines on a map, it is necessary first to determine ground elevations of a number of points over the area to be mapped. This can be accomplished by differential leveling or stadia. Then these points must be plotted accurately and the ground elevations written beside respective points on the map. The next steps are to select a suitable contour interval and then draw the actual contour lines. Contour lines are drawn freehand among the plotted points, with ground elevations written beside them. For example, if two adjacent points have elevations of 97.5 and 93.8 Once boundaries, details, contour lines, and so on have been plotted, a map is completed by including a title, the date, a legend, a scale, the name of the person (or agency) preparing the map, and any other information that may be of interest. Nowadays, many maps are prepared by computers. However, it remains the surveyor's responsibility to provide accurate input data to a computer and to verify the accuracy of maps thus prepared. As related in If a parcel of land is relatively simply shaped, such as triangular, rectangular, or trapezoidal, or can be partitioned into several such shapes, and if sufficient data are known, the parcel's area can be computed simply by applying appropriate formulas. If latitudes and departures ( If coordinates of a tract have been determined, its area can be computed by the Both the DMD and the coordinate methods require straight-line boundaries. Sometimes, one or more of a tract's boundaries are curved lines. For example, a meandering creek or river may form one boundary of a tract. If such a tract is drawn to scale on a map, its area can be determined using a device called a An example of a mechanical planimeter is shown in Another important task for surveyors is computation of earth volumes. Many earth volume determinations are associated with highway construction. Two examples, which are covered here, are volumes of cuts and fills in a roadway between adjacent cross sections and volumes of earth taken from borrow pits. The volume of cut or fill in a roadway segment between adjacent cross sections can be computed by multiplying the average of the crosssectional areas at the ends of the segment by the segment's length. This computation of volume assumes a linear variation in cross-sectional area from one end of the segment to the other. A more accurate determination can be made by adding the two end areas to the cross-sectional area at the middle of the segment multiplied by four, dividing the sum by six, and multiplying the quotient by the segment's length. Sometimes, earth to be used in a highway fill can be obtained from nearby land. Of course, the landowner must be compensated for earth removed, and such compensation is usually based on the volume of earth removed. The area from which earth is removed is known as a The volume of earth removed from a borrow pit can be determined by laying off a grid and running levels before and after earth is removed to find the initial and final elevations of each grid point. The depth of cut at each grid point can be computed by subtracting its final elevation from its initial elevation. The approximate volume of earth removed within each of the grid's squares or rectangles can be computed by multiplying the average of the depths of cut at each corner of the square or rectangle by the area of the square or rectangle. The sum of volumes from all squares or rectangles gives, of course, the total volume of earth removed from the borrow pit.  Probably a majority of all surveying done is associated with construction. Surveying of some type is required in several phases of most kinds of construction. To begin with, a topographic survey and map showing the location of whatever is to be constructed are required before construction begins. During the construction process, surveyors lay out the structure and perform other tasks as needed. After construction is completed, a final map may be prepared to document any changes that may have been made in original design plans. Several examples of specific types of construction surveys are the staking-out of buildings, highways, and pipelines. Staking out a building involves precisely locating each corner and setting its floor elevation. These tasks are effected and documented by placing batter boards. Staking out a highway entails setting sufficient stakes along the center line and “slope stakes” to each side to indicate how much cut or fill must be made by a contractor in shaping the highway. Staking out a pipeline involves locating the pipeline, such as by placing “line stakes,” and setting “grade stakes,” which the contractor can use to find the proper pipeline grade.  In theory, land surveying generally requires only the knowledge and ability to measure and lay off distances, angles, and bearings. In practice, however, good land surveyors must have experience, patience, good judgment, and some knowledge of legal principles and local customs. It is essential that a novice work under an experienced land surveyor for a period of time to become a true professional.  Like other types of surveying, mining surveying involves measurements of distances—both vertical and horizontal—and directions. Because of the underground nature of mining surveying, however, some unusual features are encountered and must be dealt with. For example, underground traverses sometimes follow very steeply inclined courses, and traverse segments are often straight for only short distances. Traverse hubs are commonly placed in a mine's roof (e.g., a hook driven or screwed into a timber) to prevent their being disturbed by the mining process. Sometimes a line of levels must be carried down a long, vertical shaft; this can be achieved by lowering a tape vertically. Cramped conditions may hamper instrument setups, and problems of darkness and dampness can cause further difficulties. Mining surveying is probably performed under the most dangerous conditions ordinarily encountered in any type of surveying.  Route surveying also involves making earth volume computations ( Actual surveys to stake out the center line of a route (e.g., a highway or railroad) constitute open traverses. Positions along an open traverse are referred to by their distance from the starting point, with each hundred feet (or meters) being designated as a “station” and the distance beyond the last full station as a “plus distance.” Hence, the location of a point along a route at a distance of 2265.4 The prefix The main measurement performed in hydrographic surveying is water depth. It can be determined in several ways. If the depth is not too great, a calibrated stick or pole can be lowered in the water until it strikes the bottom. Such a stick or pole is known as a If water depths are determined in a lake one day and then again on another day when the water surface has risen several feet, the difference in surface elevation must certainly be considered in mapping the lake's bottom. Hence, some type of vertical control is necessary. It can be accomplished by finding the surface elevation with respect to some reference datum whenever water depths are being determined and taking this into account when analyzing the raw data. Some kind of horizontal control is also necessary when water depths are being taken. In mapping a lake, it is essential that the location (in a horizontal plane) of each point for which a water depth is determined be known to plot the map or nautical chart. Horizontal control can be accomplished by traversing or triangulation, but the actual procedure is complicated by the fact that depth determinations are generally made from nonstationary boats, precise locations of which may be difficult to determine over larger water bodies. A navigational device known as a Often associated with surveying and mapping of water areas is the topographic surveying of the shoreline needed to show it on the map or nautical chart. This can be done by transit–stadia ground surveying or by aerial photogrammetry.  Of primary importance in municipal surveying is a horizontal and vertical control system. This calls for the establishment of numerous monuments, precise locations and elevations of which are known, throughout the municipal area. They provide numerous potential starting points from which future municipal surveys can begin with the assurance that all surveying done will be tied in to a common reference. Also of importance in the realm of municipal surveying are the gathering of data for and preparation and dissemination of maps of various kinds. These include base maps, topographic maps, property maps, and subdivision maps, as well as maps showing locations of utility lines and underground features (sewers, water pipes, gas mains, subways, etc.), to name a few. The precise location of any point on the earth's surface can be specified by giving its latitude, longitude, and elevation above mean sea level. Thousands of points across the United States have had their latitudes and longitudes determined accurately and marked with ground monuments by the National Geodetic Survey (formerly the Coast and Geodetic Survey). Latitude and longitude are spherical coordinates, however, and therefore indicative of geodetic positions, and referencing of local surveys to them can be troublesome. Realizing this difficulty, the Coast and Geodetic Survey established in 1935 the In the SPCS, each state has a separately established coordinate system, but all such state systems are tied together. The coordinate system for each state was established by projecting, mathematically, its surface onto the surface of a cone or cylinder (or, in some cases, both), which surface can then be developed into a plane. The projection onto a cone is known as the Some advantages of the SPCS, in addition to that of documenting forever exact locations of local surveys, are tying together separate surveys to a common system and providing checking capabilities to prevent excessive accumulation of errors of measurement in large-scale surveys.  The true azimuth of a line can be determined by astronomical observation by setting up a transit over one end of the line, sighting on a particular celestial body, and reading the vertical and horizontal angles to the line in question. If the time of observation and location (latitude and longitude) of the observation point are known, the exact position of the celestial body can be determined from an almanac of celestial body positions (known as an The celestial body most commonly used for determining the direction of true north is the North Star (Polaris). Fortuitously, it is located almost directly above the earth's geographic north pole; hence, a sighting on Polaris gives (approximately) the true north direction. In actuality, inasmuch as Polaris is not exactly directly above the geographic north pole, it (Polaris) appears to the viewer looking through a fixed telescope to move slightly back and forth (left to right to left, etc.) over a period of time. True north is, in effect, the average of the extreme left and right sightings of Polaris. Various measuring techniques for gathering data to be used in preparing topographic maps have already been discussed. Although they are widely used and provide adequate results, they have at least two limitations, particularly when applied to surveys over large areas. One is the time (and cost) involved in obtaining required data; the other is limitation on the actual amount of data that can be obtained. Both of these can be overcome by using In simple terms, photogrammetry consists of photographing the property in question from an airplane, viewing the aerial photographs, and preparing a topographic map therefrom. It should be clear that substantial savings in time are realized in gathering data by means of photogrammetry compared to more conventional means; and although the costs of operating an aircraft may be high, they are more than offset by savings in time and salaries paid. The fact that the camera “sees everything” ensures that a vast amount of data will be obtained and virtually no detail will be overlooked in the field. In practice, a number of photographs are made as the airplane flies a prescribed course so that they will overlap one another. Maps are prepared by specialists who view the photographs through a stereoscope. Specialized plotting machines may also be used. As in other cases, adequate horizontal and vertical control systems must be employed to ensure sufficient accuracy. Photogrammetry is used extensively nowadays by the U.S. Geological Survey in compiling its quadrangle maps. Significant improvements in cameras, film, plotting instruments, and other devices have made it possible to produce maps that meet high accuracy standards. It is noteworthy that certain situations preclude the use of photogrammetry. For example, for small areas, it is generally not cost-effective. Also, in areas covered by sand (deserts or beaches) or snow, lack of change in color and texture of the ground makes interpretation of the ground surface difficult. Another problem is encountered in an area of extraordinarily dense growth (e.g., a rain forest), which, of course, makes it difficult or impossible to see the ground surface. Many recent developments in surveying, some of which have been mentioned, provide measurement with greater accuracy than could have even been anticipated a few years ago. Many developments occurred as a result of the space program, which required, on the one hand, very accurate determination of relative locations of space tracking stations around the world and, on the other hand, detailed mapping of the moon as well as planets and other stars. Whereas photogrammetry has been used for many years to “survey from above,” nowadays this can be accomplished with earth-orbiting satellites. Various modern devices utilizing lasers, infrared light, and so on provide extremely accurate determinations of elevations, distances, and directions. The computer revolution has affected surveying also. Microcomputers can automatically record data, make appropriate computations, and prepare maps. Undoubtedly, efforts will continue into the future to perform surveying with even greater accuracy, in less time, and at a lower cost. Throughout it all, however, surveyors must be knowledgeable in the basic fundamentals of surveying and must constantly exercise good professional judgment in interpreting and utilizing results from the sophisticated instrumentation available.   Indicator of the direction of a line by giving the clockwise angle the line makes with a north line. Indicator of the direction of a line by giving the acute angle between the line and a north–south line and the quadrant in which the line lies. Deviation of a measured value from the true value as a result of conditions basically beyond the control of the person making the measurement. Surveying in which the approximately spheroidal shape of the earth is taken into account. Electromagnetic phenomena that can cause a compass needle to deviate from north. Difference between the direction of a compass needle when lined up in the earth's magnetic field and a true north line. Deviation of a measured value from the true value as a result of conditions basically within the control of the person making the measurement. Means of surveying by photographing land from an airplane and preparing maps from the photographs obtained. Surveying in which the approximately spheroidal shape of the earth is not taken into account and the earth is assumed to be flat over the area being considered. Instrument used in surveying that can perform virtually all of the operations normally done in surveying. Surveying of any number of consecutive lines by determining the length and direction of each line.