Grape leaf, which is known for its nutritional and medicinal properties, is finding increased applications for cuisine and remedial purposes. This article reports a comprehensive analytical method for the identification and quantification of a broad range of pesticides and plant growth regulators (PGRs) in the grape leaf matrix. The sample preparation method for pesticides involved an optimized QuEChERS-based extraction protocol, with subsequent clean-up by the dispersive solid phase extraction (dSPE) using a mixture of sorbents (25 mg PSA + 5 mg GCB + 150 mg MgSO4). The PGRs were extracted with methanol. The performance of the method was investigated and validated for a mixture of 363 pesticides (148 in GC–MS/MS and 203 in LC–MS/MS) and 12 PGRs (LC–MS/MS) in compliance with the analytical quality control criteria of the SANTE/11813/2017 guidelines. The matrix effects were comparatively higher against grape berries. The findings indicated satisfactory recoveries at 10 ng/g and higher levels with precision RSDs less than 20%. This method has potential applications in commercial residue testing laboratories and also for the regulatory compliance check purposes for its lower LOQs compared to the corresponding EU-MRLs.Grape ( The commercial cultivation of grapes receives frequent applications of a variety of pesticide formulations [ The nature of the grape leaf matrix is significantly different from the berries in terms of the biochemical composition. Compared to the latter, leaves possess less moisture content and higher amounts of chlorophyll, polyphenols and alkaloids, etc [ Despite various analytical methods existed for testing pesticide residues in grape berries [ While analysing pesticide residues in grapevine leaves, in most of the cases, the researchers have used relatively non-selective techniques, such as gas chromatography (GC)- nitrogen phosphorous detector (GC-NPD) [ In the remainder of the paper, we discuss the method including the sample preparation strategy with an optimized QuEChERS-based extraction protocol and the final analysis by GC–MS/MS and LC–MS/MS with the method validation targeting a total of 363 pesticides (148 in GC–MS/MS and 203 in LC–MS/MS). The analysis of PGR residues, on the other hand, involved solvent extraction with methanol followed by LC–MS/MS analysis. In all cases, the method performance was evaluated in compliance with the SANTE/11813/2017 guidelines [ A precision analytical balance (Model Vibra and 420 ADJ, Adair Dutt, Mumbai, India) was used for weighing the cartified reference standards (CRS) and samples. A heavy duty mixer/grinder (Vishvakarma Machine Tools, Rajkot, India), an orbital shaker (Scigenics Instruments, Mumbai, India), a high-speed homogenizer (DIAX-900, Heidolph, Schwabach, Germany), a high-speed centrifuge (Kubota Corp., Tokyo, Japan), a low-volume concentrator (TurboVap® LV, Caliper Life Science, USA and a micro-centrifuge (Microfuge Pico, Kendro, D-93 37520, Osterode, Germany) were used at different stages of sample preparation. The CRSs of pesticides (93–99.99% pure) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) and Dr Ehrenstorfer GmbH (Augsburg, Germany). The mass spectrometry-grade extraction solvents and other reagents, such as, acetonitrile, ethyl acetate, methanol, water and acetic acid, were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). By dissolving 10 (±0.01) mg of each CRS in 10 mL of solvent, the stock solutions of individual pesticides were prepared. The intermediate standard mixtures of 10 μg/mL were prepared by appropriate dilutions. For GC–MS/MS, the calibration standards, ranging within 0.005-0.250 μg/mL, were prepared by means of serial dilution of the intermediate mixture with ethyl acetate. Whereas, for LC–MS/MS, the standard solutions that ranged between 0.001 and 0.02 μg/mL were prepared in methanol: water (50:50). The control matrix extracts were used for the preparation of the matrix-matched calibration standards. The optimized method targeted the determination of a total of 363 pesticides, which included both LC and GC amenable compounds, with 69 compounds in common to both techniques, and 12 PGRs. The list of analytes included all the pesticides and PGRs, which are officially monitored in table grapes in India for export ( The fresh and tender leaves of Thompson Seedless (a table grape variety) were collected from an organically grown plot, located at the ICAR-National Research Centre for Grapes, Pune, Maharashtra State, India. The collected leaves never received any applications of pesticides since their emergence. The leaves were cleaned with water to remove dust particles; later they were air-dried and used for the method development and validation experiments. For residue testing of the field samples, however, the leaf samples were directly analyzed without any such pre-treatments. Chromatographic separation of the target compounds was achieved using an Ultra AQ C The gradient profile was 0–1 min, 95% A; 1–5 min, 40% A decreasing to 5% A; 5–12.5 min, 5% A; 12.5–16.5 min, 2% A increasing to 95% A; and 16.5–20 min, 95% A. The flow rate was 0.5 mL/min and the total run time was 20 min with an injection volume of 10 μL. The column oven temperature was maintained at 40 (±1) °C. The electrospray ionization (ESI, in positive polarity mode) parameters were as follows: ion source voltage (5500 V), nebulizer gas (30 psi), heater gas (60 psi), ion source temperature (550 °C) and curtain gas (40 psi). The estimation of the residues was performed by the retention time dependent ‘scheduled multiple reaction monitoring’ (sMRM) with two mass transitions for each test pesticide; one for quantification, and the other for qualitative confirmation, within 30% tolerance limit of ion ratio variation. The MRM detection window was set at 90 s with the target scan time of 1 s. An ultra-performance liquid chromatography (Acquity H-Class) system, coupled with a tandem quadrupole mass spectrometer (Xevo TQ-S, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) was used. The system was controlled by MassLynx 4.1 software. The LC separation of the PGRs was achieved using two different columns, The column oven and sample manager were maintained at 35 and 10 °C respectively. The mass spectrometer was operated with ESI in the polarity switching mode (positive and negative). The other parameters included desolvation temperature (550 °C), desolvation gas (1100 L/h), cone gas (150 L/h), ion source temperature (150 °C), capillary voltage (3.5 kV for positive and 2.5 kV for negative) and nebulizer gas (7 L/h). A triple quadrupole GC–MS/MS (TQ-8040, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) was used. The low pressure (LP) GC–MS/MS separation was achieved by combining a narrow restriction column (0.5 m × 0.10 mm) with a mega-bore column (15 m × 0.53 mm, 1 μm film thickness; 5% diphenyl, 95% dimethyl polysiloxane; Restek Corporation, Bellefonte, PA, USA). A gooseneck injector liner (95 mm × 5 mm, 3.4 mm) was used for splitless injection (1 μL). The system was operated using Lab Solution software (GC–MS solution 4.45) [ The MRM method development was facilitated by an ‘MRM optimization tool’ that automated the process by collecting the product ion scan data and finding the optimum collision energy (3–45 eV) for each transition. Once established, the MRM transitions were registered to a ‘Smart Database’ file. The MRM methods were created automatically not only by adjusting the analytical dwell time for each transition, but also by acquiring the data during peak elution specifically, with a view to fully optimize the sensitivity. The instrumental method parameters were set as described in our previous research work [ To obtain homogeneity, a grape leaf sample (1 kg) was spiked with the pesticide mixture at 50 ng/g. From the pesticide stock mixture (1 ng/g), a volume of 50 μL was spiked uniformly on a 1 kg sample. This was left standing for 30 min before further homogenization using a Robot-coupe In this experiment, the leaf samples extracted with ethyl acetate and acetonitrile (QuEChERS) were compared for their extraction efficiency. In one set, a homogenized sample (10 ± 0.1 g) was extracted with acetonitrile (1 × 10 mL), after adding anhydrous magnesium sulphate (4 g) and sodium chloride (1 g). After the phase separation, the supernatant was subjected to the optimized dSPE cleanup (mentioned later). For LC–MS/MS, 1 mL of the extract was further evaporated to dryness in the presence of 10 μL diethylene glycol (DEG; 10% in methanol). The dried residue was reconstituted in 1 mL of methanol-water (1:1). For the GC–MS/MS analysis, the cleaned extract was filtered through 0.2 μm membrane filter, and directly injected into GC–MS/MS. The optimized workflow of the sample preparation is presented in the In another set of experiment, the leaf samples were extracted with ethyl acetate (10 mL) in the presence of sodium sulphate (10 g). The extract was subjected to the same cleanup as applied to the QuEChERS. In both the above cases, the extract was filtered through a 0.2 μm membrane filter, and then injected into GC–MS/MS and LC–MS/MS. The results of QuEChERS and ethyl acetate based methods were compared in terms of average recoveries and cleanup efficiencies (the amount of matrix co-extractives) in six replicates [n = 6]. For comparison, the berries were also extracted using QuEChERS method [ As described above, a set of control samples (10 g) was extracted for the cleanup optimization. The supernatant was spiked at 10 ng/g. An aliquot of 1 mL was subjected to dSPE cleanup with primary secondary amine (PSA, 25 and 50 mg) and different combinations of graphitized carbon black (GCB, 5, 10, 15 and 25 mg). The amount of anhydrous MgSO Sample homogenization with water (1:2 ratio (as described above) resulted in 3 times dilution of the residues. To minimize this effect of dilution and to achieve the method sensitivity at the default MRL (0.01 mg/kg), the final extract was subjected to concentration (1.3× and 2×) steps prior to instrumental analysis. The results (at the spiking level of 50 ng/g) were compared to an extract, which was subjected to a solvent exchange (1:1 ratio) step. A third approach assessed the effect of dilution (2× and 4×) on the analyte response (S/N). All the results were estimated against solvent standard-based calibrations. The homogenized leaf samples (10 ± 0.1 The performance of the analytical method was assessed as per the SANTE/11813/2017 guidelines. The linearity in the solvent and matrix-matched calibration standards was established in the concentration range of 1–20 ng/g for LC–MS/MS and 5–100 ng/g for GC–MS/MS. In order to calculate the recovery (%) against the matrix-matched standards, the validation experiment was conducted in replicates (n = 6) at two different spiking levels (10 and 20 ng/g). The LODs and LOQs of individual compounds were estimated using matrix-matched standards, wherein the quantifier MRM transition was evaluated at S/N of ≥3 and ≥10 respectively. The precision (repeatability) was estimated as RSD (%). By comparing the chromatograms obtained from the fortiﬁed leaf samples with those of the control matrix, the selectivity of the method was assessed. The matrix effects (ME) were estimated using the following formula: A negative value of ME indicated matrix-induced signal suppression, whereas a positive value indicated signal enhancement. A total of 20 samples of grape leaves were randomly collected from different vineyards of the Maharashtra state, India. Each sample was individually screened for all the target pesticide residues, each in six replicates. The detected residues were quantified through matrix matched calibrations. During sample comminution under ambient condition, a sample: water ratio of 1:2 achieved the desired level of homogeneity (RSD < 10%). But, when the samples were processed with liquid nitrogen, repeatability was comparatively less, as evident from a higher RSD (e.g. 15 and 18% for myclobutanil and tebuconazole) as compared to the ambient condition (RSD, 5–6%). On visual observation, the samples processed under ambient condition appeared more uniform, which might have happened as a result of the addition of water before comminution, and two-step homogenization. Although the cryogenically processed samples appeared to be a dry amorphous powder, it contained several pieces of veins from the leaf blades, which resulted in a relatively poor homogeneity. All the investigated compounds passed the homogeneity requirement (RSD < 10%) in case of ambient temperature processing. It also passed the requirements of ISO 13528:2015 standard [ QuEChERS was observed to be better than ethyl acetate for the grape leaf samples. When extracted by the QuEChERS method, the number of compounds with acceptable recoveries (70–120%) was increased by almost 50% as compared to the ethyl acetate method. On gravimetric estimation, the residual matrix with the QuEChERS workflow was less by 44% in comparison to the ethyl acetate extract. A comparison of the total ion chromatograms in GC–MS showed a broad and intense signal of phytol (from the matrix), co-eluting with allethrin in the case of the ethyl acetate extract, whereas, the signal intensity of phytol was much lower (less than 10%) in the QuEChERS extract A higher signal enhancement for most of the compounds in the QuEChERS extract of leaf could be due to the presence of matrix co-extractives including phytol, beta-sitosterol, alpha-ametryn, etc., which were either absent or had a lower intensity in the berry matrix extract. In the absence of the cleanup step, the GC inlet and LC–MS curtain plate got contaminated after few injections and this resulted in distorted peak shapes and poor S/N of several analytes. Besides, retention time shifts in the range of 0.03–0.25 min were observed, which are very similar to the earlier observations related to ethyl acetate extraction [ The cleanup step also reduced the ME for several other analytes, e.g. allethrin, benalaxyl etc., to the extent of 40–60%. The MEs for fenobucarb and propoxur were reduced by 70% and 90% respectively when the extract was subjected to the optimized clean-up. On the whole, ME was similar (p = 0.05) over the various amounts of GCB. For certain compounds, however, the use of 5 mg GCB provided the best results. Such examples included endrin and o,p'-DDD, where the MEs were reduced by 72% and 57% respectively, against the control. An increase in the amount of GCB resulted in losses of their recoveries. Addition of GCB also resulted in lower signal-to-noise ratios (S/N) and, thus, increased the LOQs for a few compounds, for instance, 4-bromo-2-chlorophenol (by 75%), metolachlor (by 53%) and oxyfluorfen (by 89%). A higher amount of GCB also caused a significant loss in recoveries (<60%) for beta-endosulfan, paraoxon-methyl and trans-chlordane. In such cases, an addition of 300 μL of toluene helped to restore the recovery of such compounds within the acceptable range (i.e. above 70%). By and large, dilution by 4 or 2 times, or concentration by 2 and 1.3 times after solvent exchange into methanol: water (1:1) did not have much influence on the recovery of the target compounds. In all cases, a similar number of analytes (70–80%) had recoveries within the accepted range of 70–120% (quantified against the solvent standard). However, when the extracts were concentrated by 2× and 1.3×, recoveries of dinotefuran were unacceptably low, i.e. 41% and 37%, respectively. A similar pattern was also observed for certain analytes, including dodine, etoxazole, tridemorph and thiamethoxam, among others ( With the dilution approach, the response was better for a few of the pesticides, such as diafenthiuron. However, for LC All the target analytes (203) were estimated in a single chromatographic run of 20 min, with the calibration linearity (R The LODs of the target compounds ranged between 1–3.5 ng/g, and the LOQs ranged between 3 and 10 ng/g, except for bupirimate, which had an LOQ of 40 ng/g [EU-MRL = 50 ng/g]. Thus, the method complies with the regulatory requirements for all the target compounds. At 10 and 20 ng/g, the recoveries of all the test analytes were within 70–120%, with the associated precision (% RSD) below 20% ( The method for PGR analysis required a run time of 18 min (C The targeted 148 analytes were estimated in a single GC run of 14 min. 3-chloroaniline was the earliest compound eluted at 2.6 min, while dimethomorph was the final one, eluting at 12.03 min. At the fortification level of 10 ng/g, 83% of the total analytes fulfilled the method validation criteria of SANTE/11813/2017 with the recoveries within 70–120% (RSD ≤ 20%). Nevertheless, certain compounds, including 3-chloroaniline, propoxur, clomazone, pyrimethanil, δ−HCH, alachlor, bromacil, phorate sulfide and sulfone, aldrin, allethrin, ( Overall, the LOQs achieved by the optimized QuEChERS-based method were either equal or lower as compared to the previous literature [ We did not find any specific trend to relate retention time and matrix effect. Most of the target analytes (121) showed a moderate ME within the range of −50 to +50%. However, in comparison to the berry matrix, the leaves showed a significantly higher matrix induced signal enhancements for most of the compounds. For instance, the response of Out of 20 collected samples, fipronil sulfone was detected in two grape leaf samples by GC–MS/MS at residue levels of 0.024 and 0.016 mg/kg (RSD 7–9%, n = 6) and dimethomorph was found in a leaf sample at the residue level of 0.029 mg/kg (RSD 8%, n = 6) by LC–MS/MS analysis ( In terms of output, about 18 samples could be extracted by a single analyst within 8 h. The LC–MS/MS method could acquire about 24 samples in 8 h including the calibration standards and quality control samples. While analyzing the samples by GC–MS/MS, it was possible to acquire 4 batches of the extracted samples (72 in number) together in a 24 h cycle. This was due to fast GC–MS/MS analysis within a run time of only 14.0 min. The method allowed ∼90 GC injections and ∼75 LC injections in a 24 h cycle, facilitating high throughput residue analysis with the multiple reaction monitoring-based selectivity and sensitivity. The output of this method was therefore economically viable with regard to the total runtime and productivity for all the three classes of compounds, including LC-amenable pesticides, PGRs and GC-amenable pesticides. In this research, we have presented a large scale multiresidue method for the determination of the residues of pesticides in grapevine leaves, using GC–MS/MS as well as LC–MS/MS with high throughput. A validated multiresidue analysis method for PGRs is also presented. The method has been thoroughly validated for the largest number of agrochemicals reported for the grape leaf matrix so far. The optimized sample preparation workflow, followed by tandem mass spectrometric determinations has provided a satisfactory homogeneity, accuracy, precision, selectivity and sensitivity for all the target compounds in compliance with the EU-MRLs and DG-SANTE’s method performance criteria. Given the fact that there has been a rising interest of Mediterranean dishes in the Asian countries and rest of the world, this method holds potential to test this chosen commodity at regulatory as well as commercial food testing laboratories to ensure food safety. We gratefully acknowledge funding support received from Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: