Displaced osteochondral fractures of the body of talus quite often require a malleolar osteotomy to gain access to the fracture fragment during internal fixation. We describe a case report in which access to a displaced osteochondral fracture of the lateral talar dome was achieved using an arthroscopy-assisted fibular tunnel approach. This technique resulted in satisfactory fracture healing and a satisfactory clinical outcome.Ankle injuries can be associated with osteochondral fractures of the superolateral corner of the dome of the talus. Sorrento and Mlodzienski In the present report, we describe an innovative surgical approach that can provide access to a displaced osteochondral fracture of the superolateral corner of the talar dome in the presence of a pilon fracture using an arthroscopy-assisted fibular tunnel approach. To the best of our knowledge, this technique of fixation has not been previously described. A 37-year-old male presented to our department with a severe inversion-dorsiflexion injury to his left ankle after a fall from a height of ~20 ft. The physical examination revealed a grossly swollen, bruised, and deformed ankle with painful restriction of ankle movement. The peripheral neurovascular status was intact. The radiologic assessment with a radiograph and a computed tomography scan revealed a comminuted intraarticular fracture of distal tibia and the lateral talar dome ( The fracture of the distal tibia was reduced and stabilized using partially threaded malleolar screws and a Kirschner wire. A bridging talar spatial frame (TSF) was also used to maintain fracture reduction. Fixation of the osteochondral talar dome fracture was delayed owing to the presence of significant hemarthrosis, which would have precluded clear visualization of the talar fracture using an arthroscopic approach. The swelling had resolved within 2 weeks with leg elevation and cold compression. The patient then underwent surgery to have the talar dome fracture reduced and fixed internally. During surgery, the struts of the TSF were temporarily removed to provide access to the ankle joint. The surface of the talus was initially assessed using a 2.7-mm arthroscope with standard anteromedial and anterolateral portals. A large defect was noted over the superolateral aspect of the dome of the talus. The fracture fragments were identified, and small fragments were removed. A single large fragment was reduced satisfactorily using an arthroscopic probe. However, reduction of this fragment did not cover the talar defect entirely owing to comminution. A 1.3 guidewire from a 4-mm cannulated screw system was passed obliquely through the lateral malleolus superolaterally, with the tip aimed at the middle of the talar fracture fragment using fluoroscopic guidance. A tunnel was created in the lateral malleolus by drilling over the guidewire using a 2.9-mm cannulated drill bit. With the fragment held in the reduced position with a probe through the arthroscopy portals ( A differential pitch, cannulated headless compression screw (DePuy Synthes) was then passed over the guidewire, which allowed for satisfactory fixation and compression of fractured talar dome fragment ( The bridging frame was removed at 6 weeks, and the ankle was protected with a walker boot Seemingly minor dome fractures of the talus, in particular, those involving the superomedial and superolateral corners, are serious injuries that can be easily missed. They can cause significant long-term functional impairment in the absence of appropriate treatment. Surgical treatment of such injuries is challenging owing to the difficult access to the fracture site and the possibility of further damage using conventional methods of treatment. Although most talar dome lesions, including Berndt and Harty Arthroscopic treatment of osteochondral talar fractures is less invasive, avoids malleolar osteotomy, and allows for better visualization of the articular surface. However, the approach to the corners of the dome of the talus can prove difficult using the standard, anteromedial and anterolateral, portals. Recently, transmalleolar approaches have been popularized for drilling of osteochondral defects in osteochondroses of the talus This method of fixation offers the advantage of providing good access to the superolateral corner of the talus without causing any significant damage to the joint surface. Arthroscopic assessment combined with fluoroscopy allows for 3-dimensional visualization of the fracture and aids in the reduction and fixation of the fractured fragments. However, we emphasize that this technique requires precise localization of the lateral malleolar portal to accurately target the fracture site in the talus. The surgeon should not advance the drill into the joint (or talus) until confident about its intended trajectory into the talus. This cautious approach will not only prevent further damage to the articular surface from repeated attempts but will also save surgical time. Additionally, the surgeon should ensure that the tip of the guidewire is roughly at the center of the maximum width of the entire fragment to achieve good control of the fragment. It can be necessary to use a second guidewire to stabilize the reduction further to prevent loss of reduction during drilling. For our patient, we staged the treatment owing to the complex pattern of the injury with involvement of the anterior tibial plafond, medial malleolus, and talus. The tibial fractures were treated using a single Kirschner wire and partially threaded cannulated cancellous screws. Additional stabilization and protection of the articular surfaces was provided using a bridging TSF. Fixation of the talar dome fracture was delayed for 2 weeks to allow for resolution of the swelling and hemarthrosis. This approach made ankle arthroscopy easier and perhaps also contributed to reducing the risk of infection. We accept that we were not able to achieve an anatomic reduction because of comminution and complexity of the fracture. Owing to these factors, a small step was noted on talar articular surface. However, we were able to considerably reduce the size of the “crater” by reducing and fixing this rather large residual osteochondral fragment. Many investigators in the past have recommended excision of symptomatic Berndt and Harty grade III and IV lesions In conclusion, a high index of suspicion is necessary for associated talar dome lesions in all ankle injuries. A clear understanding of the fracture anatomy is essential, and further assessment with a computed tomography scan and arthroscopy could be required to determine the “fixability” of the displaced fragment. Our technique can be used for fixing osteochondral talar dome fractures, if surgical expertise is available.