This work presents validated Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) predictions of the effect that changes in vortex finder and spigot diameters have on the classification performance of mini-hydrocyclones. Mini-hydrocyclones (e.g. 10 mm in diameter) have been applied successfully to the separation of micron-sized particles since their bypass fraction is larger than the water recovery, which results in a high particle recovery to the underflow, as well as low water recovery. However, a larger bypass fraction can be a disadvantage when the purpose of the hydrocyclone is particle classification, because of the large amount of fine particles that are misplaced in the underflow. Although it is well known that changes in the outlets of the hydrocyclone affect its performance, there is limited research on the effect of these design parameters in mini-hydrocyclones, in particular with regard to particle classification. The aim of this study is to computationally explore the influence of spigot and vortex finder on the classification process. To this end, CFD simulations were carried out and the predictions experimentally validated in a 3D printed mini-hydrocyclone using glass beads (below 20 μm) as the particulate system. The numerical results showed very good agreement with the experimental data for recovery of solids, concentration ratio, pressure drop and particle size distribution. A trade-off was observed between the solids recovery and concentration ratio, while the solids recovery was found to be inversely proportional to the pressure drop when vortex finder diameters were kept constant. It was found that the design that yielded the lowest recovery among those tested also resulted in a particle size distribution furthest away from that of the feed. We show how the model can be used to assess changes in design parameters in order to inform the selection of designs that exhibit lower energy requirements without compromising separation performance.Mini-hydrocyclones are very effective for the separation of micron-sized particles because the cut sizes that hydrocyclones can achieve are directly proportional to their diameter. Thus, the application of mini-hydrocyclones for classification of particles has grown in popularity. It is generally accepted that in large hydrocyclones the bypass, i.e. the fraction of particles that reports to the underflow without classification, is normally equal to the water recovery. However, unlike large hydrocyclones, mini-hydrocyclones exhibit considerably larger bypass than the water recovery Particle classification using mini-hydrocyclones has been the focus of some experimental studies. Abdollahzadeh et al. Design parameters also play a key role in the performance of hydrocyclones. Although the effect that changes in design parameters have on the separation efficiency of mini-hydrocyclones has been studied Numerical studies involving Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations offer the possibility of exploring a wide range of changes in the design of mini-hydrocyclones. Ghodrat et al. The effect of design parameters on the performance of small hydrocyclones, when considering the effect of changes in the particle size of the feed, has been the subject of numerical studies for 50 mm hydrocyclones. Zhang et al. A novel design was recently presented by Wang and Wu In this work, CFD simulations were carried out and were validated experimentally to predict the performance of 10 mm mini-hydrocyclones for classification of particles. Experimental data was initially obtained from a 3D printed 10 mm hydrocyclone with a spigot of 1 mm and a vortex finder of 2 mm and used for the validation of the CFD model. The CFD model was then used to further explore different designs of mini-hydrocyclones to understand the effect that changes in spigot and vortex finder have on hydrocyclone performance. The methodology of this work is divided into three steps: (i) CFD model set-up for a 10 mm mini-hydrocyclone; (ii) experimental validation of the CFD model; and (iii) computational assessment of different designs. Four response parameters were taken into account to determine the performance of the mini-hydrocyclones evaluated:     A numerical model was set-up in FLUENT 18 for the simulation of a mini-hydrocyclone with vortex finder 2 mm and spigot 1 mm, using a Eulerian-Lagrangian formulation (a valid approach for systems with volumetric concentrations of the disperse phase lower than 10% After the continuous phase was solved, particles were injected using a Lagrangian discrete phase model. Ten injections of particles were created, with each injection corresponding to representative particle diameters. In this way, it possible to simulate more accurately the feed particle size distribution measured for the soda lime glass used for the experimental validation. For the particle force balance applied to the discrete phase, in addition to the drag force and gravity, other forces, such as pressure gradient and virtual mass forces, were included. These are forces required to accelerate the fluid surrounding the particle. The Discrete random walk model was applied to include the effect of instantaneous turbulent velocity fluctuations in the particle trajectories The mini-hydrocyclone used for the experimental validation of the CFD model was 3D printed in an Objet30Pro printer using transparent acrylic material, which is able to withstand the pressure inside the hydrocyclone. The mini-hydrocyclone has a diameter of 10 mm, a cylindrical body height of 2 mm, a vortex finder length of 6 mm, vortex finder diameter of 2 mm, spigot diameter of 1 mm and a tangential square inlet of 4 mm The experimental rig consisted of a sump tank, positive displacement pump, flow control devices and the mini-hydrocyclone. Gauges for pressure and volumetric flow, as well as a pressure reducing valve to control the feed flow rate, were installed. A CAD model of the experimental rig used in the experiments is shown in The particulate system for the experiments was polished glass beads made of soda lime glass, which has a density of 2700 kg m The stirrer was turned on before the suspension of solids were added into the water in the sump tank to avoid agglomeration of the particles. After the suspension was homogenized, the pump was turned on and the valves adjusted until the flow through the mini-hydrocyclone reached 60 mLs A full factorial design, considering three values of vortex finder and four values of spigot was used for the simulations in this work. Vortex finder diameters (VF) of 3.2, 2.6 and 2.0 mm, and spigot diameters (S) of 2.5, 2.0, 1.5 and 1.0 mm, were evaluated. It is important to mention that the rest of the design variables were kept constant and that the CFD simulations for all the mini-hydrocyclones were run under the same operating conditions and model parameters. The CFD model for the mini-hydrocyclone VF2 S1 was run under the conditions described in Section A comparison of the simulated and experimental PSD of the mini-hydrocyclone VF2 S1 underflow is shown in As mentioned before, a series of mini-hydrocyclones with combination of vortex finders (VF) 2, 2.6 and 3.2 mm and spigots (S) 1, 1.5, 2 and 2.5 mm were simulated. The results for the mini-hydrocyclone VF3.2 S1 are not shown because the predicted underflow rate value obtained was negligible. The simulated values of recovery of solids and concentration ratio are summarized in The set of mini-hydrocyclones with vortex finder 2 mm shows a slightly better performance in solids recovery than the set with vortex finder 2.6 mm, although the latter achieves considerably higher concentration ratio values when the spigot diameter is 1 mm. The mini-hydrocyclones with vortex finder 3.2 mm achieve smaller solids concentration but higher concentration ratios than their counterparts for similar spigot diameters. The CFD model was used to simulate the particle size distribution (PSD) curves for all the mini-hydrocyclones considered in the full factorial design. This section describes the application of the CFD model for the selection of a mini-hydrocyclone design. As can be seen in A summary of the simulated total pressure drops for all the mini-hydrocyclones is shown in From The CFD results for the velocities inside the different mini-hydrocyclone designs can also be used to better understand performance. Axial, radial and tangential velocities for all the designs considered in this work are shown in Figures S1, S2 and S3, respectively, in the Supplementary Material. In particular, higher axial velocities near the spigot and vortex finder can be linked to higher pressure drops, which is consistent with the fact that VF2.6 S2 has lower energy requirements than VF2 S1.5. As can be seen in Figure S1, the latter presents higher velocities near the outlets. Similarly, high tangential velocities near the vortex finder can be observed in Figure S3 for VF2 S1.5; this is in fact the case for a given vortex finder diameter as the diameter of the spigot decreases, and is particularly noticeable at the lowest vortex finder values tested. While clearly the velocity profiles in the mini-hydrocyclones cannot be directly linked to the recovery and concentration ratio that a given design yields, the aforementioned features are linked to pressure requirements and thus impact overall performance. An experimental verification of the predicted results obtained for the mini-hydrocyclones VF2 S1.5 and VF2.6 S2 was performed. These designs were 3D printed and then experiments were carried out under the same operating conditions as the CFD simulations. A comparison between the numerical and experimental results is shown in Finally, also similar to what is predicted by the simulations, the pressure drop obtained in the mini-hydrocyclone VF2 S1.5 is larger than that in the mini-hydrocyclone VF2.6 S2. This confirms that the CFD model presented in this work can accurately predict the behaviour of relevant operating variables for particle classification in mini-hydrocyclones with a range of outlet diameters. An Eulerian–Lagrangian CFD model was used to understand the effect that changes in vortex finder and spigot diameters have on particle classification in mini-hydrocyclones. This CFD model was validated with experiments performed in 3D printed mini-hydrocyclones. Good agreement was found between the predicted and experimental results for the evaluated response parameters, i.e. recovery of solids, concentration ratio, pressure drop and particle size distribution results. Three different vortex finders and four different spigots were evaluated computationally through a full factorial design in order to assess the interactions among the response parameters. In particular, a trade-off was observed between the solids recovery and concentration ratio, while the solids recovery was found to be inversely proportional to the pressure drop, when vortex finder diameters were kept constant. The particle size distributions for the different designs were also analysed and showed to be linked to solids recovery. This works shows how the information obtained through CFD modelling can be used to assess response parameters and inform the selection of mini-hydrocyclone designs that result in lower pressure drop without impacting the classification performance. This has important implications for the reduction in energy consumption in mini-hydrocyclones and can thus lead to more efficient classification systems for micron-sized particles. None. This research was carried out as part of PRODIAS, a project funded by the European Community’s Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Horizon 2020 (2014–2020) under grant agreement No. 637077. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 