The free (or open) boundary condition (FBC, OBC) was proposed by Papanastasiou et al. (A new outflow boundary condition, Int. J. Numer. Methods Fluids 14 (1992) 587–608) to handle truncated domains with synthetic boundaries where the outflow conditions are unknown. In the present work, implementation of the FBC has been extended to viscoelastic fluids governed by integral constitutive equations. As such we consider here the K-BKZ/PSM model, which also reduces to the upper-convected Maxwell fluid (UCM) for a single relaxation time and an appropriate choice of material parameters. The Finite Element Method (FEM) is used to provide numerical results in simple test cases, such as planar flow at an angle and Poiseuille flow in a tube where analytical solutions exist for checking purposes. Then previous numerical results obtained with the differential UCM model are checked in highly viscoelastic flows in a 4:1 contraction. Finally, the FBC is used with the K-BKZ/PSM model with data corresponding to a benchmark polymer melt (the IUPAC-LDPE melt). Particular emphasis is based on a non-zero second normal-stress difference, which has been reported in the literature to cause problems and seems responsible for earlier loss of convergence. The results with the FBC in short domains are in excellent agreement with those obtained from long domains used until now to accommodate the highly convective nature of the stresses in viscoelastic flows, for which the FBC seems most appropriate.The free (open) boundary condition (FBC, OBC) was proposed by Papanastasiou et al. The original idea by Papanastasiou et al. The authors have improved on this in a recent paper For In view of the above findings, the present authors decided to further study the FBC for viscoelastic fluids. In a recent paper In the present work, we continue along the same lines by studying integral constitutive equations of the K-BKZ type We consider the conservation equations of mass, momentum and energy for incompressible fluids under non-isothermal, creeping, steady flow conditions. These are written as Viscoelasticity is included in the present work via an integral rheological model for the stresses. This is a K-BKZ equation proposed by Papanastasiou et al. The non-isothermal version of the K-BKZ model is given in detail in The integral model (Eq. The values of these parameters are It should be noted that the K-BKZ model reduces to the Newtonian and upper-convected Maxwell (UCM) model with an appropriate choice of parameters. Thus, for the Newtonian fluid we either set the elastic stresses to zero and keep only the viscous (reference) stresses or we set However, for polymer melts with a spectrum of relaxation times as is the case with the LDPE melt, the Weissenberg number is not a good indication of the level of viscoelasticity. A better criterion of the viscoelastic nature of a polymeric liquid is given by the stress ratio ( The various thermal and flow parameters are combined to give appropriate dimensionless numbers The above rheological model (Eq. All lengths are scaled by The numerical solution is obtained with the Galerkin/Finite Element Method (GFEM), using a program which employs as primary variables the two velocities, pressure, and temperature ( The governing equations, weighted integrally with the basis functions, result in the following continuity, Since essential boundary conditions (BCs) for Our recent works Some other features of the above formulation are as follows. No upwinding was found to be necessary for the energy equation in the range of the present non-isothermal simulations. The program uses a Newtonian (reference) “stiffness matrix” and puts all elastic stresses (or any non-linear viscous stresses) on the RHS “load vector”. In each 8-node quadrilateral element, the strain rates are interpolated with linear basis functions. Galerkin averaging is used on the strain rates to obtain a smooth field The AVSS is capable of providing accurate results for test problems (e.g., Poiseuille flow of a UCM fluid) for very high In the present work, the program was modified for implementing the FBC. The terms of the FBC are (axisymmetric geometry): The addition of a reference viscous term is the standard way of handling integral constitutive equations and is essential for the stability of the numerical scheme Our experience with the term of Eq. Finally, regarding the inflow boundary conditions, for integral models we need information about the prior deformation history. By assuming a fully developed velocity profile, as done in all cases here, we solve the one-dimensional (1-D) problem for a given flow rate with the K-BKZ model, as it simplifies in steady simple shear flow. Also, the deformation tensor We begin our numerical tests for a Newtonian fluid flowing under pressure in a planar channel making a 45°-angle with the horizontal as shown in  On the other hand, employing the zero-traction boundary condition at outflow gives the velocity contour results of We then tested the implementation of the FBC with the integral UCM fluid in simple pressure-driven (Poiseuille) flow in a tube. The K-BKZ model reduces to the integral UCM fluid model with the choice of parameters mentioned in Section Thus, for an average velocity The results for  It is interesting to note that the upper limits for convergence were different for We now continue with the isothermal UCM flow in the benchmark problem of a 4:1 abrupt axisymmetric contraction, which was studied before by Park and Lee The simulations for the benchmark problem have been run with the FEM meshes shown in We present results at the highest elasticity level of  In our previous work The isothermal results for a 4:1 axisymmetric contraction for the IUPAC-LDPE melt have been presented before Results are shown for a test run at  We observe an excellent agreement from the two domains, meaning that the FBC can be safely used in truncated domains with this type of viscoelastic fluids. Thus, we can confidently say that the FBC has been correctly implemented for viscoelastic flows with integral constitutive equations including a non-zero second normal stress difference ( The streamlines and isobars from the simulations are given in The LDPE melt has a temperature-dependent viscosity according to the Arrhenius relationship (Eq. The boundary condition at the outlet is only the FBC either for We present results first for the axial velocity and pressure distributions in  We have implemented the free (open) boundary condition to viscoelastic non-isothermal flows in the context of integral constitutive equations of the K-BKZ type. A non-zero second normal stress difference has been correctly implemented without needing Finally, the FBC was tested with the K-BKZ model used for fitting rheological data for the IUPAC-LDPE melt, including a non-zero second normal stress difference. For elevated apparent shear rates, a truncated domain ( Financial assistance for one of the authors (E.M.) from the programme “PEBE 2009-2011” for basic research from NTUA is gratefully acknowledged.