As a former editor-in-chief of IJMP, it is appropriate that the late Professor R. Peter King and his contributions to our profession be recognized with this Special Issue of the International Journal of Mineral Processing. Professor King was a native of Springs, South Africa, where his father was a gold mine administrator. Peter was educated in South Africa and England, having his B.S. and M.S. degrees from the University of Witwatersrand and his Ph.D. from the University of Manchester in the United Kingdom. He joined academe at the University of Natal in 1966 and subsequently had a significant impact on education and research in many areas of engineering, but particularly in the area of mineral processing engineering. In 1961 he married Ellen Courtenay, his friend and companion on many adventures, including their relocation to Salt Lake City in 1990 when Peter joined the Metallurgical Engineering Faculty, College of Mines and Earth Sciences, at the University of Utah. With regard to engineering education Professor King was exceptional as both an administrator and a teacher. He demonstrated his administrative abilities as Head of the Department of Metallurgy at the University of Witwatersrand, President of the South African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Director of the USBM Generic Mineral Technology Center for Comminution, and most recently as Chairman of the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah. Peter retired from the University of Utah in 2002 and held the position Emeritus Professor until he passed away on September 11th, 2006, after a long illness. As a teacher he received accolades for extremely well organized lectures in which he treated each topic in a rigorous fashion and challenged his students to attain a high level of understanding. Prior to retirement he extended his teaching approach beyond the traditional classroom and demonstrated his leadership in the field of mineral processing education by being the first to develop and give a mineral processing course to an international student body over the internet. In addition, Peter initiated and developed virtual laboratory software for undergraduate education in mineral processing. Dr. King also distinguished himself in mineral processing engineering research with contributions ranging from comminution to flotation. Perhaps most notable is his research in the area of mineral liberation. He developed and perfected precise measurement techniques involving image analysis and advanced models to interpret the resulting data. This work was recognized by honoring him in 2002 with the A.M. Gaudin Award, SME's most prestigious research award in the field of mineral processing. Equal in magnitude are his contributions in the area of flowsheet simulation. His creation of the first flowsheet simulator, Modsim, resulted in a tool that is frequently used by both industry and universities. Dr. King's research in mineral liberation is undoubtedly the most widely read and quoted in the field. This research has resulted in a practical method for assessing liberation that is currently being used by several mining companies. Of particular significance here was the integration of his mineral liberation models into simulators for plant design and optimization. His pioneering work with internet teaching methods has made mineral processing modeling courses available to students and professionals around the world. Peter supervised the research projects of 26 graduate students. He published over 100 papers and two textbooks, Professor R. Peter King was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 2003 and was also recognized with the “Lifetime Achievement Award” by the International Mineral Processing Congress in 2003. This special issue of IJMP was organized with myself and Professor Subhash Chander as editors. Thanks to assistance from the Organizing Committee, the papers were submitted during January–May 2006. With sadness I must mention the sudden passing away of Professor Chander during the editorial work for this special issue and, at the same time, thank the new IJMP editor, Professor Kari Heiskanen, for his help with the last details to have this special issue finally published. We, his contemporary colleagues, now honor the memory of Professor R. Peter King with this special issue of the International Journal of Mineral Processing.