Hoek–Brown failure criterion is one of the widely used rock strength criteria in rock mechanics and mining engineering. Based on the theoretical expression of Hoek–Brown parameter m of an intact rock, the parameter m has been modified by crack parameters for fractured rocks. In this paper, the theoretical value range and theoretical expression form of the parameter m in Hoek–Brown failure criterion were discussed. A critical crack parameter B was defined to describe the influence of the critical crack when the stress was at the peak, while a parameter b was introduced to represent the distribution of the average initial fractures. The parameter m of a fractured rock contained the influences of critical crack (B), confining pressure (σ
                     3) and initial fractures (b). Then the triaxial test on naturally fractured limestones was conducted to verify the modification of the parameter m. From the ultrasonic test and loading test results of limestones, the parameter m can be obtained, which indicated that the confining pressure at a high level reduced the differences of m among all the specimens. The confining pressure σ
                     3 had an exponential impact on m, while the critical crack parameter B had a negative correlation with m. Then the expression of m for a naturally fractured limestone was also proposed.Natural fractures have significant influence on the mechanical properties and engineering stability of rock mass ( Through analyzing a large amount of triaxial test and field test data of rock mass, the Hoek–Brown (HB) failure criterion was developed ( The parameters In the above studies, many scholars discussed the parameter Through analysis of a large number of rock triaxial test and field test data,  For an intact rock (  In When According to laboratory experimental results of basalt samples from Mentougou in Beijing, China, the The tensile and compressive strengths of rock increase continuously with increasing overburden depth. It is found that the In Eq. On the macroscopic scale, the fractures are not uniformly distributed in the rock. In order to study the rock damage, a schematic diagram of the whole failure process of rock specimen under uniaxial compression is shown in In  Assuming that Thus, we have Dimensional analysis is applied to Eqs. For naturally fractured rock, the critical crack parameter For the fractured rock (0 < Compared with Eq. The limestone used in this experiment was sampled from Lvliang, Shanxi Province, China. The rock sample was taken in a coal mine floor passed through by a fault, which is mainly gray, brittle, and calcareous. There are irregular and oblique natural fractures distributed in the specimens. According to the geological investigation, the limestones are mainly composed of calcite (92%–97%), dolomite (2%–6%), and pyrite (0%–1.2%). The size of the tested specimens is 50 mm in diameter by 100 mm in height, as shown in All the specimens were measured by ultrasonic test, and several intact specimens were selected for preliminary testing and calculation, as listed in X-ray computed tomography (CT) scan test and circumferential P-wave velocity anisotropy test have been carried out to understand the naturally structural characteristics of these limestone specimens. The anisotropy test results and model reconstruction obtained from X-ray scanning results of three typical limestone specimens are shown in From above test results, we can know that the complex structural characteristics of limestone specimens can be reflected by the difference of P-wave velocity, which can provide information for later calculation. Some limestone specimens were adopted for ultrasonic and triaxial tests, and the test results are listed in For the fractured rock, the specimen was assumed to be complete, thus the fractures determined the integrity of the specimen. In the HB failure criterion, the integrity of the rock was described by parameter On the other hand, some researchers used the methodology of ultrasonic detection to study the effect of initial fracture ( A certain connection between parameters In From Eq. The parameter In the classical HB failure criterion, both the parameters The peak differential stresses of referred group range from 100 MPa to 260 MPa, while the parameter In order to simplify the calculation, Eq. The parameter For the same group of rock specimens, the parameters Except several test results, most data points agree well with the fitting relations. The parameters Taking into account the confining pressure, the relationships of fitting parameters The parameter As discussed in Section According to the basic derivation in the literature (  The parameter The parameter The modification is verified by experimental results of naturally fractured limestones. The HB parameter The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from