The electrodeposition-redox replacement (EDRR) process was studied to control the creation of copper and silver containing particles on the surface of a carbon nanotube film. Synthetic solutions simulating typical hydrometallurgical copper electrolysis process solutions (40 g/L Cu, 120 g/L H2SO4) with different dilute concentrations of silver (1–10 ppm) were utilized as the source for particle deposition and recovery. Such process solutions are currently underutilized for use as a potential source for the deposition of noble particles. The effect of deposition voltage, deposition time, stirring, and redox replacement time between deposition pulses were investigated as the parameters affecting the morphology and composition of the deposited particles as well as deposition kinetics. The results showed that pure copper particles can be deposited when the redox replacement time between deposition pulses is very short (t = 2 s). By increasing the redox replacement time (t = 50 s and more) the original copper particle composition transforms into a core-shell structure with an outer layer predominately consisting of silver or a bimetallic mix of copper and silver, depending on the deposition conditions. The bimetallic Cu/Ag particle size could be controlled from 200 to 840 nm by the applied deposition voltage. At high redox replacement times (t = 150 s and more) the resulting particles were shown to be pure silver with a small diameter from 100 to 250 nm.In this paper a method is presented for depositing either Ag or Cu/Ag particles on carbon nanotube (CNT) films from solutions mimicking hydrometallurgical copper process solutions, such as those used in copper electrorefining and electrowinning. In the industrial solutions used in these hydrometallurgical processes, depending on the plant operation, trace amounts of noble elements such as silver (in the ppm range) are accompanied by a considerably higher concentration of less noble metals (in the g/L range), such as copper, iron, nickel [ In the field of electrochemistry, redox replacement reactions have been used to create precise monolayers of metals on wanted substrates in a so-called surface-limited redox replacement (SLRR) process [ The electrodeposition- redox replacement (EDRR) process is a versatile one-step approach for creating porous deposits or (nano)particles from a single solution containing both the noble and non-noble elements. Recently, the EDRR process has been utilized to control the deposition of Pt/Ni [ In this communication, the EDRR process was studied in a solution with composition similar to those used in industrial copper electrolysis, i.e. containing dilute amounts of silver (1–10 ppm) and a high concentration of Cu (40 g/L). By controlling the various EDRR parameters the composition and morphology of deposited particles on carbon nanotube films could be tuned in order to produce a high-added value surface. Combining the techniques of Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy with Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (FE-SEM & EDS), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), Field Emission Auger Electron Spectroscopy (FE-AES) with electrochemical data, such as open circuit potential (OCP) transient values allowed for the comprehensive study of the resulting deposits by the EDRR method. It was found that the deposits could be tuned from pure Cu to bimetallic Cu/Ag to highly pure Ag particles. A three-electrode cell with a volume of 200 cm Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM) was done with a JEOL JSM-7100F, equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) to image and analyze the sample morphology and composition. The acceleration voltage during imaging and EDS analysis was 15 kV. At least 10 particles per sample were analyzed by EDS from randomly selected points along the surface. The reported EDS Cu:Ag wt-% ratios are calculated by the ratio of the average wt-% of Cu and Ag of the analyzed particles. The wt-% ratios were calculated for all analyzed samples to compare the trends of compositional changes between deposits. ImageJ software was used to analyze the particle sizes from SEM images of 5000 (x5k) and 30,000 (x30k) magnifications with a minimum of 100 particle measurements per sample. The error reported with the average diameter is one standard deviation. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were done to measure CNT films with different copper and silver surface compositions up to ca. 10 nm in depth with a PHI-5600ci (Physical Electronics) utilizing an Al Kα monochromatic X-ray source (1486.71 eV photon energy) with a spot diameter of 800 μm for scanning large areas of the CNT film surface. Each survey was conducted for 12 individual acquisition scans (14 min of total measuring time per spectrum) and 3 surveys were taken of each sample at different locations. The vacuum in the analysis chamber was lower than 1 × 10 Field emission Auger electron spectroscopy (FE-AES) was done with a JEOL JAMP-9500F to investigate the composition profile of individual particles on the CNT film by utilizing argon ion sputtering. The sputtering rate was a constant 3.3 nm/min (according to the sputtering rate of SiO As carbon-based material itself is known to be able to support redox replacement of some noble elements, such as Cu [ The redox replacement reaction between copper and silver in a copper process solution is thermodynamically possible due to the difference in reduction potentials between this reduction - oxidation pair. The electrode potential values for the investigated copper process solution were calculated with the Nernst equation from the concentrations of 40 g/L Cu and 10 ppm Ag: The overall reaction occurring during the redox replacement step can be described as: To observe the redox replacement reaction in our solution in its basic form between copper and silver, the following experiment was conducted: a thick bulk copper surface on a CNT film sample was deposited at −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 1200 s in a copper process solution without Ag, and then this Cu-CNT film was immersed in a copper process solution containing 10 ppm Ag for 3000 s. As with all experiments, the solutions were not purged free of dissolved oxygen and thus some corrosion of the bulk copper was expected to occur simultaneously with the redox replacement. The resulting surfaces are shown in The redox replacement system between copper and silver in an electrolyte similar to the one utilized here, containing various concentrations of copper sulphate, sulphuric acid and silver, has been scarcely studied to date with the exception of Sulka and Jaskula [ Pure copper particles were deposited at −0.1 V for 500 ms ( The EDRR process for silver particle deposition is shown schematically in   The differences between silver deposits by EDRR and cementation are shown to be numerous. The silver deposits recovered by EDRR are up to ca. 4.3 times smaller, while covering the CNT film surface more homogeneously. Typical to redox replacement processes [ Field Emission Auger Electron Spectroscopy (FE-AES) equipped with argon ion sputtering was used on the sample deposited at −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 500 ms with 150 s replacement time ( Particles (in the size range of 10 nm to 10 μm) with a Cu core and Ag shell as well as bimetallic Cu/Ag particles (with a mixed composition of both elements) have been previously investigated for a variety of applications in the form of powders [ To create Cu/Ag particles by the EDRR method from the copper process solutions containing 10 ppm Ag the replacement time between deposition pulses was decreased so as not to redox replace all of the deposited copper. Due to the short replacement time the silver could not redox replace all of the existing copper but both elements remained in the deposited particles. Three different deposition conditions were investigated: −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 500 ms, −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl 500 ms and −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 50 ms. The replacement time between pulses was varied from 2 to 300 s to produce CNT films with different deposit sizes and compositions. The morphologies of deposits on CNT films after EDRR ( Tests with 2 s replacement time were done to observe the resulting morphology during deposition of pure Cu particles with very low silver loading as the short replacement time does not allow for redox replacement to take place (EDS Cu:Ag wt% ratios ˃120). As expected, all the copper particles deposited with 2 s replacement time show a pure copper surface from XPS surveys no matter the deposition conditions. Thus, these particles show the typical morphology of copper deposited before redox replacement has occurred within a single cycle of EDRR. The copper particles deposited with −0.1 V and −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 500 ms are round with some particles growing together, typical of pulsed electrodeposition [ The Cu:Ag wt%-ratio evolution from EDS analysis at different replacement times is plotted in According to the XPS results, all samples with 50 s replacement time and higher have significant amounts of silver on the surface of copper particles (surfaces of either pure Ag or bimetallic Cu/Ag).For instance, with 50 s replacement time the samples deposited at −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 500 ms and −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 50 ms show a bimetallic surface structure of both Cu and Ag, while the sample deposited at −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 500 ms shows a pure Ag surface, i.e. core-shell structure. As the sample deposited at −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 500 ms showed the smallest copper particle size before redox replacement (and thus the highest copper surface area per particle), redox replacement was kinetically favored on the copper particles of this sample. This conclusion is also supported by the lowest Cu:Ag wt%-ratio of 6 at 50 s replacement time from EDS analysis. The bimetallic deposits of this sample, shown in When magnetic stirring was applied (300 rpm) during the EDRR process for the sample deposited at −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 500 ms with 50 s replacement time, the mass transfer of silver to the copper surface was increased considerably, resulting in deposits with considerable higher purity than when no stirring was applied. SEM images of these deposits are shown in Fig. S2, which exhibit considerable agglomeration compared with the other pure silver deposits after long replacement times and no stirring ( The sample deposited at −0.1 V for 500 ms with 50 s replacement time and no stirring was also studied with FE-AES by depth profiling to further characterize the individual deposit structures. Three depth profiles were made by argon ion sputtering coupled with elemental analysis, shown in The compiled results of EDRR from the copper process solution with 1 ppm Ag are reported in the supplementary information (Fig. S3 and Table S1). The results from those experiments followed the same general trends observed for the 10 ppm Ag solution: silver content and OCP values increased with higher replacement times. After redox replacement, the obtained pure silver particles were slightly smaller or the same size (ca. 110 nm) as from the solution with 10 ppm Ag. This result shows that the EDRR method with the investigated parameters is applicable for the creation of a CNT film surface functionalized with pure Ag particles and Cu/Ag deposits from solutions where the concentration of copper (40 g/L) is up to 40,000 times higher than the amount of silver (1 ppm). Pure copper and silver have different electrode potentials as shown in Eq. The obtained OCP transients in The results for the sample with 50 s replacement time and no stirring are markedly different. For this sample the final recorded OCP values during all cycles are within Stage II, corresponding with a mixed surface potential of copper and silver. From the previously shown XPS results ( The results suggest that the progress of the EDRR process could also be observed by the open circuit potential, which indicates the in-situ deposit composition on the CNT film during EDRR. For a further study of EDRR in the Cu The electrodeposition-redox replacement method was investigated to control the deposition of pure silver and bimetallic copper/silver particles onto a carbon nanotube film. The utilized solutions simulated industrial copper electrolysis solutions with 1–10 ppm Ag, 40 g/L of Cu and 120 g/L sulphuric acid. With this method, first an electrodeposition pulse was applied to produce highly pure copper particles. The cell was then set to open circuit potential conditions and redox replacement took place between the solid copper particles and silver ions in the solution. Three different deposition conditions of −0.1 V for 500 ms, −0.5 V for 50 ms and −0.5 V for 500 ms vs. Ag/AgCl were used and the redox replacement times at open circuit potential were varied between 2 and 600 s. With 20 cycles of deposition and redox replacement, the carbon nanotube film surface could be tailored with a variety of Cu/Ag deposit compositions, or pure silver particles. The composition of the particles could be controlled from pure copper to copper core‑silver shell to pure silver particles by controlling the redox replacement time. Moreover, the progression of the replacement was also observed from the open circuit potential transient during the experiment. When applying stirring the EDRR process was considerably faster with the deposits showing a higher degree of agglomeration. Silver particles with up to 99.9% purity and ca. 100 nm diameter could be formed with deposition conditions of −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl for 50 ms and 300 s of replacement time. The EDRR method for recovery of pure silver particles from the copper process solution with 10 ppm Ag was shown to be >7 times more efficient than by traditional cementation in the same solution. Various types of bimetallic copper-silver particles could be produced with the method as well. For example, copper core-silver shell nanoparticles ca. 250 nm in diameter with a copper to silver ratio of 6 could be deposited with the conditions of −0.1 V for 500 ms with 50 s replacement time. With a higher applied charge of −0.5 V for 500 ms and 50 s replacement time, the core-shell particles were ca. 840 nm in diameter with a copper to silver ratio of 33. In summary, this paper shows the versatile nature of the electrodeposition-redox replacement method to control the composition of bimetallic Cu/Ag and pure Ag particles. The method could be applied to energy efficiently recover homogeneously distributed high purity silver deposits or to create a surface of desired Cu/Ag composition directly on the employed carbon nanotube film from solutions containing industrially relevant concentration ranges (dilute Ag concentration and high Cu concentration). This work has been financed by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at