Vitamin D is a multifunctional hormone that can affect many essential biological functions, ranging from the immune regulation to mineral ion metabolism. A close association between altered activity of vitamin D and vascular calcification has been reported in various human diseases, including in patients with atherosclerosis, osteoporosis, and chronic kidney disease (CKD). Vascular calcification is a progressive disorder and is a major determinant of morbidity and mortality of the affected patients. Experimental studies have shown that excessive vitamin D activities can induce vascular calcification, and such vascular pathology can be reversed by reducing vitamin D activities. The human relevance of these experimental studies is not clear, as vitamin D toxicity is relatively rare in the general population. Contrary to the relationship between vitamin D and vascular calcification, in experimental uremic models, low levels of vitamin D were shown to be associated with extensive vascular calcification, a phenomenon that is very similar to the vascular pathology seen in patients with CKD. The current treatment approach of providing vitamin D analogs to patients with CKD often poses a dilemma, as studies linked vitamin D treatment to subsequent vascular calcification. Recent genetic studies, however, have shown that vascular calcification can be prevented by reducing serum phosphate levels, even in the presence of extremely high serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and calcium levels. This article will briefly summarize the dual effects of vitamin D in vascular calcification and will provide evidence of vitamin D-dependent and -independent vascular calcification.Vitamin D is a multifunctional hormone that exerts effects on most of the organ systems. In contrast to the endocrine effects of VDR, the autocrine functions of VDR require local generation of the active ligand (calcitriol). VDRs are present in most of the human tissues, including endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Vascular calcification is a complex process that induces stiffening of the vessel wall and reduces vascular compliance. Vascular calcification was previously considered as a passive process related to non-specific responses and had little clinical significance. However, availability of electron beam and multidetector row computed tomography imaging helped clinicians to monitor the Vascular calcification often mimics certain molecular events including those seen in skeletal mineralization. Studies have linked vitamin D therapy to higher incidences of vascular calcification; in a retrospective study, the severity and progression of vascular calcification correlated with the plasma levels of vitamin D in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients undergoing prolonged dialysis treatment. Vitamin D is a strong inducer of both FGF23 and klotho. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D has been shown to increase FGF23 promoter activity in osteoblasts through a vitamin D-responsive element. Vitamin D-associated vascular calcification was also noted in various genetically modified mouse models. Studies have shown a negative correlation between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and vascular calcifications, Vitamin D-independent vascular calcification was shown recently in genetically altered mouse models. For instance, Furthermore, hyperphosphatemia and hypercalcemia can induce cardiovascular calcification, affecting the myocardium, and cardiac valves. Vascular calcification is a complex, ectopic biomineralization process, involving autocrine, paracrine and endocrine interactions of numerous factors ( Delineating the kidney-vascular axis in the context of regulating calcium, phosphate and vitamin D metabolism in health and disease will help us not only to determine the molecular mechanisms of vascular calcification but also in achieving therapeutic modulation of the involved pathways and prevent/delay this deadly vascular disorder. I am grateful for the technical support of Razzaque lab members, particularly, Drs Teruyo Nakatani, Kazuyoshi Uchihashi and Mutsuko Ohnishi of the Department of Oral Medicine, Infection and Immunity at the Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA. Some of the original research that formed the basis of this review was supported by a grant (R01-DK077276 to MSR) from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, and institutional support from Nagasaki University School of Biomedical Science and the Harvard School of Dental Medicine.