Gas and coal outbursts seriously threaten the safe and effective production of coal mines with low-permeability and high-gas coal seams. To solve this problem, a hydraulic flushing technology with cross-seam boreholes was carried out. Based on the strain-softening constitution and Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion related to the gas pressure and second principal stress, a multi-physical coupling model was built. The failure range and permeability evolution after hydraulic flushing were studied, and the mechanism was presented. Furthermore, the optimal spacing of hydraulic flushing boreholes (HFB) was determined to provide the basis for field testing. Field tests were then carried out to verify the feasibility of the numerical model. The results indicate that hydraulic flushing can greatly improve the permeability of a coal seam; the failure range around the HFB increases with the gas drainage days; and the optimal radius and spacing of the HFB are 0.6 and 5.5 m, respectively.Many coal seams in China are under high The study shows that the mechanism of increasing permeability by hydraulic flushing is mainly embodied in the following three aspects: (I) Hydraulic flushing can flush out a large amount of coal and gas using a high-pressure jet, releasing the elastic energy and internal gas energy accumulated in a coal body ( A lot of studies have been carried out on the stress and permeability development of coal around the circular boreholes which were perpendicular with coal seam. The static failure range and deformation of coal around borehole after hydraulic action has also been studied by scholars as well. In the above studies, the development of stress and permeability with the dip angle of hydraulic flushing borehole, and the dynamical change of the failure range caused by pressure decrease during gas drainage have not been taken into account. Due to the limitations of the above two aspects, the explorations of hydraulic flushing mechanism lack comprehensiveness. In this study, based on the strain-softening constitution and the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion considering the gas pressure and second principle stress, the failure extent and permeability evolution of coal around the borehole with different dip angles after hydraulic flushing are explored, the dynamic development principles of the failure range with the drainage pressure and the diameter of the borehole are studied, and the influence mechanism of various factors of hydraulic flushing is determined. The results could guide the HFB arrangement optimization. This test site is located in the JLS coal mines in Henan province. The current mining coal seam (#2-1) has a risk of a CGO. The dip angle, thickness, and bury depth of the coal seam are 8°, 4.3 m, and 423 m, respectively (  Twelve coal samples were collected from coal seam #2-1 to determine the coal and gas parameters. The permeability of the coal was tested using a MYS-1 seepage test machine (MT 223-1990, 1990). Three coal samples with a height of 100 ± 0.25 mm and a diameter of 50 mm were used to determine the permeability of coal, the equation considering Klingberg is shown: The gas seepage velocity under different gas pressure is determined by changing the gas pressure at the inlet end of coal sample, then the curve of K and P is fitted to obtain the gas permeability k A mercury intrusion method ( Five cross-seam boreholes were drilled from the floor rock roadway to measure the gas pressure and gas content. A direct method was used to acquire the gas content according to the industry standard This study used Comsol Multiphysics finite element software to simulate and study the increased permeability and effectiveness of the gas drainage. A model with strain-softening constitution and Mohr-Coulomb failure criteria was built. In geotechnical engineering, most rock masses show strain-softening character, which have been proved by compressive tests in laboratory and field tests. The strain-softening constitution could accurately analyze the rock mass stress and deformation of pre-failure and post-failure ( In this study, a global model with a single and double HFB arrangement in a coal seam was built to explore the influences of the radius and dip angle of the HFBs, as well as the gas drainage pressure changes, on eliminating the CGO. The dimensions of the mudstone, coal seam, siltstone, limestone, and siltstone were 30 m × 30 m × 0.3 m, 30 m × 30 m × 4.3 m, 30 m × 30 m × 8.5 m, 30 m × 30 m × 0.6 m, and 30 m × 30 m × 3.8 m, respectively (as shown in As shown in The boundary and initial conditions for the solid deformation model and gas flow model are separately set. For the solid deformation, the model bottom was fixed, the right side and rear side were set as roller boundaries, a vertical The determination of the optimal simulation parameters applied is critical to the accuracy of the numerical results. The loading process of the coal and rock undergo elastic, softening, and failure stages. The coal and rock during the elastic stage are not damaged and their mechanical properties are not changed. During the softening stage, the elastic modulus, cohesion, and friction angle of coal and rock changes with the strain. When the coal and rock continually deforms, they enter the residual stage. Based on the above three stages, the coal around the HFB can be divided into the crushing zone, fracturing zone, and elastic zone. The coal enters the fracturing zone during the softening stage. The coal and rock in the crushing zone are completely damaged, and their mechanical properties conform to the residual stage. The effective stress equation of the fluid–solid coupling is as follows: The equation of coal and rock deformation is Equivalently, the strain expression is The pre-failure coal and rock is elastic, and the strain–stress relationship is linear: The strain–stress relationship of the post-failure coal and rock is nonlinear, and the total strain consists of elastic and plastic strain. The plastic-equivalent strain of a coal seam is expressed through the following equation ( Mohr-Coulomb equation could comprehensively reflect the strength characteristics of rocks, but it doesn't take gas pressure and second principal stress into account. During gas drainage, the gas pressure around the HFB decreases with the drainage time, which influences the effective stress and strain of coal and rock. Thus, Suarez-Rivera et al. modified the equation ( The friction and cohesion functions are given as follows: The porosity of a coal seam is indicated as follows ( The pre-failure permeability is determined by the Kozeny–Carman equation: The post-failure permeability of coal is given as ( Gas desorption causes effective stress increase, matrix shrinkage and permeability damage. At same time, the interaction between gas molecules and the wall along the flow path can form Klingberg effect during gas desorption. The effective stress, gas molecule slippage (Klingberg effect) and coal matrix shrinkage effects can occur simultaneously ( The failure range and extent of coal after hydraulic flushing was explored based on the fluid–solid coupling model, and the porosity and permeability in the coal were studied. Furthermore, the gas pressure and effect of CGO elimination were investigated. The principle of the numerical calculation applied is shown in  Permeability is a most important factor affecting the gas drainage and elimination of a CGO. Increasing the permeability of coal seam is also the direct purpose of hydraulic flushing. As shown in Although increasing the radius of the HFB can expand the area of increased permeability, the excessive radius of the HFB causes a large amount of energy in the high-pressure water loss along the path between the jet tube and wall of the HFB, and the capacity of the coal breakage decrease. The effective HFB radii of hydraulic flushing equipment used in this study are between 50 and 80 mm, the water pressure is 25 MPa. For the mechanical properties of JLS coal, the effective HFB radius formed by hydraulic flushing is about 0.6 m by field tests. When the HFB is not vertical (90°) but is at other dip angles (60°, 50°, 40°, and 30°), the cross section of the HFB is not circular but elliptical (  The permeability at the minor axis of the ellipse is as shown in  High-pressure gas exists in the pores and fractures of a porous medium, which can effectively support the solid skeleton of the coal. It is known from the effective stress equation of fluid–solid coupling (Equation As shown in When the hydraulic flushing with a cross-seam borehole is used to eliminate the danger of a CGO, an optimal spacing of the HFB can maximize the range of CGO elimination and minimize the construction time and cost. In this section, the failure zone and gas drainage effect are studied to determine the optimal spacing between two HFBs when the dip angle is 90° and the radius is 0.6 m. As shown in The effects of CGO elimination at different spacings (4, 5.5, and 7 m) are compared after the gas drainage of 30 days. As shown in    The influence of various factors (radius, dip angle, and drainage time) on the hydraulic flushing with a cross-seam borehole was explored through field tests, and the optimal spacing of the HFB was determined. Furthermore, the results of the simulation were verified through field tests. Based on the results of the simulation, the arrangements of the HFBs are as shown in As shown in The gas pressure in the observation hole of group DE at 4 m from the center In simulation results, the CGO elimination ranges after 30 day gas drainage are 1.87 m, 2.53 m, 2.96 m, 2.35 m, and 1.51 m in groups A, B, C, DE, FG, respectively. In addition, the gas pressure change trends are similar with the results of field test. The gas pressure and simulation results of the observation holes show agreement. The gas pressure of the field test is lower than that of simulation result in group B and DE after 30 days gas drainage, because the numerical simulation is calculated using the continuous finite element method, which does not consider the fractures in the coal. However, there are numerous fractures in the coal mass, which are beneficial to the gas drainage. Based on the above analyses, the simulation models are feasible. As shown in As shown in In this study, based on Strain-softening constitution and Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, a three-dimensional multi-physical coupling model was built, the gas pressure, second principal stress and klingberg effect on failure zone were taken into consideration. Then, the radius, dip angle, gas drainage time and spacing of hydraulic flushing borehole was explored, their influences on the failure zone and permeability evolution were revealed. At last, the feasibility of the model was validated by comparing the results of simulation with field tests. And the optimal arrangements of HFB were tested in the field. According to the main research results of this paper, the following conclusions were obtained. The mechanism of hydraulic flushing was to increase the radius of the HFB, release the stress, and enlarge the strain of the coal around the HFB for improving the permeability. According to the failure extent of coal and the permeability development principle, the coal around the HFB can be divided into crushing ring zone, fracture ring zone, and elastic zone. The permeability in the crushing ring zone and fracture ring zone increase significantly compared with the elastic zone (undamaged zone). The radius of HFB is crucial to the failure area, which increases obviously with radius, and a function of S = 3 × 10 Through the field test and simulation results, it can acquire that hydraulic flushing could greatly improve the gas drainage efficiency, and the optimal radius and spacing of HFB are 0.6 m and 5.5 m, respectively. The gas pressure measured in the field test conforms to the simulation, it verify the simulation model is rational and feasibility. The research methods and conclusions used in this study can provide reference for the coal mine which has similar geology and production condition. However, the heterogeneity of coal wasn't explored in this study, in order to make the study results more accurate, the permeability and porosity anisotropy of coal should be analyzed in future study. This work was supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at