Orthogonal array design (OAD) has been used to arrange the experimental runs in order to maximize lead recovery and also minimize zinc dissolution from an Iranian zinc plant residue (ZPR). The residue assaying 9.21% Zn, 12.37% Pb and 5.31% Fe was used in successive processes involving sulfuric acid (H2SO4)–water leaching to bring zinc into solution and therefore enrich the lead in the residue and then brine leaching for lead recovery. An L25 orthogonal array (OA, five factors in five levels) was employed to evaluate the effects of NaCl concentration (C
                     brine
                     =50, 150, 200, 250, 300 g/L), time (t
                     =10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 min), pulp density (S
                     /
                     L
                     =25, 50, 100, 150 and 200 g/L), pH (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) and stirring speed (R
                     =100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 rpm) on extraction of the individual metal ions (Pb, Zn, Fe). Statistical analysis, ANOVA, was also employed to determine the relationship between experimental conditions and yield levels. The results showed that increasing pulp density and initial pH reduced mean responses for lead. However, increasing brine concentration promoted the recovery of lead. The experimental results for selective leaching showed that under optimal leaching conditions (S
                     /
                     L)1: 25 g/L, (pH)1:1, t
                     3:30 min, (C
                     brine)5: 300 g/L and R
                     4: 400 rpm, the extraction of lead and zinc were 89.43% and 3.84%, respectively; giving a solution containing 2.99 g/L Pb, 0.02 g/L Zn and negligible amount of iron.In the zinc extraction process, a large amount of leach residues are generated daily and semi-soluble lead (II) sulfate (PbSO Different industrial wastes containing lead have been subjected to various recovery methods. However, brine leaching (leaching by chloride solutions using NaCl, MgCl  The main advantages of chloride-based leaching systems over sulfate-based ones are ( Pyrite is not attacked by chloride salts. Most metal chlorides are considerably more soluble than the corresponding sulfate salts. Facile regeneration of the leaching reagents in cyclic processes. Lead (II) sulfate is poorly soluble (K Brine leaching is based on the formation of complex chlorides of lead in concentrated chloride solutions. Lead sulfate is insoluble in water, but soluble in saturated chloride solutions acidified by HCl, H Nevertheless, it can be seen that the addition of chloride can lower the solubility of lead. However in very chloride rich media, the lead can become soluble ( During brine leaching, the PbSO Solubility of PbCl In addition, lead forms complex ions in concentrated chlorine solutions according to the following equations: In the present study, lead recovery from ZPR obtained from NILZ electrolytic zinc plant was investigated. In the first stage, ZPR was leached with concentrated H Taguchi method has been shown to be an effective means for the improvement of the productivity in the research and development stage, so that high quality items can be produced quickly at low cost. It has found much application in a wide range of industrial fields because of its universal applicability to all engineering fields ( Zinc plant residue was kindly supplied from NILZ plant. The ZPR was exposed to air for 15 days to be dried. The dried residue was then crushed using ball mill and then homogenized. The homogenized samples were used for chemical analysis using XRF (Philips PW2404 model) and atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) (AA-300 Perkin-Elmer model). Mineralogical characterization was performed using a Philips PW1730 model X-ray diffractometer. For morphology observations, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used. According to atomic absorption analysis, the ZPR contains 9.21% Zn, 12.37% Pb and 4.31% Fe. XRF results are shown in Industrial grade H Initially, H After water leaching, the secondary zinc plant residue (SZPR) was subjected to brine leaching to investigate the recovery of lead. At first, the SZPR was exposed to air for 4 weeks to be dried and then it was crushed using a ball mill for half an hour. After that it was divided into approximately 250 g samples using a riffle. Samples were directly used for the experiments without any particle size fractionation since some preliminary tests showed that for particle sizes less than 200 μm, no observable change was achieved in lead recovery through leaching of SZPR. This goal was attained by such a milling operation. As can be seen from particle size distribution curve, Experimental parameters and their levels were determined in the light of preliminary tests and as mentioned earlier it was observed that temperature could be neglected. Also, applying a brine concentration of above 300 g/L was practically impossible due to saturation. In the OAD method, selection of factors is based on the previous knowledge of brine leaching. Based on those experimental conditions reported by other researchers for the leaching of similar residues and preliminary tests performed, significant factors that can affect the extraction recoveries using brine leaching were identified as (a) pulp density, (b) initial pH, (c) time, (d) NaCl concentration and (e) stirring speed. The most significant factors were chosen for optimization, using a five-level OAD with an OA The order of experiments was obtained by inserting parameters into columns of OA, L  According to AAS analysis, the SZPR (residue left after the H Corresponding leaching efficiencies with two replications (responses 1 and 2) obtained under the candidate conditions are displayed in The data obtained from the experiments may now be analyzed. Taguchi recommends analyzing the mean response for each run. With respect to the optimization criterion, system is optimized when the response is as large as possible for lead, so we deal with factor levels that maximize the mean response. Vice versa, the system is optimized when the response is as small as possible for zinc, so we deal with the factor levels that minimize the mean response. The Taguchi method uses graphs of the marginal means of each factor, as shown in It is verified that pulp density is conversely proportional to mean response. According to According to According to Statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to see whether the process parameters are statistically significant. The According to these results, brine concentration has the greatest effect on mean responses for lead. The Also, pH, stirring speed and pulp density have respectively greater influence on the response for lead. However, the effect of time is negligible on lead recovery. Also, pH has the greatest effect on the recovery of zinc. The The results showed that maximum lead and minimum zinc content occurred in conditions ( Orthogonal array design (OAD) experimental plan was proposed for the brine leaching of lead-bearing zinc plant residues. In the view of above, an OA The most effective parameter for maximum dissolution of lead and zinc is found to be F.F. and F.R. would like to thank IZMDC for partial financial support of this project. M.S.S. is thankful to F. Akyürek, for her assistance in some Taguchi calculations.