Kinetics of the dissolution of copper in aqueous alkaline 2,2′-dipyridyl solutions was investigated at varying oxygen partial pressure, complexing agent concentration, temperature and pH of the solution. It has been found that the oxygen partial pressure was the basic parameter which limited the process rate.
                  The pH in the solution is the second factor that influences the dissolution rate at elevated oxygen partial pressure (0.05 MPa). It may be assigned to formation of various forms of Cu–2,2′-dipyridyl complex, depending on OH− ion concentration. Such complexes vary distinctly in their stability constant values.2,2 Dipyridyls easily adsorb on the metal surface We present here the results of an investigation on copper dissolution in alkaline 2,2 Solutions were prepared using twice-distilled water and analytical grade reagents. Discs of metallic copper (99.99%), of 1.00 mm thickness and 7.06 cm The volume of the solution in all tests was 200 cm Copper dissolution in aqueous solutions of 2,2 The effect of oxygen partial pressure on the rate of copper dissolution in alkaline 2,2 Curves reflecting the effect of oxygen partial pressure on copper dissolution under the above conditions are presented in The oxygen partial pressure effect on the rate of copper dissolution is shown in The effect of complexing agent concentration on copper dissolution rate was investigated under the following conditions: oxygen partial pressure=0.05 MPa; Results are presented in The temperature effect on dissolution rate was investigated within the range of 20–57 °C, under two oxygen partial pressures: 0.0021 MPa (partial pressure of oxygen in the atmospheric air) and 0.05 MPa. Both experiments were performed under identical conditions to those applied in previous experiments. Values of activation energy ( The presence of Cu Investigation on copper dissolution in 2,2 The total rate of copper dissolution is directly proportional to the oxygen partial pressure. Within the pressure range from 0.0021 to 0.08 MPa, the process is limited by transport of oxygen to the copper surface. The values of activation energy confirm the diffusive nature of this process. There is no influence of 2,2 The pH of solution has a clear effect on the rate of copper dissolution. It may be explained on the assumption that Cu(II) and 2,2 Copper dissolution in 2,2 Under the conditions of electroless copper deposition, i.e. when using formaldehyde as reducing agent, at pH 10–13 and at temperature 50–70 °C, in the presence of oxygen and 2,2