Ceria-based materials are prospective electrolytes for low and intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells. In the present work, fully dense CeO2 ceramics doped with 10mol% gadolinium (Gd0.1Ce0.9O1.95, GDC) have been prepared with a Pechini method. Characterization studies were realized with thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA), differential thermal analysis (DTA), mass spectroscopy (MS), high temperature FT-IR (HT-FTIR) and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD). A single-phase with a fluorite type structure was found to form at a relatively low calcination temperature of 500°C. Dense GDC pellets having 98% of the relative density were obtained at sintering temperature of 1400°C/6h, which gave significantly higher total ionic conductivity of 3.4×10−2
                     Scm−1 at 500°C in air. The present work showed that the Pechini method is a relatively low-temperature preparation technique to synthesize Gd0.1Ce0.9O1.95 powders that provided high sinterability and good ionic conductivity.Solid oxide fuel cells, SOFCs, have a great potential for being the cleanest, most efficient and versatile technology for the conversion of chemical to electrical energy. The cost of the current SOFC systems has a restrictive effect on a wide range of commercial applications. In order to be economically competitive, the cost of the materials and the fabrication should be considerably reduced. One way for cost reduction is to lower operating temperature so that interconnection, i.e. heat exchanges between the structural components will decrease. Hence, working with lower temperatures provides utilization from comparatively cheap metal components in low and intermediate temperature SOFCs. For this purpose, by using high ionic conductivity electrolyte at low temperatures, operating temperatures can be reduced Most commonly, solid electrolyte materials which are used in SOFC are yttria stabilized zirconia, doped ceria (e.g. gadolinia doped and samaria doped ceria), stabilized Bi Ceria (CeO Therefore, researchers have recently focused on the ceria based electrolytes. Since ceria based electrolytes have higher densities, they provide SOFCs to work under lower operation temperatures. There are several techniques for preparing Gd This study aims to prepare Gd doped ceria ultra-fine crystallites using Pechini method as an electrolyte for low temperature SOFC applications. Thermal decomposition of these products was investigated in dry air atmosphere by simultaneous thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA), differential thermal analysis (DTA) and mass spectroscopy (MS). Crystallite structures and morphologies of these products were characterized by XRD and SEM techniques. Moreover, bond characterization of the samples was performed by using high temperature Fourier Transform-Infrared Spectroscopy (HT-FTIR) technique. The electrochemical properties of dense GDC samples sintered at 1300 and 1400 Cerium (III) acetate hydrate (Ce(CH The thermal behavior of Gd To measure the density of the calcined powders, the powders were calcined at 1000 The morphology of the sintered samples according to sintering temperature at 1200, 1300, and 1400 Thermal decomposition of Gd The MS data (see X-ray diffraction patterns obtained for the GDC powders calcined at 200, 400, 500, 700 After calcination at 500 HT-FTIR spectroscopy analysis was performed to characterize GDC gel precursor (dried at 110  The SEM micrograph of the calcined at 500 The samples sintered at 1400 The complex impedance spectra measured at 350 The total conductivity value of Gd Conductivity values for bulk and grain boundary contributions were calculated from the corresponding resistances obtained by using the impedance spectra. Arrhenius plot of the total conductivity were calculated using these data and presented in In order to obtain a fluorite-like type single-phase structure, 10 The present work was supported by the