A study was conducted on leaching of fly ash mixed with NaOH solution and on mixing procedure for preparing geopolymer. Leaching of SiO2 and Al2O3 was investigated by mixing fly ash with NaOH solution for different time intervals and leachates were analyzed in terms of silica and alumina contents. To make geopolymer paste, separate mixing and normal mixing were used. For separate mixing, NaOH solution was mixed with fly ash for the first 10min; subsequently sodium silicate solution was added into the mixture. For normal mixing, fly ash, sodium hydroxide and sodium silicate solution were incorporated and mixed at the same time. Geopolymers were cured at 65°C for 48h. Microstructure of paste and compressive strength of mortar were investigated. Results revealed that solubility of fly ash depended on concentration of NaOH and duration of mixing with NaOH. For mixing procedure, separate mixing gave slightly better strength mortar than normal mixing. High strength geopolymer mortar up to 70.0MPa was obtained when the mixture was formulated with 10M NaOH and sodium silicate to NaOH ratio of 1.0, and the separate mixing sequence was used.Fly ash is an industrial waste normally used to replace Portland cement for making concrete. However, it can only partially replace Portland cement since SiO Geopolymer with good mechanical properties viz., high compressive strength and stability at temperature up to 1300–1400 The present work investigates alumina and silica in the form of Al Fly ash from Mae Moh power plant in the north of Thailand with a mean particle size of 19 Three NaOH concentrations of 5, 10, and 15 For separate mixing (S), fly ash was mixed with NaOH for 10 To make mortar, sand was added to paste mixture at sand to fly ash ratio by weight of 2.75 and mixed for one more minute. The mixture was cast into 50 Results of measuring of Si From When alumino-silicate source material came into contact with alkali solution, leaching of both Si Surfaces of fly ash, before and after leaching with NaOH with different concentrations and leaching periods were investigated using SEM. Results shown in Results of optical microscope examination and SEM on geopolymer paste are shown in Results of XRD of fly ash and geopolymer pastes are shown in Compressive strengths of fly ash geopolymer mortars are shown in Water glass to NaOH ratio (G/N) clearly affected the strength of low concentration 5 The results also gave a comparison between two mixing sequences of geopolymer mortars with 10 IR spectra of geopolymer are shown in Peak area and peak height are frequently used in quantitative assessment of geopolymer reaction. Ratio of inverted peak height (H) and ratio of area of inverted peak (AS) of Si–O–Si stretching vibration are tabulated in For N series ( It should, however, be pointed out here that results obtained are specific to the test conditions. It is possible to produce good geopolymer at ambient temperature instead of curing at temperature of 65 When fly ash came into contact with NaOH, leaching of Si, Al and other minor ions started. The amount of leaching was dependent on NaOH concentration and leaching time. The results indicated that leaching time of 5–10 Mixing sequence had some effects on geopolymerization of paste and compressive strength of mortar. Separate mixing procedure allowed time and condition for leaching of silica and alumina from fly ash particles into NaOH solution. IR study and compressive strength confirmed that geopolymerization was elevated with S series compared to N series. At high water glass content, its effect became dominant and the effect of leaching of fly ash was less. Geopolymers with relatively high strengths of 60–70 Optical microscope and SEM studies suggested that geopolymerization started with gel formation in colloidal form varying in sizes from less than 1 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports from Thailand Research Fund (TRF) and the Commission on Higher Education, Ministry of Education, Thailand, under TRF New Researcher Scholar Contract No. MRG5280001. Appreciation is also extended to PERCH-CIC Program.