Coal permeability measurements are normally conducted under the assumption that gas pressure in the matrix is equalized with that in fracture and that gas sorption-induced swelling/shrinking strain is uniformly distributed within the coal. However, the validity of this assumption has long been questioned and differential strain between the fracture strain and the bulk strain has long been considered as the primary reason for the inconsistency between experimental data and poroelasticity solutions. Although efforts have been made to incorporate the impact into coal permeability models, the fundamental nature of those efforts to split the matrix strain between fracture and coal bulk remains questionable. In this study, a new concept of differential swelling index (DSI) was derived to theoretically define the relation among sorption-induced strains of the coal bulk, fracture, and coal matrix at the equilibrium state. DSI was a function of the equilibrium pressure and its magnitudes were regulated by the Langmuir constants of both the matrix and the coal bulk. Furthermore, a spectrum of DSI-based coal permeability models was developed to explicitly consider the effect of differential strains. These models were verified with the experimental data under the conditions of uniaxial strain, constant confining pressure, and constant effective stress.As an “unconventional” gas resource, coalbed methane (CBM) is a natural product of coalification process ( One of the key reservoir parameters for CBM production and CO Significant experimental efforts have been made to investigate the characteristics of coal permeability evolution. Coal permeability experiments can be generally divided into stress-controlled (constant confining pressure and constant effective stress) and displacement-controlled ones (uniaxial strain condition and constant volume condition) ( Laboratory-measured coal permeability in terms of adsorbing gasses such as CH Most experimental data ( An ingenious experimental work was conducted by A permeability test for coal was conducted under constant volume condition to investigate the coal–cleat interactions using helium ( Various coal permeability models have been proposed to explain the variability of coal permeability under laboratory or field conditions. Based on applicable boundary conditions, major coal permeability models were classified into two groups ( This discrepancy between assumption and reality has long been recognized. In the study ( In other studies (e.g. To explain the phenomenon of coal permeability switch from reduction to rebound under constant confining pressure condition, the concepts of critical pressure and critical time were introduced to define the switch from local swelling to macro-swelling due to gas diffusion from fractures to matrices ( As mentioned above, the impact of the differential strain between the fracture strain and the bulk strain is a challenging issue. To address this issue, a concept of differential swelling index (DSI) was introduced in this study to define the relation among sorption-induced deformations of the coal bulk, fracture, and coal matrix. Furthermore, a spectrum of DSI-based coal permeability models was developed to explicitly consider the effect of differential strains. As shown in Introduction, coal permeability models can be classified into four categories. (1) The gas sorption-induced strain results in fracture strain only ( Coal is a typical porous medium that consists of both matrices and fractures. In this study, the butt/face cleat system, fractures, bedding plies, and joints are all called the fracture system. Microscopic experimental techniques can be used to investigate sorption-induced strains in coal ( By comparing the current stage and initial stage, we can obtain the volumetric balance between coal matrix, coal fracture and coal bulk: Let Eq. Although the fracture system controls the evolution of permeability, it is almost impossible to measure the adsorption strain of the fracture in experiment. The previous work on this issue has indicated that the value of pore strain was around 50 times the bulk strain for the coal under hydrostatic conditions ( In Eq. For this special case, the difference between Langmuir strain of coal matrix and coal bulk defines the differential swelling behavior. If the Langmuir strain constants are fixed, the ratios remain unchanged. This is consistent with the current assumptions ( In this section, DSI was included in the coal permeability model. It is commonly assumed that the fracture system controls the gas flow in coal while the flow in the coal matrix can be neglected ( Solving Eqs. Substituting Eqs. As the bulk modulus Integrating Eq. By substituting the definition Eq. The relationship between permeability and fracture porosity can be described by the cubic law ( Solving Eqs. If equal adsorption-induced fracture and bulk strains are assumed (e.g. Eq. The general permeability model defined by Eq. Under the constant confining pressure condition as shown in By substituting DSI (Eq. For the case of constant effective stress condition as shown in Substituting Eq. By substituting Eq. For the case of uniaxial strain as shown in Substituting Then the average effective stress imposed on the coal can be expressed as Substituting Eq. By substituting Eq. For the case constant volume condition as shown in Assuming Biot's coefficient Integrating Eq. Based on the cubic law and by substituting the DSI into the porosity model, we can obtain the governing equation for the permeability change under the constant volume condition: By substituting Eq. In this section, our models are compared with experimental observations under a spectrum of boundary conditions from constant confining pressure to uniaxial strain. Four sets of experimental data under these boundary conditions ( We compared the model results of Eq. As shown in We compared our model performance of Eq. We compared our model performance of Eq. As shown in Section In the following, all of the input parameters are taken from As shown in As shown in Eq. In this study, a concept of DSI is proposed to theoretically define the relation among sorption-induced strains of the coal bulk, fracture and matrix at the equilibrium state. DSI is a function of the equilibrium pressure and its magnitudes are regulated by the Langmuir constants of both the coal matrix and the coal bulk. Furthermore, a spectrum of DSI-based coal permeability models is developed to explicitly consider the effect of differential strains. These models are verified with the experimental data under the conditions of uniaxial strain, constant confining pressure and constant effective stress. Based on the model results and verifications, the following conclusions can be drawn: When the gas sorption-induced fracture strain is assumed the same as the bulk strain, DSI is equal to unity; when the Langmuir constants for matrix are the same as the ones for coal bulk, DSI is a constant. However, DSI is a function of the equilibrium pressure when the Langmuir constants for matrix are different from the ones for coal bulk. The theoretical development of DSI concept essentially removes the basic assumptions in previous studies. An equilibrium state is typically assumed when interpreting permeability measurements – representing the assumption that equilibration has been reached and that both sorption-induced changes in deformation and their impacts on the evolution of permeability have ceased. At the equilibrium state, coal permeability is a function of equilibrium pressure and its magnitudes are regulated by the magnitudes of DSI. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work was supported by