Fractures of the olecranon represent 10% of upper extremity fractures and most necessitate operative fixation. The dominant factor that drives reoperation in isolated olecranon fractures is failure of fixation. A second factor in the development of a nonunion is the fracture pattern. Unrecognized comminution at the triceps insertion can lead to extensor mechanism failure if secure fixation is not achieved. Treatment of olecranon nonunion and failure of fixation can be challenging. The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the incidence, risk factors, evaluation, management, outcomes, and sequelae of olecranon nonunion and failure of fixation.Serum: qualitative Urine: quantitative CMP TSH T T Cortisol Testosterone Albumin Prealbumin Vitamin C Vitamin D Calcium Alkaline phosphatase PTH DEXA Cancer (UPEP, SPEP, bone marrow biopsy, Computation Tomography Abdomen & Pelvis) Hematogenous Open fracture Intramedullary Sedimentation rate (ESR) CRP CBC Culture Although olecranon fractures are common, accounting for approximately 10–20% of all upper extremity fractures, the incidence of nonunion in isolated olecranon fractures is low, approximately 1–5%. Nondisplaced olecranon fractures (Mayo Type 1) predictably heal well with nonoperative treatment. Although most displaced olecranon and proximal ulna fractures are treated operatively, fractures in low-demand, elderly, and/or infirm patients can be nonoperatively treated. Few long-term data exist regarding outcomes of patients with displaced olecranon fractures (Mayo Type 2 and 3) conservatively treated. Risk factors for symptomatic nonunion of nonoperatively treated olecranon and proximal ulnar fractures are age, female gender, tobacco use, chronic corticosteroid use, active infection, poor host nutritional status, early immobilization strategy, and failure of the treating physician to recognize a more serious injury or degree of fracture displacement. It has been the experience of the senior author that most symptomatic nonunions of nonoperatively treated fractures are often the result of a delay to seek treatment because of social factors. Patients with symptomatic nonunion of the olecranon or proximal ulna complain of pain and/or weakness with elbow extension. Although patients with acute olecranon fractures often have a palpable defect in the dorsal elbow, patients with a chronic nonunion may not. Olecranon nonunions often represent fibrous union due to motion and strain through the fracture site. A thorough history and physical examination are mandatory. Careful evaluation of elbow range of motion, stability, previous incisions, evidence of infection, and viability of the soft tissues must be performed. Extremity motor, sensory, and vascular examinations must be documented. It is critical to assess each patient’s needs, expectations, occupation, hand dominance, and medical comorbidities because all help to determine treatment strategy. Laboratory workup for nonunion should be obtained to evaluate for infectious and other treatable causes of nonunion such as vitamin or hormonal deficiencies ( High-quality radiographs of the elbow with orthogonal views are crucial to understanding the nature of each fracture. In cases of nonunion, it is often necessary to obtain multiplanar radiographs or computed tomography (CT) images to assist in preoperative planning. Because the proximal ulna has curves in the sagittal and coronal planes, it is also important to image the contralateral (uninjured) extremity. Operative indications are broad. Healthy patients who present with a nonunion and pain, loss of elbow motion, or extension weakness are surgical candidates. The fracture pattern and the patient’s functional status determine the appropriate surgical technique. If patients present with complaints of ulnar neuritis or if fracture fixation requires fixation on the medial aspect of the olecranon, then preoperative discussion should include nerve release and possible anterior transposition. Although sometimes considered to be a salvage procedure, triceps advancement provides predictably good functional outcomes in certain patient populations with the least likelihood of repeat surgery. Low-demand patients with olecranon fractures involving less than 50% of the olecranon articular surface or fractures with severe, nonreconstructable proximal comminution are ideal candidates. Surgical technique: The patient is placed in the beanbag lateral position with the operative extremity draped over a post. A sterile tourniquet may be used. The entire upper extremity is prepped should mobilization of a scarred triceps become necessary. A posterior approach over the elbow is performed. To preserve blood supply, full-thickness soft-tissue flaps are raised. The ulnar nerve is identified and protected. The nerve should be adequately released if the triceps is to be advanced to prevent ulnar neuropraxia. The joint is opened through the nonunion site and pointed-reduction forceps are used to grasp the proximal olecranon fragment. Sharp dissection of the triceps insertion off of the proximal fragment allows for maximal triceps tissue to distally repair. The elbow is flexed, allowing for inspection of the joint for loose bodies and evaluation of the articular surfaces. Traditional teaching advocates reattachment of the triceps tendon at the level of the articular surface of the olecranon to provide a “sling effect.” It is essential to obtain secure fixation into the remaining bone of the olecranon, midway between the articular surface and dorsal surface. Our preferred method is to create a shallow trough to increase cortical contact ( Tension-band fixation is ideally suited to stable fracture patterns proximal to the coronoid tip that are not at risk for sigmoid notch compression. As mentioned in previous chapters, tension bands convert the dorsal distraction force of the triceps muscle into articular surface compression force via a figure-of-eight wire loop. Centrally, compressed fragments must be elevated and small amounts of cancellous graft may be used to reconstruct a smooth greater sigmoid notch. Emphasis remains on articular congruity and small central areas of comminution may be discarded provided the overall architecture of the trochlear curve is preserved. A 2-mm drill is used to place drill holes proximal and distal to the fracture, facilitating use of pointed-reduction clamps ( Wires (18-gauge or 22-gauge) are typically used to create the tension band. Braided cable or multifilament reinforced suture material such as FiberWire (Arthrex, Naples, FL) may also be used. Both have been shown to be superior to monofilament wire in biomechanical studies. Patients who require surgery for oblique or multifragmented olecranon nonunions must be treated with plate fixation. These fractures typically result in ulnar shortening and narrowing of the sigmoid notch if treated with either intramedullary or tension-band fixation. The goal of treatment is to re-establish the olecranon and coronoid articular facets without altering the contour and dimensions of the trochlear notch. Small fragments may be absent or impacted and the surgical strategy should emphasize realignment of the dorsal cortex. The trochlea may be used as a template to reconstitute the proximal ulna. Careful resection of interposed soft tissue and scar must be performed. It may be necessary to abrade the bone ends with either a high-speed burr or curette to establish bleeding bone. Fragments can be provisionally fixed with small screws, such as from a mini-fragment set, or held with K-wires. Tricortical or structural bone allograft can be placed into voids created by fracture impaction after subchondral surfaces have been elevated and reduced. The dorsal plate is applied once the fracture has been adequately reduced. The plate is initially fixed to the diaphysis The wound is evaluated 3–5  Nonunions of operatively treated olecranon fractures are the result of persistent fracture gap, motion at the fracture site, infection, lack of vascularity, unrecognized type and severity of injury pattern, improper implant selection, or a combination thereof. The appropriate surgical technique is predicated upon the understanding of the injury pattern and the implants available for fixation. As discussed earlier, the rate of nonunion after fixation of olecranon fractures is 1–5%. Patients with symptomatic nonunion of the olecranon may present with a myriad of complaints, and it may be difficult to discern their etiology. Complications such as arthrosis, infection, ulnar neuritis, and symptomatic hardware are common after fracture fixation about the elbow. Failure of fixation may be due to poor surgical technique or infection. Infection should always be suspected in cases of failed fixation. A baseline blood count with differential, complete metabolic panel, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels should be obtained on all patients with nonunion after surgical intervention. Physical examination should evaluate triceps function, elbow motion, and neurovascular status. Previous incisions should be documented with the intention of incorporation into the planned surgical approach, when possible. The index history and physical, operative report, progress notes, and radiographs should be obtained. Previous clinical and radiographic data should be reviewed. The operative report is reviewed for implant identification and to determine whether ulnar nerve release or transposition was performed. Orthogonal radiographs of the affected elbow are sufficient for many olecranon nonunions; however, CT may be necessary to better evaluate bridging cortices. Obtaining films of the uninjured elbow is often helpful. MRI is not necessary in the evaluation of olecranon or proximal ulna nonunion. The goal of surgery is to provide stable internal fixation that will facilitate fracture union. In cases of wound breakdown with exposed hardware or bone, staged reconstruction with soft-tissue mobilization is required. A detailed surgical strategy should be developed before the surgical incision. Given the difficulty of nonunion surgery, all implants and instrumentation must be available if intraoperative difficulties are encountered. These include implant-specific removal tools, a high-speed burr, a battery-powered drill with extra batteries, suture for tagging structures or applying traction, wire driver, K-wires, and bone graft. This list is not all-encompassing and should be tailored to the surgical plan and surgeon preference. Preoperative assessment of flexion contracture and ulnar nerve symptoms is essential because concomitant contracture release and ulnar nerve decompression, with or without transposition, may be necessary at the time of surgery. In all cases of revision surgery, it is important for the surgeon to understand the expectations of the patient and to provide insight if those expectations are likely to be fully realized through surgical intervention. Finally, if bone graft will be required, the surgeon should preoperatively discuss the source of graft (autograft versus allograft) with the patient. Patient positioning for treatment of olecranon fracture nonunion is beanbag lateral over a post. The entire upper extremity is prepped and a sterile tourniquet is placed. Before inflating the tourniquet, previous scars are outlined with a surgical marker because the surgeon should attempt to incorporate those scars into the new incision. A longer incision should be made so that normal tissue planes can be identified before entering scarred tissue. The posterior approach requires that full-thickness flaps are raised to expose the triceps and proximal ulna. In revision surgery, the ulnar nerve is difficult to find but can typically be identified at the proximal-medial border of the triceps and dissected from proximal to distal, from known to unknown. In all revision cases, the nerve is released and transposed anteriorly in a subcutaneous position. Previous hardware is removed and the nonunion site is aggressively debrided to remove all soft tissue and nonviable bone. Intraoperative specimens are collected and sent for frozen and permanent sectioning. Antibiotics are now intravenously administered. The intramedullary canal is opened with an appropriately sized drill bit to break up pedestals of sclerotic bone. The nonunion site is carefully evaluated so that ulnar length and alignment are restored. Failure to do so places the patient at risk for shortening of the sigmoid notch with resultant arthrosis. The trochlea can be used as a template to restore the greater sigmoid notch. Provisional fixation should initially be performed with antegrade intramedullary K-wire fixation. For short proximal segments, an additional K-wire can be driven in a retrograde fashion from the olecranon into the distal humerus. Once ulnar length and radiocapitellar and ulnohumeral congruity are confirmed, a mini-fragment locking compression plate (LCP) is placed over the medial aspect of the proximal ulna. The plate is temporarily secured to the ulna with 2.7-mm screws, allowing for placement of the bone graft and the dorsal olecranon plate without loss of reduction ( It is important to recognize, especially in cases of significant bone loss, that the proximal ulnar anatomy is complex; it has 6° of valgus, an anterior bow, and torsion. The incision is irrigated and 1 Olecranon bone plating is reserved for patients who present with nonunion of the olecranon who also have poor bone quality, ulnar bone loss, and a radiocapitellar joint without evidence of arthrosis. The procedure below is largely adopted from the technique described by Papagelopoulos and Morrey. The entire extremity is prepped and a high sterile tourniquet is placed. Antibiotics are held until intraoperative cultures are obtained. A posterior approach to the olecranon is performed. Full-thickness flaps are elevated. The ulnar nerve is identified and transposed into an anterior subcutaneous position. Any previously placed hardware is removed. Tissue is resected from the nonunion site and sent for frozen section analysis and permanent culture. Systemic antibiotics are administered. The bone ends are debrided, and all nonviable tissue and bone is excised. If a high-speed burr is used, then care is taken to avoid thermal necrosis of the healthy bone. Any lateral or medial callous is resected to prepare a flat surface for the bone plate and the dynamic compression plate (DCP), respectively. K-wires may be used to obtain provisional fixation. Care is used to re-establish ulnar length, alignment, and articular congruity. Once the nonunion is deemed to be free of infection by frozen section analysis, a cortical allograft strut is cut and shaped to fit the contour of the lateral ulnar surface. Allograft struts vary in size. It is important to choose a graft that is long enough to provide three screws of fixation proximal and distal to the nonunion site and wide enough to hold any cancellous autograft that is packed into the nonunion site. Because most patients who require a bone plate do not have adequate autograft tissue, allograft bone may be required. Cancellous screws are used to secure the allograft to the ulna proximal and distal to the nonunion site. The fracture site is packed with cancellous allograft. A 3.5-mm contoured DCP is placed on the medial side of the ulna. A 3.5-mm cortical screw is first placed in the hole just proximal to the nonunion site; with the bone plate on the lateral side of the ulna, this provides three cortices of fixation for each screw. Next, the hole just distal to the nonunion site is drilled eccentrically and tapped to provide compression across the nonunion site with standard Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen technique. The provisional K-wire fixation is removed. The remaining proximal and distal holes are drilled, measured, tapped, and filled accordingly ( The incision is irrigated and vancomycin powder is placed before closure. The extremity is placed into a well-padded splint with the elbow at 80°–90° of flexion. In patients who present with nonunion and bone loss due to either infection or open trauma, the Masquelet technique is extremely useful. The treatment strategy for patients with infected olecranon nonunions and for patients with olecranon nonunions secondary to bone loss from an open fracture are the same. Both require a staged procedure to achieve bony union ( The patient is placed in the beanbag lateral position with the operative arm draped over a post. The entire upper extremity is prepped and a sterile tourniquet is placed. Previous surgical incisions are marked. In all cases of known or suspected infection, antibiotics are held until soft tissue is collected from the nonunion site and sent to the laboratory. Especially in cases in which the location of the ulnar nerve is unknown, a longer incision should be made proximally so that normal tissue planes can be identified before entering scarred tissue. In cases of a previous nonunion with retained hardware, the hardware is removed. The nonunion or open fracture site is aggressively debrided to remove all soft tissue and nonviable bone. The intramedullary canal is opened with an appropriately sized drill bit to break up any sclerotic pedestals of bone and remove debris. Cultures are not routinely collected in cases of open fracture, but they are required in all revision cases. Antibiotics are administered and the wound is copiously irrigated. The sterile field is redraped. Ulnar length and elbow joint congruity are re-established, and alignment is maintained with provisional K-wire fixation. It is useful to compare intraoperative fluoroscopic images to those taken of the contralateral elbow before the start of the procedure. Congruity of the elbow is confirmed. A precontoured olecranon plate is applied to the ulna to bridge the bone void and provide an internal splint. Proximal and distal screws are used to provide provisional fixation. Once elbow congruity is confirmed and the elbow is found to be stable through a full range of motion, the rest of the screws are used to secure the plate to the bone. If the proximal ulnar segment is short, then it will likely require locked screw fixation. Large defects may require an additional medially or laterally placed plate to provide a “cage” to cradle the bone cement. The wound bed is dried and hemostasis is achieved. The polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) bone cement is prepared to act as the void filler. Before stirring in the monomer agent, antibiotics can be added to the dry polymer mix to provide local elution for several weeks, depending on the concentration of the antibiotics and the vascularity of the area. The PMMA is mixed and not implanted until it has lost its sheen and is of a doughy consistency. The cement is placed into the defect and care is taken to fill the void without pressing the cement into the interstices of the exposed bone ends. Once the cement has cured, the wound is irrigated and dried. A drain is placed, and the incision is closed in layers. In patients with documented osteomyelitis, intravenous antibiotics are usually continued for 6 The optimal timing for grafting with the Masquelet technique is generally accepted to occur at 4–6 The approach to Stage 2 is the same as Stage 1. Preoperative antibiotics are held until intraoperative tissue sampling reveals a frozen section negative for acute inflammation. Because the ulnar nerve was previously transposed, a full-thickness incision is taken down through the previous scar to the plate. Careful dissection is taken around the ulnar side through which the bone cement spacer was placed. It is very important to prevent stripping of the induced membrane. Once exposure is achieved, the membrane is opened through an “H”-shaped incision and the bone cement is teased out. The bone ends within the membrane are abraded with a curette and the void is irrigated. Corticocancellous bone graft is packed into the void and care is taken not to overcompress the graft. The membrane is closed with interrupted sutures. The incision is irrigated and 1 The incidence of nonunion after fixation of the ulna fractures is not well documented in the literature. Proximal-third ulna fractures are more common in children than adults. Risk factors for symptomatic nonunion of operatively treated proximal ulna fractures are similar to those described previously. In addition, fracture patterns that result in an unstable pattern are more likely to result in nonunion. Failure of the treating physician to recognize an unstable fracture pattern involving the proximal ulna can lead to nonunion and/or a painful, unstable elbow. Patients with symptomatic nonunion of the proximal ulna complain of pain and/or weakness with elbow extension. If the radial head is unstable or dislocated, then they will present with lateral elbow pain and may have subjective symptoms of instability. Motion through the fracture site may be palpable and prominence of implants often occurs. Preoperative radiographs must be obtained and compared to serial postoperative radiographs. Ulnar angulation, ulnar comminution, and subluxation of the radial head on postoperative radiographs portend a poor outcome. Healthy patients who present with a nonunion and pain, loss of elbow motion, or extension weakness are surgical candidates. Patients with evidence of radial head subluxation without evidence of radiocapitellar arthrosis are encouraged to undergo operative intervention to prevent arthritis. The fracture pattern, presence of radiocapitellar arthrosis, and ulnar bone stock determine the appropriate surgical technique. Patients with nonunion of proximal ulna fractures without evidence of radiocapitellar arthrosis are treated with revision ulnar plating and bone graft. Patient positioning, identification of previous incisions, transposition of the ulnar nerve, dissection Previous hardware is removed and the nonunion site is aggressively debrided to remove all soft tissue and nonviable bone. The intramedullary canal is opened with a drill bit to break up any sclerotic pedestals of bone. Intraoperative specimens are collected and sent for frozen and permanent sectioning. Ulnar length, rotation, and angulation are re-established and fluoroscopic images are compared to those of the contralateral extremity. Provisional fixation should initially be performed with antegrade, intramedullary K-wire fixation. Digital radiographs should be taken of the provisionally fixed elbow in extension, flexion, pronation, neutral, and supination to ensure that the radiocapitellar joint remains stable in all positions. If radial head subluxation is noted, then ulna length, angulation, or rotation is not restored and provisional fixation should be adjusted. Once ulnar length and elbow joint congruity are confirmed, a mini-fragment LCP is placed over the medial aspect of the proximal ulna. The plate is temporarily secured to the ulna with two 2.7-mm screws proximal and two screws distal to the fracture. This fixation method allows for placement of the bone graft and the dorsal olecranon plate without loss of reduction. The fracture ends are next squared with a small oscillating saw in preparation to receive the cortical autograft. In patients with poor bone quality, cortical autograft may be used to fill the defect. Once a negative frozen section is confirmed, the tricortical bone graft is harvested from the iliac crest and shaped to fit the defect in the ulna. A dorsal plate is applied as previously described to provide compression across the graft site. The wound is irrigated, vancomycin powder is placed, the incision is closed, and the arm is placed into a well-padded splint for 10–14 Revision olecranon plating with radial head excision is reserved for two patient subtypes with proximal ulna nonunions: (1) low-demand patients with osteoporosis and (2) patients with evidence of radiocapitellar arthrosis. In many of these cases, radiocapitellar arthrosis is due to chronic subtle subluxation caused by ulnar shortening. In this situation, the radius acts as a strut that attempts to hold the ulna out to length and prevents ulnar fracture healing. Once a patient develops radiocapitellar arthritis, resection of the radial head and shortening of the ulna to achieve bony apposition can provide primary bone healing without the need for graft. Patient positioning, identification of previous incisions, transposition of the ulnar nerve, dissection down to the previous fixation, and removal of implants are performed as previously described (see Dissection is carried around to the lateral aspect of the elbow and the lateral capsule is opened. Two small Homan retractors are placed around the radial neck. A small oscillating saw is used to make a transverse cut approximately 1 The previous hardware is removed and the nonunion site is aggressively debrided to remove all soft tissue and nonviable bone. The intramedullary canal is opened and sclerotic pedestals of bone are removed. Intraoperative specimens are collected and sent for frozen and permanent sectioning. Intravenous antibiotics are administered. The ends of the ulna are squared with a small oscillating saw. The ulna is shortened to provide bony apposition. Care is taken to ensure that the overall alignment and rotation allow for an impingement-free arc of motion without radiocapitellar abutment. Provisional fixation should initially be performed with antegrade intramedullary K-wire fixation. Digital radiographs should be taken of the provisionally fixed elbow in extension, flexion, pronation, neutral, and supination to ensure that the proximal radius is no longer articulating with the capitellum but is aligned in all planes. The dorsal plate is applied to the bone and clamped into place. The first 3.5-mm screw is placed into the oblong hole in the distal segment, allowing for flexibility in plate positioning. The home-run screw is drilled and driven from the posterior tip of the olecranon and out the anterior cortex distal to the coronoid. The oblong screw is tightened and proximal screws are placed with care to avoid perforating the articular surface. Two more distal screws are placed through the plate and all screws are finally tightened. Final fluoroscopic images are taken to confirm that the articular surfaces have not been violated (   Dissection of ulnar nerve in previously operative surgical fields: The ulnar nerve can be predictably isolated as it pierces the medial intermuscular septum, just anterior to the triceps. Once the nerve is proximally isolated, careful dissection of the nerve from surrounding scar tissue is performed with a #15-blade scalpel and DeBakey forceps from proximal to distal. Remember, the extent of distal dissection is at the first motor branch of the ulnar nerve at it arborizes into the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle. Implant removal: In all revision cases, it is critical to obtain previous operative reports to establish the position of the ulnar nerve and identify the specific implants used. If operative reports are unobtainable, then copies of patient radiographs can be sent to various company representatives until the device make and model can be identified. Before the administration of anesthesia, the device-specific implant removal tool or set must available. It is also important to have a generic screw removal set available for every revision case. Finally, a high-speed burr, a battery-powered drill with extra batteries, suture for tagging structures or applying traction, wire driver, K-wires, and bone graft should all be available in the room before the start of all revisions. Restoration of articular congruity: The trochlea can be used as a template to restore the greater sigmoid notch. The nonunion site is carefully evaluated so that ulnar length and alignment are restored. Failure to do so places the patient at risk for shortening of the sigmoid notch with resultant arthrosis. It is useful to take and save orthogonal view radiographs of the contralateral elbow and forearm on the C-arm before prepping and draping for intraoperative comparison. Infection prophylaxis: All wounds are copiously irrigated and dried. Unless a previous allergy is documented, vancomycin powder is placed into the wound before skin closure. This practice is documented and supported in the cervical spine literature and routinely performed by the senior author. Proximal ulna nonunion: It is not uncommon to see proximal or even distal ulna nonunions occur when there is bone loss because the radius acts as a strut that attempts to hold the ulna out to length. This produces strain across the fracture site and prevents healing. In addition, many cases of proximal ulna nonunion present with radiocapitellar arthrosis due to chronic subtle subluxation caused by ulnar shortening. To avoid extensor mechanism failure in highly comminuted fractures, figure-of-eight wiring can be combined with plating (Izzi, Athwal). The future of treatment options pertaining to fracture nonunion care about the elbow includes several burgeoning fields of medicine. Incorporation of further individualized medical practices to modify patient-specific risk factors such as smoking, comorbid medical conditions, and increased patient education can lead to improved post-operative healing and associated outcomes. Injection of Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP) and Bone Marrow Aspirate Concentrate (BMAC) are examples of progressive medical technologies that may possibly improve the biologic milieu within a fracture to better promote healing. Likewise, improved surgical technologies such as