Air was blown into a vertically vibrating three-dimensional bed from its perforated bottom to control the size separation of a binary granular system in experiment. We focused on the effects of dimensionless vibration acceleration Γ and air velocity u on the separating state. A model was investigated, in which energy dissipation was calculated and linked to the driving force exerted on particles. The acceleration difference of binary particles was calculated by the main parameters of vibration, airflow, and physics properties of particles. The particle motion and redistribution have been explained and predicted with the fundamental theory of dynamics. We noticed that Brazil nut (BN) separation was caused by vibration, and turned to its reverse, but with the stronger energy dissipation when Γ was increased. Reverse Brazil nut (RBN) separation was observed with a rising u, meanwhile the dissipated energy was declined. However, an improved Γ weakened the airflow-induced RBN separation. Various transitional forms between BN and RBN separations, such as uniformly mixed distribution, were obtained. In conclusion, the energy-dissipation correlated size separation can be controlled and predicted under coupling vibration and airflow.Complex separation behaviors of the energy-dissipated granular material have been observed under external excitation, widely applied in ore dressing, grain drying, and pharmaceutical processing The well-known BN separation often appears in a vertically vibrating bed Vibration parameters influence the particles' rearrangement, but the interstitial gas also plays a crucial role in size separation The focus of our work is to explain and predict separation behaviors under vibration and airflow. In experiment, we introduced an airflow to a vibrating three-dimensional bed from its bottom. The influences of vibration acceleration The physical properties of binary particles are presented in After mixing binary particles, the granular mixture's equivalent diameter is The cylindrical container is tightly fixed on the standard vibrator as shown in When the granular system is stable, vibration and airflow are stopped at the same time. Then, the granular bed was evenly divided into 6 layers along the vertical direction as shown in In our experiment, the final separation states were observed when the system stabilizes under the different vibration and airflow conditions. Three stable patterns of vertical distribution occur with the increase of air velocity The pattern of size separation in the vertical direction has a direct dependence on the mass heights of large and small particles, In Generally, particles are down at the wall and up in the middle of the granular bed, thereby resulting in a stable BN or RBN separation. However, with the increasing of After vibration and airflow were exerted on the granular system, particles began to move and redistribute in the granular bed. The driving force, that is the effective force exerted on each particle by vibration and airflow, depends on the physics properties. The difference of driving forces applied on particles is the main factor for the particles' motion and redistribution. For analyzing the driving forces of particles, we regarded the granular mixture as a system, which only consists of a kind of particles with the equivalent diameter Drag force of a single particle is expressed as follows: Thereby, the driving force under vibration and airflow can be rewritten as The mean of vibration force McNamara and Luding Combining Eqs. The driving force In Eq. The driving force When the binary granular system is subjected to vibration and airflow, the driving forces Curves of accelerations of large and small particles under different conditions have been demonstrated in The drag force is raised when the air velocity MIX distribution forms with With the rising vibration acceleration The evidence we discussed above, shows that vibration mainly causes BN separation and airflow has a better efficiency of RBN separation. Although, excessive vibration weakens the vibration-induced BN separation and airflow-induced RBN separation. The competition between the effects of vibration and airflow determines the reciprocal transformation between BN and RBN separation. In the existence of competitive equilibrium under proper conditions, the granular system occurs a MIX distribution during the transition process. Furthermore, this MIX distribution is delayed with the increased vibration acceleration The energy of the granular system can be dissipated by the particle collisions, and compensated by the input energy from the external excitations. In our model, size separation is correlated with the dissipated energy via a parameter Under different conditions of vibration and airflow, the average dissipated power of one equivalent particle, Size dependence of particle separations of binary granular system under varying vibration acceleration This article was sponsored by Expansion of granular bed depends sensitively on airflow and vibration The parameter