A critical literature survey was conducted to examine the stability constants of copper cyanide species. The distribution and equilibrium potentials of copper cyanide species depend on the mole ratio of cyanide to copper, total cyanide concentration, pH and temperature. With increasing CN:Cu mole ratio, the distribution of copper cyanide species shifts more completely to the highly coordinated complex (Cu(CN)4
                     3−) at a high cyanide concentration than that at a low cyanide concentration. The equilibrium potential for Cu(I)/Cu decreases with increasing CN:Cu mole ratio. Increasing the pH is similar to increasing free cyanide concentration. Increasing temperature results in decreasing stability constants. Therefore, the distribution of copper cyanide shifts to the lowly coordinated complexes. The potential measurements have confirmed the validity of the calculated results. The Gibbs free energies have been derived using reliable stability constants of copper cyanide species. In the potential–pH diagram, CuCN, Cu(CN)2
                     −, Cu(CN)3
                     2− and Cu(CN)4
                     3− predominate in the different pH regions, depending on the concentrations of copper cyanide species and free cyanide.Cyanide leaching has been widely accepted as an excellent industrial method to recover gold and silver. However, the cyanidation of copper–gold ores containing the common oxide and secondary sulfide copper minerals results in cyanide degradation and copper solubilization as cuprous cyanide complexes. In conventional gold processing, the copper and complexed cyanide are not recovered after the gold is removed from the solution. This leads to a significant economic penalty in excess cyanide consumption, loss of a valuable copper by-product and significant cost in cyanide destruction during effluent treatment. Therefore, the recovery of copper and associated complexed cyanide from leach solutions has been approached in a variety of ways such as acidification–volatilization–regeneration (AVR), ion exchange and electrolysis The thermodynamics of aqueous copper cyanide complexes is needed for solving fundamental and applied problems in the above processes involving copper cyanide. There are some conflicting or erroneous reports about the stability of copper cyanide due to the use of different thermodynamic constants and conditions Copper cyanide can be dissolved in the presence of excess cyanide to form cyanocuprate ions Cu(CN) The equilibrium constants for copper cyanide complexes The differences among the reported values of The solubility product ( A Cupric ions react with CN When the mole ratio of cyanide to copper is high, a purple cupric tetracyanide is formed, which rapidly decomposes into cyanogen and a copper species There are two reports about the formation constant of cupric tetracyanide Copper cyanide species establish an equilibrium speciation The concentration distributions of these species are dependent on pH, temperature and the total concentrations of copper and cyanide. The mass balances of the copper and cyanide species are described by the following equations: There is the following relation between the potential and the concentration of cuprous ions: With decreasing pH from 12 to 9 (see  The redox potential for Cu(I)/Cu decreases with increasing ratio of total cyanide to copper and to some extent with increasing pH. From In the electrowinning process for copper recovery from solutions, the total cyanide concentration in solution is maintained at a constant value and the copper concentration decreases due to copper cathodic deposition. For example, the copper concentration decreases from 2 to 1 g L The stability of the copper–cyanide solution depends not only on the ratio of total cyanide to copper, but also on the concentrations of total copper, pH and temperature. For example, the critical cyanide concentrations for stable solutions containing 1 M Cu(I) are about 2.8, 2.7, 2.6 and 2.5 for 25, 40, 50 and 60 °C, respectively. If the cyanide concentrations are lower than the above values, the product of the equilibrium [CN The cuprous equilibrium potential can be expressed by The copper cyanide solutions were placed in a 100-mL airtight water-jacketed electrolytic cell whose temperature was maintained constant (±0.2 °C) using a water bath circulator. The solutions were rendered free of oxygen by bubbling with highly pure argon gas, which passed through a Fisher Oxiclear gas purifier to reduce oxygen to below 5 ppb. The copper electrode was a 2-mm-diameter 99.999% pure copper wire, which was first polished by silicon carbide sand, then washed with acetone and finally put in 0.01 M pure sodium cyanide solutions at pH 10 awaiting use. A Solartron 1286 electrochemical interface was used to measure the potential between the copper wire and the saturated calomel reference electrode and the potential data over time were recorded by a computer. The liquid junction potential, estimated by the Henderson equation Reagents 99.99% sodium cyanide, 99.99% copper cyanide, standard 1 M NaOH solution and ultrapure deionized water were used to prepare the required copper cyanide solutions containing 0.01 M NaOH. Any oxygen in the solution has a significant effect on the potential measurement. The electrode potential decreased with continued argon gas bubbling and was stabilized after 3 h. In general, 3 h were required to stabilize the potential and so the final value was taken after this time. The equilibrium constants obtained by In  The distributions and equilibrium potentials of copper cyanide species are functions of the mole ratio of cyanide to copper, total cyanide concentration, pH and temperature. With increasing CN:Cu mole ratio, the distribution of copper cyanide species shifts more completely to the highly coordinated complex (Cu(CN)