The removal of ink particles from recycled paper appears to be an important stage in the pulp treatment process, since it allows for the production of material with suitable characteristics for reuse. Although, the deinking of paper pulp is usually conducted in a flotation cell with agitation, into which air is injected countercurrent to the feed. Recent studies have focused on columns without agitation and on reactor/separators. The work reported on here involved an investigation into the use of dissolved air flotation (DAF) to remove ink from old newspaper and comparative studies with induced air flotation (IAF). Before the flotation treatment, the old newspapers were physically and chemically treated to detach the ink from the pulp. The flotation experiments were conducted using Ca(oleate)2, CaCl2, sodium oleate, SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) and SBDS (sodium benzene dodecyl sulfate). The experimental results demonstrated that ink removal was more efficient with the concomitant use of Ca(oleate)2 and SDS in the two processes studied. The efficiency of the process was measured by the pulp's brightness and yield.The use of recycled paper offers numerous environmental and operational benefits compared with the costs involved in several virgin pulp production methods. It has been stated that each ton of paper, if produced of 100% recycled wastepaper, saves approximately 24 trees. According to The paper recycling process consists of at least four stages: (i) separation of the fibers and dispersion of the ink and other contaminants; (ii) ink and pulp separation and removal; (iii) deinking pulp bleaching; and (iv) effluent treatment and reuse. An important requirement when using recycled fibers to produce high quality products is the removal of components that affect the visual appearance of recycled paper (particle sizes of 30–80 μm) ( The studies for deinking of wastepaper have been going on for more than 200 years. The use of flotation in large scale to remove printing ink from wastepaper followed the development of deinking flotation cells. This started with the employment of the Denver Cell from the mineral processing industry in the 1950s and has increased steadily ( Flotation is a solid–solid, liquid–liquid, solid–liquid or solid–liquid–liquid The purpose of this work was to study the removal of ink from old newspapers, using Ca(oleate) Main differences between these technologies are related to the bubble size distribution, gas hold-up and carrying capacity (lifting power). In DAF, bubbles are minute (microbubbles of the order of 50 μm in diameter), present low carrying capacity (up to 4% solids by weight) but the removal of fine (<13 μm) particle is high and do not require surface hydrophobicity ( Ink removal by flotation. In the removal of ink by flotation, the basic matter is the suspension, which consists essentially of water as the carrier (98–99%); fibers to be obtained as the clean fraction (1–2%), filler (<0.6%), the ink to be removed (<0.15%) and additive (<0.1%). In addition, the suspension contains negligible amounts of soluble and insoluble organic and inorganic compounds, which may, however, affect the flotation process and its results ( In contrast with ore flotation, the important factor in deinking flotation is the residual suspension rather than the floating froth. More, the efficiency of ink removal flotation requires that three basic conditions are met, i.e., the ink particles must be separated from the fibers, they must be hydrophobic, and they must be of an appropriate size (5–250 μm) ( The pulp was produced from old newspaper (Porto Alegre, South Brazil). The pulp was chemically treated with the following products: sodium bicarbonate, hydrogen peroxide 35%, and NaOH. Ca(oleate) The DAF and IAF tests were conducted in two flotation units illustrated in Ca(oleate) The pulp slurry of old newspaper (10% weight) mixed with tap water was produced in a disintegrator operating for approximately 5 min. The pulp was reacted with 1 wt.% of hydrogen peroxide and 2 wt.% of sodium bicarbonate. All the reagents used were proportional to the weight of the dry newspaper. The pH in this stage was adjusted to about 9.5–10 with NaOH. The pulp was homogenized for 1 h. To produce the right consistency for flotation, the pulp was diluted in tap water in a proportion of 0.5–1 wt.%. Collectors were added during stirring at top speed (2000 rpm) for 5 min. The purpose was to release the fibers and facilitate the detachment of the ink from the paper. The following parameters were used in the DAF tests: saturation pressure of In both cases, the floating ink particles were discarded and the pulp left in the cell was washed over a 38 mesh screen. The pulp was then pressed to remove the water and dried in air, following the NBR 14529 standard. The brightness of the cake thus formed was measured with a Minolta Inc. SpectraMatch, model CM 508d spectrophotometer. The amount of dried pulp was used to calculate the yield. The measurements were taken in triplicate and the results shown here represent the arithmetic average of the results obtained. The influence of calcium soap and surface-active substances on the pulp's brightness and yield are shown in the figures below, where NWI and NWOI indicate newspaper with and without ink, respectively.  Deinking with the use of calcium soaps may involve three mechanisms: (i) the Ca The efficiency of ink removal from the pulp was greater when SDS was associated with Ca(oleate)   According to The results of studies 1–14, showed in     The results obtained led to the following conclusions: The use of the flotation technique resulted in good brightness and pulp recovery in the removal of ink from pulp produced from discarded newspaper. The use of Ca(oleate) The paper pulp recovery rate was lower in the tests in which SDS and SBDS were used without Ca(oleate) The IAF and DAF techniques both remove ink from paper pulp efficiently, although IAF allows for higher pulp recovery rates. The authors thank to the students and colleagues for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM––Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil (FAPERGS, CAPES, CNPq, UFRGS). Authors thank to James José Varela for his assistance in the brightness analyses.