The CaCl2-rich distiller waste discharged in the Solvay process has not been recycled comprehensively. A novel CO2 mineralization route with waste CaCl2 solutions via coupled reaction-extraction-crystallization technique was proposed. The effect of Na+, K+, Mg2+, Al3+, NO3
                     − and SO4
                     2− ions which exist in the distiller waste on the conversion of CaCl2 as well as the morphology of product CaCO3 was studied with the aid of titration, Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS), Particle Size Analyzer, X-ray Diffractometer (XRD), Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) and Thermogravimetry (TG). Among the ions, Na+, K+ and NO3- have little influence that could be ignored. Both Al3+ and SO4
                     2− are adsorbed on the surface of vaterite and inhibit the transformation to calcite by lowering down the surface energy. Therefore, small particles with diameters of less than 10 μm even 1 μm which are hard to be filtered are formed. While for Mg2+, the effect is negligible when the content is less than 5 wt %. However, as the content increases, Mg2+ could not only be adsorbed on the surface but also insert into the crystal lattice of CaCO3, forming the worm-like Mg-calcite. Finally, the experiment of simulated distiller waste was investigated to take a very important step towards industrialization.Climate change is becoming more and more serious and how to control and utilize CO A large number of solutions containing alkali or alkali earth metal chlorides have been applied to mineralize CO In China, CaCl In addition to the ammonia-soda process, the CaCl CaCl The experiments were performed in a homemade-jacketed reactor shown in The phase compositions of the solid products were examined by X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D/MAX-B, Rigaku, Japan) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54178 Å), with a scanning rate of 2 °/min. The morphology and elemental compositions of the solid products were characterized by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Quanta 250, FEI Co., USA) coupled with the energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS, TEAM, EDAX Co., USA). The thermal analysis was performed by thermogravitry (TG, SDT Q600, TA Co., USA). The contents of ions in the solid products were determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, ARCOS FHS12, SPECTRO Co., Germany) after dissolving products in hydrochloric acid. Particle size distribution of CaCO As seen in NaCl was added to keep the mass ratio of NaCl to CaCl  Generally, there are two common mechanisms of how impurity ions affect the crystal products. The crystal morphology could be modified or controlled through either selective adsorption of impurity ions on the certain crystal surface or incorporated insert of impurity ions into the crystal lattice. Specifically, on one hand, the impurity ions may play the role as a surface poison by being adsorbed as hydrated ions on active growth sites, therefore, the spread of monomolecular stages on the crystal surface is inhibited. On the other hand, the impurity ions may be incorporated into the growth crystal to some extent. Or the two mechanisms work simultaneously [ The particle size distributions of CaCO Relation between the concentration of H Kosswig et al. [ Because of the lower solubility product constant (K In industrial production (taking the distiller waste in ammonia-soda process for example), whether NaCl is removed or not does not affect the crystal type, morphology and particle size distribution. Moreover, the concentration of H The effect of K MgCl  According to The particle size distributions of CaCO As is known, high Mg/Ca ratio would affect the type and morphology of CaCO The coupled reaction-extraction-crystallization process of MgCl Similar with NaCl and KCl, the existence of a small amount of MgCl AlCl From The XRD analysis for the products is compared in The percentage of calcite and vaterite in the product could be calculated according to Rao Eq. ( The components of CaCO For further interpreting how the Al The content of Al in CaCO The selective adsorption of Al As seen in Seen from As shown in The H NO We can see from From the discussion in XRD results for the products are shown in The average particle size could be lowered down for all the four impurities as seen in The H In general, the addition of sulfate, particularly MgSO In this section, solutions with the similar component as Particle size distribution result is shown in The component of CaCl The authors are greatly thankful to the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFB0605703), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1607115) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2017M621387) for financial support. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: