Background
                  Pilon fractures involve the dome of the distal tibial articular surface. The optimal treatment for high-energy pilon fractures remains controversial. Some authors advocate the use of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) to avoid articular incongruence. Others advocate the use of bridging external fixation with limited internal fixation (EFLIF) to reduce soft tissue complications. Literature reports of prospective studies comparing the radioclinical outcomes of ORIF and EFLIF in high-energy fractures are scarce. Retrospective studies have their limitations because of insufficient randomisation. The objective of this randomised prospective study is to compare the clinical, radiologic and functional outcomes of displaced and comminuted closed pilon fractures, Rüedi and Allgöwer type II and III, treated by either ORIF or EFLIF.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Forty-two patients were selected for the study. Twenty-two patients were subjected to ORIF and 20 patients were subjected to EFLIF. We used the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score as a standard method of reporting clinical status of the ankle. Patients were followed-up clinically and radiologically for over 2 years after the surgical treatment.
               
                  Results
                  The results of ORIF and EFLIF in treatment of high-energy pilon fractures are equally effective in terms of functional outcomes and complication rates on the short term.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Soft tissue integrity and fracture comminution seem to have a significant influence on outcomes of intervention. A prospective multicentre study with a larger sample size that controls for other associated variables and comorbidities is warranted.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level II.Pilon fractures involve the dome of the distal tibial articular surface and extend into the adjacent metaphysis. They are relatively rare fractures ranging from low- to high-energy injuries. The low-energy rotational injuries have been shown to have excellent functional results with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). The high-energy axial-loading injuries have had uniformly moderate results and higher complication rates. We carried out a two matched group, assessor-blinded prospective randomised clinical study comparing the results of ORIF to that of EFLIF for closed displaced pilon fractures, Rüedi and Allgöwer type II and III. The study was conducted during the period from February 2010 to December 2012. Patients were followed-up for over 2 years after the surgical treatment. A total of 45 patients were randomised to the study. One patient refused treatment. Two patients—one to each group—were randomised, and they received planned treatment but dropped out. They had insufficient follow-up and incomplete data to be included and analysed for the results. Therefore, 42 patients were selected for the study. Twenty-two patients were subjected to ORIF (Group I), 14 males and eight females in that group. Twenty patients were subjected to EFLIF (Group II), 13 males and seven females, and the study was conducted at the authors' institution. Patients were explained about the study, and written consent was obtained. Patients were eligible if they were aged 18 years or more, with a recent (less than 3 weeks) closed intraarticular displaced distal tibial fractures of Rüedi and Allgöwer type II and III. Exclusion criteria were other serious leg injuries sufficient to affect outcome at 2 years such as peripheral angiopathy, neuropathy in the injured limb, multiple fractures, morbid obesity and compartment syndrome. We included patients with bilateral fractures provided that both of the fractures met the inclusion criteria. Patients who consented to participate were randomised by flipping a coin 1:1 to receive either ORIF or EFLIF. We used adaptive minimisation to avoid development of significant differences between the two groups in some prognostic factors such as smoking status, Rüedi and Allgöwer type fractures, and soft tissue injury severity. Bilateral fractures were allocated the same treatment on both sides. The preliminary management for all participants was bed rest, analgesia, elevation of the foot and application of ice and a posterior slab. Patients were subjected to plain radiographs, including anteroposterior, mortise and lateral views centred over the ankle and full-length radiographs of the leg including the knee and ankle. Targeted X-ray examinations were conducted on other areas depending on clinical findings. Additionally, patients were routinely subjected to computed tomography of the distal tibia and ankle joint. Soft tissue injury severity was assessed according to Oestern and Tscherne classification. Patients were instructed 6 weeks of nonweight bearing. After removal of the foot plate, partial weight bearing was started with early active mobilisation of the ankle and subtalar joints. A standardised physiotherapy rehabilitation regimen was then implemented. We used the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score as a standard method of reporting clinical status of the ankle and hindfoot. Data were coded, entered and processed on a personal computer using SPSS software version 21. The cut-off value for significance was set at In general, the results of ORIF and EFLIF in treatment of high-energy pilon fractures were equally effective in terms of functional and radiologic outcomes and complication rates at the final follow-up. Patient characteristics and radioclinical results with complications are depicted in ( The optimal treatment for high-energy pilon fractures remains controversial. Numerous retrospective studies comparing outcomes of ORIF and EFLIF in high-energy fractures have been conducted. Well-designed and well-implemented prospective studies help to avoid or minimise bias in research as outcome is unknown at time of enrolment. Hence, we conducted a two matched group, assessor-blinded “prospective” randomised clinical study comparing the results of ORIF to that of EFLIF. Schul and Grimes stated that trials with inadequate or unclear randomisation tended to overestimate treatment effects up to 40% compared with those that used proper randomisation. We are aware of only one randomised, prospective study to compare the results of ORIF and EFLIF in tibial plafond fractures. In conclusion, both ORIF and EFLIF as treatment options in the treatment of high-energy pilon fractures are equally effective in terms of functional and radiologic outcomes and complication rates on the short term. Soft tissue integrity and fracture comminution seem to have a significant influence on outcomes of intervention. Well-designed and well-implemented randomised prospective studies aid in reducing the bias. Residual and potential sources of bias need to be addressed when interpreting the results and generalising conclusions. A prospective multicentre study with a larger sample size that controls for other associated variables and comorbidities is warranted. The authors of the present study declare that there are no conflicts of interest and no financing was received for research on which the study is based.