Data presented in this article focus on the application of steam pressure filtration in combination with a water insoluble pore liquid. The article describes measured temperature profiles during steam pressure filtration within a filter cake. This article is co-submitted to the article ‘Steam Pressure Filtration in Combination with a Water Insoluble Pore Liquid’ [1] (DOI: 10.1016/j.ces.2020.115782) where the occurring phenomena as well as the interpretation of temperature profiles during steam pressure filtration are explained in detail. The article expands the shown data to other material systems.  The temperature data are useful to validate the applicability of steam stripping (steam distillation) during steam pressure filtration. The process provides an alternative to conventional dewatering and drying processes to treat solids contaminated with volatile organic compounds and thus operators of the completely chemical process industry (i.e. purification of solids after crude oil extraction, polymerization processes or multistep syntheses) as well as filter manufacturers could benefit from these data. The data can be used for process understanding and the experimental design to verify the feasibility of steam pressure filtration for the desired material system. The data potentially helps drawing attention on steam pressure filtration, which possibly provides an energy saving alternative to conventional process combinations of mechanical separation and thermal drying processes. Presented data in this article deal with the characteristic temperature profiles during steam pressure filtration  The filtrate mass increases linearly until the temperature at TC1 begins to rise. Afterwards, the filtrate flow flattens before the increase is again linear when the temperature at TC1 reaches the steady state. The residual moisture of the filter cake after 40 s steam treatment amounts      The following chapter is an extended version of the chapter Materials & Methods of the main publication ‘Steam Pressure Filtration in Combination with a Water Insoluble Pore Liquid’ The experiments are carried out in a modified pressure nutsche in accordance with VDI Guideline 2762 The right part in the flow diagram shows the preparation of steam. To provide saturated steam, water is evaporated and the entrained liquid water from the evaporator is separated in the condensate separator, which is placed in the standpipe. Thereby the steam is passed through a bed of steel wool. The drops are separated due to their inertia and collected in a container. The steam emerges from the separator in a saturated state. The pipes are heated to avoid a further condensation of the steam at the pipe walls. The steam can also be slightly superheated if the temperature of the pipe heating is higher than the boiling temperature of the steam. The lower part of the nutsche consists of a removable cake formation unit, which can be clamped with quick-locks to the nutsche. The cake formation unit is also shown in It is composed of a drain funnel and the so-called cake forming ring. The funnel also serves as a mount for support plate and filter medium, which is clamped between mount and cake-forming ring with quick-release fasteners. The thermocouple TC1 is in contact with the filter medium and thus measures the temperature of the filtrate at the outlet at ambient pressure. Additionally, thermocouples TC2-TC5 are implemented to measure the temperature at different layers in the filter cake and above. The cake-forming ring is also equipped with a valve for discharging air when steam is applied. The top cover of the nutsche has a sight glass. Using a light it is possible to observe the suspension and filter cake during the process. The experiments are carried out in the described steam pressure filtration equipment. The nutsche is first flushed with nitrogen before the suspension is filled into the heated nutsche. The solids volume concentration for all experiments is The filter cake formation is evaluated according to VDI Guideline 2762 In the next step, the steam outlet and the magnetic valve are opened to allow the steam to enter the process room. When steam flows out of the steam outlet it is closed ( The steam filtration experiments are ended after a defined process time by closing the magnetic valve of the steam inlet. The nutsche is carefully vented to avoid the expansion of the condensate within the pores of the filter cake, which could lead to the destruction of the filter cake. The cake formation unit is removed after the experiment from the nutsche and small axial samples are taken with a sampling spear ( The solids used in this work are diatomaceous earth (Celite®512) representing a naturally occurring material with inner pores leading to high residual moistures after conventional dewatering. The solids are sylanized (Dynasylan® OCTEO) improving wettability for the solvent Symbol directory The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships, which have, or could be perceived to have, influenced the work reported in this article. Parts of the presented results (IGF 19305 BR: steam pressure filtration in combination with a water insoluble liquid as mother liquid) have been supported via AiF within the programme for promoting the Industrial Collective Research (IGF) of the German Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi), based on a resolution of the German Parliament.