The physiochemical nature of the metal–extractant species in organic solvent has been a matter of debate over liquid–liquid extraction of transition metals by bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate. The aggregation behavior of nickel(II), cobalt(II), lead(II), and zinc(II) bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate have been investigated using molecular modeling. The recently confirmed “open” water channels rodlike reversed micelles which is in contact with the nonaqueous solvent rather than in an inner core (or “closed” water channel) of the nickel–extractant species by Ibrahim and Neuman appears to be a unique structure for such species. Lead–, cobalt– and zinc–extractant species behave in a different manner. The cobalt–extractant species form rodlike reversed micelles, but does not show the formation of any open water channel. The zinc– and lead–extractant species form ellipsoidal (or deformed spherical) reversed micelles with fewer water molecules located at the core of the micelles which is in accord with the conventional view of reversed micelles. The structural variations of the reversed micelles for the metal extracted species are in accord with the known extraction behavior of such metals when using HDEHP.In hydrometallurgy, solvent extraction is a very powerful method for the separation of metals which is due to the high recovery and purity of the separated metals The choice of extractant is one of the most important factors in the process. The extractants are usually surface-active agents and are classified into three groups: acidic, basic and neutral extractants Neuman and co-workers The concept of “structure–function relationships for molecules” is commonly accepted and applied, even in solvent extraction field (e.g., Bruce Moyer's work with the design of crown-ethers for separation of monovalent ions, Ref. HyperChem Similar type of optimization and dynamic simulations were performed on Zn(DEHP) Geometry optimization and MD Simulation methods were used to investigate the physicochemical nature of the metal–extractant species (Co(DEHP) The geometry optimization and molecular dynamic structures of one Co(DEHP) The molecular simulation of 2–7 Co(DEHP) In the Co(DEHP) In addition, the interactions of water molecules with the Co(DEHP) Molecular modeling and dynamic simulations were also used to investigate the nature of Zn(DEHP) Similarly, the nature of the Pb(DEHP) One can see that there are structure–function relationships for the investigated reversed micellar aggregates. In this work, we see that there are differences in the reversed micellar aggregate structures of Ni, Co, Zn and Pb species and this corresponds to the observed macroscopic behavior in that some metals are selectively extracted in the nonpolar organic phase. It is apparent that Ni(DEHP) Molecular modeling is a powerful technique to study the structure–function relationships for reversed micellar aggregates of metal–extractant molecules in the solvent extraction processes. Both geometry optimization and dynamic simulations clearly indicate that the metal–extractant species which form in the organic phase are reversed micelles. The main forces between the metal–extractant complexes are van der Waals and electrostatic forces. The reported open water-channel model for Ni(DEHP)