Computational models of austenite decomposition are widely used to predict external shape and internal microstructural changes as functions of time and temperature. One modeling approach involves converting the measured transformation strain to phase fractions using the lattice parameters of parent and product phases, because the transformation strain is caused by crystal structural change and an enrichment/depletion of the solute atoms in solid solution. A conversional model of transformation strains occurring during austenite decomposition to phase fractions was developed using an optimal set of lattice parameters and thermal expansion coefficients of each phase associated with low alloy steels. The model is composed of four different transformation strain formulae for ferrite, pearlite, bainite and martensite transformations, respectively, and can be applied to continuous cooling transformations as well as isothermal ones. The conversional model demonstrated a good match between calculated and measured phase fractions of industrial low alloy steels cooled at the different rates after austenitization.Internal state variable (ISV) models of phase transformation kinetics in steels and alloys have been widely used for the micromechanical simulations of heat treatment processes, because their differential form allows them to be coupled naturally to governing equations for the thermal and mechanical aspects of a given process, and they are easily solved with minimal computational resources. The ISV models typically rely on the measured fractions of parent and product phases. While optical microscopy and image analysis have provided the phase fractions for a long time, they are very time consuming and hardly distinguish low-temperature transformed phases such as bainite and martensite. In addition, the microstructural analysis has been done only at a single temperature: room temperature in most cases. Recently, dilatometric tests have become very attractive because they can be used to determine the start and end temperatures of phase transformations and to monitor dimensional change continuously during a given heat treatment process. Therefore, critical to the ISV models is the ability to convert the continuous dilatational strain to phase volume fractions Several studies have been made on the analytical transformation strains for austenite ( As mentioned above, most transformation strains have been proposed for isothermal and continuous cooling ferrite and pearlite transformations, whose cooling rate is relatively slow (∼0.2–1 Assuming that thermal and transformation strains are isotropic, the measured linear strain change by a dilatometer can be converted to the relative atomic volume change between parent and product phases as follows: Onink et al.    The effect of carbon enrichment into austenite during ferrite transformation was also considered in the above equations. In order to calculate the total transformation strain at Reaction II, the absolute volume changes at Reaction II-1 and Reaction II-2, not the relative volume change, must be added: In this study, the following transformation strain formulae for bainite and martensite transformations are proposed, based on the volume fractions and lattice parameters of banitic ferrite, cementite in bainite, and martensite: Both equations contain pro-eutectoid ferrite and eutectoid fractions, which are able to happen before bainite or martensite transformation, just for the case of continuous cooling transformations. The decomposition of austenite to bainitic ferrite and cementite in Eq. Ferrite is assumed to be free of carbon so that the lattice parameter of ferrite does not change with carbon concentration and is only a function of temperature. The following formula for the ferrite lattice parameter of Onink et al. Onink’s formula Stuart and Ridley’s thermal expansion coefficient Recently, Onink et al. Roberts There are few reports about the thermal expansion coefficient of martensite ( Finally, the lattice parameters of martensite are A mathematical algorithm to calculate the volume fraction of each phase from the dilatometric data measured during isothermal or continuous cooling transformations (hereafter called a conversion routine) has been developed based on the relationship between the lattice parameter of each phase and the transformation strains in the previous sections. The chemical composition, initial specimen length and dilatometric strain as functions of time and temperature are necessary for the input data of the conversion routine. In order to understand what kind of transformation is happening during the cooling, first we need the critical transformation temperatures (A  The transformation strain is obtained from the difference between the dilatational curve and the extrapolated line of thermal contraction of austenite. The increment in pro-eutectoid ferrite volume fraction can be calculated using Eq. The increment in volume fraction of each phase during a certain time step is calculated using the measured temperature and transformation strain and the volume fraction of each phase calculated in the previous time step as follows: Continuous cooling dilatometric tests of the commercial low alloy steels were carried out to confirm the accuracy of the conversion routine. The chemical composition of the steels is given in The dilatometric curves of the AISI 4115 specimens are shown together in A lattice-based model was developed in this study to convert measured strain to phase volume fraction in association with austenite decomposition of low alloy steels. The model was based on the relative atomic volume change occurring during the phase transformations due to both crystal structural change and enrichment/depletion of solute atoms. The atomic volume of each phase such as ferrite, pearlite, bainite and martensite was calculated using the lattice parameter of each phase as a function of solute contents and temperature. The model was applied to continuous cooling dilatometric curves to obtain the volume fraction of each phase and showed good agreement between the calculated and measured phase fractions at room temperature in several low alloy steels. Moreover, the quantitative volume fractions of the low-temperature transformed phases such as bainite and martensite could be separately predicted using the model, which was almost impossible by image analysis. The volume fraction of each phase calculated as a function of time and temperature using the conversional model can be used to develop accurate kinetic models of phase transformations in low alloy steels.