In the present work, nano silicon carbide has been prepared by pyrolysis of rice-husk ashes as starting materials. Three rice-husk ash samples having different features were used. The first was coarse-grained rice husk ash (fired husk as is), the second was fine rice husk ash (hand-ground), while the third was ball milled one. Effect of ball milling of the starting ashes for 6h on the formation of nano SiC was investigated and compared with those prepared without milling. The particle sizes of the prepared SiC materials were affected by the milling process. The particle sizes of the obtained nano SiC from ball milled staring materials were smaller than those prepared without milling. The pyrolysis conditions, i.e. the temperature and atmosphere were optimized. The optimum firing temperature to obtain well crystalline nano SiC was 1550°C. The effect of pyrolysis atmosphere, i.e. argon, vacuum and nitrogen was also demonstrated. The pyrolysis in argon exhibited lower efficiency on the formation of SiC than vacuum; while the pyrolysis in nitrogen atmosphere led to formation of SiC/Si3N4 nanocomposite.In Egypt, a large quantity of rice husk is generated as a by-product after rice harvest. Its major constituents are organic materials and silica. Silica is naturally distributed in the backbone cellulose structure of the rice husk These reactions take place as competing processes at different temperature and pressure. The same reactions occur at higher temperature between solid quartz and graphite. In the rice husk ashes, with very high surface area and close contact between the amorphous silica and carbon, SiC forms at lower temperatures (1200–1550 The starting material was rice husk ash. Such material produces as a waste material after harvest season of rice and causes many ecological pollution problems. Three rice-husk ash samples having different features were used. The first was coarse rice husk ash (fired husk as is), the second was fine rice husk ash (hand-ground), while the third was ball milled one. SFM-1Disk-Top Planetary Ball Miller was used for milling the starting ash sample for 6 Silica content was analyzed by hydrofluoric acid (HF) attacking method. Drops of HF were added on cold to rice-husk ash (burnt at 800 The carbon content was also confirmed and determined by Carbon & Sulphur detector, Model ELTRA 2000 made in Germany. X-ray diffractometer type Philips, model Brukur D8 Advance-Germany, Target Cu Kα, with secondary monochromator, V XRD patterns of the synthesized SiC from coarse (fired husk as is) and fine (hand ground) rice-husk ash samples pyrolysized at 1450 In contrast, the pyrolysis in vacuum was guaranteeing the lower pressure around the reactants and consequently increased the formation of SiC. Although the formation of SiC produced in vacuum was higher than that produced in argon atmosphere, the pyrolysis temperature (1450 According to the above conclusion, the pyrolysis process of rice-husk ashes was carried out in vacuum at different temperature i.e. 1450, 1500 and 1550 TEM images of nano SiC particles produced from coarse and hand-ground rice-husk ashes are shown in In the present work, the first step to look at was the milling efficiency. Since as the particles approached nano metric dimensions, there is a reduction in the milling efficiency as a result of two competing phenomena, namely, comminution and agglomeration. The second step to look at was to observe if the conditions for using high energy milling process generate contamination. The comminution process was executed in a planetary ball mill operated at 500  Nitridation of rice husk is, in principle, identical to the carbothermal reduction. Nitridation of the rice husk ash (carbon and silica mixture) is simultaneously occurring when firing in nitrogen atmosphere. The overall reaction for carbothermal reduction and nitridation of rice husk can be written according to the following equation: The process has been reviewed through different mechanisms with different paths of reactions. However, the general opinion seems to be that SiO gas plays an important role in Si The subsequent reaction is The equilibrium partial pressure of oxygen associated with Eq. This is not difficult since Eq. The formation of silicon oxy nitride can be eliminated as long as carbon is present in excess or at least in the stoichiometric ratio of the overall carbothermal reductions. XRD patterns of the composite that prepared from coarse-grained (as is) and hand-ground rice husk ashes under nitrogen atmosphere or vacuum at 1550 The carbothermal nitridation synthesis of alfa-Si The present set of experiments has demonstrated the synthesis of nano SiC powders using rice husk ashes, a low cost silica and carbon source. The relationship between the processing condition and the characteristics of the final powder has been investigated. The major conclusions derived from this study are as follows. The simultaneous carbothermal reduction of rice husk ash could be greatly enhanced by high-energy ball milling prior to the reaction. The formation of nano SiC at the lower temperature 1500 The particle sizes of the obtained nano SiC from the ball-milled staring materials were smaller than those prepared without milling. The optimum firing temperature to obtain well crystalline nano SiC was 1550 The pyrolysis of rice husk ash in nitrogen atmosphere at 1550