The photocatalytic degradation of 3-chloropyridine was studied using different titania-based catalysts, its disappearance followed a zero-order kinetics. In our conditions, complete mineralization of 100ppm of 3-chloropyridine occurred within ca. 480min of UV-radiation on bare-titania systems. Doping of titania with metals was detrimental for photocatalysis. Some reaction intermediates were identified by SPME–GC–MS and a tentative degradation pathway was proposed implying two parallel routes with hydroxylation and ring opening prior to or after the release of chloride ions. Unlike 3-chloropyridine, 2-chloropyridine degradation follows a first-order kinetics. Competitive reactions on solutions containing 3-chloropyridine and 2-chloropyridine evidenced the stronger adsorption of the latter compound. Finally, in a similar way as described for 3-chloropyridine, photocatalytic degradation of 2,3-dichloropyridine followed a zero-order kinetics. Moreover, detection of coupling products containing 3 chlorine atoms evidenced the existence of a radical mechanism.Emissions of halogenated organic compounds are associated with a wide range of industrial processes. Most of these compounds are toxic and present high carcinogenic and mutagenic activity. Therefore, development of efficient methods to dispose of them is important. Direct combustion requires temperatures within the range of 1073–1273 This work must be seen in the context of a project on the destruction of herbicides residues in water, a topic of paramount importance in Andalucia, a Spanish community highly dependent on agriculture. 3-Chloropyridine (3-Clpy), 2-chloropyridine (2-Clpy) and 2,3-dichloropyridine (2,3-diClpy) (99% purity each) were provided by Sigma–Aldrich. 96% sulfuric acid, sodium nitrate, sodium nitrite, sodium chloride, ammonium fluoride, anhydrous sodium acetate, sodium hydroxide, 37% hydrochloric acid and All photocatalytic degradation assays were carried out using titania-based photocatalysts. Therefore, different titania-based systems doped with diverse transition metals (Ag, Fe, Pd, Pt, Zn and Zr) in a metal/Ti nominal ratio equal to 0.01, whose syntheses were described in a previous paper Water used for preparation of samples was Milli-Q quality water (Millipore Iberica, Spain). 2-Clpy, 3-Clpy and 2,3-diClpy calibrations were carried out from water solutions in the range of 0–150 Concerning anion detection, standard solutions containing NaNO All catalytic runs were performed in a Pyrex cylindrical doubled-walled immersion well reactor (23 Constant agitation of the suspension was insured by a magnetic stirrer placed at the reactor base. Solutions of pure chloropyridines were prepared in Milli-Q water and kept in the dark at 4 Samples taken at different times of irradiation were filtered through 0.22 Evolution of inorganic ions (NO For ammonium ion determination, ion suppression module was not necessary and a Metrohm Metrosep C2 100 column (100 CO Reaction products were followed by SPME–GC–MS using a CP-3800 Gas Chromatograph connected to a Varian 1200 Quadrupole MS and provided with a CombiPal autosampler. A Supelcowax-10 capillary column (0.25 Different fibers were tested as adsorbents (polyacrylate, PDMS/DVB…). The best one had polyacrylate as the stationary phase (Supelco 57305). Prior to use, the fiber was conditioned at 300 The use of a diode array detector allowed us to check peak purity through simultaneous quantification at several wavelengths. In the case of 3-chloropyridine, determination was performed at 210 and 266  Results obtained from experiments performed at different 3-Clpy initial concentrations in order to determine the substrate partial order are shown in Such a kinetics is consistent with resulted reported elsewhere for 3-amino-2-chloropyridine A complete degradation of an organic molecule by photocatalysis, normally leads to gaseous CO Evolution of heteroatoms (nitrate, ammonium and chloride) is depicted in As regards CO Moreover, CO The fact that CO In order to identify reaction intermediates different samples were analyzed by GC–MS (direct injection) and SPME–GC–MS. In view of the results a tentative degradation pathway for 3-chloropyridine disappearance is suggested ( Hydroxylation of the ring prior to the chloride release would explain that 3-chloropyridine disappears at higher rate than chloride species are formed (1.9 Having a look at the literature on photocatalytic degradation of pyridine and pyridine derivatives there are discrepancies concerning the reaction mechanism through holes or hydroxyl radicals. Therefore, Agrios and Pichat In a similar way as described for 3-Clpy, 2-Clpy photocatalytic degradation was studied. Interestingly, unlike 3-Clpy, 2-Clpy degradation follows a pseudo-first-order kinetics as shown by Stapleton et al. The method was then applied to monitor photocatalytic degradation of an aqueous solution containing 50 A final experiment was carried out starting from a solution containing 100 The different kinetics observed for 3-Clpy and 2,3-diClpy (zero-order one) or 2-Clpy (first-order one) will probably reflect different reaction mechanisms. Given their basic character, chloropyridines will probably adsorb on TiO The above-mentioned results allowed us to draw the following conclusions. Photocatalytic degradation of 3-chloropyridine was studied on different titania-based catalyst. A first screening allowed us to select two bare-titania systems for further studies. Doping of titania with metals was detrimental for photocatalysis. Under our experimental conditions complete mineralization of 100 The authors wish to acknowledge financial support from the Consejería de Educación y Ciencia of the Junta de Andalucía (Projects FQM 191 and P07-FQM-2695) and the Spanish Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia (Projects CTQ 2005-04080/BQU and CTQ2007-65754, co-financed with FEDER funds). Finally, Dr. Colmenares is thankful to the Spanish Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deportes for a post-doctoral fellowship and A. Marinas to Junta de Andalucía for a contract.