The variations of shear flocculation of colemanite mineral with sodium oleate and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as anionic surfactants with suspension pH, surfactant concentration, stirring speed, and flocculation time have been investigated. It was determined that sodium oleate was more effective in the flocculation than SDS and the colemanite particles could be flocculated by oleate in the broad pH range. Also, a stirring speed of 500rpm and a flocculation time of 3min were required to achieve the maximum flocculation degree of colemanite particles. The effects of magnesium, barium, aluminum, and ferric chlorides as inorganic salts on the shear flocculation of colemanite suspension were also studied. In the presence of these cations, the flocculation degrees of colemanite suspension reached high values at particular conditions. However, some differences in the behavior of flocculation of colemanite mineral were observed depending on pH, cation concentration, type of surfactant and inorganic salt.Colemanite (Ca Although there have been various studies on the flotation behaviors of colemanite mineral, there has not been any investigation on the shear flocculation properties of this mineral in the literature. Therefore, this paper aims to determine those characteristics experimentally. Determination of such properties regarding to colemanite mineral will also support fine particle processing of colemanite ores. The shear flocculation experiments were conducted using a high purity sample of colemanite mineral from Bigadic, Turkey. The chemical composition of the sample consists of 41.18% B Shear flocculation experiments were carried out in a 400 The zeta potential measurements were made by a ZetaPlus apparatus from Brookhaven. The ZetaPlus is an automatic instrument designed for use with suspensions of particles from 10  The variations of zeta potential of colemanite in the presence of 10 The shear flocculation of colemanite with sodium oleate and sodium dodecyl sulfate as a function of pH is shown in The effects of the concentration of sodium oleate and SDS on the shear flocculation of the colemanite suspension at pH 9.5 and 11.5 are given in The variation of the shear flocculation of colemanite with stirring speed is shown in      The isoelectric point (i.e.p.) of the colemanite sample was determined as a pH of 10.2. However, the zeta potential of the colemanite with the adsorption of sodium oleate and sodium dodecyl sulfate as anionic surfactants became completely negative values in the pH range of 7–12. In the presence of inorganic salts, while the positive charge of the colemanite surfaces at pH values below the i.e.p. increased, the zeta potential of colemanite particles above the i.e.p. changed from negative to positive. The shear flocculation degrees of the colemanite suspension increased due to the increasing surface hydrophobicity with increasing sodium oleate concentration. Also, while the flocculation of the suspension with sodium oleate was achieved in the broad pH range, a weak flocculation with SDS was only obtained in the narrow pH range. On the other hand, it was determined that a stirring speed of 500 The shear flocculation behaviors of colemanite with sodium oleate and sodium dodecyl sulfate were also investigated in the presence of magnesium, barium, aluminum, and ferric chlorides. The maximum flocculation degrees with Mg The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by