This paper presents the relationship between the bubble surface flux that overflows and the mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate. Even though this study was carried out in a flotation column, the knowledge derived from this paper may be applied to all froth flotation processes. The experimental set up was equipped with an image analysis system to estimate the froth bubble diameter and the air recovery. This study describes the difference between the bubble surface flux entering the froth zone (SbI
                     ) and the flux that arrives to the top of the froth (SbT) and then overflows to the concentrate (SbO
                     ), the latter being most directly related to the mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate. It was observed that the superficial area of the overflow increased with increasing collector addition and air flow rate, but decreased with increasing froth depth and particle size distribution. Visual evidence and experimental results suggest that, it is common that the superficial area of air that overflows in the concentrate is covered by particles. Only when this condition is almost achieved does overflows occur; otherwise, a high level of coalescence and bubble bursting take place at the froth surface. This was concluded after finding compatible trends between the estimated and predicted mass flow rates of solids in the concentrate, when a tractable geometrical model was used (R
                     2
                     =0.8).The importance of the froth zone was recognized a long time ago by process operators and they intuitively applied this knowledge. Recent advances in technology, particularly in computer science and artificial vision, have encouraged researchers to develop automated expert systems that include this knowledge to design control actions in their process. However, despite the fact that this technology has been adopted, a number of issues remain to be resolved. Several research works have focused on this subject, and drawn conclusions about the usefulness of this technology ( The air recovery concept was introduced by With respect to the velocity of froth overflowing the lip, this variable is commonly estimated by a vision analysis technique using the mathematical cross-correlation method ( Since in this work, a mathematical model was used to validate the importance of the bubble surface flux that overflows with the concentrate (  The materials used in this work were: sphalerite as the floating mineral, cupric sulphate as activator, methyl isobutyl carbinol as frother and sodium isopropyl xanthate as the collector. The pulp (20% w/w) was conditioned for 15 To generate a wide range of variation of the bubble surface flux of the overflow and consequently vary the mass flow rate of the concentrate, the collector addition and froth depth were the manipulated variables. Four collector additions were analyzed and four froth depths were tested for each case. Even though the frother addition was not tested in this experimental work, it was evident that this variable affects the bubble surface flux of the overflows. With the aim of measuring the gas hold-up in the collection and froth zones, the column was equipped with electrical conductivity sensors. The conductivity cell immersed in the froth zone (close to the froth surface) had two electrodes placed 0.005 and 0.105 Because the model needed the particle packing factor, this parameter was evaluated by image analysis and it was found that angular particles of sphalerite were very close to having an approximately square geometrical arrangement ( To compute the bubble surface flux that overflows ( The Sauter bubble diameter in the collection zone was characterized with the following method. A porthole was installed close to the top of the column to allow video recording of the bubbles from a lateral view in the interface zone. Since sphalerite was floated in this work, the bubbles visibility was reduced making difficult to apply the standard techniques for the diameter measurement. Furthermore, to isolate the bubbles by using an external screen viewer was not possible because the reduced space of the laboratory flotation column. In this context, these images were processed with a similar way to that of the froth surface, i.e., tracing manually the outline of each bubble. To compute the reported Sauter bubble diameter ( As mentioned, air recovery ( After the bubble diameter of the froth surface and the air recovery were estimated, the mass flow rate of concentrate was obtained using the geometrical model. It is opportune to mention that since airflow rate feed ( Because this model has been described in literature (    These results are consistent with those recently reported in the literature ( To evaluate the bubble surface flux that overflows, the arithmetical mean bubble diameter at the top of the froth and the air recovery must be estimated. As stated, the mean bubble diameter at the top of the froth was estimated with image analysis software (Image Pro Plus®). The illustrations in In   After the bubble diameter at the top of the froth and the air recovery were estimated, the mass flow rate of concentrate could be computed using the model proposed by  Traditionally, the mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate is associated with the bubble surface area flux generated in the collection zone ( Based on experimental data, it was concluded that the bubble surface flux of the overflow decreased with increasing froth depth and particle size distribution, and increased with collector addition and air flow rate. It is possible that several flotation systems operate under conditions where almost all the superficial area that overflows in the concentrate is covered completely by a monolayer of particles, although it is accepted that some fraction of concentrate may be carried out by entrainment. This is concluded when the mass flow rate of concentrate predicted by a geometrical model that assumes that all the surface area of the overflow is loaded by a monolayer of particles is in accordance with the experimental measurements ( Precision in the estimation of both the air recovery and froth bubble diameter is a key factor for computation of the mass flow rate of concentrate with a geometrical model. In this work, both variables were estimated with unconventional methods that require manual actions and sampling procedures. This was possible on a laboratory scale, and may be possible on an industrial scale which requires a way to be developed to estimate the air recovery. The authors are grateful to (See