This study aims to refine an indigenous off-grade molybdenite [41.5% Mo] to one of high-grade MoS2 for industrial applications. Investigations were carried out on the removal of the oxide/silicate gangue and the base metal sulphide associations by their selective dissolution in two acids, namely, HCl or HF deployed singly, sequentially or in the mixed mode. Under optimum conditions practically all the oxide and silicate gangue and 90% of the metallic impurities were removed. Starting from the low-grade molybdenite concentrate a refined molybdenite (97.8% MoS2) was made whose composition compares well with that of a technical-grade MoS2 of the Climax Molybdenum Company.About 50% of the world's molybdenite concentrate is derived from its primary ores and the remainder as a low-grade concentrate by-product of copper, uranium and tungsten mining that is not suitable for the production of molybdenum bearing products ( Off-grade molybdenite concentrates are complex as they contain substantial quantities of gangue in the form of oxides and silicates as well as numerous base metal sulphides. During the past four decades many attempts were made on the refining of low-grade molybdenite concentrates and most of these were based on the premise that it is possible to selectively dissolve out the associated gangue. These include leaching with (i) microorganisms ( In the first five approaches, base metal sulphide associations like those of copper, zinc, nickel, arsenic, bismuth and iron (non-pyritic) were reportedly removed to varying levels. In the sixth and seventh approach a part of the oxide gangue was also dissolved out but only limited upgrading was possible. The chemistry of upgrading (refining) off-grade molybdenite concentrates is based on the premises that (i) molybdenite (MoS where M stands for copper, nickel or iron. A low-grade molybdenite concentrate procured from UCIL was used as the feed material for refining, whose chemical composition and particle size distribution are given in Three types of experimental assemblies were used. (i) Cylindrical reactors of varying capacities (500–2000 ml) made of glass or polypropylene (depending on the lixiviant) with provision for internal or external heating up to 90 °C and fitted with stirrers. (ii) A PTFE-lined bomb of 200 ml capacity which can be used up to 130 °C with no stirring. (iii) A sophisticated autoclave supplied by M/s PARR Instrument Company (USA) was modified by us with the assistance of M/s Montech Instruments (Chandigarh, India) to suit the use of hydrofluoric lixiviant by fitting its 1 L Hastelloy B Bomb with a PTFE cup (800 ml capacity) and providing PTFE sleeves for all the wetted parts. A number of experiments were carried out on 20 g scale deploying one of the three reactors using dilute HCl or HF singly or sequentially (HCl followed by HF) or in a mixed (HCl The extent of refining in any leaching test was estimated from the relationship where 69.2 is the % MoS Studies on the effect of leach duration indicated that 2 h was adequate to refine the molybdenite concentrate with either of the lixiviants (dilute HCl or HF) deployed in different modes ( To prepare acceptable grades of the molybdenite and for economizing the quantity of HF, sequential leaching tests were conducted using the molybdenite product prepared by hydrochloric acid leaching. In the leach tests with HCl alone as well as sequential leach with HF, acid concentration (HCl or HF) beyond 10 wt.% was not beneficial ( Increasing the stirring speed beyond 1500 rpm was required to achieve the optimum refining with this concentrate with a particle size > The higher effectiveness of HF as a lixiviants in comparison with HCl is understandable because the latter cannot attack silica/magnesium silicate gangue which account for over 60% of the overall gangue. Hydrofluoric acid can dissolve practically all the gangue except FeS Since the concentrate contained 8% MgO as magnesium silicate the formation of an insoluble film of MgF Based on the studies carried out on the low-grade molybdenite concentrate, it was concluded that leaching with a mixed lixiviant containing 5–10 wt.% HF and HCl (each 25% excess) at 110–120 °C in an autoclave for 2 h under vigorous stirring will give a product containing 97.5% MoS The refined MoS The leach liquor generated from the refining of the low-grade molybdenite concentrate is quite complex and it consists of significant quantities of H Needless to say that recovery of the fluoride salts is essential because it will not only contribute to the overall process economics but also aid in environmental compatibility of the recycle liquors. An estimated benefit of the process, obtained by comparing the local prices of the products (chiefly refined molybdenum disulphide and sodium silico-fluoride) with the local costs of the inputs (concentrate, acids and soda ash) indicates a value to cost ratio of six which offers a good window for commercial pursuit of the proposed approach.  Leaching of the low-grade molybdenite concentrate with dilute HCl was not effective as it enabled only 17% gangue removal at 115 °C. On the other hand, dilute HF was found to be a more potent lixiviant capable of dissolving out 36% of the gangue even at room temperature. On leaching the concentrate sequentially with dil. HCl followed by dil. HF or a mixed acid (HF Processing the low-grade molybdenite concentrate using a PTFE-lined autoclave at 120 °C for 2 h with a well stirred mixed lixiviant (5 wt.% HF+HCl) yielded a product containing 97.5–97.8% MoS The grade of the refined molybdenite compares favourably with that of a technical-grade MoS The authors are thankful to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Govt. of India (New Delhi) for sponsoring a Research Scheme on this subject. They are grateful to (i) the Head, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University (Varanasi) (ii) the Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory (Jamshedpur) and (iii) the Director, Nonferrous Materials Technology Development Centre (Hyderabad) for providing facilities.