The paper presents a model of the reaction between SO2 and trona based slurries. Experimental findings relevant to the desulfurisation in a spray dryer were compared with the proposed mathematical model and were found in good agreement. It is observed that at high stoichiometric ratios, the diffusion of SO2 from the gas bulk to the droplet interface is dominant for absorption and with decreasing stoichiometric ratio the absorption efficiency decreases. An increase in the temperature also causes a decrease in absorption efficiency. At the stoichiometric ratio (Na/S=2), SO2 removal efficiency was found to be around 90%.area (m conversion efficiency of trona heat capacity (J/(kg SO total gas concentration (kmol/m particle diameter (m) diffusion coefficient (m heat transfer coefficient (W/(m humidity (kg/kg) thermal conductivity (W/(m Lewis number mass of a spherical particle (kg) mass (kg) mass of solids (kg/kmol) mole flux (kmol/(m Nusselt number Prandtl number heat (J) Reynolds number unreacted soda fraction Schmidt number Sherwood number stoichiometric ratio time (s) temperature (K) water content of droplet (kg water/kg solids) residual water fraction in droplet SO constant gas bulk temperature SO latent heat (J/kg) density (kg/m dimensionless temperature initial difference between inlet and outlet temperatures gas bulk inlet outlet droplet interface water Spray drying produces particles by atomizing a solution or slurry and evaporating moisture from the resulting droplets by suspending them in a hot gas. The production of dry, spherical particles from a liquid feed in a single processing step makes spray drying a unique and important unit operation. Industrial and utility interest in the spray dry scrubbing concept for the control of SO In that context, an alternative sorbent utilization, like as trona, can also be used to make the spray dry scrubbing process competitive against the established wet processes. Recently, there has been an increased interest in the modelling of the spray dry scrubbing process The first group contains those models whose equations are so constructed that an analytical solution can be obtained. Such models are solved only for one particle diameter and it is assumed that the particle temperature is the temperature of adiabatic saturation during the whole drying process The second group encompasses the models in which the character of equations is similar to that in the first group, but the number of simplifying assumptions is smaller which causes that numerical solutions must be used. In this group the models are solved taking into account non-uniform spraying and hydrodynamics of drying agent in a dryer. In all models in this group, the parameters of the drying agent in a cross-sectional area of the dryer are taken as constant. Zbicinski et al. reported that results obtained in this group of models describe well the process of spray drying In literature, the studies on trona based scrubbing in spray dryer are limited to experimental studies. The kinetic studies on the reaction between trona and SO In this study, SO Natural soda ore, namely trona, is one of the main sources of the alkaline solutions which has the form of Na Although the overall reaction chemistry is fairly simple, the simultaneous heat and mass transfer is considerably more complex. Furthermore, several drying phases in the spray dryer, representing quite different reaction conditions, are involved. The mixing conditions also play an important role in modelling. From the standpoint of classical mass transfer theory, two limiting reaction concepts can be identified. At high stoichiometric ratios based on fresh soda, excess of CO During the drying of droplets, two separate drying phases can be identified: constant-rate drying phase and falling-rate drying phase. In the first, liquid droplets leaving the atomizers contain a large number of individual particles, which are in constant random motion within the droplet. As evaporation occurs, the droplet shrinks and the distance between the single particles is reduced until particle surfaces touch. Hence, the particulate motion within the droplet becomes restricted and the droplet diameter remains unchanged during subsequent drying. During the second, evaporation of moisture from the interior of the particle to the surface starts to predominate. Due to the nature of the solid crust, all the particles are immobile. Hence, physical and chemical properties of the particles may vary with their distance from the center of the drop since reaction products formed at one location cannot move to another. As a preliminary design consideration, the assumption of surface saturated condition and neglect of a drying falling rate period, with resulting constant droplet surface temperature, is probably adequate. In other words, the change in the solids content, due to chemical reactions during the drying process, is not taken into account. The two-phase flow inside the spray dryer is described with a steady state one-dimensional model. The overall mass transfer and reaction Eq. Diffusion of SO Absorption of SO Dissociation of sulfurous acid into ionic sulfur species: Diffusion of liquid phase sulfur species towards the droplet center. Dissolution of Na Precipitation of sodium sulfite: The drying begins with the constant rate period during which the drying rate is controlled by gas phase resistance for heat and mass transfer only. Afterwards the water recedes into the porous solid and the falling rate period starts. In this period an additional resistance lowers the drying rate. The heat and mass transfer rates to the droplets are given by: The The chemical composition of the trona ore, which is obtained from Beypazarı ore, is given in Experiments were performed to demonstrate the influences of stoichiometric ratio, gas temperature and inlet trona solution concentration. The results are discussed in terms of SO The conversion efficiency of trona is defined as the ratio of converted soda mole flux to soda mole flux at the inlet of the spray dryer: Increasing trona conversion causes to additional liquid phase mass transfer resistances for SO The influence of the gas temperature is illustrated in The effect of outlet temperature was investigated for different temperature levels changing from 85 to 120 In this paper, a model approach for SO