Dental caries is a widespread chronic disease caused by glucolytic biofilms. Despite considerable success in prophylaxis, there is still a strong demand for biomimetic biofilm management. Reflections on the abraded, but mostly caries-free teeth observed in prehistoric sculls or omnivorous primates, respectively, offer perspectives for developing new approaches in preventive dentistry. It is hypothesized that nano-sized hydroxylapatite crystallites occur in the oral cavity during extensive physiological wear of the hierarchical structured enamel surface due to dental abrasion and attrition. These nano-scaled apatite enamel crystallites might promote re-mineralization and physiological biofilm management at the tooth surface.
                  Indeed, modern bioinspired nanomaterials in preventive dentistry containing nano-sized hydroxylapatite particles have shown efficacy in reducing oral biofilm formation and yield re-mineralizing effects. Accordingly, they seem to mimic extensive abrasions which do not occur with modern diet.Caries is still the most prevalent infectious disease in modern society For better understanding of caries it is worthwhile to have a closer look at the process of bioadhesion in the oral cavity as well as at the architecture of the substrate – dental enamel. After extensive tooth cleaning, a thin proteinaceous layer termed pellicle is formed on all oral hard tissues from the oral fluids Dental enamel as the main solid substrate of oral biofilm formation is a masterpiece of bioceramics In the history of man, caries occurred mainly with sedentism and the beginning of agriculture. However, there was only a moderate increase of caries despite the general change of diet from proteins to carbohydrates In the last years several oral heath care compounds, tooth pastes and mouth rinses were developed containing nano-sized bioinspired apatite particles in combination with or without proteinaceous additives like caseino-phosphopetides Different types and pharmaceutical forms of nano-hydroxylapatite promote re-mineralization and repair of de-mineralized enamel or micro-sized tooth surface defects Typically, these nano-crystallites mimic the size of natural dentinal hydroxylapatite (20 The hypothesis of the present paper underlines the relevance and necessity of biomimetic oral health care products providing and replacing nano-sized hydroxylapatite-particles in the modern population. These artificial nano-apatites might be supplied during daily oral hygiene measures using tooth pastes, mouth rinsing solutions, chewing gums etc. Further research is necessary to elucidate the re-mineralizing, antibacterial and biofilm preventive effects of nano-sized enamel abrasive. None declared. We would like to thank Andreas Krause from Rehm in Dithmarschen, Germany, for the photography.