Children with disabilities that limit mobility are at increased risk for osteoporosis. In the United States, 10 million people have osteoporosis and 34 million people are estimated to be at risk of acquiring this condition. Typically, bone fragility and osteoporosis have been associated with older adults; however, these problems can also affect children. The childhood and adolescent years are critically important in producing healthy bone mass. Yet cerebral palsy and epilepsy, which are both chronic disorders that frequently coexist, are predictors of muscular and skeletal compromise. Nurse practitioners should be aware of recommendations for promoting and achieving optimal bone health in children with these disabilities and screening patients who are at risk of sustaining fractures. Impaired physical mobility (i.e., decrease in weight-bearing activities) Medications such as corticosteroids and anti-epilepsy drugs Dietary deficiency such as low calcium, vitamin D, phosphorus, overall poor nutrition Low body weight Race (i.e., non-Black) Female gender Family history of osteoporosis Previous fracture history  Nutritional assessment, including: Calcium, 1300 mg daily (children ages 9-18 years) Vitamin D, 400 IU daily (infants, children, and adolescents) Basic laboratory studies may include: Complete blood cell count Serum creatinine Alkaline phosphatase Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OH-D) Calcium Albumin Aspartate aminotransferase Phosphorus Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry to include: Lumbar spine Proximal femur Weight-bearing activities (if possible) Sunlight exposure According to the National Institutes of Health, osteoporosis is a skeletal disorder characterized by compromised bone strength, predisposing a person to an increased risk of fracture ( Reduced bone mass in children with chronic health conditions is increasingly recognized as a risk factor for fractures. Although genetics plays a primary role, accounting for 70% to 75% of bone strength ( Factors influencing bone mass have the greatest effect early in life. Adequate nutrition, including calcium intake and weight gain, and weight-bearing activity, which provides proper mechanical forces, are essential in attaining maximal BMD ( Children with neuromuscular disorders such as cerebral palsy (CP) have increased risk for osteoporosis and pathologic fractures. This risk is higher in persons with more severe disability. It is estimated that epilepsy will develop in 13% of children with CP ( In childhood, adequate nutrition is requisite to achieving optimal bone health. Generalized nutritional issues, such as adequate protein intake, play an important role, and any diseases that result in malabsorption can negatively affect ultimate bone density. Specific nutrients involved in healthy bone development include calcium and vitamin D. Calcium is absorbed from the gut, stored in the bone, and excreted in the kidney. It is essential in the function of muscles and nerves. Calcium concentration is regulated by a complex interaction of vitamin D, parathyroid hormone (PTH), and phosphorus. Vitamin D in its active form is necessary for the proper absorption of calcium through the gut and kidneys. The active form is produced via a series of conversion steps in the skin (through exposure to ultraviolet light), liver, and kidney. Vitamin D deficiency can be due to inadequate oral intake or malabsorption from the gut, liver disease, or drugs that affect hepatic activity, as well as renal abnormalities or decreased sunlight exposure, which both affect conversion of vitamin D to its active form ( Daily calcium requirements vary by age, with 1300 mg per day recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) for children aged 9 to 18 years. Yet it has been estimated that fewer than 40% of children aged 6 to 19 years meet the minimum daily requirement ( Vitamin D deficiency is an increasing public health concern among persons of all ages. Because of the mounting evidence for widespread vitamin D deficiency, the AAP has doubled the recommendation from 200 to 400 IU daily for all infants, children, and adolescents ( Mechanical factors are important in achieving normal BMD. Decreased bone strain produced by immobility (e.g., prolonged bed rest, limited weight-bearing activities, casts, or other immobilization) can cause significant bone loss; conversely, strenuous activity strengthens bones ( During growth, bone markers reflect bone turnover, which consists of both skeletal modeling and remodeling (  Neuromuscular conditions like CP may put a child at higher risk for calcium and vitamin D deficiency, as well as under-nutrition in general. In children with CP and other developmental conditions such as muscular dystrophy and spina bifida, weight-bearing activities and mobility are limited, thereby increasing the risk of osteoporosis. Seizures occurring in childhood can have serious long-term effects. The impact of epilepsy related to seizure-induced injury, as well as the independent effects of AEDs, can affect future osteoporosis and fracture risk ( In addition to the trauma of seizures and falls, studies suggest that low BMD is linked to AED exposure in both older and younger populations ( Chronic AED therapy causes abnormalities in calcium metabolism, including hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, elevated levels of serum alkaline phosphatase, and serum PTH, and reduced serum levels of biologically active vitamin D metabolites ( Plain radiographs can reveal qualitative problems in bone mineralization, such as decreased trabecular bone with a “washed-out appearance,” thinning of the cortices, and possible fractures ( Optimal bone mass is achieved through a combination of environmental factors, including adequate protein, caloric, calcium, and vitamin D intake, as well as weight-bearing activities and sunlight exposure. Therefore, the primary approach to treating low BMD should address the cause or causes. Elimination or reduction in medications that adversely affect BMD should be considered, as well as minimizing periods of immobilization. Once a fracture occurs, a vicious cycle of increasing disuse osteoporosis from treatment-related immobilization can occur. Children at risk for low BMD, including those with neuromuscular conditions that limit weight-bearing activities and those taking AEDs, should be evaluated with DXA. Although limited data are available to determine the cutoff BMD at which patients should be considered at risk for fracture, treatment of patients with a Guidelines from the AAP ( Although experts have not reached a consensus with regard to what defines vitamin D deficiency in children, recent AAP guidelines recommend aiming for a serum concentration of 25-OH-D greater than 50 nmol/L. Based on the practice settings, serum levels may vary slightly and may also be reported in different measurements ( Bisphosphonates are medications that inhibit bone resorption while allowing bone formation to continue. They have been used to a limited extent in children with low BMD and have been shown to decrease bone pain, improve mobility, and reduce fracture risk ( Less work has been done with oral bisphosphonates in children, partly because these pills cannot be crushed as the contents are caustic and the patient must be able to swallow a whole pill. Also, the patient must be able to remain upright after taking these medications or esophageal irritation can occur. Many pediatric patients at risk for low BMD have limited mobility and complex medical problems that limit upright positioning (  Having a raised awareness of risk factors such as impaired physical mobility, long-term AED use, and other potential causes for osteoporosis should be included in the assessment of this population. Patient/parent education must be used as a tool for preventing bone loss and promoting bone health. Anticipatory guidance should include an emphasis on the broad benefits of a healthy diet, including the role of calcium and vitamin D in supporting peak BMD. Steps should be taken to ensure that physical activity and weight-bearing exercises are maximized if possible. Also, NPs should discuss with parents the possible risk of bone loss and the potential consequences. Osteoporosis can be a silent process that progressively affects bone strength over a period of years before clinical symptoms are apparent, so its diagnosis and treatment may be delayed. Therefore, all patients with disorders that may affect bone and mineral metabolism should be accurately examined for the occurrence of osteoporosis (