Torrefaction of biomass improves the grindability of raw biomass by the transformation from a fibrous structure to a more brittle and friable, coal-like material. Torrefied biomass is a more desirable feedstock for co-firing applications, especially in existing coal-fired power plants. Therefore, measuring the grindability and the specific energy consumption are critical for understanding the comminution behavior of torrefied biomass, and thus selecting appropriate milling equipment. In this study, the effect of torrefaction temperature on the specific grinding energy consumption and the grindability of torrefied wood pellets and wood chips was investigated and compared with that of coal. The applicability of three well-known grinding equations (Kick, Rittinger and Bond) was studied for the torrefied biomass using a knife mill. The specific grinding energy of both torrefied wood chips and pellets linearly decreased with increased torrefaction temperature over a range of 250–290 °C. Rittinger's model was the best-fit for both wood chips (R2 = 0.72–0.90) and wood pellets (R2 = 0.67–0.76). When the intercepts were considered, the Rittinger's and Bond's equations fitted well with the experimental data (R2 = 0.79–0.99) for all torrefied biomass. The grindability of torrefied biomass was measured using the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) grindability index. A relationship between the Bond Work Index (BWI), based on the Bond's theory and HGI was developed for wood chips and wood pellets. Contrary to HGI index, BWI decreased with an increase in torrefaction temperature. The grindability parameters developed for torrefied biomass can be used for modeling and selecting suitable milling equipment.Thermal pretreatment by torrefaction improves the thermal and physical properties of biomass by reducing moisture content, increasing calorific value, improving hydrophobicity and grindability [ Grindability of a material relates to the rate of energy required for grinding from an initial size to a specific particle size distribution. It may also be referred to as the resistance of a material to be ground to a certain size [ A general relation for energy consumption of grinding a specific material and the product size has been proposed by Walker et al. 1937 [ The grinding of raw biomass has been widely investigated in several studies [ The existing milling facilities in power generation plants are adapted to coal at certain ranges of grindability. Some of the standard tests for grindability measurement of coal include the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) test [ The grinding behavior of wood pellets and torrefied wood pellets is required for defining and differentiating the characteristics of torrefied biomass [ The objectives of this study were: 1) to determine the effect of torrefaction temperature on the specific grinding energy of wood chips and wood pellets, 2) to investigate the applicability of comminution equations for the grinding of treated (torrefied) and un-treated wood chips and wood pellets, 3) to develop the grindability indices of the torrefied material based on the Hardgrove (HGI) and Bond (BWI) methods, and compare with ISO grindability analysis. The wood chips and wood pellets produced from southern yellow pine were acquired from the commercial pelleting plant in the Southeastern U.S. The moisture content of wood chips and pellets as received were 7.9% ± 0.02 and 6.2% ± 0.32, respectively, measured in accordance with the ASABE standard S358.3 MAY 2012 [ The bulk density of the raw and torrefied materials was measured based on the standard method [ The dimensions of at least fifteen pellets were used to define the average pellet diameter. For defining the average diameter of wood chips, a batch of wood chips was separated into four groups; chunks, bigger chips, smaller chips, and shreds. The total weight and dimension (length, width, and thickness) of wood chips from each group were measured. The average characteristic size was calculated based on the summation of the average spherical diameter of each group's particle volume times the weight fraction. The wood chips and pellets were ground using a laboratory heavy-duty knife mill (Retsch SM 2000, Germany). The knife mill used in this study consisted of a cutting blade rotor (1690 rpm, 60 Hz), which was powered by a 1.5 kW electric motor. The instantaneous power consumption (W) during the grinding experiment was recorded every 2 s using a data logger and transferred through a multi-function transducer (CR Magnetics Inc., MO) attached to a computer. Three different screen sizes 0.5, 1, and 2 mm were used in the knife mill to classify the ground materials for each sample studied. Preliminary tests were conducted to specify the amount of biomass samples required for each run in order to consistently operate the grinder. The relevant time of grinding and the efficiency of grinding were estimated by measuring the throughput rate. Once the proper amount of biomass sample for grinding was determined, the grinding experiment with each screen size was performed in triplicate. The grinder motor was equipped with a circuit breaker to avoid motor overloading. The net specific energy for grinding of each sample was calculated by integrating the power-time curve divided by the mass of the output material and reported in kWh Mg Particle size distribution of the ground biomass was determined by sieving the material in accordance with ANSI/ASAE standard S319.3 [ The relationship between the energy consumption for grinding and the product particle size was generally proposed by Walker et al. [ The general equation was further developed, and three famous size reduction laws of Rittinger, Kick, and Bond were established based on different exponent values (Eqs. Kick's Theory Rittinger's Theory Bond's Theory In this study, the specific energy of grinding (kWh Mg The Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) test [ Primarily, the calibration curve was obtained according to the modified volumetric HGI test [ Each test was repeated three times for every standard reference coal sample, and the m% values were plotted versus the HGI value for the calibration curve ( After obtaining the calibration curve, the HGI value of the biomass was evaluated. The samples need to be pre-crushed for HGI test [ The other well-known grindability index that has been extensively applied in the mineral industry and is valid for coal is Bond Work Index (BWI). The BWI is defined as the specific energy (kWh Mg In this study, the Bond Work Index (kWh Mg The grindability of biomass for uncompressed biomass was defined in accordance with Rittinger's theory [ The effects of torrefaction temperature and knife mill screen size for wood chips and wood pellets on the specific energy consumption and the particle size were analyzed using R Studio statistical software package version 3.2.2. A two-way factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was performed on specific grinding energy, geometric mean diameter (dgw), geometric standard deviation (Sgw) of particle diameter, 80% passing size of the product (P80), and ISO grindability indices of all combination of torrefaction temperature and screen size samples. If the change in torrefaction temperature or screen size was significant ( The physical and fuel properties of the raw and torrefied wood chips and wood pellets are given in As the torrefaction temperature increases, the fixed carbon content increased, and the volatile matters content decreased, approaching the values of coal samples. The moisture content and ash content of the torrefied biomass were considerably lower than that of coal. Torrefaction reduces the bulk density of both wood chips and wood pellets while increasing the energy content. The densification of torrefied wood chips would not only increase the volumetric energy density, but also improve handling, transport and storage. The torrefied wood pellets had comparable volumetric energy density as coal and could be effectively handled, transported and stored. There was no significant difference between the specific grinding energy consumption of torrefied wood chips at 270 °C and 290 °C. The specific grinding energy consumption of torrefied pellets at 230 °C was 60% lower than that of the untreated pellets, and it dropped by >80% at 250 °C. The energy consumptions for grinding torrefied pellets at 270 °C and 290 °C were only slightly lower than that of 250 °C torrefied pellets and the differences were not statistically different ( The relationship between the specific grinding energy consumption and the torrefaction temperature within the temperature range of 250–290 °C is depicted for both the torrefied chips and pellets in The knife mill has been extensively used for biomass milling applications [ In this study, it was shown that energy consumption for grinding of raw wood chips was substantially higher than that of raw wood pellets as the pellets were compressed from pre-ground wood chips. In case of the torrefied biomass, the difference between the energy consumption for grinding of torrefied wood chips and torrefied wood pellets decreased by the increase in the torrefaction temperature. Hence, at the higher torrefaction temperatures (270 and 290 °C), the grinding energy consumption was more of a function of the material characteristics than the initial form/structure of the biomass (wood chips or wood pellets). The variation in the mean particle size of ground biomass at different torrefaction temperature is shown in For wood chips, the mean particle size was almost halved at 250 °C torrefaction temperature, and it continued to decrease significantly ( The influence of mill types on the size of the ground particles of raw and torrefied biomass pellets was studied by Williams et al. [ The particle size distribution and cumulative passing percentage of ground samples through 2 mm screen are depicted in The grinding parameters derived for each comminution equation of torrefied pellets and torrefied wood chips are given in The ISO grindability, HGI, and BWI indices for raw and treated wood chips and wood pellets are summarized in The HGI index for wood chips and wood pellets were increased with the increase in the torrefaction temperature. The HGI index for the torrefied wood pellet was similar to one of the coal samples used in the calibration process. The HGI index is a positive value based on the mass of ground material passing the 75 μm sieve. Unfortunately, no meaningful HGI index was achieved for the control and slightly treated biomass (T230), due to their fibrous nature ( The higher value of BWI represents the higher resistant for grinding, as similar to the ISO grindability index. There was an uncertainty about the F80 of the pellet, where the average pellet diameter was used as F80 in accordance with Williams et al. [ While the HGI index is commonly used by the coal industry, the bond index is also a more common index used by all mineral industries. Therefore, the correlation between HGI and BWI has been proposed by several studies [ Although BWI showed a decreasing trend with the increase in HGI, additional experimental data are required to develop a reliable correlation. The HGI and BWI indices, which represent the grindability of different material independent of the initial or final particle sizes may be more applicable to simulate the grinding unit operation than that of the ISO grindability index. The grindability of both the torrefied wood pellets and wood chips was investigated using a knife mill at different torrefaction temperatures with different screen sizes (2, 1, and 0.5 mm). In general, the specific grinding energy and the mean particle size decreased with an increase in torrefaction temperature (230 to 290 °C). The variation of specific grinding energy over the torrefaction temperature (250 to 290 °C) followed a rather linear trend for both torrefied wood chips and wood pellets. Rittinger's comminution theory showed the best conformity for both torrefied wood pellets and torrefied wood chips. The calculated Bond Work Index (BWI) for raw wood chips and raw wood pellets were 2605 and 732 kWh Mg The authors acknowledge and thank the Consortium for Advanced Wood-to-Energy Solutions (CAWES) with funding provided by the