Reaction sintering of clay and reactive alumina is an innovative as well as cost effective method of mullite formation. In the present investigation, clay obtained from Neyveli (South India) and reactive alumina (mean particle size of 0.7μm) were used as starting materials. To improve the densification of mullite, magnesia and yttria (1–5wt.%) were used as sinter additives to the above materials. Boehmite was partly substituted for reactive alumina (1–7wt.%). As per the stoichiometric composition the raw materials were mixed, uniaxially pressed and sintered at 1500, 1550 and 1600°C for 3h. Among the sintered samples, the samples sintered at 1600°C exhibited better properties. The 3wt.% MgO addition showed improved density up to 2.91gcm−3 with the maximum strength of 125MPa. Y2O3 addition favoured the development of equiaxed mullite, but did not help to increase the density and strength. The boehmite substitution (5wt.%) yielded maximum density of 96% theoretical density (3.01gcm−3) and strength of 120MPa. Microstructural studies showed that the addition of boehmite resulted in a blend of small to bigger crystals throughout the structure.Mullite, ideally 3Al It is well known that kaolinite undergoes a series of reactions during the early stages of heating and finally forms mullite with the segregation of SiO Mullite powder compacts have poor solid state sinterability because of the low interdiffusion rates of Si Experiments were carried out on raw kaolinite from Neyveli (South India) with reactive alumina (Alcoa SG 9000, mean particle size 0.7 Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) experiments were carried out using NETZSCH STA 409PC with α-alumina as the reference material, at a heating rate of 5  The XRD results of samples sintered at 1600 The SEM microstructures of the samples sintered at 1600   The physical properties of the samples sintered at 1500, 1550 and 1600 The additions of MgO, Y The addition of yttria in mullite aids the formation of a liquid phase at low temperature and promotes densification The boehmite substitution to reactive alumina leads to maximum bulk density (3.01 The maximum strength of the samples with Y The results of the present study indicate that the addition of MgO increases the grain growth and thereby increase the density to maximum value. The physical properties are good for 3