Research on accelerated ripening of dry fermented sausages started in the early 1990s. Fermented sausages manufacture is a very important part of meat industry in many countries and the acceleration of ripening would result in a reduction of the storage time and would increase the profit margin and the competitiveness of the end product. The different strategies that have been assayed with this purpose include ripening at elevated temperature, use of genetically modified starter bacteria, addition of enzymes and addition of slurry systems. Over the last decade, numerous studies have been carried out, especially on the addition of enzymes. The aim of this paper is to review and update the knowledge on this topic. The more recent approaches in this field, such as the use of microbial extracts, are also presented.Dry fermented sausages can be defined as meat products consisting of a mixture of meat and fat particles, salt, curing agents, spices, etc., which have been stuffed into a casing, fermented (ripened) and dried. These products are made from a range of meat species over a wide geographical range. It is in Southern and Central Europe where dry fermented sausages have their longest tradition and are still most widespread. Production and per capita consumption figures are the highest in Germany, Italy, Spain and France One could say that there are almost as many types of sausages as geographical areas and producers and, although production is based on a combination of fermentation and drying, there are clear regional differences. In the Mediterranean countries, France, Hungary and the Balkan countries, air-dried, spicy sausages predominate, while in Northern and Central Europe, most of the fermented sausages are smoked, and drying is less intensive. Semidry sausages, common in North America, are rapidly fermented and frequently heated after fermentation In Europe, manufacture of fermented sausages was largely a small-scale enterprise using traditional labour-intensive methods, while in the United States the development of the large-scale Chicago meat industry meant that a high level of automation was applied by the early years of the 20th century. However, understanding of the principles of meat fermentation developed very slowly. It was not until the 1940s, following the development of starter cultures, that the first attempts were made to put the process on a scientific basis in order to get a greater rate of automation and rationalization of the manufacture of such products. Intensive research into the microbiology and chemistry of sausage ripening was triggered when traditional empirical methods of manufacture no longer met the requirements of large-scale, low-cost industrial production, i.e. short ripening times and highly standardized products. However, even today, there is a considerable craft element and, in some countries, the fermentation remains spontaneous and the success of the process depends on the climatic conditions of the geographical area where sausages are produced. Nowadays, dry fermented sausage manufacture is a very important part of the meat industry in many countries. To give an idea of its importance, in the European Union, the production of dry fermented sausages may be estimated at about 750,000 tonne in 1995 The manufacture of dry fermented sausages is considered to occur in three phases: formulation (mixing of ingredients), fermentation and ripening/drying. During the whole ripening process, several microbiological, physicochemical and biochemical changes take place, which are responsible for the sensory quality and safety of this kind of product. In the fermentation, two basic microbial reactions occur simultaneously, i.e. the production of nitric oxide by nitrate- and nitrite-reducing bacteria ( The development of flavour in meat products is a very complex process, not yet fully understood due to the high number of factors involved. In general, flavour compounds result from enzymatic and chemical reactions, such as lipid oxidation, Maillard reactions and Strecker degradations, together with raw meat properties, additives, processing conditions, etc. Lipids generally form the major fraction in fermented sausages and their role in dry sausage flavour development has been studied by many authors Proteolysis is involved in the development of flavour and texture of dry sausages and it has also been extensively studied It is generally accepted that for all ripened foods (cheese, dry ham and semidry sausages, etc.) there must be a certain lag between initial product manufacturing and the final aged product. However, while some maturation time is inevitable, present understanding of phenomena occurring during ripening has led to experimentation in order to shorten it by speeding up the reactions that generate flavour and modify texture. The time and energy requirements of the ripening process contribute very much to the total costs of fermented sausage manufacture because the cost of the ripening of this kind of products is very high due to the duration of this process. Thus, the acceleration of ripening would result in a reduction of the storage time and it would increase the profit margin and the competitiveness of the end product. The first attempts to accelerate the maturation of ripened foods were carried out in the early 1970s in cheese, with the purpose of enhancing the lipid and protein breakdown by different strategies: ripening at elevated temperature, use of genetically modified starter bacteria, addition of enzymes and addition of slurry systems. Several reviews on this topic have been published Taking into account these considerations and previous experiences in cheese, it seems more interesting to shorten the ripening period of dry fermented meats by accelerating the enzymatic and chemical reactions responsible for the flavour development on these products. Apart from the selection of proteolytic and lipolytic starters The addition of enzymes has been the most developed method for accelerating the processing of muscle foods, i.e. fish and especially meat products. For instance, enzymes have been successfully applied to marine raw materials, including fish, shellfish or algae The use of enzymes is a relatively cheap method, has a specific effect on flavour precursors and offers the possibility of the choice of a certain enzyme to produce a specific effect. Among the disadvantages of using enzymes, there is the risk of overmaturation, together with some legal limitations. In contrast with cheese, the use of enzymes in dry fermented sausages does not present difficulties due to enzyme solubility or losses during the manufacture of the product, although the sausage mixture is not as homogeneous as milk. The first work on accelerating the ripening of dry fermented sausages by adding enzymes was carried out with an enzyme complex extracted from Lipases have been traditionally used for the enhancement of flavour in cheese, especially in strong-flavoured products such as hard Italian, i.e. Grana, Provolone and Parmesan cheeses Several authors have assessed the addition of different lipases—most of them 1,3-specific—to dry fermented sausages ( Paleari Naes Fernández Arbolés and Juliá Zalacain Zalacain The effect of a lipase from Proteases have also an important background in relation to use for accelerating the ripening of cheese Naes In further work, Naes Dı́az Sandtorv Melendo Zapelena More recently, the role of an exogenous protease from The same authors The combined action of proteases and lipases has been studied by Ansorena In the same way, Melendo In summary, from the works previously reported it can be concluded that: When proteinases are added to sausages, depending on the concentration used, an intense proteolysis can be achieved, affecting mainly to myofibrillar proteins with an increase in the different nitrogen fractions (water soluble non protein nitrogen, total volatile basic nitrogen) and quantitative and qualitative changes in the free amino acids. When certain concentrations are used, an excessive softening is observed. The addition of lipases accentuates the hydrolysis of triglycerides proportionally to the concentration added, yielding high amounts of free fatty acids, mainly unsaturated ones. A more intense oxidation can be also registered, with the accumulation of some volatile compounds such hexanal. When very high amounts are added, an oily texture may appear. The addition of enzymes enables the production of higher amounts of precursors (amino acids and fatty acids) of flavour compounds (aldehydes, ketones, lactones, alcohols, esters, etc.), but sensory analysis shows that, in some cases, only a slight improvement in flavour was obtained. Thus, it seems that the sole addition of proteases and/or lipases is not useful for shortening ripening time or improving sensory quality. In our opinion In this way, our research group is currently studying the use of other enzymes with this purpose, particularly crude extracts obtained from non-toxigenic moulds which are used as starters in different meat products when inoculated superficially. Meat products ripened with moulds are part of a long-standing gastronomic tradition in some European countries such as Spain, Italy, France or Germany and the surface coating of moulds is considered as an indicator of a successful ripening process and a good quality final product. The use of such organisms is, therefore, reported to improve sensory properties of sausages, and its beneficial role has been mainly associated to extracellular proteolytic and lipolytic activity It is, therefore, reasonable to assume that the addition of a fungal extract to the fermented sausage mixture during manufacture, combined with proteases and/or lipases or active starter cultures would increase the accessibility of the mould enzymes to the precursors of flavour compounds and a greater accumulation of volatile substances than in conventional fermented sausages. Up to now, we have studied the addition of an intracellular extract obtained from different non-toxigenic strains isolated from Spanish dry fermented sausages, including From our current work, it can be concluded that, as expected, the addition of the protease or the superficial inoculation of moulds determines an increase of free amino acids in comparison with control sausages. However, the superficial inoculation of moulds has some additional consequences such as an antioxidative effect and the ability to produce some volatile compounds responsible for ‘ripened’ flavour, especially some branched aldehydes (2- and 3-methylbutanal, 2-methylpropanal) and esters This work has been financed by the Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CICYT) (Project ALI 96-0928).