In contrast with the conventional remelting recycling of aluminum and its alloy chips, the solid state recycling techniques, which can convert the chips directly into dense bulk materials, have attracted significant attention primarily because it possesses many advantages including lower energy consumption, lower metal loss as well as almost no emissions of harmful gases and solid wasters. In this keynote paper, with a view to the current researches of the solid state recycling techniques based on the severe plastic deformation (SPD) and powder metallurgy (P/M), the characteristics and applications of several typical methods, such as hot extrusion, equal channel angular pressing (ECAP), cyclic extrusion compression (CEC), friction stir extrusion (FSE), high pressure torsion (HPT), screw extrusion and spark plasma sintering (SPS), are introduced. A growing number of researches and literatures suggest that the mechanical properties of solid state recycled specimens are primarily dependent on the chip bonding quality and microstructure of the corresponding bulk materials. Then, the mechanism analysis of consolidation of chips is carried out, and three relevant theoretical modes, characterizing the bonding quality, are also mentioned. Moreover, the factors influencing the density and microstructure of chip-consolidated product are discussed comprehensively. Eventually, recommendations in the improvement of solid state recycling techniques and the future prospects are put forward.Non-ferrous metal recycling has a number of benefits, the most outstanding being the potential to reduce the extraction of virgin ores considerably, thus preserving those non-renewable resources. During the mining of these metals, negative environmental impacts are caused, including the emissions of carbon dioxide and hazardous gases, the generation of considerable amounts of solid waste, and the destruction of landscape ( To the present, two major processes have been proposed to recycle the nonferrous metal scraps, i.e. the conventional remelting method ( To our knowledge, compared with the conventional remelting recycling, direct conversion of aluminum and its alloy chips into compact specimen by extrusion leads to savings of 40% in materials, 26–31% in energy and 16–60% in labor ( The SPD techniques, defined as metal forming processes, are viable avenues for microstructure refinement of metals, alloys and intermetallics ( Hot extrusion is a very popular solid state recycling technique, as shown in Attempts were made to achieve better bonding of aluminum chips using cold compression only, but it was found that disintegration of outer surface of the cold compressed billets occurred during free upsetting although the obtained billets showed high relative density and compactness ( At present, ECAP is an extensively used SPD processing technique to fabricate bulk ultrafine-grained materials with high-angle grain boundaries via pure shear ( Although ECAP is generally applied to the severe plastic deformation of the bulk materials, it can also be used to consolidate metallic particles or powders. For instance, in the work of For the solid state recycling of granulated metal chips, the ECAP process can also exert an important influence on the good bonding between chips. As described in the introduction section, Luo et al. have converted the Ti and its alloy machining chips directly into fully dense materials of superior mechanical properties using the process of ECAP. The CEC method is one of the promising SPD techniques to induce very large strain in the sample. In the CEC process, the sample contained within the chamber underwent extrusion and compression, and these two procedures alternate in each pass ( For the solid state recycling, after the cold pre-compaction of metal chips, the CEC processing was conducted by pushing the obtained billet from one cylindrical chamber into the second same chamber with a diameter D, through a relatively smaller cylindrical passage with a diameter d, as demonstrated in Friction stir welding (FSW) is a solid state joining process in which a rotating tool with a shoulder and the specially designed pin traverses along the butting surfaces of two clamped plates or sheets to be joined ( Today the HPT process is considered by many researchers as the most effective grain refinement method. As seen in In addition, the HPT process can also be used for the consolidation of powders (  As far as we know, the final quality of SPD-recycled specimens is decided mainly by the density and microstructure of the corresponding materials, which rely on the deformation conditions ( It has been reported ( To present, there have existed three main theoretical modes to characterize the quality of the consolidation of chips: (a) According to the study of For the whole area for chips' bonding, the whole sintering indicator (W For the compressible processing condition, it is known that Thus, the following relationship can be obtained by combining Eqs. From the above Eq. (b) In order to predict the quality of bonding of chips, the pressure-time criterion was proposed by Based on the above pressure-time criterion, Considering the bonding area (A (c) Recently a new criterion has been proposed by The bonding quality index (BQI) depends on the integration of the mean stress (P In general, the following factors may be responsible for the consolidation of chips: the characteristics of chips, the die geometry, the conten of reinforcing phase as well as the processing parameters such as ratio and rate of the extrusion, billet temperature et al. As mentioned above, the oxide layers can suppress the bonding of chips. Fine aluminum scraps and chips usually have larger specific surface area. And the total surface area per unit volume (S: mm As for hot extrusion recycling, cold pre-compaction is usually done firstly, the number of compaction layers is considered to be closely related to the billet density. It was found that four-layer billet could be used as representative of multi-layer compaction ( Other factor, such as the volume fraction of reinforcing phase, should not be ignored ( Under the premise of good consolidation of aluminum and its chips by the SPD methods, the mechanical properties of recycled specimens are primarily dependent on the grain refinement, uniform dispersion of reinforcing phases, the precipitation of certain intermetallics at grain boundary ( During the solid state recycling, nonferrous metals (such as Al, Mg) are usually subjected to the combined action of work-hardening and work-softening. Hence the chip-consolidated specimens may exhibit dynamic recrystallization phenomenon, which can account for the formation of fine equiaxed microstructure. The dynamic recrystallization was found to depend on the deformation temperature and the strain rate ( In a word, the fine-grained microstructure of the chip-consolidated product during the SPD processing can lead to good mechanical properties. Furthermore, high density of dislocation, resulting from severe deformation, can enhance the strength further. Small amout of oxide contaminants seems to result in dispersion strengthening ( The P/M technique is a rapid, economical fabrication process for making near-net shape products from powders (  The spark plasma sintering (SPS), also referred to as pulsed electric current sintering (PECS), is a promising process which makes the sintering of powders possible at low temperature and a short time under the combination of a current (i.e. pulsed DC) and pressure. The SPS process possesses many advantages over conventional sintering techniques, such as pressureless sintering (PLS), vacuum hot pressing (VHP) and hot isostatic pressing(HIP). These advantages include: ease of operation, high sintering speed, low sintering temperature, high reproducibility and highly dense sintering samples of finer grains ( As stated before, solid state recycling techniques possess many advantages over the remelting recycling including lower energy consumption, lower metal loss as well as almost no emissions of harmful gases and solid wasters. Furthermore, in contrast with the degradation utilization of aluminum and its alloy chips via the remelting method, solid state recycling techniques can obtain the recycled products of the same chemical composition as scraps. Consequently one of the important research focused on recycling of aluminum scraps will be the solid state or meltless recycling. However, for most of the aluminum plants, the remelting recycling method is currently still the first choice during the efficient treatment of aluminum scrap chips. Regardless of the characteristics of chips (such as the size, shape and cleanliness), consolidation of chips prior to melting is a common practice in many operations today. As for the promising meltless recycling techniques, like hot extrusion, screw extrusion, ECAP, CEC, HPT, SPS et al., the chips can be consolidated into the nearly fully dense products in the laboratory, and the recycled specimen may have equal or even higher mechanical properties in comparison with the reference specimen from the original ingot. On one hand, with the addition of reinforcing phases, aluminum matrix composites can be produced from aluminum chips. On the other hand, during the solid state recycling, the fine-grained microstructure of the chip-consolidated product may be formed. Furthermore, high density of dislocation, resulting from severe deformation, can enhance the strength further. In spite of this, these novel processes are immature and still in the stage of theoretical study. According to our theoretical analysis, the quality of recycled specimen is closely related to the characteristics of chips, the die geometry, content of reinforcing phase as well as the processing parameters during the laboratory production. These influencing factors are of significant importance to not only determine the bonding quality of chips but also effect the microstructure evolution of recycled specimen, such as the size of grain, the dispersion of second phase (oxide contaminants, or reinforcing phase) and the formation of microvoids. In future, the attentions for the solid state recycling techniques based on the severe plastic deformation or the powder metallurgy should be highlighted as follows. Optimizing processing parameters further, such as ratio and rate of the extrusion, billet temperature, the number of passes (CEC), the sintering cycle (SPS) et al. Redesigning die geometry to create new route of material flow, fulfilling better consolidation of chips. Like the porthole die employed to achieve better chip bonding during the hot extrusion, the original die geometry for other solid state recycling methods (like CEC, HPT, FSE, ECAP et al.) can be made suitable adjustment, redesigning new deformation route. Subsequently, it is necessary to utilize the finite element analysis to simulate the process of chip bonding, thus predicting the welding quality of the recycled product. Improving the mechanical properties of solid state recycled product further. It has been reported that suitable heat treatment conditions could enhance the mechanical properties of the extrudate from Mg chips ( In addition of the common chip-consolidated products, such as aluminum extrudates and sintering specimens, other solid-state recycled products can also be fabricated from the aluminum and its alloy chips. During the consolidation of chips by the process of SPD and P/M, the voids or pores between chips can be utilized sufficiently to fabricate the cellular material. The aluminum foams can be produced from aluminum and its alloy chips by the sintering-dissolution process (SDP) ( The aluminum powders can be fabricated from the Al scraps by the mechanical milling, directly acting as multipurpose products, such as the activated Al powders that react and burn with water ( The authors acknowledge the financial support by