Limestone particle attrition was investigated in a small circulating fluidized bed reactor at temperatures from 25 to 850°C, 1atm pressure and superficial gas velocities from 4.8 to 6.2m/s. The effects of operating time, superficial gas velocity and temperature were studied with fresh limestone. No calcination or sulfation occurred at temperatures ⩽580°C, whereas calcination and sulfation affected attrition at 850°C. Increasing the temperature (while maintaining the same superficial gas velocity) reduced attrition if there was negligible calcination. Attrition was high initially, but after ∼24h, the rate of mass change became constant. The ratio of initial mean particle diameter to that at later times increased linearly with time and with (U
                     g
                     −
                     U
                     mf)2, while decreasing exponentially with temperature, with an activation energy for fresh limestone of −4.3kJ/mol. The attrition followed Rittinger’s surface theory [Beke B. Comminution. Budapest: Akademiai Kiado, 1964; Ray YC, Jiang TS, Wen CY. Particle attrition phenomena in a fluidized bed. Powder Technol 1987a; 49:193–206]. The change of surface area of limestone particles was proportional to the total excess kinetic energy consumed and to the total attrition time, whereas the change of surface area decreased exponentially with increasing temperature. At 850°C, the attrition rate of calcined lime was highest, whereas the attrition rate was lowest for sulfated particles. When online impact attrition was introduced, the attrition rate was about an order of magnitude higher than without impacts.harmonic mean particle diameter, m average diameter of particles on initial mean particle diameter, m mean particle diameter after attrition time attrition activation energy, kJ/mol pre-exponential factor, s/m attrition rate constant, s attrition rate constant, s/m total mass of original particles, kg mass of particles in riser bed, kg mass of all particles on number of original particles on number of all particles on universal gas constant total surface area of original particles, m total surface area of particles after attrition time time, s temperature, K superficial gas velocity, m/s minimum fluidization velocity, m/s volume of each particle on time rate of change of weight fraction of bed particles, kg/kg weight fraction of particles on weight fraction of original particles on weight fraction of all particles on particle density, kg/m Circulating fluidized bed (CFB) reactors have been used in many industrial processes, such as combustion/boilers, fluid catalytic cracking, drying, and gasification. Advantages include good solid mixing, high heat transfer, large contact surface area and large processing capacity Calcium based sorbents, primarily limestone (CaCO Sorbent attrition in circulating fluidized bed combustion process may be beneficial in removing the product CaSO Particle attrition is influenced by many factors, including particle porosity, particle size, material hardness, density, surface texture, cracks and particle shape Ray et al. Scala et al. In this paper, limestone particle attrition was investigated in a small circulating fluidized bed reactor at temperatures from 25 to 850 The limestone continuous attrition apparatus, a circulating fluidized bed (CFB) system, shown schematically in For tests of the effect of particle online impact attrition, the facility shown in The composition and sulfation morphologies of the limestone are summarized in The effect of attrition time on limestone particle size distribution was first investigated at 25 In order to describe the CFB continuous attrition quantitatively, the mass harmonic mean particle (or Sauter mean) diameter The effect of superficial gas velocity on attrition was next investigated at 25  By taking the derivative of the mass change ratio in the riser with time, we can estimate the bed material loss rate, defined as Four correlations of the form of Eq. The effect of temperature on uncalcined, unsulfated limestone particle attrition was investigated by conducting tests at 25, 130, 300 and 580  Based on Eq. The experimental results show that fresh limestone particle attrition can be related to the CFB operating parameters, at least for the conditions studied. Eq. To check the validity of the correlation, the predictions are compared with the experimental data in Examination of the above empirical correlation (Eq. If the mass and weight fraction of original particles on the Dividing Eq. In order to investigate the effects of calcination, sulfation and CFB riser configuration on attrition, three long-term (64  The results with and without calcination, with calcination followed by sulfation and with calcination/sulfation accompanied by impact jetting are compared in Limestone particle attrition was investigated in a small circulating fluidized bed reactor at temperatures from 25 to 850