The synergistic extraction of heavy rare earths from chloride medium was investigated using the mixture of heptylaminomethylphosphonic acid mono-(2-ethyl-hexyl) ester (HEHHAP, HA) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex272, HB) in heptane. The extraction efficiency of heavy rare earths and the separation factors between adjacent lanthanides with the HEHHAP-Cyanex272 mixture are both better than those for the sole HEHHAP or Cyanex272 system. The separation factors between adjacent heavy rare earths are also higher than those for other synergistic systems. The rare earth extraction is a cation exchange process deduced by both slope analysis method and constant molar method. The extracted complexes are determined to be LnH2Cl2A2B (Ln = Yb, Lu). The loaded metal ions can be easily stripped by HCl or H2SO4. The stripping efficiency is over 90% when the concentration of HCl was more than 1 mol/L. The synergistic extraction of heavy rare earths with the mixed HEHHAP-Cyanex272 system is an endothermic reaction. The negative values of ΔG indicates that the extraction reaction of Ln(III) is spontaneous and favorable.HEHHAP+Cyanex272 Cyanex272 HEHHAP In recent decades, rare earth elements have been proved with excellent properties and widely used in many high-tech fields, such as clean energy vehicles, aerospace, special luminescent materials. However, the production of high purity rare earths is the base of their application in high-tech fields. Solvent extraction is one of the most popular methods to recover and separate rare earths ( Synergistic extraction is an effective extraction method with the mixed extractants ( Heptylaminomethyl-phosphonic acid mono-(2-ethylhexyl) ester (HEHHAP), as an acidic amino-organophosporus extractant, was synthesized for the extraction and separation of RE(III) in our laboratory ( Heptylaminomethyl-phosphonic acid mono-(2-ethyl-hexyl) ester was synthesized in our laboratory ( The corresponding Ln(III) oxides were dissolved in concentrated hydrochloric acid and diluted with distilled water to prepare stock solutions of Ln(III) which can be standardized by titration using EDTA standard solution at pH 5.5 with xylenol orange as an indicator. NaCl solution was used to keep the constant of ionic strength in some experiments. All the other reagents were of analytical grade and used without further purification. The solvent extraction experiments were carried out by shaking the mixture of equal volumes (5 mL) of organic and aqueous phases in equilibrium tube for 30 min at 298 ± 0.5 K(unless stated otherwise), which is enough to reach equilibrium. The stripping experiments were carried out by mixing the pre-saturated organic phase and different mineral acid solutions for 30 min at 298 ± 0.5 K. The metal concentration in the aqueous phase before and after extraction was determined by ICP-OES and the metal ion concentration inthe organic phases can be obtained based on the mass balance. The distribution ratio ( In order to determine whether the mixture of HEHHAP and Cyanex272 has a synergistic effect on the extraction of heavy rare earths or not, the constant mole method was used to examine the extraction of several heavy rare earths by various compositions with different HEHHAP fraction ( The synergistic enhancement factor ( The extraction mechanism of lanthanides by HEHHAP (Eq. Here,to gain insight into the synergistic effect in the mixture system of HEHHAP and Cyanex272, Yb(III) and Lu(III) were selected as the examples for the mechanism study. Assuming that the synergistic extraction of Yb(III) and Lu(III) by the mixed HEHHAP and Cyanex272 from chloride medium can be expressed as follows: Then, the equilibrium constant  Based on the above results and the charge balance, the primary extraction equilibrium of heavy rare earths from chloride medium by the mixture of HEHHAP and Cyanex272 can be proposed as the following equation: The infrared spectra of the extracted complex and the extractants were also recorded to further confirm the composition. Some characteristic absorption peaks are listed in The effect of temperature was investigated in the range of 298 K -318 K. The plots of log As an essential step of the extraction and separation process, it is of great significance to find an ideal stripping reagent to recover metal ions and recycle organic phase. Therefore, the stripping of the loaded Yb(III) was studied with different mineral acids, including HCl, H A mixture of lanthanides plus yttrium in chloride solution was extracted using HEHHAP, Cyanex272, and the mixed HEHHAP-Cyanex272 system, respectively. The separation factors were calculated and the values among heavy lanthanides were tabulated in The mixture of heptyl-aminomethyl-phosphonic acid mono-(2-ethyl-hexyl) ester (HEHHAP) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex272) was applied for the extraction and separation of heavy rare earths from chloride solutions. Obvious synergistic effect was observed for this mixture system and the maximum synergistic enhancement factor was obtained at The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the