In this paper, a novel polyamide containing pyrimidine and methine thiophene linkages (poly(pyrimidine-thiophene-amide) (P(P-T-A))) was synthesized. Then, the magnetic calcium alginate nanocomposite containing P(P-T-A) (CA-P(P-T-A)-Ni0.2Zn0.2Fe2.6O4 (NZFO)) was synthesized for studying neodymium (Nd+3), terbium (Tb+3), and dysprosium (Dy+3) ions adsorption in the single ion solutions. The obtained results of X-ray diffraction (XRD), field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM), and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) indicated the successful synthesis of the materials. The value of saturation magnetization of the nanocomposite was reported to be 15.28 emu/g, indicating an appropriate magnetic response. Under the optimum conditions, adsorption efficiency for Nd+3, Tb+3, and Dy+3 was 96.73, 94.82, and 97.58 %, respectively. According to the experimental results, it can be stated that the data of REEs adsorption were efficiently fitted by nonlinear pseudo-second-order kinetic model. Adsorption isotherms were also evaluated by fitting with Freundlich and Langmuir isotherm models. A better fit was achieved by Freundlich model in the case of Tb+3 and Dy+3 ions, while Langmuir isotherm fitting reported a better result for Nd+3 adsorption data. Moreover, the changes in Gibbs free energy (ΔG°), enthalpy (ΔH°), and entropy (ΔS°) values presented a feasible and endothermic ions adsorption process onto the nanocomposite that occurred spontaneously under the investigated conditions. The obtained results indicated that the nanocomposite can be considered as a potential adsorbent for the efficient adsorption of the investigated ions.In recent years, the extensive utilization of rare earth elements (REEs) in numerous innovative implements such as TVs, laser, liquid crystal displays (LCDs), screens, fluorescent lamps, particular magnets, etc., has been reported by researchers [ The aforementioned reasons clarify why recycling the wastes of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) and particular magnets is receiving growing consideration. Besides, the quantity of such wastes created in western nations is not only enormous but also develops yearly. Thus, a real secondary mine, known as urban mine, is represented for the recovery of base, precious, and rare earth elements [ In this manner, various techniques have been carried out for REEs recovery such as co-precipitation, solvent extraction, ion exchange, hydrometallurgy, adsorption, and so on [ Alginate, as a natural polymer, is the derivation of various types of brown algae. The properties of alginate such as biocompatibility, low cost, and capability of carboxyl groups of alginate for the formation of complexes with ions such as cobalt alginate (Co-Alg Polyamides (PAs), known as one of polymeric materials possessing high performance, are commonly characterized by high melting point, good mechanical properties, good chemical resistance, and thermo-oxidative stability that are gathered all together to provide an extensive range of applications [ Ionic Liquids (ILs) are considered as low melting salts that demonstrate a new kind of advanced and technological ionic solvents that can be considered to be used in a specific application [ In the present study, calcium alginate/(poly(pyrimidine-thiophene-amide)/Ni Sodium alginate was bought from PanReac AppliChem. Dy(NO Ni The RT Ionic Liquid (IL) was synthesized based on the procedure introduced in the literature [ TMAPD was synthesized according to the following procedure: A mixture containing 2.54 g (0.02 mol) of 2-amino-4,6-dihydroxypyrimidine, 1 mL (0.01 mol) of 2-thiophenecarboxaldehyde, and 20 mL of DMSO was stirred for 6 h at 110 °C. After completion of the reaction tested by thin-layer chromatography, the temperature of the solution was decreased to the RT, and a violet powder obtained by pouring the solution into 400 mL of cold DW (−5 °C) was filtered, rinsed several times using DW and then dried using vacuum oven at 100 °C. The reaction yield was 92 % (3.20 g), and the obtained compound has not shown sharp melting point and started to be decomposed above 300 °C. FT-IR (KBr, cm The synthesis of P(P Sodium alginate powder was dissolved in DW with the concentration of 1.5 % (w/v) to prepare a sodium alginate solution. 0.5 g of P(P-T-A) and 0.7 g of Ni To analyze the morphology and chemical characterization of the products, FE-SEM and EDX were respectively applied using Zeiss Neon-40, Germany. 400 MHz and 100 MHz of Bruker Advance DRX instrument were respectively used to record The experiments related to batch ions adsorption using CA/P(P-T-A)/NZFO were performed by a laboratory shaker adjusted at 180 rpm. To explore the influence of solution pH, the pH values of metal ions solutions (30 mg/L) were adjusted from 1.5 to 5.5 using a pH meter. Each solution containing 0.03 g of the adsorbent was shaken for 20 min at 25 °C. In order to perform kinetic experiments, the mixtures of 0.03 g of the nanocomposite and 50 mL of the solutions (REEs concentration: 30 mg/L) were agitated at various contact times (ranging from 2.5 to 70 min). For finding the adsorbent dosage influence on the adsorption process, various quantities of the nanocomposite in the range of 0.01−0.06 g were utilized by keeping the pH of the solutions at the optimized constant value. 0.04 g of the nanocomposite and the solutions at the concentrations ranging from 30 to 300 mg/L at RT were applied for isotherm study. The ionic strength of the solution was taken into consideration for its influence by the presence of NaNO q The reusability experiments were done by separating the nanocomposite loaded with the related ions from the solutions. In the following, DW was used to rinse the nanocomposite several times, and then it was contacted with 0.2 M HNO The peaks in the NZFO XRD pattern detected at 2θ values ranging from 10° to 70° shown in The morphology of the NZFO shown in  The FT-IR spectra of CA, NZFO, P(P  The value of 45.87 emu/g obtained for the magnetic saturation of NZFO ( Solution initial pH value, as an essential parameter in the adsorption process, must be optimized to reach a favorable adsorption efficiency. In this research study, pH of the solutions was adjusted in the range of 1.5–5.5 to study the behavior of the REEs adsorption. The experiments at pH < 5.5 were not studied to avoid the REEs precipitation in the solutions. According to the results in From the experimental data presented in To explore the kinetics of adsorption, the nonlinear models of intra-particle diffusion (IPD), pseudo-second-order (PSO), and pseudo-first-order (PFO) written in n: data points number, q  One of the major factors that has a considerable influence on the ions adsorption is adsorbent dosage, determining the adsorbent potential via the number of biding sites that are accessible and active for the ions adsorption while the concentration is at constant value. The nanocomposite dosage effect on the adsorption efficiency of the REEs is illustrated in The capacity of adsorption of CA/P(P-T-A)/NZFO was investigated by the influence of the initial REEs concentration. As presented in Langmuir and Freundlich in the form of nonlinear were utilized for fitting the adsorption data of the REEs. Langmuir model hypothesis is mentioned as follows: uniform and equivalent active sites on adsorbent surface, the adsorption process in a monomolecular layer, and no fundamental interaction between substances adsorbed on the surface of adsorbent. Freundlich model hypothesizes a multilayer adsorption onto the heterogeneous surface of adsorbent. The models are written in The fitting of the isotherm data by the models are indicated in The efficiency of the REEs adsorption affected by ionic strength is indicated in Different temperatures ranging from 25 to 45 °C were applied for the batch adsorption of the ions by the nanocomposite (0.04 g) at 90 mg/L of the ions and pH = 5.5. The results presented in Gibbs free energy (ΔG°, kJ/mol), enthalpy (ΔH°, kJ/mol), and entropy (ΔS°, kJ/mol K), as the parameters of thermodynamic, were computed using the equations as following [ The value of ΔG° is negative and small that increases by increasing temperature, which indicates a reduction in Gibbs energy in the adsorption process. The ΔG° negative values demonstrate that the process is naturally spontaneous and feasible. The positive ΔH° values confirm the nature of adsorption to be endothermic, and the values of ΔS The regeneration of an adsorbent is important in designing a process of adsorption. To explore the reusability of the nanocomposite, desorption test was performed by using HNO The synthesized nanocomposite with the dosage of 0.04 g was applied in a ternary solution of the REEs with the ratio of 1:1:1 (30 mg/L of each ion) for evaluating the competitive adsorption of the REEs. In a multi-component system, antagonism, synergism, and non-interaction effects take place depending on the value of q In this study, CA/P(P-T-A)/NZFO magnetic nanocomposite was synthesized and characterized using various methods including XRD, FE-SEM, EDX, NMR, TGA, VSM, and FT-IR. The synthesized nanocomposite adsorption efficiency was investigated by conducting comprehensive experiments in aqueous solutions for the REEs adsorption. The optimum conditions for maximum adsorption efficiency were pH = 5.5 and 0.04 g of the nanocomposite in the solutions containing the REEs at the concentration of 30 mg/L. The REEs adsorption kinetic onto the nanocomposite was well explained by PSO in comparison with PFO and IPD models. In addition, the equilibrium adsorption data were tested by using the nonlinear models of Freundlich and Langmuir. A well description of the adsorption data of Tb The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: