In this paper the effect of CNTs additive and different milling techniques on the microstructure and mechanical properties of the Al6061-CNTs metal matrix composites was studied. Planetary and horizontal attritor milling with different modes were used as milling techniques. The levels of damage introduced to the surface of multi walls carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were characterized through analyzing the Raman peak ratio (ID/IG) characteristic of each processed sample. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used to study the morphology of the Al-6061alloys and Al-6061-MWCNTs composite powders. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used for phase identification and the mechanical properties of the composites were determined by means of tensile tests. Despite the level of energy imposed on the powders, among the three used milling modes, the two-stage milling mode including low speed (200rpm) followed by high speed (1000rpm) horizontal milling was the most effective in dispersing of CNT, since no clusters were found. Accordingly, the slight addition of CNT (1.5wt%) could elevate the tensile strength from 265 to 538MPa, with respect to unreinforced alloys processed in the same conditions.Nanocomposites represent a recent approach to engineer materials with heretofore unattainable combinations of physical and mechanical properties to meet the ever increasing performance demands of advanced technologies The planetary ball mill performs planet-like movement of the vials containing the milling media and the sample, producing impacts of the balls and themselves, and the balls and the walls of the vial In recent studies, CNT–MMC was prepared by HEBM and the mechanical properties of light metals significantly improved To date, the effect of different powder milling techniques on the CNT reinforced aluminum matrix composites production have not been adequately studied. The aim of this research is to use three different milling methods (Planetary and horizontal attritor milling with different modes) with the objective of a homogeneous dispersion of CNT in the aluminum alloy 6061. The milled powders were consolidated by spark plasma sintering (SPS) followed by hot extrusion. The microstructure and the mechanical properties of the composites were then analyzed and the effect of CNT strengthening was also evaluated. MWCNTs powders (average outer diameter (OD) 9.5 The composite was produced by blending the Al6061 powder with MWCNT contents of 1.5 Another nanocomposite powder was prepared using horizontal attritor with different mixing stages. First a low speed milling of CNT and metal powder at 200 Consolidation of all powders was performed using the SPS technique carried out at 35 The morphology of the powder mixtures was observed by using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Philips CM200). Samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) by a FEI instrument model Helios. TEM samples were imaged at 150 Raman scattering (Bruker, SENTERRA II) of the powder mixtures and sintered composites was obtained in the spectral range of 200–1800 The morphology of the as-received Al6061 and the CNTs are shown in Powder morphology of Al6061 and Al6061–CNT composites after planetary milling are shown in Furthermore, there are no visible signs of MWCNT held on the surface of the ductile particles with a CNT content of 1.5 The SEM and TEM images of composite powder obtained by the horizontal attritor mill are shown in For the composite sample, the CNT are barely observable on the SEM pictures, even at high magnification ( To improve the debundling and dispersion of CNT, a milling mode (sample TSC) including a low speed milling of Al-CNT mixture at 200  Raman spectroscopic measurements were carried out to assess the damages on the surfaces of CNTs during ball-milling. Structural changes and the crystalline phases in the composite powder were characterized by XRD. The evaluation of the energy level for each process was conducted by calculating the crystallite size as a reference, since the higher the strain imposed on the material during the process, the smaller the average crystallite size Another feature shown in  In all samples, the SPS followed by hot extrusion could fabricate Al6061–CNT composite with a high relative density (over 99%) and degree of orientation for the CNTs. From the optical microstructure of the Al6061–CNT composites at different milling conditions ( Bright field TEM images of the TSC composite are shown in The mechanical properties of the samples are shown in Good dispersion of CNT in the metal matrix, the level of damage on the surface of CNTs and the matrix strength are the main factors affecting the mechanical properties of MMCs  In this study, Al6061–CNT composites with different milling techniques were fabricated. The effects of three different milling modes on the morphology of the Al6061–CNT particle, CNT dispersion, the level of defects introduced to CNTs and mechanical properties were analyzed. Despite the energy differences in the milling modes used, each milling system has its own mechanism for the distribution of the particles. Among the milling conditions, the two-stage horizontal attritor milling including ball milling at low speed followed by high speed, produced the greatest dispersion of CNT as compare to other milling conditions. Applying shear force at low speed milling (200 The financial support of this work by the