Cermet based coatings are being increasingly used to combat erosion–corrosion in oil sands pipelines and pumps where the degradation is caused by a slurry mix of sand particles and aqueous solution. This research assesses the erosion–corrosion resistance of cermet composite coatings obtained by HVOF thermal spraying of microcrystalline and ‘duplex cobalt coated’ near-nanocrystalline WC–17Co feedstock powders. Electrochemical measurements, surface characterization, and the extent of weight loss were studied through an impingement jet system. Results suggest that the erosion–corrosion mechanism in the coatings was dominated by pure erosion in the microcrystalline coating and corrosion-enhanced erosion in the near-nanocrystalline coating.Thermal spray coatings, and in particular those applied by the high velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF) process, are being used to replace traditionally used heat-treated hard irons and steels to prevent or decrease wear loss of machinery and equipment running in various industrial processes. Cermet composite coatings have a growing potential for applications for the wear and corrosion protection of different component parts in extraction, conveying, sand collection machinery, and piping systems in mining and mineral processing industries. These coatings are composed of hard ceramic particles with a tough metallic binder. The ceramic particles provide excellent wear and corrosion resistance due to the high hardness and chemical stability. The metal matrix is usually ductile and provides good wetting and adhesion characteristics which, in return, give fracture toughness to the coating. Composition of the binder in thermal sprayed coatings plays a significant role in influencing the corrosion resistance of these coatings and thereby affects the total weight loss caused by the combined erosive–corrosive degradation of the coat The erosion–corrosion process in aqueous conditions has been defined in terms of regimes, ranging from erosion to corrosion dominated depending on the response of the material to the corrosive slurry In this study, the erosion–corrosion behaviour of a novel near-nanocrystalline WC–17Co cermet coating was compared with that of a conventional microstructured WC–17Co coating. The near-nanocrystalline powder particles consisted of an engineered ‘duplex’ Co structure (6 The electrodes for weight loss and electrochemical measurements were made of coated and uncoated AISI 1018 carbon steel. The two coated specimens were produced by HVOF spraying of near-nanocrystalline and microcrystalline WC–17Co feedstock powders. The nominal composition and the source of the precursor powder materials are given in The specimens were machined and embedded in epoxy resin manufactured by LECO, leaving a circular working area of 0.68 The test solution was a single phase, aqueous solution of 3.5 An impingement jet system, as shown in Electrochemical measurements were conducted using a Solartron 1280C electrochemical system on a three-electrode test cell, with specimen electrode as working electrode ( Potentiodynamic polarization curves were measured at a potential sweep rate of 1 At the end of erosion–corrosion tests, electrodes were removed from the impingement rig and rinsed with deionized water. The surface morphology and composition of the surface scale were observed and analyzed by SEM and EDXA analysis (Model XL 30 Multiprobe Philips, Tokyo), and a surface topography map was taken by using an AFM (Model XE 100, Park Systems, Seoul). After the tests, an acidic solution was used to remove the corrosion products formed on the surfaces of the electrodes. This acid preparation consisted of an ultrasonic 50   The values of the corrosion kinetic parameters in polarization curves such as corrosion potential (  To understand the corrosion behaviour of coated steel, a quantitative comparison of the electrochemical parameters was made using the equivalent circuit shown in A comparison of the data in The erosion–corrosion interaction can be described as It can be seen from  To study the synergistic effect, the degradation of the surface strength of the materials and the ability or inability to form protective film on the surface need to be examined. Stack and Abd El Badia In addition to micro-cracks, however, a trace of WC grain exposure may well be observed on the microcrystalline WC–17Co coated surface, (see AFM was used to measure the surface profilometry at the end of the erosion–corrosion tests.  In this study the erosion–corrosion resistant behaviour of a near-nanocrystalline ‘duplex Co coated’ WC–17Co coating produced by HVOF spraying was compared with a microcrystalline WC–17Co coating and an uncoated AISI 1018 carbon steel. The results showed that the combined erosion–corrosion resistance of the coated coatings was significantly higher than that of the uncoated steel. Furthermore, the near-nanocrystalline coating showed approximately 1/3 lower erosion–corrosion rate than that of the microcrystalline coating. Preliminary results showed that the erosion–corrosion mechanism in the coatings was dominated by pure erosion in the microcrystalline coating and the corrosion-enhanced erosion in the near-nanocrystalline coating. The authors express their gratitude to Professor Y.F. Cheng for his permission to use the Corrosion and Pipeline Engineering Research Laboratory at University of Calgary. The financial support provided by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is gratefully acknowledged. The microscopic characterization of the work was supported by an equipment and infrastructure grant from the