We perform a quantitative textural analysis of banding in obsidian from Big Glass Mountain (BGM), Medicine Lake Volcano, California and from Mayor Island (MI), New Zealand. The samples are compositionally homogeneous, with banding defined by variable microlite content (BGM) or vesicularity (MI). The spatial distribution of alternating light and dark bands has a 1/wavenumber power-spectral density, as well as multifractal characteristics. Through the use of simple mathematical models, we demonstrate that formation of the observed banding structure is consistent with a continuous deformational reworking of magma. Our results indicate that changes in crystallinity (vesicularity) were concurrent with magma deformation and are random multiples of the total amount of crystallinity (vesicularity) that was already present at any given time. Banded obsidian from BGM and MI can be found in close spatial proximity to brittle deformational textures. We therefore propose that a key element of banding formation in our samples may be magma brecciation or fragmentation. Fragmentation can result in variable rates of degassing of fragments, which in turn can lead to nonuniform crystal (vesicle) nucleation and growth rates. Repeated fragmentation, welding and subsequent viscous deformation can thus lead to banding formation.Banding in obsidian samples from Big Glass Mountain (BGM), Medicine Lake Volcano, California and from Mayor Island (MI), New Zealand preserves a record of deformation associated with magma ascent, eruption, and emplacement. Alternating light and dark bands ranging in width from tens of microns to decimeters are defined by differences in crystallinity (BGM) or vesicularity (MI). Proposed processes for banding formation include viscous magma mixing (e.g., Although textural heterogeneity caused by mixing of preexisting parent magmas has received considerable attention, the origin of compositionally homogeneous banded lavas, such as BGM or MI samples, remains relatively unexplored. This is an important area of study because crystal or bubble nucleation and growth are intimately linked to magma degassing The main goal of our analysis is to assess whether banding in the BGM and MI obsidian samples preserves a record from which we can gain insight into the general nature of the underlying formational process, and hence about magma ascent and emplacement processes inaccessible to direct observation. We use spectral and multifractal analyses of banding to test if the formation of textural heterogeneity occurred prior to deformation, or if both processes are concurrent. We focus on obsidian because the optical transparency allows measurements of structures to be made over a broad range of scales. Moreover, the obsidian samples under consideration bear evidence of a genetic relation between brittle magma deformation and banding formation. A petrographic description of both samples is provided in In Banding in BGM and MI obsidian is defined by alternating planar layers of varying color as a consequence of varying micorocrystallinity (BGM) or microvesicularity (MI). In cross-section this layering ranges in thickness from microns to decimeters and may attain lengths of up to several meters. Often, the layering can be distorted or folded BGM is a 900-year-old rhyolite-to-dacite obsidian flow Banding is predominantly defined by varying concentrations of pyroxene microlites ( MI is the visible portion of a 700-m-high and 15-km-wide Quaternary shield volcano Our subsequent analysis is based on photomicrographs of polished obsidian samples. Because of the degree of magnification, each analyzed sample image actually represents a composite of a number of high-resolution digital photographs. The digitized sample from BGM has a length of 200 mm and a resolution of 2 μm/pixel ( We normalize gray-scale color index, Here The wavenumber power spectrum, Monofractal records are often characterized by Multifractal records can be characterized by the singularity spectrum, Here Counting the number of segments, For a given segmentation length, or an equivalent box-counting dimension, The spectrum In practice, the slopes of The singularity spectrum ( To assess the limitations of our results, we test several alternative hypotheses, summarized in   In our third test, we examine the possibility that a preexisting measure (e.g., microlite content) of identical probability distribution as the BGM sample ( A simple mathematical model that has been used to represent the characteristics of chaotic mixing is the generalized Baker's map (e.g., Here The results of the hypothesis tests, summarized in We have shown that a multiplicative process, whereby the development of textural heterogeneity and the spatial redistribution thereof are concurrent and interrelated, is consistent with banding of obsidian samples from BGM and MI. The multiplicative cascade represented by the two-scale Cantor set ( Brittle deformation of magma occurs when strain rates locally exceed the ability of the melt to deform viscously Because of the displacement and rotational component associated with simple shear deformation, fragments from different spatial locations could easily become juxtaposed. Once strain rates have relaxed magma fragments can become welded and deformed viscously. Viscous deformation of texturally heterogeneous, welded fragments will then result in banding. This process may occur repeatedly (continuously) during ascent or surface emplacement of magma. It is, except for welding of fragments and viscous deformation, essentially equivalent to the comminution of rocks in fault or shear zones, where banding may also be observed Banding has been observed in close association with brittle deformation in BGM samples ( Castro and Mercer Pervasive banding formation over the observed spatial scales requires repeated stretching and folding, in which nearby parcels of magma can diverge strongly from each other. Unlike brittle deformation, the required divergent stretching is not easily achieved in a highly viscous magma without considerable complexity of the flow geometry (e.g., We conclude that the observed banding structure in BGM and MI obsidian is consistent with a repeated (or continuous) change in crystallinity or vesicularity that is a small random multiple of the amount already present. Moreover, this textural evolution was concurrent with, or integral to, the mechanical deformation of magma. Such a process creates increasingly finer scales of banding through a cascade to shorter and shorter wavelengths until some cutoff value, given by vesicle or crystal size, is reached We thank J.V. Smith, D.W. Dingwell, and two anonymous reviewers for comments and suggestions that helped improve this manuscript. We also thank A. Rust, A.M. Jellinek, and A. Namiki for comments on an earlier version of the manuscript; K.V. Cashman for providing the Mayor Island sample; and T. Teague and M. Calaleta for sample preparation. This work was supported by a National Science Foundation grant and the Garniss Curtis fund to M.M.; and by the Turner Fellowship to H.M.G.