The paper summarizes results of investigation on the effect of NaCl addition to the acidified cupric chloride leaching solution as well as the effect of the particle size (surface area) of chalcopyrite on the kinetics leaching. While NaCl addition has a definitely positive effect on the leaching rate, the effect of particle size is almost negligible. The experiments conducted under this investigation showed good agreement with the opinion stated in the literature that the major effect of NaCl presence results from the formation of complexes. The negligible effect of chalcopyrite particle size on the leaching kinetics suggests that, at least for the metal recovery obtained in our experiments, the chalcopyrite particles do not become covered by the solid layer that would slow down the reaction.HydroCopper™ process is regarded to be one of the most promising hydrometallurgical ways of treating the sulfide materials. It is capable of processing the so called “refractory ores”, i.e. materials which are not easily amenable to the dissolution in the leaching solutions. Examples of this type of minerals are chalcopyrite and tetrahedrite. HydroCopper™ is the trademark for the countercurrent leaching process of copper sulfide minerals in the acidified cupric chloride solution containing elevated sodium chloride concentrations (  The surface area of the solid particles is another import parameter influencing the leaching rate. A commonly accepted opinion is that the sulfur precipitated at the solid surface of particles can significantly slow down the rate of leaching ( The aim of this paper is to investigate the effects of both NaCl concentration and the solid surface area on the leaching rate of chalcopyrite under conditions that are similar to those applied in the HydroCopper™ process. In all experiments the chalcopyrite concentrate with the composition given in The leaching solutions were prepared by mixing appropriate volumes of the distilled water and the chemical grade reagents: cupric chloride, hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride. The concentration of the metallic ions dissolved in the leaching solution was determined by the atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). The solid residues were subjected to the XRD analysis in order to trace any possible phase changes that might have occurred during leaching. The dissolution rate of chalcopyrite was determined based on the analyses of iron. The copper ions in the solution were not analysed as copper was a major component. The schematic view of the laboratory experimental setup is shown in The experimental conditions were close to those used in the HydroCopper™ process. In each experiment 64 g of the chalcopyrite concentrate charge was leached in 400 ml of leaching solution containing between 200 and 300 g/L NaCl at 80 and 100 °C, respectively. Two levels of cupric chloride concentration were tested −0.75 and 1 M. The leaching solution was acidified by 0.5 M hydrochloric acid. The results are shown in It is seen in the figures that the increasing metal recovery into solution is the result of increasing amount of NaCl in the leaching solution. Moreover, the reaction rate is high at the beginning of the experiment. At a later stage the reaction rate slows down as documented by a decreasing slope of the kinetic curves. This observation can be explained by taking into account the chemical reaction that describes leaching of chalcopyrite in the cupric chloride solution: If only reaction (1) takes place in the leaching the iron and copper extraction efficiency is expected to be 38.3% and 28.7% for 1 M and 0.75 M solution respectively. The above values need to be corrected by taking into account the side-reactions accompanying the leaching. Firstly, zinc is also dissolved during leaching thus consuming cupric chloride from the solution. Secondly, sulfur is partially oxidized to the sulfate. This reaction may result in the drop of the oxidation potential of the solution even to greater extent than the presence of zinc in the chalcopyrite concentrate: The observed value of metal extraction efficiency are in a fairly good agreement with the expected values and the leveling off of the leaching curves may be interpreted by the consumption of cupric chloride, or in other words by the exhaustion of the oxidizing ability of the leaching solution. It needs to be also mentioned that because our laboratory experiments have not been carried out in the countercurrent arrangement the oxidizing ability of the leaching solution could not be recuperated as would be the case in the semi-industrial trials. The experimental conditions were similar to those described above. In this case, however, the particle size of the chalcopyrite concentrate was different. In each experiment 300 g/L NaCl were added to the solution. Since the previous experiments showed that the leaching rate is faster at higher temperatures, the experiments were carried out at 100 °C. The concentrate was screened in order to separate the following size fractions: −40 μm, −80+60 μm and −200+100 μm that were subsequently used for the leaching experiments. The behaviour of iron and zinc during leaching is shown in Results shown in From the experimental results obtained in this investigation studying both the effect of NaCl addition into the acidified cupric chloride leaching solution and the effect of chalcopyrite concentrate particle size the following conclusions may be drawn: the addition of NaCl into the leaching solution enhances the rate of leaching, the NaCl enhances the rate of reactions via formation of complexes in the leaching solution, as a result of this enhancement the metal recovery in leaching are close to the theoretical values calculated from the reaction the particle size (i.e. the surface area) of the chalcopyrite has negligible effect on the leaching rate, the formation of the compact layer at the surface of concentrate particles that would slow down the leaching was not observed, in comparison with the other hydrometallurgical processes—as e.g. leaching of chalcopyrite in the ferric chloride or ferric sulfate solutions ( The permission of Outokumpu Research Centre, Pori, Finland, to publish the above experimental results is deeply appreciated.