Geopolymerisation can transfer large scale alumino-silicate wastes into value-added geopolymeric products with sound mechanical strength and high acid, fire and bacterial resistance. However, due to the complexity of source materials as well as the interaction between source materials during the geopolymerisation, previous studies have mostly dealt with single or bi-component systems, which could potentially narrow the application of this technology. The present work selects three industrial materials, i.e. fly ash, kaolinite and albite to investigate various combinations. The results show that when appropriate reaction parameters are used, the three component system gives geopolymers possessing the highest compressive strength and the lowest probability of cracking. It is believed that the higher reactivity of the fly ash and albite, the interaction between the source materials and the gel phase, and the reinforcing effect caused by the large unreacted albite particles are responsible for this satisfactory mechanical behaviour.Geopolymerisation is being considered for replacing traditional structural materials and offers a possible solution to the immobilisation of toxic and radioactive wastes as well as the treatment of industrial wastes to produce value added construction materials. Therefore, there is an increasing need for multiple source materials to be jointly geopolymerised to maximally exploit the respective properties of the individual sources regarding compressive strength, stability and durability ( This could suggest that the geopolymerisation of both calcined and non-calcined materials may give superior short and long term properties. A selection of multiple source materials may also be used to manipulate the geopolymeric reaction by exploiting their respective structural and surface properties and elemental compositions. Moreover, the development of a methodology to geopolymerise multiple source materials will enhance the application of this technology in the treatment of industrial wastes. Many industrial wastes, such as mine tailings, paper sludges and some naturally occurring minerals ( Before 1995, most geopolymers were synthesised from either kaolinite or metakaolinite (calcined kaolinite) ( In the past seven years, substantial research on geopolymerisation has been conducted at The University of Melbourne. This work includes the immobilisation of heavy metals in fly ash based geopolymers ( Fly ash has a long history as an additive in the cement industry where fly ash functions as an effective but minor cementitious binder ( The present study investigates the geopolymerisation of multiple source materials with the aim to develop a methodology to optimise reaction parameters. Three materials, i.e. fly ash, kaolinite and albite have been selected as a case study, as they have been widely used in geopolymerisation previously ( Kaolinite, grade HR1/F, was purchased from Commercial Minerals, Australia and has a particle size of 50% less than 0.5 μm and 1% larger than 38 μm. Albite (NaAlSi A specified mass of kaolinite, albite and fly ash (±0.01 g) was separately mixed with NaOH and KOH solution in a polypropylene beaker at room temperature for 18 h using a magnetic stirrer. After centrifuging, the clear liquid part of the solution was diluted to 0.1 M alkaline concentration and neutralised by concentrated HCl to pH<1. A Perkin–Elmer Optima 3000 ICP-OES was used to analyse the concentrations of silicon and aluminium leached into the alkaline solution with selected results being given in A total of 950–1000 g of source materials were dry mixed for 5 min by hand and 2 min by a FRITSCH Vibratory Shaker before the addition of MOH and M X-ray powder diffraction patterns [from 5 to 70° (2  The elemental composition of these three materials has two major differences ( During leaching, the kaolinite, albite and fly ash behave differently with the kaolinite and the fly ash dissolving substantially more Al and Si species along with an increase in concentration of alkaline solutions, while the albite shows no significant increase in leached Al and Si when the concentration of alkaline solutions increased from 5 to 7.5 M and further to 10 M. As a consequence, the leached Al (ppm) and Si (ppm) detected for the kaolinite, albite and fly ash is given only for 5 M (M The difficulty of geopolymerisation of multiple minerals is to determine a set of reaction parameters, such as mass ratio among the source materials, solid versus liquid ratio (S/L), alkalinity versus water ratio (M The geopolymerisation of fly ash and kaolinite was based on empirical reaction parameters ( In summary, it is seen that the effect of the variables in The geopolymerisation of kaolinite and albite was conducted with the mass ratio of albite to kaolinite varying from 1.0 to 7.0 in MOH and M A wide range of fly ash/albite mass ratio (from 9 to 1) and other parameters (S (g)/L (ml), Na The geopolymerisation of the fly ash, kaolinite and albite was conducted by varying the reaction parameters S (g)/L (ml), Na  The three minerals investigated in the present study, i.e. fly ash, kaolinite and albite are different in structure and in elemental composition, which results in the differences in reactivity between them during geopolymerisation. The XRD ( It has been observed from the present and previous studies that geopolymerisation involving fly ash (  A method of geopolymerising three source materials, i.e. fly ash, kaolinite and albite has been proposed. The results show that the compressive strength (as a measure of the extent of reaction) of the formed geopolymer is greatly increased when these three minerals undergo geopolymerisation together. The higher reactivity of the fly ash and albite, the interaction between the source materials and the gel phase and the reinforcing effect caused by the large unreacted albite particles give satisfactory mechanical strength of the formed geopolymers. This study also indicates that not only a significant improvement in compressive strength, but also a substantial reduction in reaction time can be achieved when a calcined source material (e.g., fly ash) is added to the geopolymerisation of non-calcined materials (for instance, kaolinite and albite). The financial contribution of Defor Pty. Ltd. and the Australian Research Council (ARC) is greatly appreciated.