The low-cycle fatigue (LCF) and creep-fatigue (CF) interaction tests of TP347H austenitic stainless steel are carried out in air under a fully-reversed strain amplitude of 1.0% at 600 °C. A 10 min tensile dwell is applied in CF interaction testing. The influences of dwell on dislocation structures and fracture behavior have been evaluated. It is found that CF interaction life is lower than LCF one. The fatigue fracture mode changes from transgranular crack under LCF to transgranular plus intergranular fracture with tensile dwell. A lot of dislocation planar slip bands (PSBs) were found under CF interaction condition. PSB interacts with PSB of another slip system, twins, grain boundary (GB), and triangular GB. Strongly PSB-GB interaction causes stress concentration at GB, creating cavities and crack initiation, causing intergranular fracture. The stress concentration within the PSBs will also cause cracks, resulting in transgranular fracture morphology with fatigue striation.Precipitation-hardening heart-resistant stainless steels have been widely used as structural components in thermal power plants, due to their excellent oxidation, creep and corrosion resistance. TP347H/TP34HFG, HR3C and super304H heat-resistant steel are the main materials for key equipment superheater and reheater pipelines of ultra-supercritical (USC) units. The maximum temperature of this type of heat-resistant steels are 620 °C. The Sanicro25 has a maximum operating temperature of 700 °C and is a candidate for critical equipment for advanced ultra-supercritical units (A-USC). USC units work at high operating temperature and pressure conditions, frequent equipment start-up, peak shaving, temperature fluctuations, etc., which will result in fatigue damage due to thermal stress. They will be serviced at high temperatures for a long time and will withstand creep damage. In actual working conditions, key equipment is subjected to creep-fatigue (CF) interactions. At present, the CF interaction in actual conditions is simulated and studied in the laboratory mainly by isothermal low-cycle fatigue (LCF) and introduction of dwell loading during the tensile or compression of LCF [ Compared to LCF, CF significantly reduces fatigue life, mainly owing to the different ways of fracture mechanism under LCF and CF conditions that the LCF is dominated by transgranular fracture and ductile fracture, while under CF conditions, it is intergranular fracture or intergranular plus transgranular fracture. Under CF, significant creep rupture characteristics were observed, such as cavities at grain boundaries (GBs) and GB cracks formed by cavities coalescence. The type, size and morphology of carbides at GBs have an important effect on the formation of GB voids under high temperature CF interaction. He et al. found in HR3C steel under CF at 650–750 °C that voids are related to the fracture of the primary Z phase (NbCrN) particles with the tetragonal structure of space group P4/nmm on GBs [ On the other hand, Sandhya [ Austenitic heat-resistant steel has many forms of dislocation structures under CF interaction, such as cells, tangles, walls, twins, planar slip structure and persistent slip band. Substructural recovery towards formation of well-defined cells was found to be more pronounced for CF and LCF-creep-HCF loadings in comparison to LCF indicating [ In 316LN austenitic stainless, wavy-slip dislocation structures, such as cells, tangles and walls, are noticed, whereas dislocation structures such as planar slip bands impinging on GB are noticed under CF interaction [ Zhou et al. have found that dynamic strain aging (DSA) effect occurs under LCF at 550 °C and high temperature tensile conditions at 500–650 °C. The DSA effect appears microscopically as a large number of PSB structures [ Samuel et al. [ Other researchers J. Polák [ The mechanism of CF interaction at high temperatures in austenitic stainless steel still needs to be studied in depth. The mechanism of dislocation deformation and its influence on CF damage is still unclear. In this paper, the typical steel TP347H austenitic stainless steel for USC units is used, and the CF interaction of the simulated materials in the ultra-supercritical unit operating temperature of 600 °C. The chemical composition of TP347H austenitic steel is shown in The LCF and CF interaction specimens were machined with an 18 mm gauge length and 6 mm gauge diameter. The specimen surface was polished along the longitudinal direction with the emery paper down to #1000 in order to remove surface defects. All the tests were carried out in air under a fully-reversed, total axial strain control mode at the strain amplitude of 1.0% at a constant strain rate of 3 × 10 JSM−6360LV Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was applied to examine the specimen and fracture surfaces. SEM-EBSD was applied to study grain orientation distribution and twins in solution treatment sample of steel. A Philips Tecnai12 Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Talos F200X STEM examinations were used to investigate the evolution of dislocation structures and carbides under LCF and CF interactions conditions at 600 °C. Samples for TEM were obtained from thin slices cut at a distance of 2 mm away from the fracture surface. The slices were obtained by ion thinning. SEM and Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD) images of the specimens after solution-treatment are shown in  The fatigue fracture morphology of TP347H steel at 600 °C and strain amplitude of 1.0% includes crack initiation, propagation and final fracture in The fracture morphology under CF in After a little dotted box of It can be concluded from In order to further study the damage mechanism under CF interaction, the surface of the LCF and CF samples were observed as shown in In triangular GBs in The precipitated phases under LCF and CF are further analyzed by TEM as shown in Dislocation structures by TEM examinations under LCF testing are shown in In As can be seen from  The dislocation structures formed under CF are composed of mainly PSBs and a small amount of dislocation tangles and micro-twins, which indicates that the dislocation planar slip is dominant under CF condition. It is observed in There is no cavities and cracks in the fracture surface of LCF samples in In particular, the new M In order to study the cyclic hardening and softening mechanism under LCF and CF, STEM observations were performed on typical cells and PSB structures of the two experimental conditions, respectively, as shown in  PSB, cell and dislocation tangle structures are formed during the CF testing. PSB structures mainly formed under CF mean that dynamic strain aging (DSA) is very strong at dwell, compared with other people's research results [ Under LCF and CF conditions, cyclic hardening and softening also have an important effect on the damage mechanism and life. The investigation from  Several cavities are observed at GB in   The fatigue fracture mode changes from transgranular crack under LCF to transgranular plus intergranular fracture under creep-fatigue (CF) interaction at 600 °C. Nano-scale NbC particles precipitate under both LCF and CF loading, and M More planar slip bands (PSBs) form under the CF than those under the LCF condition. PSB originates from dislocation planar-slip under the CF. Dynamic strain aging (DSA) is stronger under CF condition than that under LCF. DSA effect leads to gliding of dislocations on particular planes, which restrains dislocation cross-slip. There is a strong interaction between PSBs and twin, GB, triangular GB and PSB. PSB-GB interaction causes stress concentration at the GBs, resulting in cavities and cracks. The stress concentration in the PSBs will also cause cracks.  All authors declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence our work about the manuscript entitled “ The authors thank the financial support of Joint Fund of Iron and Steel Research by