With the identification of coal deposits that are enriched in rare earth elements (REEs) across the world, coal and coal by-products are considered as an alternative source for REEs due to the combined supply and demand restrictions for these elements. Studies are being conducted to recover these elements from various coal sources. In this study, coal samples from the East Kootenay coalfields in British Columbia, Canada were examined for the presence of REEs in run-of-mine coal samples and flotation products.
                  Results reveal that on an ash basis, the concentration of REEs varies from 174 to 1038 mg/kg in the samples. To understand the REE as sociation, which is essential for extraction purposes, a three-step sequential extraction process along with a mineralogical evaluation using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD) data was used. It is found that a significant portion of REEs in the feed samples were reported to middling and tailings streams. The mineralogical analyses reveal REE association with aluminosilicate mineral in the samples.Most of the elements in the periodic table occur as trace elements in coal deposits, With critical supply of REEs, the coal deposits with enriched concentration of REEs are currently being assessed as secondary sources for exploitation. There is indication of the presence of REEs in some Canadian coal deposits, especially in British Columbia (BC) coalfields. For this study, six run-of-mine coal samples of approximately 300 kg were collected in different seams from two mines in the East Kootenay coalfield in southeastern BC. The samples were shipped in barrels to the Coal and Mineral Processing Laboratory at the University of British Columbia. Representative samples were obtained for testing using the standard ASTM procedure for coal sample preparation D2013/D2013M-12. Proximate analysis was conducted on representative samples in duplicates using the ASTM standard methods. The moisture content of the sample was determined by weight loss resulting from oven-drying of a 1 g sample in a dry crucible at 104–110 °C for 1 h. The tree analysis procedure was adopted from the Australian Standards AS 4156.2.2–1998 (R2013). The sequential extraction procedure for REEs in coal was successfully applied by Dai et al. For total REE quantification, feed and test product samples (0.2 g) were added to lithium metaborate and lithium tetraborate flux and mixed thoroughly. The samples were then fused in a furnace at 1025 °C. The resulting melts were cooled and digested in an acid mixture. It was then analyzed by inductively coupled plasma – mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and the analytical results were corrected for inter-elemental spectral interference. This analysis was conducted by the MS Analytical laboratory in Langley, BC. In this study, REEs in coal are expressed on both a whole coal basis (REE concentration in the coal sample) and on an ash basis (REE concentration in the ash of the coal sample). Quantitative XRD data was collected on selected samples to identify the mineral phases. The XRD data were collected over a 2 FEI Quanta 650 was used for the SEM/EDS analysis. It was operated at 20 kV with a 10 mm working distance on selected samples to examine finely disseminated rare earth minerals as well as to determine their mineral associations. The coal samples used in this study are referred to as feed coal samples in the discussion to differentiate them from tree flotation products. Feed coals 1 to 4 were obtained from one mine, while feed coals 5 and 6 were received from a different mine. The results of the proximate analysis on the feed coals are listed in The tree release analyses provided a separation performance curve achievable under a predetermined set of conditions for flotation of the feed samples. As depicted in The tree release analysis products were classified based on their ash content as: low-ash products (<10 wt% ash), middlings (10 wt%–60 wt% ash), and tailings (>60 wt% ash). REEs were analyzed in the feed samples and the classified tree analysis products. The results are presented in A coal seam with a thickness greater than 5 m may be considered as a potential source of REEs if its rare earth oxide content on the ash basis is above 800–900 mg/kg. It can be inferred that the REE concentration in the feed samples (see A higher value for this index represents a higher market value for the REEs in the coal seam since the concentration of critical REEs increases with the index. Dai et al. The REE concentrations are generally presented as graphs by normalizing the concentrations in the sample using the concentration in the reference material. Many factors contribute to the fractionation of REEs in coal into LREEs and HREEs such as detrital REE sources like clay, a solution feeding the peat swamp during the early stages of coalification, and the organic affinity of HREE than LREE. Seredin and Dai It can be seen from One of the rare earth carriers in these types of metalliferous coals is zircon. Zircon originates from either volcanic ash or authigenic minerals and can be identified by the enrichment of Hf, Th, U, Y and HREE. REEs can have both organic associations and inorganic associations in coal, although organic-associated REEs are considerably less abundant. The weak negative correlation between ash and REE content on ash basis ( Since the correlation analyses suggested the presence of both organic- and inorganic-associated REEs in the studied coal samples, sequential extractions were conducted on all six of the different feed samples in order to quantify the REEs into three different fractions, as outlined in section Results of the sequential extraction of six feed samples from the East Kootenay coalfield in BC are shown in Further, REE distribution in the low-ash products (<10 wt% ash), middlings (10 wt%–60 wt% ash) and tailings (>60 wt% ash), as obtained from the tree analysis, revealed that most of the REE by weight reported to the middling and tailing streams, as shown in Dai et al. The two tree release analysis products with the highest concentration of REEs, low-ash product (A16) and tailings (A9), were selected for SEM/EDS characterization in order to find the REE mineral carrier in the studied coals. Further, quantitative XRD was used to identify the minerals present in the tailing (A9), the result of which is shown in  Using transmission electron microscopy, Hower et al. Run-of-mine coal samples from the East Kootenay coalfields in BC, Canada were studied for the presence of rare earth elements. It is found that among the six feed samples studied, the concentration of REEs on ash basis varies from 230 to 314 mg/kg. To understand the association of REEs in coal as well as to estimate the enrichment of REEs during coal beneficiation, all the feed samples were subjected to tree release flotation analysis. Analysis of the flotation products from the tree release analysis reveals that the highest concentration of REEs occurs in products with low-ash content (A16), at more than 1000 mg/kg REEs on ash basis. The distribution patterns of REEs in the samples show mixed M- and H-type. Sequential extraction analysis reports more than 65% of inorganically-associated REEs in coal. Correlation analyses indicate the presence of REE mineral phases zircon and monazite, but mineralogical study using SEM with EDX identified association of REEs with clays in both low-ash product and tailings. Even though the correlation study shows the presence of organic-associated REEs in the samples, the identification of association of REEs with clays in the low-ash products reiterates the dominance of inorganically-associated REEs. The dominant inorganic mode of occurrence implies that coal waste streams such as middlings and tailings should be used for development of REE extraction process. Further, during the coal preparation organic matter is separated from inorganic matter of the coal, so any amount of REE associated with the low-ash stream might not be available for commercial extraction. An additional study of mineralogy using SEM and electron microprobe is required to further clarify the REE mineral phases in these samples for selective REE extraction process development. The authors gratefully acknowledge the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at