Based on the laser particle size analysis and activity test results, the grinding kinetics of copper tailing powder has been studied with aid of Divas-Aliavden grinding kinetic equation, Rosin-Rammler-Benne (RRB), Swebrec distribution model, Fuller-curve packing model, fractal theory and grey correlational analysis. The results show that the grinding process of copper tailing powder follows well with the Divas-Aliavden grinding kinetic equation, and the grinding efficiency of copper tailing powder draws near to zero after ground 90 min. In addition, the grinding process can not only levigate copper tailing powder, but also narrow down and homogenize the Particle Size Distribution (PSD). The Equivalent Particle Size (EPS) shows a negative while the Specific Surface Area (SSA) shows a positive linear correlation to the double logarithm of grinding time. The PSD of copper tailing powder complies with both RRB and Swebrec models well, while the RRB model is still superior to Swebrec to describe the PSD of copper tailing powder in the full range of particle size. The incorporation of copper tailing powder, especially the finely ground one, makes the PSD of composite materials even close to Fuller-curve, and thus contributing to high packing density. The PSD of copper tailing powder show fractal features, and the fractal dimension increases but its growth rate tends to slow down with the grinding time. The activity index increases with the grinding time. According to the grey correlational analysis, the mass fraction of particles ranging 3–5 μm has a maximal positive effect on the activity index at all curing ages. As a result, 60 min is chosen as the optimal grinding time for copper tailing powder in consideration of economic and technical benefits.Copper tailings are the byproduct of copper mining industry, and a kind of fine sand-like solid waste leftover from the copper extraction [ The utilization of copper tailings as mineral admixture or fine aggregate to partially replace cement or sand has been reported, which has provided an effective way for consuming this kind of solid waste [ Therefore, in order to increase the utilization quantity and efficiency of waste copper tailing powder as mineral admixture, the grinding kinetic process, the particle characteristics, the activity index, and the impact of particle characteristics on the activity index of copper tailing powder ground for different times have been investigated thoroughly in this paper. This may have instructional significance for the practical application of copper tailing powder in the cement and concrete. The copper tailings were supplied by China Construction Mining Corporation. After pretreatment of drying at 60 °C, smashed with hammer, and filtered from 1 mm square hole sieve in sequences, the copper tailings were ground for different times, i.e.,15(A), 30(B), 45(C), 60(D) and 90(E) min respectively. The grinding operation was carried out in a small insulative ball mill of SM500 × 500 mm, with the number of 7, 6, 5 and 4 cm steel balls counting for 9, 24, 34 and 42 respectively. The total charge is 100 kg. The ball mill has a speed of 48 r/min, with the loading capacity of 5 kg sample. The chemical compositions of the copper tailing powder determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) are listed in The PSD of copper tailing powder was measured by a laser particle size analyzer (Master size 2000), produced by English Malvern Plant, ranging from 0.1 to 1000 μm. The particle size analyzer was calibrated with mono-dispersed particle size standards and the PSD data presented here has been corrected with obtained calibration curves. The EPS and SSA of copper tailing powder and cement were also calculated by software included in the laser particle size analyzer. The powder morphology was investigated using a scanning electron microscopy (JSM-5610LV, Japan). The strength of testing mortars with water to binder ratio of 0.5 and sand to binder ratio of 3 was tested according to Chinese Standard GB/T18046-2008. The strength activity is calculated in reference to Chinese Standard GB/T 12957-2005. Divas-Aliavden grinding kinetic equation is the most widely used one to describe the ball-mill grinding process of the solid particles [ The PSD curves of the copper tailing powder determined by laser particle size analyzer are shown in A large amount of evidence has been found that the ball-mill grinding process of solid particles follows the grinding kinetic equation [ Eq. In light of the kinetic equation as described above and the experimental data ( As shown in From The EPS is defined as the particle size when the cumulative passing of the particles reaches up to a certain value in this study. D90, for example, refers to the particle size value when the cumulative passing reaches up to 90%, or rather; it means that the quantity of particles (by mass) with size below D90 accounts for 90%. The EPS (D10, D25, D50, D75, and D90) and the SSA of copper tailing powder ground for different times are given in Apart from the fineness and morphology, the PSD features of cementitious materials also play a determinant role in the workability, hydration properties and strength of cementitious materials [ The governing equation for RRB function is expressed as, where, R/% is the cumulative sieve residue of particles; The Swebrec distribution function can be described as: The PSD data were fitted by means of the RRB and Swebrec functions as shown in As shown in The original packing density of cement-based powder materials was found to have a decisive effect on early strength of hardened paste in addition to hydration degree. In order to achieve closest packing of powder materials, several mathematical models were established, such as Horsfield model, Andreasen model, and Stovall model. However, the ideal screen analysis curve of the closest packing, i.e., Fuller curve, proposed by Fuller and Thompson, has become the most widely used one to describe the closest packing of powder materials. The expression is given as follows, In order to investigate the effect of copper tailing powder (30% by mass) with different grinding time on the original packing density of cement-based powder materials, the screen throughput of typical particle size has been calculated and compared with that calculated by Fuller curve, of which the maximal size is set as 80 μm. The calculation results are listed in The cumulative sieve throughput curves of composite cement-based materials are observed to move towards the left with respect to that of cement ( As shown in The fractal theory has been introduced nowadays for description of the PSD of brittle powders. The fractal model assumes a fixed amount brittle materials, which will break into small particles with certain probability and sizes. When this process repeats itself to the infinity in the grinding or crushing operation, particles with a distribution of fractal nature will be obtained and the breakage can be described by Griffith's model [ The lg[m(d)/d] − lgd curves based on the experimental data are protracted in In order to characterize the PSD characteristic with aid of fractal theory, the relationship between fractal dimension D and (a) the uniformity coefficient n, (b) the characteristic particle size d*, (c) the grinding time t, (d) the SSA, has been investigated as shown in As shown in   To sum up, the fractal dimension is proved to be an effective technical index to characterize the PSD features of copper tailing powder. The activity index of copper tailing powder is calculated in accordance with Chinese Standard GB/T 12957-2005 as follows: The testing results are shown in The effect of PSD of copper tailing powder on its activity index is also investigated by the grey correlational analysis, which is dedicated to quantitatively analyze the contribution of factors (sub-sequences) to results (primary-sequences) [ Firstly, the PSD of copper tailing powders ground for 30, 60, 90 min are classified into five intervals and the mass fraction of each interval is figured out as listed in The relational polarity shows the characteristic of regularity for samples at all ages. When the particle size is smaller than 5 μm, the relational polarity is positive, implying that the increase of particles with size below 5 μm would be propitious to improve the strength for all ages, and appears just inverse for the particles with size larger than 5 μm. Among the three distribution intervals below 5 μm, the intervals of 3–5 μm show highest relation degree for all ages, followed by intervals ranging 0–1 μm and 1–3 μm in order for samples at 3 days but just the opposite for the samples at 28 and 90 days. It is indicated that the increase of mass fraction of particles ranging 3–5 μm has a maximal positive effect on the strength growth for all ages, followed by mass fraction of particles ranging 0–1 μm and 1–3 μm respectively for samples at 3 days but just inversed for samples at 28 and 90 days. The grinding process is supposed to increase the mass fraction of particles below 5 μm, however, the mass fraction of particles ranging 3-5 μm, which have greatest promotional effect on the strength growth of the samples, appears no increase when the grinding time increases from 60 min to 90 min. Instead, the unnecessary and meaningless consumption of energy happens under this condition. As a result, 60 min is chosen as the optimal grinding time for the copper tailing powder in consideration of economic and technical benefits.  Copper tailings are easy to be ground, the maximal particle size of samples decreases from 135 μm to no larger than 14 μm after ground for 90 min. The grinding process of copper tailing powder follows well with the Divas-Aliavden grinding kinetic equation, and the grinding efficiency of copper tailing powder draws near to zero after 90 min. EPS shows a negative while SSA shows a positive linear correlation to the double logarithm of grinding time. The PSD of ground copper tailing powder complies with both RRB and Swebrec models well. While the RRB model is still superior to Swebrec model to describe PSD of copper tailing particles obtained in the full range of particle size. The grinding process can not only levigate copper tailing powder but also narrow down and homogenize the PSD. The incorporation of copper tailing powder (30% by mass) increases the content of fine particles with size below 2 μm and reduces the content of coarse particles with size over 14 μm. This effect can be strengthened when long-time ground copper tailing powder is incorporated, which makes the PSD of composite materials even close to Full-curve, thus contributing to higher packing density. The PSD of copper tailing powder shows fractal features. And, the value of fractal dimension increases but its growth rate tends to slow down with the grinding time. The activity index increases with the grinding time. The mass fraction of particles ranging 3–5 μm has a maximal positive effect on its activity at all curing ages. 60 min is chosen as the optimal grinding time for copper tailing powder in consideration of economic and technical benefits. This project is funded by the