Macroporous resins containing imminodiacetic acid (IDA) groups (Lewatit TP-207, Purolite S-930 and Amberlite IRC-748) were studied under dynamic conditions for uptake of nickel ions from the sulphate solution at pH 4 deriving from preliminary acid leaching of Orimulsion fly ash and subsequent vanadium recovery and impurities removal stages. The effects of temperature and ionic medium on the Ni adsorption were investigated.
                  The Lewatit TP-207 showed higher Ni uptake capacity in all operating conditions examined with an adsorption capacity of 1.32 mmol of Ni/g at 40 °C using the real process solution at pH 4.
                  The extraction of Ni adsorbed on the resin was obtained using 10 wt.% H2SO4; the resultant concentrated solution of nickel sulphate, containing about 13 g/L of nickel, can be suitable for elettrowinning, precipitation etc.Orimulsion is a bitumen–water emulsion produced from bitumen extracted from the Cerro Negro field of the Orinoco Belt of eastern Venezuela. The total Orinoco bitumen reserves are estimated at about 1.2·10 Orimulsion has relatively high levels of sulfur, nickel, and vanadium compared to many fuel oils and coals, and has been the subject of much debate regarding the environmental impacts of its use. The fly ash deriving from its combustion contains appreciable levels of vanadium (up to 13 wt.%) and nickel (up to 4 wt.%) in highly leachable forms that makes their recovery of interest. Among the compounds of vanadium in the fly ash, vanadium pentoxide, V In this work, a simple flow sheet has been proposed to recover vanadium and nickel from an Orimulsion fly-ash. This consists of a preliminary acid leaching, oxidation and precipitation of vanadium as vanadium pentoxide, V The objective of this study was to investigate the performance of different commercial chelating resins having functional imminodiacetic acid (IDA) groups in removing Ni ions from the final solution deriving from the stages of precipitation of vanadium and of removal of impurities. For this reason, preliminary adsorption experiments in column were carried out to examine the effect of different parameters such as temperature, ionic media, and presence of competitive ions on the Ni adsorption. The fly-ash used in this work has been collected by electrostatic precipitator of a power plant fuelled by Orimulsion. Carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen containing in the fly-ash were determined by a LECO CHN 600 elemental analyser. Sulphur content was measured by a LECO SC 432 DR IR detector. Moisture was determined at 105 °C. The acid leaching and the oxidative precipitation of vanadium were carried out at atmospheric pressure in a Pyrex stirred reactor, equipped with a reflux condenser and placed in a heated water bath. The leaching was conducted in 2M H The resultant solution (precipitate filtration solution and washing solution) was submitted to a second precipitation stage in which impurities, such as iron and aluminium, were precipitated as hydroxides at pH 4, by adding either 2M NaOH or 30 wt.% NH For the measurement of the metal elements in the fly-ash and in the vanadium pentoxide precipitate, the solid samples (0.5 g) were digested with hydrofluoric acid (2.5 mL) and nitric acid (7.5 ml), and the element concentrations in the resultant solutions were detected by an ICP-AES. The solutions deriving from the extraction and precipitation stages were analysed directly by ICP-AES. The following commercially available chelating resins were selected for the present study: Lewatit TP-207 (Na Purolite S-930 (Na Amberlite IRC-748 (Na All three resins having functional IDA groups are generally employed for the selective removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solutions and from wastewater even in presence of high concentration of sodium, calcium and magnesium. The resins were used in di-sodium form, because the total exhaustion of the resin with sodium ions increases the active chelating groups available for adsorption of metal ions such as Ni Preliminary adsorption tests are performed in order to investigate the effect of temperature and of ionic media on the Ni adsorption and to individuate the resin with higher adsorption capacity. For this scope, synthetic aqueous solutions of Ni(NO 50 mL (Bed Volume, BV) of wet-settled conditioned resin was charged in a glass column (i.d. 16.5 mm and height 290 mm) equipped with a thermostated water jacket obtaining a bed height of about 230 mm. The adsorption curves were determined under dynamic conditions by passing the Ni solution through the column at a rate of 8 BV/h (400 mL/h) using a peristaltic pump. At determined times about 10 mL of the effluent was collected and then analysed. The Ni concentration was measured by photometric method (reaction with potassium 1 reagent powder) on spectrophotometer (V 530 by Jasco) in the case of the process solution, while in the synthetic solution by ICP-AES analyser because of interference of other ions. The adsorption runs were carried at temperature of 20 and 40 °C to investigate the effect of temperature. After the absorption was complete (that is the metal concentration in the column outlet was nearly the same of the feed solution), the flow of solution was stopped and the adsorbed nickel was extracted by passing through the column a 10 wt.% H In order to investigate the competitive effect of ammonia and magnesium, present at high concentrations in the process solution, adsorption tests are performed using synthetic Ni(NO All adsorption and elution experiments were repeated 2 or 3 times. The composition of the Orimulsion fly-ash used in this work is reported in The extraction yield of vanadium and nickel obtained by acid leaching were 84.3% and 95.1%, respectively. By adopting the conditions reported in the Experimental section, the typical vanadium red-brown precipitate was obtained from the leaching solution. The precipitation yield of vanadium and nickel, referred to the relative contents in the leaching solution, were about 94% and 10%, respectively. The V The precipitation yields obtained increasing pH at 4 by adding of NaOH or NH As shown, both the basic agents permitted an almost complete precipitation of iron, high removal of aluminium, medium removal of the residual vanadium and moderate losses of nickel in the precipitate, in special way by using NH On the basis of these results, NH  The sorption capacity towards nickel increases with temperature for all three resins and this may be attributed to the so-called “chelate effect” that concerns a large positive change in entropy on formation of a chelate complex, which means that the change of Gibbs free energy with temperature will be negative so the equilibrium constant will become larger as temperature increases ( On the basis of the results, the subsequent adsorption tests have been performed at 40 °C. The comparison of the adsorption curves obtained with the three resins at 40 °C in nitrate and sulphate medium is shown in At 40 °C for both ionic media, the TP-207 showed the highest breakthrough capacity followed by the IRC-748 and S-390. The comparison of the results obtained with the synthetic solution of NiSO In order to interpret the results obtained with the process solution, adsorption tests were carried out using synthetic solutions of NiNO As shown in As shown in On the basis of these results, the behaviour observed with the process solution ( For the resin TP-207 after adsorption, about 4 BV of 10 wt.% H Since the volume of eluent is much lower than the volume of solution treated (ratio In the present work, the possibility of recovering nickel by chelating resin from the sulphate solution derived after vanadium recovery from Orimulsion fly ash has been examined. For this scope, three commercial chelating resins, TP-207(Na Preliminary adsorption tests were carried out under dynamic conditions using synthetic solutions of nickel at the same concentration of the process solution and at pH 4. An increase of temperature from 20 to 40 °C lead to higher breakthrough adsorption capacities towards nickel for all three resins. The capacities of the resins determined at 40 °C were slightly higher for nitrate than sulphate media. For both temperatures and ionic media, the resin TP-207(Na On the basis of the results, the removal of nickel from the process solution at pH 4 has been performed at 40 °C using the resin TP-207(Na Extraction of adsorbed nickel from the resin was completed using about 4 BV of 10 wt.% H According to the results of the present study, Lewatit TP-207 resin can be used effectively for the recovery of Ni from aqueous sulphate solutions deriving from the leaching of Orimulsion fly ashes. The authors wish to thank Bayer Italia, Purolite Italia and Rohm and Hass Italia for technical support and for kindly supplying with samples of the resins tested in the present work.