Titanium dioxide (TiO2) due to its high refractive index, is widely used in paint industry as a white pigment. In order to reduce this high cost of TiO2, a part of TiO2 is generally substituted by some other industrial mineral fillers such as calcite and calcined kaolin; however, this substitution affects the quality of paints in terms of stability, coverage (opacity), brightness (gloss), scrub resistance (film toughness), etc. In the present paper, precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC) was substituted for TiO2 in paint mixture at three different pigment volume concentrations (PVC). It was observed that substitution of TiO2 by PCC depends on PVC value at which there is an optimum PCC amount. The quality of paints produced by PCC along with its rheological properties was evaluated based on standard features in both wet and dry paints such as viscosity, density, opacity and gloss values. Addition of PCC increases the opacity to a certain point. Similarly, scrub resistance and viscosity increases with the addition of PCC at all PVCs, however, viscosity is not as much critical for the paint production. On the other hand, there is no any systematic effect of PCC on gloss value of the paint. This study overall demonstrates that PCC can be successfully used to substitute TiO2 only with a careful adjustment of PVC and other extenders used in the paint formulation.Paints are generally used for both decorative aims and protection of various surfaces. There are two kinds of paints in terms of solvent type used; namely water and organic solvent-based, of which water-based paints are more desired since they are more environmentally friendly. A typical waterborne paint consists of 20% water, 30% binder, 10% chemical agents (additives), and 40% pigments and minerals. The binder polymers used in waterborne paints, usually a variety of styrene acrylic copolymer emulsions are generally composed of 30–50% water which leaves the dry film letting 50–70% of the polymer fibers exposed to the surface. These fibers serve both adhere the particles to each other and to the surface. On the surface of a dry film, there are only pigment particles and polymer fibers to maintain the integrity of the film. While all the other components get dried out, polymer fibers and minerals keep the identity of paint film. As a consequent, the minerals used in a paint recipe directly and strongly affect the characteristics of the paint. TiO On an equal volume basis, 64 TiO In this study, the effect of PCC on an architectural waterborne paint formulation is investigated at three PVC levels with the aim of its substitution for TiO Calcined kaolin and calcite used in this study were received from “Microns” and “Som Group” companies in Istanbul, Turkey, respectively. Titanium dioxide is a commercial product of Tronox (CR828). It is produced by the chloride process and a zirconia/alumina-treated rutile pigment for use in multiple applications. Styrene acrylic copolymer (PST 50A) used as binder was obtained from “Organic Chemical” and the rest of the components such as dispersants, surfactants and some solvents were obtained from “Ishakol Paint Company” in Istanbul, Turkey. PCC (B1) characterized by scalenohedral crystals with a narrow size distribution was received from “Adaçal Industrial Minerals A.Ş.” in Afyon, Turkey. This product is specially produced for paint applications. Oil absorption, SEM micrographs of minerals are shown in In order to reveal the behavior of PCC particles in paint colloidal system, its surface charge was examined. PCC suspensions of 10% by weight were prepared for zeta potential measurements. The desired pH values were obtained using 0.1 A commercial paint recipe is shown in Three types of paint in terms of % PVC namely 40, 55, and 80 were produced and examined to identify the interaction of PCC with other pigments on a series of four paints considering the opacity of the paints and its capability to replace TiO Production of waterborne architectural paints is explained elsewhere Three original recipes of industrial paints which consist of 16.5% TiO Zeta potential of various minerals used in this paper as a function of pH is depicted in  Although substitution of TiO Viscosity of the paints is in the range of 120–134, 110–127 and 97–121 Krebs Unit (KU) for 40%, 55% and 80% of PVC that shows increasing trend with decreasing PVC. There is no systematic change on paint viscosities upon changing type and amount of solid particles and all the viscosity values apart from 80% of PVC are in an acceptable range. Considering these two sets of gloss values, it is clear that PCC decreases the gloss of the produced paints. Although this is not a drawback result for PCC, it may restrict the areas and formulations in which PCC can be used since it changes the gloss class of paint. Evaluation of all of the results presented in We, in a previous study, reported a new formulation containing 35% pigment which would substitute 8% of TiO The flow behavior of PCC suspensions was defined as pseudoplastic where its viscosity increased with increase in pH within the pH range examined. Thus, PCC provides higher viscosity within the pH range of paint (around 8.5) and addition of further additives to increase the viscosity of paint can be decreased. PCC yielded by almost 10% higher viscosities compared to the others The isoelectric point of (iep) for TiO It is well known that calcite particles with optimum size distribution contribute to better distribution of TiO Particle size distribution of the pigments is another parameter on which light scattering and opacity depends. It is known that the smaller size of the co-pigments or extenders means, the more dispersed TiO As described above, finer particles give rise to a more homogenous paint system and more hiding power as well. Moreover, PCC production is a process of re-crystallization of calcite under well controlled conditions; hence, the products are purer with higher PCC was also found to increase the resistance of paint films against scrubbing as presented in Phase separation and ease of application as well as viscosity changes were checked after the storage. Phase separations were detected for all paints; it is less in paints containing PCC. However, pigment cake was easily reincorporated by hand stirring with the spatula and homogenous paints were obtained. Viscosity values increased by 10 KU that is normal and in an acceptable range for PVC values of 40 and 55. Application of paint was also tested by film applicator and brush. Ease of application and homogenous films were obtained for PVC values of 40 and 55. On the other hand, it was difficult to apply and get a smooth film for PVC value of 80%. Formulation of this PVC consists of very large amount of pigment particles and thus very close to CPVC. Therefore, PVC of 80% is not practically applicable. The following salient findings were derived out of this investigation. Optimum formulations developed for different PVC values show that reduction of TiO Changes in opacity and gloss values are dramatic upon addition of PCC for 40% PVC compared to that of 55% and 80% PVC. This is attributed to the effectiveness of micro and nano air voids at higher PVC values. PCC showed more favorable results than GCC and C.Kaolin in terms of optical properties such as opacity and gloss. While PCC can be considered as an indispensable TiO Interaction among particles is crucial for paint quality. C.Kaolin shows detrimental effect for the addition of PCC that causing the agglomeration problem governed by electrostatic attraction among particles while calcite does not show such a problem. This is because of electrostatic attraction which is governed by surface charge of the particles at pH range of paint medium. This work was supported by Scientific Research Program of