An interpolation and smoothing technique has been developed for observed (analytic or experimental) mass–size–density data defined over a given domain having a reduced number of contiguous size and density intervals. The domain for interpolation employs a larger number of subintervals of the domain of the observed data. The technique imposes mass and attribute mass conservation between the observed and estimated (interpolated and smoothed) data. The proposed technique is an extension of an existing technique developed for interpolating and smoothing mass–density or attribute content–density data by utilizing minimization of absolute differentials (incremental specific mass differentials and incremental attribute content differentials).
                  In the proposed technique, several minimization objective functions comprising least relative differential (normalized differentials) squares and two associated special cases are proposed. The associated special cases are introduced to demonstrate the deviation of their results from the normalized differentials results. The present interpolation approach is fundamentally different from existing techniques inasmuch as the interpolation problem is carried out as two-dimensional problem rather than interpolating through a single dimension, and the resulting estimates are used to interpolate through the second dimension. Several data sets are used to demonstrate the main features of the proposed technique.In many mineral, coal, and oil sands processing plants, sampling of different streams is routinely carried out as part of the plant or process performance evaluation or audit. Plant streams are sampled according to a well-designed sampling scheme In the literature, several interpolation schemes for observed mass–size and mass–density data have been developed including osculatory interpolation In the present paper, the Hughes smoothing scheme is extended to smooth incremental mass–size–density data and incremental attribute content–size–density data by minimizing various objective functions. However, the present approach is fundamentally different from an existing approach in that the interpolation problem is carried out as a true two-dimensional problem rather than interpolating through a single dimension (say density) and the resulting estimates are used to interpolate through the second dimension (say size) In general, a typical mineral or coal stream is made up of constituent particles having different sizes and densities. Let us define the mass fraction of the material having particle size in the range Let us define In practice, the observed stream mass distribution (i.e., incremental fractional mass fractions) is determined over sets of discrete contiguous particle size and particle density intervals using standard ASTM procedures. In a cell with size and density intervals Δ Let the numbers of contiguous size and density intervals used in the observed size and density analyses be denoted by In many cases, due to economic constraints, Given an observed set of incremental specific mass–size–density, Let us designate the set of estimated incremental fractional mass per unit size and unit density (specific mass) as Given the While the objective function defined in In optimization problems involving these objective functions, it is extremely difficult to manipulate the necessary conditions for the stationary point in a meaningful way and it may even be impossible to obtain closed-form solutions. Such difficulties are due to the nonlinearity introduced by the divisions in The approach adopted in the present paper is fundamentally different from In general, stream attribute contents are expressed as fractions of the incremental fractional masses. Therefore, it is logical, first, to interpolate the incremental fractional masses and to fix the optimal In this case, only mass–size or mass–density data are considered and the specific masses The objective function, The objective is to find the optimal solution It should be emphasized that, in the results reported, the constraints given in Several data sets are considered to illustrate the proposed techniques. The first is a set of Canadian oil sands tailings size data. In this case The second data set is coal washability data where A set of Canadian experimental coal washability data is given The incremental mass estimates in A technique for interpolating and smoothing observed incremental fractional mass and attribute contents (defined over limited numbers of size and density intervals) and using larger numbers of size and density intervals has been developed. The particle sizes and densities of the observed data are subsets of the enlarged sets of the estimated data. Three objective functions utilizing relative and ratio-specific mass differentials are proposed. Mass and attribute mass conservation are imposed between the analytic and enlarged sets. Specific conclusions are in order: The present technique is fundamentally different from existing techniques inasmuch as the interpolation problem is carried out as a true two-dimensional problem rather than interpolating through a single dimension and using the resulting estimates to interpolate through the second dimension. It has been demonstrated that some of the results reported in the literature can be obtained using closed-form solutions. The relative or normalized differentials formulation is preferable. The observed data should capture the global nature of the stream attributes to guarantee reliable data; alternatively, some physical fundamentals about the nature of the material can be used to estimate the attribute content and variation in subranges. The utilization of the Microsoft Excel™ Solver™ module in solving the interpolation problem is beneficial to coal plant engineers. This work was supported in part by the federal Panel on Energy Research and Development (PERD). The author gratefully acknowledges the helpful suggestions made by one of the reviewers.