Froth flotation represents one the most important technologies for the development of the modern era, as it has enabled a steady and affordable flow of mineral raw materials. Recent studies show an increasing demand for more environmentally friendly processes, resulting in stricter regulations and the need to gain social license to operate by mining operations. As the demand of raw materials keeps growing, and ore grades decline, there is an urgent need to improve the efficiency of flotation as well as reducing the environmental impact of enrichment processes.
                  The work hereby presented explores a novel type of frother chemistry, where commercial frothers are partially substituted with a biodegradable molecule produced from sustainable sources (namely, hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose) to form polymer-surfactant (PS) mixtures. In the second part of this series, the unique froth stabilization of this PS-mixture is tested in a bench-scale flotation study on chalcopyrite model ore. The use of PS-mixtures results in a robust system capable of maintaining separation efficiencies (SE) at ca. 90 % even under conditions of low pH (i.e., 5.5) and low collector concentration (i.e., 5 g/ton). In comparison, benchmark commercial frothers had a significant decrease in SE under these conditions (ca. 78 %). The advantageous performance of the PS-mixture frother is further tested in a short case study made with Cu-bearing sulfidic tailings. The outcome of this study demonstrates for the first time various advantages of the PS-mixtures in froth flotation, including: i) the generation of a stable, yet selective froth phase with sustainable reagents; ii) a robust flotation performance, able to withstand changes in pH and collector concentration, and iii) the ability to selectively float minerals with low hydrophobicity, such as those found in tailings deposits.For over a century, froth flotation has remained one of the major operations for the processing of minerals, offering an efficient, cost-effective technique for the production of concentrates. However, the current trends in the mineral industry will likely force the development of new froth flotation technologies capable of addressing complex needs, such as environmental impact awareness and decreasing ore grades in operating sites [ While various strategies are currently under exploration to improve the efficiency of mineral concentrators, an aspect that remains largely unexplored is the use of green chemical reagents in froth flotation. As a general definition, green chemistry can refer to reagents that have minimum environmental impact, lower toxicological and hazardous effects, or that can be produced from sustainable sources [ Based on the forecasted needs of the mining industry described above, the present study showcases a green chemical alternative to improve the performance of the flotation process. The proposed solution is to use a polymer-surfactant (PS) mixture as froth stabilization agent, particularly using sustainable cellulose derivatives as their macromolecular component, an approach unlike that of current commercial frother chemistries. PS-mixtures have been used effectively in other industries such as the food, oil and pharmaceutical industries, as they have consistently reported a high stabilization performance in two-phase foams and emulsions [ The PS-mixture explored in the present study was carefully chosen to provide an increased level of control over froth stability while at the same time offering a more sustainable alternative for flotation reagents. In the first place, a commercially available polyethylene glycol ether frother (NF240) was chosen as the surfactant fraction, as it represents a popular type of reagent in the flotation of sulfidic minerals [ Indeed, the use of cellulose-based materials has drawn the attention of various chemical-consuming industries due to its sustainable origins and for having a polymeric backbone that can be functionalized to target specific applications [ In the first part of this study [ Two different HPMC-molecules were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich: i) Product No. H8384 (hereby labeled as HPMC22k), with an average and molecular weight of 22 kDa, a methoxyl content of 28–30 % and a hydroxypropoxyl content of 7–12 %; and ii) Product No. 423238 (hereby referred to as HPMC10k) with an average molecular weight of 10 kDa, a methoxyl content of 29 % and a hydroxypropyl content of 7%. The commercial frother used was Nasfroth 240 (NF240), which is a polyethylene glycol ether supplied by Nasaco International LLC. The collector was an industrial-grade sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX). pH was regulated with Ca(OH) All chemicals were used without any further purification. The water used in all aspects of this study was purified with an Elga Purelab Option-R 7/15 to a resistance of 15 MΩ. The model ore consisted of a mixture of chalcopyrite (CuFeS The tailings were obtained from First Quantum Minerals Ltd.’s Pyhäsalmi mine located in Central Finland. The sample was obtained in the form of a wet cake with moisture content determined experimentally to be 2.8 % and did not undergo any further processing before use. To properly assess their flotation behavior, it is important to mention that the tailings produced by the Pyhäsalmi concentrator are the result of the sequential flotation of chalcopyrite, sphalerite and pyrite. Therefore, the tailings have undergone conditioning for pyrite flotation as the last flotation stage before reaching the tailings pond. In previous studies, the main components of the tailings have been reported as pyrite (FeS An initial x-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis of the tailings used in this study showed a negligible amount of Ba (< 0.5 %), high concentration of Fe (> 30 %) and intermediate amounts of Ca (ca. 6 %). Tailings samples were also characterized by induced coupled plasma (ICP) analysis, which reported an average Fe content of 36.7 % and a Cu content of 0.10 (± 0.01) %. For the preparation of synthetic ore, chalcopyrite rocks were crushed first in a laboratory-scale jaw crusher (Wedag MN 931/1 with a 200 × 125 mm gap and a minimum opening of 12 mm) followed by a laboratory-scale roller crusher (Wedag) to reach a nominal particle size of <4 mm. The crushed samples were divided into representative samples of approximately 50 g. The quartz samples were divided into representative samples of 550 g. Similarly, the tailings were divided into representative samples of 600 g. The separation into representative samples was conducted with a Retsch rotary sampling machine. The mass of each sample was verified with a Precisa XB 6200D laboratory scale. The grinding procedure of the synthetic ore included separate grinding for chalcopyrite and quartz due to differences in the hardness of the minerals. Chalcopyrite was dry-ground with a Fritsch Pulverisette 9 ring mill for 12 s, with tungsten carbide rings as grinding media, whereas quartz was ground in a laboratory scale ball mill (Technical research center of Finland, type 14MK3/9) with a volume of 5.67 l using a ball charge of 5.5 kg and a solids content of 50 % for 45 min. The target particle size of both species was d80 = 100 μm (See Supplementary Information S1 for details). The water used in the ball mill already had its pH adjusted to the level used in the flotation experiments. A different approach was chosen for the tailings sample since the extent of their remnant hydrophobicity is unknown and their particle size are within ranges acceptable for flotation. It was decided to run flotation tests in the presence of untreated tailings in the first place, followed by a set of experiments where a short (i.e., 7.5 min) regrinding procedure in the ball mill was applied with the goal of liberating chalcopyrite surfaces. The particle size characterization of the samples was performed with a Mastersizer 3000 in an aqueous suspension. The particle size results of tailings are presented in Supplementary Information (S2). The three frother systems compared throughout this study were the following: i) pure commercial frother (NF240); ii) pure amphiphilic polymer (HPMC); and iii) PS-mixture (HPMC + NF240). The flotation experiments were conducted in a 1.5 l Outokumpu laboratory-scale flotation cell. The operational parameters used in all aspects of the study are presented in The following conditioning procedures were conducted before each flotation experiment. The minerals were dispersed in water with pH adjusted using Ca(OH) Once the conditioning time was over, the impeller speed was increased to 1300 rpm and the air flow was turned on. This was regarded as the starting point of the flotation experiment. During the flotation tests, froth fractions were collected during the following time periods: 0−3 min, 3−6 min, 6−10 min, 10−14 min, 14−20 min for the synthetic ore and an additional sixth time fraction of 20−30 min for the tailings. After sampling of each froth fraction, the pulp volume was restored to its original level by adding make-up water with the same frother concentration corresponding to the experiment. At the end of each flotation experiment, the collected froth fractions and tailings were initially dewatered with a vacuum filter through a 0.45 μm filter paper and dried in a convection oven at 50 °C. The design of experiments used for studying the flotation performance of chalcopyrite model ore is presented in The conditions studied in the presence of tailings are presented in The composition of the dried samples was characterized with an Oxford Instruments, X-Met5100 XRF gun with a specific setting for high sulfur grade mineral samples. A selected group of samples were analyzed by ICP elemental analysis and a correction factor based on these results was applied to the XRF analysis to improve its accuracy (See Supplementary Information, S3 for details). The average Cu head grade of the synthetic ore was also verified by ICP-analysis and was of 2.2 % in average. The chemical composition of the floated fractions and tailings were used to determine the Separation Efficiency (SE) and flotation kinetics. The results of the synthetic ore studies were also processed with MODDE™ software to create a Pearson correlation matrix and a partial least squares (PLS) model in order to study the influence of pH and collector concentration in the flotation performance of each frother system. Details of these analytical methods used are found in the Supplementary Information (S4). In the first part of this article series, it was found that the mixtures of NF240 and HPMC presented a synergistic behavior that resulted in increased initial diffusion rate of species that promoted the formation of smaller bubbles, better bubble coalescence prevention and consequently higher stabilization of foams [ The main results of the flotation experiments of chalcopyrite model ore are summarized in Upon further examination, it was noticed that the use of each frother system results in a different flotation behavior when conditions are modified. These differences are most clearly observable from the grade-recovery curves of each frother system ( Regarding the performance of pure HPMC ( On the other hand, the most attractive flotation performance was obtained in the presence of the PS-mixtures, as seen in As seen in An additional metric that is not evident from the grade-recovery curves is flotation kinetics. Fast kinetics are attractive since they represent higher productivity of flotation operations. As seen in The robustness of the PS-mixtures is highlighted when the experimental results are mathematically treated with separate PLS models for each frother. The PLS model created equations whose coefficient values represents the tolerance towards changes on each operating variable (i.e. collector concentration, pH and their interaction) for each frother system. In other words, a smaller coefficient value indicates a higher tolerance to variability in operating conditions. These coefficients are compiled in  The presented results show a clear advantage on the use of the PS-mixture by allowing a selective separation of valuable minerals under conditions where flotation with commercial frother was negatively affected. This statement is further emphasized when considering the good reproducibility of the measurements presented in the Supplementary Information (S5). The observed behavior of the PS-mixtures also introduces the possibility of utilizing atypical chemical conditions in certain flotation scenarios due its ability of separating less hydrophobic particles. A first explanation to the observed phenomena regarding froth stability and its impact on solids recovery in the presence of different frothing agents can be found in the work of Tan et al. [ Considering the robust behavior of the PS-mixtures shown in Section One of the most striking differences between the frother systems was their froth characteristics upon simple visual examination ( As seen in Although the experiments with model ores demonstrated that flotation with HPMC and PS-mixtures can be selective, the high mass pull obtained may also suggest the possibility of entrainment in a significant extent. There are, however, a few observations that are contradictory to the generally accepted characteristics of entrainment. Indeed, entrainment is often associated with operating characteristics like recovered water in the froth phase, particle size, pulp density, or mineral specific gravity [ As a first approach to understand the entrainment behavior of the froth in the presence HPMC, a set of flotation experiments was carried out with quartz particles. The behavior of quartz is assumed to represent pure entrainment in all frother systems since hydrophilic silica exhibits repulsive van der Waals forces and a tendency to remain suspended in water, both events preventing bubble-particle attachment [ Another observation regarding entrainment was made when studying the XRF-results of experiments run in RG-10-F, compiled in It is also worth noting the seminal work of Schulze et al. [ While the effect of entrainment is not further studied within this manuscript, these results suggest that the high mass pulls obtained with pure HPMC and PS-mixtures are the result of true flotation in a significant extent. In this context, it is also worth mentioning a study by McFadzean et al. [ In terms of selective flotation of Cu, the results in The results from experiments in the RG-F-5 and RG-F-10 series imply that selective separation of weakly hydrophobic particles in the presence of HPMC and PS-mixtures is possible, reflecting the results discussed in Section As seen in Among the main differences observed with HPMC-aided experiments was their accelerated flotation rate. Such faster kinetics are especially intriguing, as increased froth height has been linked with reduced flotation kinetics in previous studies [ As presented in Finally, it is seen that the PS-mixture also rendered a significantly faster flotation than that of pure NF240. This final observation further confirms the advantage on the use of PS-mixtures, since their use resulted both in the best flotation efficiency ( The present study represents the first ever published work on the use of amphiphilic cellulose derivatives as a sustainable alternative to commercial frothers for the flotation of chalcopyrite and Cu-containing tailings. The results with the synthetic chalcopyrite ore showed that the PS-mixture is capable of matching the performance of commercial frothers, with the advantage of a robust flotation performance and faster kinetics throughout a wide variety of conditions. The consistent efficiency of PS-mixtures is attributed to a combination of fine bubbles and a froth stabilization ability that it less dependent on the hydrophobicity of minerals. The present work thus opens a new avenue of study on polymer-surfactant mixtures for the stabilization of three-phase froths, with the particular possibility of incorporating sustainable reagents Similar tendencies were observed in the presence of Cu-bearing tailings. HPMC and its mixtures were capable of producing a stable froth without further chemical modification of tailings. The use of PS-mixtures produced a unique froth flotation behavior that resulted in the best separation efficiency among the studied frother systems in flotation of tailings. While admittedly further research of the subject is necessary to determine the optimal usage of HPMC in froth flotation (including e.g., variation of molecular chain length of HPMC, and optimization of HPMC-surfactant ratio), the behavior hereby reported opens a wide range of possibilities in industrial practice. Indeed, the higher SE and faster kinetics of the HPMC-NF240 system may be translated in higher throughputs and a more consistent flotation performance that could result in an economic recovery of tailings and the improvement of froth flotation of Cu in general.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper The authors wish to acknowledge First Quantum Minerals Ltd.’s Pyhäsalmi mine for providing the samples used in this research. This work is part of the “CellFroth” project supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: