A study of a local industrial symbiosis involving the recovery of platinum from waste thermocouples which is then used for the preparation of catalytic electrodes suitable for dye-sensitized solar cell production is reported. The small quantity of platinum in the filaments of used thermocouples, thousands of which are discarded each year by metal foundries, can be economically recovered by conversion to chloroplatinic acid hydrate, an ‘added value’ product, which can then be used in the fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cell counter-electrodes. 91% recovery of platinum from filaments as chloroplatinic acid hydrate has been achieved by aqua regia digestion of manually isolated filaments. Cost-benefit analysis shows the proposed process derives sufficient value to cover landfill costs for what is left of the waste thermocouples after platinum removal; provide ∼5 days employment; and provide 63% materials cost savings for electrode preparation in comparison to purchasing commercially available chloroplatinic acid hydrate. The proposed local industrial symbiosis would, per year, divert ∼50  g of platinum from landfill, avoid up to 1400 kg of CO2 emissions associated with primary production of an equivalent quantity of platinum, and give enough platinum to produce catalytic electrodes for ∼500 m2 of dye-sensitized solar cells, which could supply clean energy for 12 homes in the locality. The process exemplifies the environmental, economic and social benefits available through adoption of circular practices, which make use of secondary materials available within the local economy by valorizing wastes. The process also overcomes economic barriers to critical raw materials (CRMs) recovery from dissipative applications.Pt wire WTC Purchased from supplier The world faces the limits of current ‘linear’ economic models due to resource security issues, growing population and increasing per-capita consumption. Transition is necessary to a new ‘circular economy’: a resource-efficient industrial economy which decouples economic growth from resource consumption ( CRMs are vital to the functionality of many low-carbon technologies upon which reductions in global emissions and achieving sustainability with the planet rely ( A reason for low recovery rates of CRMs, even for valuable metals like platinum (Pt), is the use of these metals in dissipative applications, i.e. where they are present in low concentrations and the consequent high costs of recovery and low total recoverable value make traditional recycling routes unfeasible, resulting in loss of these elements from the economy ( Platinum is a CRM with high economic value (>$37/g) Low recycling rates are typical for many of the CRMs in electronics, where they are often used in trace amounts within complex systems. The dissipative nature of the application of many CRMs in WEEE represents considerable economic and technical barriers to their recovery. Ueberschaar et al. have shown this to be the case for Ga recovery from LEDs and ICs on PCBs in which small amounts of Ga are diluted within a complex mixture of materials ( Enhancing recycling rates of CRMs from dissipative applications relies on improving the cost-benefit of recovery. This can be achieved through enhancement of eco-design in products to reduce costs of disassembly and retain CRMs in closed-loop applications as demonstrated by Recycling of materials from WEEE for fabrication of solar cells is not only environmentally beneficial in comparison to primary resource based production, but offers a potential pathway to reduced energy payback times (EPBT), reduce levelised cost of energy generation (LCOE), and enhanced competitiveness and intangible value for PV manufacturers in a global market in which consumers are becoming increasingly environmentally aware ( A significant application of Pt in industrial electronics is in thermocouple wire. The thermocouple temperature sensors market is estimated at $1.6 billion in 2018 with a growth rate of 6.6%/year over the period 2014–2020 ( Although the term industrial symbiosis has developed with the field of industrial ecology, and the principle has gained popularity as interest in circular economy has grown, the principle itself can be seen enacted throughout history. Industrial symbiosis is tied to the very birth of the chemical industry. Perkin's manufacture of mauveine laid the foundations for the synthetic dye industry. These 'synthetic colours were the product of a completely new industry that was based on the hydrocarbons distilled out of coal tar, previously the inconvenient waste of coal gas works' ( Chloroplatinic acid hydrate is an important precursor in many applications of platinum ( This simple process requires no specialist equipment other than a fume hood, and produces no solid or liquid waste other than WTCs minus filaments. The potential for small scale recovery close to the source of generation of WTCs offers interesting possibilities at low economic and environmental cost in comparison to traditional recycling routes. If a suitable partner organization could be found that uses chloroplatinic acid hydrate, then an industrial symbiosis strategy could potentially lead to: increased levels of PGM recovery from end-of-life devices; reduced waste management costs for producers of WTCs; mitigation of materials criticality issues; reduced environmental and economic costs for organizations using chloroplatinic acid hydrate. A local foundry To evaluate the potential industrial symbiosis, the following question was asked: can chloroplatinic acid hydrate of sufficient quality for use in DSSCs be synthesized from WTCs in sufficient quantity and at sufficient cost-benefit to justify the process? Here, the answer to this question is shown to be ‘yes’ and that the barriers to recovery of Pt from this dissipative application in thermocouples may be overcome by local industrial symbiosis. This example also illustrates the benefits of the circular economy/industrial symbiosis approach. Although this article focuses on the example of Pt from WTCs for DSSC counter-electrode catalysts in a relatively small scale local operation, chloroplatinic acid hydrate is important in numerous applications where Pt deposition is required. A major example for low-carbon technologies is in the preparation of catalysts for fuel cells ( To verify the suitability of this industrial symbiosis process WTCs were collected and inspected and filaments were isolated and converted to chloroplatinic acid hydrate from which DSSC counter electrodes were prepared. To verify the suitability of WTCs as a Pt source for DSSC catalysts and the procedure of chloroplatinic acid hydrate synthesis, purchased Pt wire was also digested to produce chloroplatinic acid hydrate, and yields compared. These two chloroplatinic acid hydrate samples, along with a standard purchased sample, were used to create counter electrodes. Electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to compare the electrochemical performance of counter electrodes created from the different chloroplatinic acid hydrate samples in ‘dummy cells’. A cost-benefit analysis for the proposed industrial symbiosis was conducted for comparison with current costs incurred by the WTC producer and chloroplatinic acid hydrate user. A 5.5 kg sample of WTCs was obtained from the local foundry, and was coned and quartered to give a representative sub sample of 82 individual WTCs for further study. 99.998% Pt wire (Johnson Matthey) was used as received. HCl (31.5–33.0%) and HNO The overall procedure of isolation of filaments, chloroplatinic acid synthesis and fabrication of DSSC counter electrodes is outlines in ∼100 mg of Pt filaments, or wire, were digested by boiling in 10 ml of Pt analyses by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) was carried out using a PerkinElmer AAnalyst 200 with a single element PerkinElmer 50 mm Lumina Universal hollow cathode lamp and an air-acetylene flame, using the method of multiple standard additions ( NSG Tec7 FTO glass (7 Ω/sq) was cut into 25 mm × 15 mm pieces. A small hole was drilled into the non-conductive surface adjacent to the upper right hand corner of a 1 cm EIS was performed on the cell using a GAMRY Reference 600 Potentiostat at open circuit voltage. An AC voltage of 10 mV The area tested by EIS analysis was 1 cm SEM imaging of platinized counter-electrodes was carried out at 5 kV using a 30 μm aperture Secondary Electron (SE2) detectors and InLens detectors on a Zeiss Nvision using a Gemini SEM column. Cost benefit analysis was carried out by comparison of the cost of purchasing chloroplatinic acid hydrate with the cost of production via the industrial symbiosis process shown in A cost-benefit analysis was conducted by comparison of the total cost of chloroplatinic acid hydrate synthesis, with commercial prices of chloroplatinic acid hydrate when purchased in 1 g and 25 g lots from a supplier, and administrative overheads associated with buying chloroplatinic acid hydrate are not included. As chloroplatinic acid hydrate is used to deposit Pt metal on DSSC counter electrodes, the true cost benefit is shown by comparison of the cost per gram of Pt as chloroplatinic acid hydrate with wt%Pt taken into account. It is convenient to discuss the results in terms of: the isolation of filaments from waste thermocouples; the chemical analysis of the chloroplatinic acid hydrate prepared from these filaments and the suitability of this chloroplatinic acid hydrate for DSSC electrode manufacture; and the environmental impact, and cost benefit, of the proposed industrial symbiosis. Inspection of WTCs revealed their physical condition to be variable with some in close to ‘as new’ condition (e.g. The quartz tube was removed with pliers to access the base of filaments protruding from the refractory cement. Filaments were snipped as close to their base as possible to minimise the quantity remaining within the refractory cement of WTCs ( SEM/EDS analysis revealed that thick filaments are ∼100% Pt and thin filaments are ∼ PtRh14% alloy, (close to the alloy composition of PtRh13% given for ANSI-type R thermocouple filaments in the manufacturer specification and within the tolerance of the EDS ( WTCs have an average PGM concentration of ∼120 ppm, considerably higher than the majority of ores refined for Pt production (Nishnij-Tagil, Russia: 10–20 ppm; South African Bushveld complex: 3–20 ppm) ( AAS analysis of the solution after filament digestion shows the average Pt content of WTC filaments to be 95 (±1)%, in line with expectation. The mean values of The data in The local foundry currently generates ∼43,340 WTCs per year, which would yield 51.4 (±0.2) g of filaments, more than enough to support the current activities of the local research centre. Recovery of this quantity of Pt offsets demand for an equivalent quantity from primary sources, negating the requirement to mine and process between 2.5 and 17 tonne of ore and saving ∼200–1400 kg CO The associated costs of the potential industrial symbiosis operation shown in The cost of producing WTC-derived chloroplatinic acid hydrate was calculated to be $47.39/g ( Process costs could be reduced further by an increase of scale by extension of the process to take waste thermocouples from other foundries, steel works and glass works, along with the development of semi-automated isolation of WTC filaments. Although traditional automated recycling processes (grinding, with subsequent automated materials separation stages) without prior removal of filaments would render efficient recovery of Pt impossible ( Additional cost benefit may be achievable through automated recycling of the remaining portions of WTCs. Comminution followed by eddy current and density separation techniques could produce Cu, plastic and refractory oxide fractions for recycling in order to valorize this material, which would generate additional revenue whilst reducing landfill cost. The proposed industrial symbiosis valorizes a source of Pt in the waste arising from its use in a dispersive application, for which traditional recycling pathways are uneconomic. Manual isolation of filaments from waste thermocouples (WTCs) with subsequent digestion in The diversion of Pt from landfill enhances resource-efficiency and mitigates materials criticality issues by decoupling supply from primary production. The recovery of 50 g Pt from the single foundry discussed here offsets demand for an equivalent quantity from primary sources, negating the requirement to mine and process between 2.5 and 17 tonne of ore, and saving ∼200–1400 kg CO The authors wish to thank Weartech International Ltd. for the supply of WTCs, and Dr Simon Curling, Bangor University Biocomposites Centre Commercial Analysis Service for ICP-OES analyses. This work has been supported by the European Social Fund (ESF) through the