This paper presents three-dimensional micro-macro modeling of foam structure to investigate the responses of closed-cell aluminum foam subjected to dynamic loadings. The response of the closed-cell Alporas aluminum foam under the low velocity impact is investigated numerically and experimentally. In order to access 3D modeling of the internal microstructure of the closed-cell aluminum foam, computerized tomography and unit cell methods are employed. For macro modeling, a solid continuum model is utilized as the crushable foam material. The effective parameters on the impact response including foam density and velocity of the impactor are considered. In order to show the validity and accuracy of results obtained from finite element methods, low velocity impact tests have been conducted and the results are compared with the experimental data. It is demonstrated that the simulated results agree well with test data. The results of the present paper indicate that the adaptation of experimental results with all three methods of macro and micro modeling is more remarkable for low density foam samples. The crushable foam model has the lowest accuracy. CT scan method is the most accurate and in terms of computational cost, the Kelvin unit cell method showed better performance than other models.Metal foams are generally composed of aluminum, but they can also be produced by other metals. Foams are materials that in most cases are produced by trapping gas bubbles in a liquid or solid In the 3D modeling of the internal structure of the different materials, computerized tomography is an important and useful technique. In this method, material is scanned by 2D images, thus material microstructure can be obtained. Due to the increasing quality of X-ray imaging and development in the processing of images, the applications of images obtained by CT scan is expanding. Because of the quality and high precision of the method, some researchers have used this method In the present work crushing behavior of closed-cell aluminum foams of the type Alporas under impact loading is studied. Impact load is of the low velocity type created by drop test setup. The foam behavior is investigated based on both experimental and numerical analysis and the results are compared with each other. Moreover, a parameter study on the impact velocity as well as foam density is performed. CT-scan, Kelvin unit cell and crushable foam techniques were employed to finite element modeling of foam structure. In order to fabricate the required test samples, aluminum foam of the type Alporas [38-40] were produced. Aluminum foam is made from molten aluminum by stabilizing bubbles in the melt which consists of several steps, namely thickening, foaming and cooling. Initially aluminum is molten and then the blowing agent (TiH In macro modeling of the closed-cell foam structure, crushable foam material model is used. One of the input data for defining this model is stress-strain diagram of uniaxial quasi static compression test. Compressive static tests for three different foam densities were conducted in order to evaluate overall behavior, energy absorption and densification strain of the closed-cell aluminum foam samples. Moreover, the static tests define the two essential parameters of the impact test, i.e. mass and velocity of the impactor. The procedure of performing static tests is shown in The falling weight impact test is one of the methods used to assess the impact properties of the materials. The foam sample used for the test was placed on a flat fixed plate and impacted centrally by a vertically falling weight. The drop test device is mainly consists of a main body, adjustable impactor, extra weights, acceleration sensor and data acquisition system. After locating the sample and loading the weights depending on the impact energy, the height of the impactor can be adjusted. By releasing the impactor, the data acquisition system saves the acceleration sensor data. Three different 3D models of the foam structure for finite element analysis of the impact test are developed. First, 2D images of the all foam samples were taken layer by layer using multi-slice CT scan device. Then CT images are imported into Mimics software. Using CT images, 3D microstructure model of close-cell aluminum foam is constructed and the foam volume is meshed. The steps of this procedure is depicted in For estimating microstructure of the foam, Kelvin unit cell is employed. First the unit cells of the type Kelvin are created by the CATIA Software which are then repeated in three directions. The created cellular structures can be seen in Crushable foam model is used as a macro model for estimating foam mechanical behavior. As illustrated in Then, 3D finite element microstructures of the closed-cell foam are imported into LS-DYNA software. In order to analyze the nonlinear behavior of microstructure of aluminum foams under intense dynamic loadings precisely, the PLASTIC KINEMATIC model, material type 3 in LS-DYNA, is employed to simulate the cell-walls, aluminum alloy. This model is suitable to model isotropic and kinematic hardening plasticity with the option of including rate effects. Standard computational parameters are as follows: mass density ρ In order to incorporate the strain rate sensitivity of the base material, the well-known Cowper–Symonds relation Element type used for the CT-scan foam model is of the type solid 4-point tetrahedral. For meshing Kelvin foam structure, shell elements have been used. Since the density of the foam is an effective factor on its behavior, then the density of the created structure has to be similar to the foam sample used in the experimental test. In order to match the values of density for specimen and numerical model on the other hand, different values for thickness of shell elements are considered which is calculated according to the following relation In order to analyze the effect of the low velocity impact on the foam samples, a number of experimental tests are first conducted and these results are compared with those of the numerical methods. Although the curve associated to the crushable foam model predicts almost the same values for plateau stress as other methods, i.e. unit cell, CT scan and experimental data, the resulting peak stress by the model, however, is not satisfactory. In higher values of the foam density, an agreement between numerical results and experimental data is still observed. The curve associated to CT scan method, however, predicts more precise results in greater densities, while the Kelvin unit cell overestimates stresses. Similar to the low density case, the crushable foam model is still incapable of predicting initial peak stress. The fact that CT scan method provides more precise results in comparison with Kelvin unit cell is expected since the model provided by the former is more similar to foam samples in comparison with the latter. The values of peak stress as well as energy absorption of low velocity impact (3.7 Care must be taken that the precision provided by CT scan method is a result of high computational cost of solving finite element governing equations. It may be concluded that although CT scan method is of high precision, (Kelvin) unit cell provide an appropriate initial estimate in many applications.  The results of present section imply that although both methods provide appropriate results in foam impact problem, stresses predicted by the CT scan method are more precise in lower velocities. On the other hand, Kelvin unit cell provides more smooth results in higher velocities. For various initial velocities as well as foam densities, crushable foam model is incapable of peak stress prediction and the values of plateau stress are in agreement with experimental data only for foam samples with low densities. In this paper low velocity impact behavior of closed-cell aluminum foam is studied numerically and experimentally. Foam structure is simulated using Kelvin unit cell, CT-Scan method and also crushable foam models. Then, foam models are analyzed under low velocity impact test via LS-DYNA software. The results of the FEM are compared to the results of the experimental tests. The comparison indicates that the kelvin and CT-Scan models are of high accuracy and efficiency. The effect of the two important parameters including impactor velocity and foam density on the impact response is investigated. The results show that: Among various methods discussed herein, the CT scan method is deemed to be the most precise scheme to characterize micro-structures of foam materials. The evidence to this fact is the remarkable agreement between numerical results obtained by the CT scan method and experimental data. Finite element solutions always predict higher values of peak stress and energy absorption compared with experimental data which is more significant in greater densities. By increasing the initial velocity in a constant density, the values of peak stress as well as energy absorption increase. In a constant initial velocity, increasing the foam density from 0.2 to 0.5 gr/cm3 leads to higher values of peak stress and energy absorption. Among various methods discussed herein, the CT scan method is deemed to be the most precise scheme to characterize micro-structures of foam materials such that a remarkable agreement between numerical results obtained by the CT scan method and experimental data is observed. By increasing the velocity of impactor, the values of peak stress increase in CT scan method. Furthermore, finite element overestimates the results, as expected. One of the most accessible scheme to characterize porous materials is the crushable foam model in LS-DYNA software involving low computational cost. Among various values for foam densities as well as impactor initial velocities, it is always observed that crushable foam model is incapable of peak stress prediction. On the other hand, plateau stress is estimated in a satisfactory way, especially in the case of foam density 0.2