The ionic dissociation of NaCl has long been thought to be fully understood in terms of the simultaneous removal and hydration of the constituent ions from the surface. However, there are two observations that trouble the current model of ionic dissociation. The first of these observations is that the surface is charged. This has been established by several of studies using laser doppler electrophoresis and membrane electrochemistry. This has not been accounted for in descriptions of ionic dissociation, dissolution or crystallization of salt. The second observation is that the current model, which envisages sodium and chloride ions hydrating and departing the surface, does not yield a rate law consistent with experimental data. These two observations are resolved in this work. It is proposed that the removal of ions form ionic vacancies while deposition forms excess ions on the surface. Vacancies and excess ions are the source of surface charge. The effect of this surface charge affects the rate of removal of ions from the surface, resulting in a feedback mechanism: ionic vacancies are formed by the removal of ions, which affects the rate at which ions are removed. From this model, expressions are derived for the establishment of the charge on the surface and for the kinetics of ionic dissociation, dissolution and crystallization of NaCl.The ionic dissociation of common salt (NaCl) involves the interaction of ions on the salt surface with water and their transfer to the bulk of the solution where they remain as stable hydrated ions (see There are two troubling pieces of evidence that impact on the mechanism of ionic dissociation of salt that have not been addressed. The first piece of evidence is that the surface of salt in an aqueous solution, even in concentrated brines, is charged ( The purpose of this article is to draw attention to these two pieces of additional evidence, and to propose a mechanism that explains these two additional pieces of evidence in a manner that is consistent with the Arrhenius postulate. The mechanism of reaction that is proposed here may be applicable to several fields where solids are in contact with solutions. The surfaces of salt particles in a slurry of salt particles and aqueous solution are charged. This somewhat surprising property has been known qualitatively and quantitatively since at least the 1960s. Industrially, the difference in the surface charge of NaCl and KCl has been exploited to separate KCl from NaCl by flotation (in saturated brines) in the production of potash. The observation of charge on the surface of salt in aqueous solutions is not inconsequential. If the surface is charged, the nature of this surface charge will itself have a strong influence on the movement of cations and anions to and from the surface of the salt because they are also charged entities. Thus, acknowledging that the surface is charged raises questions about the effect that this charge has on the mechanism of ionic dissociation. The property of a charged surface is not anticipated in the current description of the ionic dissociation of salt, which envisages Na Relaxing the assumption of the simultaneous removal of cations and anions by allowing the anions and cations to be removed independently from one another would allow for the development of a non-stoichiometric surface, and hence a surface charge. However, doing so raises a subtle question concerning the principle that governs reaction stoichiometry - if the anions and cations are removed/deposited independently how is stoichiometric dissolution/crystallization established? In other words, the mechanism of charge formation must also provide a condition for reaction stoichiometry. The observation of surface charge seems to suggest that a modification of the currently-accepted description of ionic dissociation is required. If it is true that the mechanism of reaction is incompletely described, such a disparity might be visible in the rate data. That such a disparity exists is demonstrated next. In the currently-accepted model (see for example, The rate of the forward reaction is proportional to the surface area. The rate of the reverse reaction, that is, the deposition of sodium and chloride ions to form new surface material of NaCl, is proportional to the surface area and the concentrations of sodium ions and to chloride ions. Thus, the rate of dissociation per unit area for Eq. Consider a test of Eq. According to Eq. It is this difficulty to correctly describe this set of rate data that requires that the current view of the mechanism of dissociation be re-examined. There are alternative models that can produce a linear relationship like that shown in For these reasons, a new mechanism is required. A new mechanism that addresses these issues is presented in the next section. Consider the following situation. The surface consists of Na The net amount of vacancies and deposited ions on the surface may lead to an excess charge. This excess surface charge is dynamic, in the sense of the concept of “dynamic equilibrium” – anions and cations are leaving and arriving at the surface all the time. This means that the sign and magnitude of the surface charge will be dependent on the relative rates of removal and deposition of anions and cations. The existence of a surface charge, though, must affect the rate of removal of the individual anions and cations from the surface. Thus, there is a feedback mechanism: the surface charge affects the rate of removal of ions of different charge, but the rate of removal of the ions determines the surface charge. The purpose of this section is to derive expressions for the surface charge and rate of dissolution based on this feedback between surface charge and removal of ions. The net charge, or excess charge, on the surface, The symbols A common representation of the interface between a solid and solution is the Helmholtz model, in which the interface is viewed as a capacitor ( The quantity that is required from these relationships is their rate of change so that a rate expression can be derived. Combining Eqs. The cationic vacancies are formed by the removal of anions from the surface, and destroyed by the deposition of anions onto the surface. The net rate of formation of cationic vacancies, Eq. A well-known phenomenon in dissolution studies is the observation that the rate of removal of one component is initially higher than that of another before they eventually settle to the stoichiometric condition ( Stoichiometric conditions are established once a stationary state is established, that is, when the potential does not change. Under these conditions, the left-hand side of Eq. Inspection of Eq. The surface charge and the interfacial surface potential affect the rate at which the cations and anions are removed from or deposited onto the surface. The functional dependence on the potential difference is an exponential form, more specifically this dependence is in the form of a Boltzmann-type function, similar to that found in electrochemical rates. The net rate of removal of anions and cations is therefore given by Eqs. The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. Eqs. Substitution of Eq. At equilibrium, the rate given by Eq. The rate expression can be rearranged in terms of the equilibrium constant as given in Eq. Eq. The numerator of the right-hand side of Eq. If an experiment was performed in which common salt is dissolved or crystallized without the addition of other ions, the relationship The value of the equilibrium constant is obtained from the concentration of the salt at saturation, which at 25 °C is 36.12 g/100 g water ( The correspondence between the proposed mechanism and the measured data is shown in Ionic dissociation, therefore, might be thought of as two “partial reactions” linked by surface potential ( The role of the surface potential is hidden in the sense that it does not explicitly appear in either the rate expression or the equilibrium expression, as can be seen from Eqs. It is because the surface potential difference is not explicit, but is a hidden variable, its importance has not been identified previously. Most importantly, its explicit identification here has important implications for the several related scientific fields. Eq. There is the possibility that one of the partial reactions, either for the removal of the anion or for the removal of the cation, reaches equilibrium without the other ( The work shows that the currently-held view of the dissociation of salt is deficient in two respects: (i) it does not account for or predict the presence of a charge on the surface, and (ii) it is inconsistent with the experimental data for the rate of dissolution. An alternative view is presented, in which the excess surface charge is formed due to a difference in the rate of removal of anions or cations during an initial phase of non-stoichiometric dissolution. With the passage of time, a stationary state is attained due to the feedback mechanism that the charge affects the rate of removal of ions. The attainment of the stationary state is the prerequisite for stoichiometric dissolution. This proposal has been formulated mathematically and is shown to be consistent with the data for the dissolution of salt. Test work on the formation of the surface charge on salt under different conditions is required to test the proposed theory further. Should the proposed model be verified with rigorous experimental testing of Eq. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest.