All bisphosphonates available for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis reduce bone turnover, increase bone mineral density (BMD) and thereby reduce fracture incidence. Incident vertebral fractures are a key efficacy endpoint in bisphosphonate trials. They are less influenced by extrinsic factors (e.g., falls) than non-vertebral fractures and are highly predictive for future vertebral and non-vertebral fractures. The registration studies for daily oral alendronate, risedronate and ibandronate all demonstrated substantial reductions in vertebral fracture risk vs. placebo in postmenopausal women with established osteoporosis: 44% and 47% for daily alendronate, 41% and 49% for daily risedronate and 62% and 50% for daily and intermittent ibandronate, respectively.
                  The effect of bisphosphonate treatment on non-vertebral fractures in these trials was variable, and highlights the difference in nature and incidence of non-vertebral fractures compared with vertebral fractures. Daily risedronate demonstrated a 39% reduction in non-vertebral fracture risk in the overall study population (P
                     =0.02 vs. placebo), but failed to achieve a significant effect in a second study. Alendronate and ibandronate did not show a significant effect in the overall populations of their respective trials, however, in high-risk patients (femoral neck BMD <−2.5), daily alendronate achieved a risk reduction of 36% on all clinical fractures. Also in high-risk subgroups, daily ibandronate showed 69% (P
                     =0.012 vs. placebo) and 60% (P
                     =0.037 vs. placebo) reductions in non-vertebral fracture risk (femoral neck BMD <−3.0 or lumbar spine BMD <−2.5 plus a history of clinical fracture in the past 5 years, respectively).
                  Less frequent dosing regimens, which may improve patient compliance with treatment, have become standard in the management of postmenopausal osteoporosis. To establish the efficacy of a new regimen of a daily drug with proven antifracture efficacy, a bridging study is commonly used with surrogate endpoints of antifracture efficacy such as BMD and bone turnover markers. MOBILE (Monthly Oral iBandronate In LadiEs; a bridging study) confirmed that monthly oral ibandronate is non-inferior and even superior to daily oral ibandronate for gains in lumbar spine BMD (primary endpoint) and total hip BMD. These gains in BMD suggest that at least equivalent antifracture efficacy may be expected from this regimen in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis.Both vertebral and non-vertebral fractures have a devastating effect on the lives of women with postmenopausal osteoporosis, and the prevention of these fractures is the key treatment goal. Pain is one of the major consequences of vertebral fracture; some patients experience intolerable, debilitating pain over several weeks or months Fracture prevention must be at the foremost of physicians' minds when they are considering the most effective treatment to prescribe. When exploring the efficacy of the available therapies for postmenopausal osteoporosis, three main determinants of fracture risk reduction must be taken into consideration: bone mineral density (BMD), bone turnover (resorption and formation) and the structural and material properties of bone. These factors all contribute to bone strength, which in turn determines fracture resistance. The current cornerstone of osteoporosis treatment is antiresorptive therapy, of which the leading agents are the oral nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates, alendronate, risedronate and ibandronate. These three bisphosphonates all have a similar mode of action, which leads to the reduction of the excessive bone turnover and increases in BMD, factors associated with the risk for fractures. Once absorbed and distributed in the body, bisphosphonates localise at, and bind to, bone mineral surfaces exposed by bone resorbing cells (osteoclasts) as part of the normal bone remodeling cycle BMD is an important surrogate measure of fracture risk. Wasnich and Miller have shown that greater increases in lumbar spine BMD result in larger reductions in vertebral fracture risk Vertebral fractures are a key efficacy endpoint in bisphosphonate trials. They are less influenced by extrinsic factors (e.g., falls) than non-vertebral fractures and are highly predictive for future vertebral and non-vertebral fractures In trials of new osteoporosis therapies, study design influences treatment outcomes; demonstration of an effect on fracture risk is dependent on several independent factors including baseline BMD The Fracture Intervention Trials (FIT) were the registration studies for daily oral alendronate In FIT1 New vertebral fractures, the primary endpoint, were defined by morphometry as a decrease of 20% (and at least 4 mm) in at least one vertebral height between the baseline and latest follow-up radiograph In the VERT North America (NA) study The primary endpoint was the incidence of new vertebral fractures, defined by morphometry as a decrease of 15% or more in the anterior, posterior or middle vertebral height in a vertebra that was normal at baseline The BONE study The primary endpoint of BONE was the rate of new morphometric vertebral fractures after 3 years. Similar to FIT1, morphological diagnosis of a new vertebral fracture required a relative height reduction of at least 20% and an absolute decrease of at least 4 mm in any vertebral body height from the baseline radiograph The daily bisphosphonate registration studies were not designed to show non-vertebral fracture efficacy, although data were reported for all studies as either a secondary endpoint or non-vertebral fractures captured as adverse events. However, randomized controlled trials in evidence-based medicine are designed to answer one question only: the primary endpoint. In addition, non-vertebral fracture rates are influenced by intrinsic and extrinsic factors leading to heterogeneous risk profiles in the different study populations. Different outcomes are seen as dependent on each study's criteria, i.e., exclusion of traumatic fractures and exclusion of some fracture locations, as well as differing risk for non-vertebral fracture, and inadequate statistical power. The effect of bisphosphonate treatment on non-vertebral fracture risk in the daily registration studies was variable, and highlights the difficulty in assessing non-vertebral fractures in trials that were designed with vertebral fractures or all clinical fractures as the primary endpoint. In addition, there was wide variability across the studies in terms of baseline BMD In the FIT studies, non-vertebral clinical fractures were confirmed by radiographic reports In the VERT studies, non-vertebral clinical fractures were recorded throughout the study and were confirmed by radiographic reports The Hip Intervention Program (HIP) was a large study ( In the BONE study, non-vertebral fractures were identified symptomatically and reported as adverse events by the investigator. Suspected clinical fractures were radiographically confirmed. Non-osteoporotic fractures (i.e., fractures of the hands, feet, face, and skull) were excluded from subsequent analyses Rates of hip fracture are distinctly lower than those for vertebral or even non-vertebral fracture; consequently, demonstration of positive pharmacological effects is considerably more difficult. Robust assessment requires large patient populations, in excess of those required to demonstrate vertebral antifracture efficacy, and the enrolment of patients who are at high risk for hip fracture (e.g., the elderly, or those with a very low femoral neck BMD In the HIP study, where the occurrence of hip fracture was the primary endpoint, a significant effect on hip fractures was seen when different doses of risedronate treatment (2.5 mg and 5 mg daily) were pooled together: 2.8% vs. 3.9% with placebo; relative risk reduction 30% ( When considering a trial design for a new drug regimen it is essential to question whether it is ethical to deny effective osteoporosis treatment to patients who are at risk of fracture To ensure that no patient is denied effective treatment, the bridging study concept is employed and accepted for trials of new regimens of drugs that already have a regimen with proven vertebral fracture efficacy. A bridging study is a randomized, double-blind study of the new regimen vs. the established regimen using surrogate endpoints that are indicative of antifracture efficacy instead of actual fracture incidence. Surrogate endpoints include BMD and biochemical markers of bone turnover, both of which are readily measurable. Changes in BMD and bone turnover markers are recognized indicators of antifracture efficacy Recent studies of weekly regimens of oral alendronate and risedronate and a monthly regimen of oral ibandronate have used the bridging study method to compare the new regimen with the established daily regimen of the same agent, all of which have proven antifracture efficacy. In these bridging studies, increases in lumbar spine BMD with daily (10 mg) and weekly (70 mg) oral alendronate These data from the daily vs. weekly bridging studies suggest that increasing the dosing interval beyond daily requires an increase in the dose in order to achieve equal efficacy. It can be seen that extending the interval from daily to weekly using only a cumulative dose resulted in a slight drop off in efficacy in terms of BMD gains. Therefore it was assumed that for ibandronate, extending the interval from daily to monthly would require a dose adaptation for optimal efficacy. The cumulative daily dose for ibandronate would be 2.5 mg The currently available nitrogen-containing oral daily bisphosphonates have consistently shown a significant 41–62% reduction in the risk of vertebral fractures in different populations of osteoporotic patients, with different degrees of severity of the disease. However, their effect on non-vertebral fractures varies from study to study, with an overall magnitude that is less than for vertebral fractures, but is more pronounced in patients who are at relatively high risk for fracture. In addition, ibandronate demonstrated vertebral fracture efficacy with an intermittent regimen. Due to ethical issues with placebo-controlled, studies for agents that have proven fracture efficacy, new bisphosphonate regimens must be evaluated through bridging studies, comparing the new regimen with the established daily regimen using surrogate endpoints for fracture such as BMD and markers of bone turnover. Bridging studies of alendronate and risedronate have shown a slight trend towards reduced efficacy in terms of gains in BMD when weekly doses equivalent to the cumulative daily dose were compared with the daily dose. Therefore, for the study of monthly oral ibandronate, higher doses than the cumulative daily dose were investigated and these have proven to be superior to the daily dose for gains in BMD. As the daily regimen has proven antifracture efficacy, and BMD is a validated surrogate for fracture efficacy, the superior monthly regimen has the potential to improve fracture outcomes beyond the daily regimen. The author would like to thank Charlotte Kennerley (medical writer) for her editorial assistance.