The shrinking core model (SCM) has been extensively applied in the kinetics analysis of particulate systems. This is because in its classical form it is one of the simplest models developed for fluid–solid reactions. However, it requires single-sized solid grains failing to describe the leaching kinetics for broad particle size distributions (PSDs). The current investigation successfully applied an extension of the SCM to the leaching of chalcopyrite with a broad PSD in a mixed chloride–sulphate solution. Such a medium was selected because there is renewed attention to leaching in mixed systems due to the increasing utilization of saline waters in both leaching and bioleaching of sulphide ores. Moreover, chloride is a catalyst of chalcopyrite leaching. Specifically, the effects of temperature (70°C to 90°C) and reagent (Fe3+, Cu2+ and Cl−) concentrations on the leaching kinetics were determined. The results showed that chalcopyrite leaching was faster with Cu2+ (larger rate constant) than with Fe3+, but the activation energy was similar in both cases with 66.6kJ/mol for 0.5mol/L of Cu2+ and 66.8kJ/mol with 1.0mol/L Fe3+.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Hydrometallurgical processes developed to treat chalcopyrite ores and/or concentrates can be classified as nitrate, chloride, sulphate or ammonia leaching with respect to the applied leaching solution. Regardless of the selected leaching agent the presence of an oxidant such as ferric iron, cupric ions or oxygen is always required to oxide the sulphide and release copper. Notwithstanding, sulphate-based leaching has some advantages over other leaching media because sulphate leaching is generally simpler and better understood and the recovery of copper by solvent extraction–electrolysis is relatively straightforward. However, there is a critical shortcoming: the leaching kinetics of chalcopyrite is slow in ferric sulphate systems ( The mechanisms proposed for the dissolution of chalcopyrite in both sulphate and chloride media are still very controversial and several alternative mechanisms have been suggested. The oxidative dissolution of chalcopyrite in acid ferric or cupric solutions can be described by the mixed-potential electrochemical model and the following anodic reaction is proposed ( Eq. Elemental sulphur has been commonly detected as a product of chalcopyrite dissolution, but the formation of metal-deficient sulphides in acidic media has also been suggested. The formation of intermediate non-stoichiometric phases is represented by The non-stoichiometric phase presented in Covellite (CuS) was positively detected on mineral particles after leaching in chloride ( Copper leaching in chloride systems has been investigated for quite some time ( The shrinking core model (SCM) ( Examples of the SCM application to model chalcopyrite leaching comprise the following systems: (i) hydrogen peroxide ( Therefore, the current work investigated the leaching kinetics of a chalcopyrite sample, taking into account the effect of the particle size distribution (PSD) through the  For a chemically-controlled process, the fraction unconverted (1-X For an ash/inert layer diffusion-controlled process, no algebraic expression can be obtained for f(D,t). The value of f(D,t) has to be determined for each D, using Finally, for a liquid film-diffusion controlled process: For a multi-sized PSD, the particles of smaller diameter react faster than those with the larger sizes. Therefore, the fraction of unreacted (FU) particles will be also a function of the PSD, namely: where p(D) D g(D,t) D  Therefore, the overall conversion or fraction reacted is given as The Rosin–Rammler PSD was applied in the current work. The sample utilized in the leaching experiments was a chalcopyrite chunk, which was crushed and then ground in an orbital mill. This sample was subjected to analysis in a laser particle size analyser, model Cilas 1064 and the average particle size was measured as 19.6 The chemical leaching tests were performed batchwise, using a 500-mL unbaffled (7.5 Throughout the experiments, a 0.1% (w/v) solids concentration was utilized and 1.5 The morphological features of the chalcopyrite sample and reactions products formed in the current study were analysed by SEM-EDS. The solid particles were mounted in epoxy resin and then polished to a flat, mirrored surface. Samples were carbon coated afterwards and then examined in a VEGA 3LMH model from TESCAN. The leaching residue was filtered, washed with distilled water dried at room temperature and stored in a freezer to avoid or reduce oxidation until observation. Because of the reduced availability of freshwater in some countries, the mining industry is relying increasingly on seawater for mineral processing and hydrometallurgical operations. In this new industrial context mixed sulphate–chloride systems will have important implications on sulphide leaching and downstream processes. Mixed systems are also considered because they are less expensive than leaching in pure chloride systems. The positive impact of chloride ions on copper extraction in sulphate media is well known, but there is no agreement on what is the threshold value in which copper extraction stops to be benefited. Whereas chloride is a prerequisite for the Cu The effect of the leaching agent (Fe Chalcopyrite dissolution reached 46% with 0.5 It appears from Temperature is an important parameter in the dissolution of copper sulphides and both faster leaching kinetics and larger extraction yields are expected when it is increased. Copper extraction increased from 17% to 50% as the temperature also increased from 70 From data presented in As stated, the classical form of the SCM is valid solely for reacting particles of the same size (monosize PSD), which was not the case in the current work. Therefore, the mathematical approach developed by In terms of particle size distributions, the Rosin–Rammler function ( In The cumulative Rosin–Rammler distribution (F) can be represented as follows: Substituting D The effect of the PSD on the kinetics parameters can be related to the covariance (CV) of the distribution. According to The cumulative PSD of the chalcopyrite particles depicted in Such a hypothesis was confirmed with a computer program written in mathematica 9.0 to solve where The activation energies were calculated from the values of The activation energy encountered in the current work with cupric ions, 66.6 Despite all issues related to corrosion of pipes and reactors, the presence of chloride ions largely improves chalcopyrite leaching. Even in a bioleaching context, it can have beneficial effects on copper extraction because some chloride tolerant bacterial strains have been recently isolated. The current work shows that in either system (Fe As suggested by the high values of activation energy, chalcopyrite leaching with chloride ions is highly temperature dependent, with faster kinetics in Cu The financial support from the funding agencies