The success of a tunnel-boring machine (TBM) in a given project depends on the functionality of all components of the system, from the cutters to the backup system, and on the entire rolling stock. However, no part of the machine plays a more crucial role in the efficient operation of the machine than its cutterhead. The design of the cutterhead impacts the efficiency of cutting, the balance of the head, the life of the cutters, the maintenance of the main bearing/gearbox, and the effectiveness of the mucking along with its effects on the wear of the face and gage cutters/muck buckets. Overall, cutterhead design heavily impacts the rate of penetration (ROP), rate of machine utilization (U), and daily advance rate (AR). Although there has been some discussion in commonly available publications regarding disk cutters, cutting forces, and some design features of the head, there is limited literature on this subject because the design of cutterheads is mainly handled by machine manufacturers. Most of the design process involves proprietary algorithms by the manufacturers, and despite recent attention on the subject, the design of rock TBMs has been somewhat of a mystery to most end-users. This paper is an attempt to demystify the basic concepts in design. Although it may not be sufficient for a full-fledged design by the readers, this paper allows engineers and contractors to understand the thought process in the design steps, what to look for in a proper design, and the implications of the head design on machine operation and life cycle.A tunnel-boring machine (TBM) is a “tunnel-production factory”; as such, all parts of the production line should be functional in order to make the final product, which is the next meter of excavated tunnel. TBMs have existed since the mid-19th century, both in concept and in reality, and have been an integral part of the tunneling industry since the 1950s. The continuous improvement of TBMs and their capabilities since their introduction, especially in the past two decades, has made them the method of choice in many tunneling projects longer than ∼1.5 km. Of course, other issues related to the tunnel application or ground conditions may change this choice, and may require the use of competing systems such as drill and blast and/or the use of the sequential excavation method (SEM), also known as the new Austrian tunneling method (NATM), which primarily uses roadheaders. Although the selection and choice of TBM specifications appear to be straightforward, this seemingly simple task has proven to be challenging in several projects Designing the cutterhead involves the following factors: the choice of the cutter type, spacing of the cutters for the given geology along the tunnel, cutterhead shape and profile, balance of the head, efficient mucking, position and design of the muck buckets, access to the face and allotted space for letting miners reach the face, consideration for the structural joints and assembly of the head, and cutting clearance for the cutters and the body of the TBM. Each of these design parameters has some implication for the efficiency of the cutting process as well as the maintenance of the cutters, cutterhead, and cutterhead support. Another issue with the design of the head is the smooth operation and balance of the head, which allows for better steering of the machine, especially in mixed face conditions. Despite the importance of the cutterhead design of a TBM, the amount of published literature on this subject is very limited Some activity on this topic has taken place in recent years, as the TBM market seems to be growing in Asia. Research on this topic has mainly taken place in the state key laboratories in China, and has also been done by researchers in Turkey and Korea This section offers an overview of cutterhead design in terms of simple steps to allow the reader to understand the process and be able to evaluate the critical design issues when dealing with the acquisition of a new rock TBM or the refurbishment of an existing machine for a given tunnel geology. The first step in the process of cutterhead design and in the evaluation of a TBM for a project with a given geology is cutter selection. More information and a general guide on cutter selection for rock-cutting applications can be found in a paper by Rostami (1) (2) (3) Note that the cutterhead rotational speed (measured in revolutions per minute) on hard rock TBMs is a function of the disk cutter size and velocity limit, and the diameter of the TBM, as follows: The cutter tip width, The second step in cutterhead design involves the selection of the cutting geometry, including the spacing and location of the cutters on the profile. Selection of the spacing and penetration is a function of the cutting forces. Although the allowable cutter load is the first parameter to check when selecting the cutting geometry, it is necessary to keep in mind that an overall check of the TBM thrust, torque, and power may be needed in order to verify the assumption of the penetration at the end of the design cycle. Optimum spacing is a concept that has been discussed in the literature; it refers to the spacing at which the required energy of rock cutting/excavation is minimized for a given depth of penetration The optimum spacing can be as high as 110 mm in softer, more brittle rocks such as sandstone and limestone. To determine optimum spacing in a more systematic way, it is prudent to evaluate the cutting forces based on the selected disk geometry (diameter and tip width) and the rock physical properties. Various formulas and models have been developed and introduced for this purpose; these can be used at this stage to assist in determining the most probable depth of penetration that can be achieved under the given circumstances. One of the most frequently used formulas for the estimation of cutting forces acting on disk cutters is the “Colorado School of Mines (CSM) model” Individual cutting forces can be estimated as follows: normal force The estimated forces can be used as a measure to find the maximum penetration into the rock within the cutter load capacity for the selected disc, and hence the spacing from the abovementioned S/P ratio. Users can use other formulas for estimating cutting forces as per Refs. TBM cutterheads can have a cone, dome, or flat shape. Cone and dome shape cutterheads have gradually been phased out, and new machines primarily use flat-profile cutterheads. The flat-profile cutterhead ( A detailed cutterhead design starts with the development of the cutterhead profile. The profile is the cross-section of the face where the cutters excavate the rock and leave marks of their tracks. An example of a TBM cutterhead profile is given in The process of cutterhead profile design starts with assigning the location of the first cutter from the center and continues with allocating all the subsequent cutters relative to the previous ones. For this purpose, the notion of cutter spacing can be used. The cut or cutter spacing, as discussed earlier, is the lateral distance between the cutters. It can be expressed in linear terms, from the center point of the tip of one cutter to the next. Alternatively, it can be expressed in terms of the distance between the cutters in a radial direction (i.e., radius from center). Geometric equations can be used to estimate The TBM diameter, Angle In practice, the first four disk cutters are combined in a set called the “center quad.” This is because of the lack of space at the center, where there is no room for the installation of individual cutters, and because the mounting assembly (hub) for the cutters does not allow the placement of the cutters in such a way that the desired spacing can be reached. There are other arrangements for the center in which six cutters are placed together; however, the overall arrangement is the same as that of the quad, except that there are six cutters instead of four. Other cutters can be allocated along the line of the profile based on the assigned (optimum) spacings. This means that when a quad is allocated, the fifth cutter can assume a radius of about 450 mm (assuming a 100 mm spacing between the fourth and fifth cutters). Given the clearances of the cutter housing, the cutter can be allocated to the area adjacent to the center quad without much interference. The same applies for the sixth cutter and onward. Thus, these cutters in the so-called face area can be allocated to the profile without much of a problem, until they reach the transition and gage area. The cutter tilt angles start at the transition area, and the offset from the face also increases (coordinate To allocate the cutters in the gage area, once the curvature of the head is established, cutters can be assigned to follow this curvature at an angle of about The number of cutters at the gage area is a function of the hardness of the rock and of how conservative the designer wants to be in protecting the gage cutters. It is necessary to keep in mind that in addition to the load of the regular cutters along the face, the gage cutters must go through the pile of muck at the face, which causes additional load and wear. For these reasons, the spacing of the cutters in the gage area is reduced to relieve these cutters and reduce the extraneous stresses on them. Given the radius of the curvature of the gage area—which could be 500 mm, for example—the length of the section of the curve (arc) would be around:  Additional cutters can be placed on the gage, and particularly at the last position. These cutters are called “copy cutters” and are effectively placed on the profile at the location of the last cutter to provide relief to the last cutter, thus ensuring that the diameter of the tunnel is not reduced due to wear on the gage cutters. Although machines designed for softer and less abrasive rocks do not typically have copy cutters, TBMs used in harder, more abrasive (igneous or granitic) rocks have one copy cutter—that is, there are two cutters per position in the last spot. It is a common practice to use cutters with a wider tip or disks with a carbide insert in the gage cutters at the last ∼2–3 positions, in order to ensure that the cutting diameter is not compromised. Some machines also have one or two cutters that are mounted on an assembly and that can be extruded by 10–25 mm beyond the nominal profile (bored diameter). These cutters can be used for overcut on single or double shield machines to avoid jamming due to ground convergence. They can also cut a relief slot for the gage cutter in case of excessive wear on the gage disks, which can result in a reduced tunnel diameter. In such cases, this slot is needed to avoid overloading the gage cutters in the first few rotations after the changing of the old cutter, or even to make room for the installation of the old cutters, which otherwise cannot be secured in place, especially in back-loading cutterheads. With the profile of the head selected and the position of the cutters (i.e., the cutter radius and tilt angles) defined, the next question is how to spread the cutters around the head for a uniform distribution. The implications of the distribution of the cutters around the head are the balance of the cutterhead in uniform material and, more importantly, the balance of the resultant forces in mixed ground conditions and the magnitude of side loading on the disk cutters. For a given profile, if the cutters are clustered in a certain location on the head, they can cause unbalanced and eccentric forces. In these cases, the resultant force is away from the center of the cutterhead, resulting in non-uniform loading of the main bearing. Eccentric forces are caused by the summation or superimposition of the cutting forces of various disk cutters. If the cutterhead is fully balanced, it will ideally create a resultant force that is parallel to the tunnel/TBM axis and at the center. If there is a shift in the resultant force causing it to move away from the axis of rotation, or if the resultant force is at an angle to the machine axis, it causes moments relative to the A good cutterhead design and cutter distribution avoids clustering of the cutters in any area of the head, and thus avoids eccentric forces and moments. The best and easiest approach to assign the location of the cutters on the cutterhead is to use the concept of angular spacing. This refers to using a polar (or cylindrical) coordinate system to allocate cutters using the radius from the center and an angle relative to a reference line. The radius from the center is already defined by the profile, and the angle can be defined relative to an axis (i.e., the Using this methodology allows the distribution of the cutters on the head to be controlled. To avoid unbalanced cutter distribution around the head, the angular spacing used in the design should permit the optimal distribution of cutters around the head General principles for good and optimized cutter distribution for the cutterhead design are as follows: A cutterhead should have a uniform distribution of cutters around the head. For example, if the cutterhead is broken into The easiest way to achieve a good distribution is to try to maintain cutterhead symmetry as much as possible. This is easier to maintain when the number of cutters is an even number. Then for cutter It is preferable to avoid placing cutters over muck buckets, cutterhead joints, and cutterhead structure, if it is known. It is important to be cognizant of the minimum space required to fit a cutter on the head. In other words, the cutters should be able to physically fit the prescribed pattern. Although the designer attempts to create a uniform distribution and maintain symmetry, it is nearly impossible to obtain a fully symmetrical design and perfectly uniform distribution of cutters due to practical reasons. In such cases, the designer can use gage cutters to try to maintain the balance of the head and minimize the eccentric forces. With these guidelines in mind, it is possible to either design a cutterhead or be able to check the balance of a given design. The available patterns for cutterhead designs can be divided into three categories as follows: (1) (2) (3)  One important note to keep in mind is that the design of the cutterhead and the cutter allocation are not purely mathematical exercises as indicated in some publications, and that the result may be somewhat asymmetrical and unbalanced. At this stage, the design of the cutterhead is an interactive task between the selection of the number and location of the buckets and the adjustment of the location of the gage cutters to prevent interference with the buckets. This is done by manually changing the angular position of the cutters in this area to place them between the buckets or within the allowed space. The same logic applies to the cutterhead joints, where the cutterhead may be split into pieces to accommodate a certain size requirement for assembly, for transfer into the shaft or starter tunnel, or to contain the weight of the cutterhead in larger sized machines ( The selection of the number, size, and allocation of the buckets is an integral part of the cutterhead design. The number and size of the buckets are proportional to the anticipated volume of material excavated, and increase with the expected ROP of the TBM in softer rocks. This is to accommodate efficient mucking and removal of the cut material from the face in order to avoid erosion of the face plate, wear of the cutters, and accumulation of muck and fines in the invert, the latter of which can cause excessive load on the gage cutters and premature failure. Another issue is the size of the opening of the buckets, which is somewhat controlled by the expected sizing of the muck and is selected to allow certain size blocks into the muck chutes. The typical range of material that is allowed to enter the chute is about 100 mm × 100 mm or 100 mm × 150 mm, as the upper limit of the size; blocks larger than this range are kept in the face to be broken by the disks. This is done by the face plate or face shield holding such blocks in the face. Once the number of buckets is known, the buckets are systematically and evenly spread around the head; thus, their angular position will be determined as 360°/ Some examples of programs using an algorithm for cutter distribution around the head are presented here. The basis for cutterhead modeling and for related spreadsheets is discussed elsewhere An interesting setting is the distribution of the cutters at The difference in the performance of TBMs using cutterheads with different patterns in various conditions can be seen by cutterhead modeling, which will be discussed in the following section. Meanwhile, it is important to note that since the cutterhead is rotating, when the cutters are lined up in a spoke pattern, it is likely that quite a few of them will enter or exit a certain formation together, especially if the contact surfaces of different rocks are at the center of the cutterhead. This creates huge variations in the required forces and torques on the cutterhead, significant eccentric resultant force, and uneven loading of the main bearing. For a detailed analysis of cutterhead lacing, each cutter in the profile is analyzed individually and the overall interaction of the forces acting on individual cutters is considered in order to evaluate the cutterhead behavior. In this approach, the spatial locations of the cutters (e.g., the radius from the center, spacing from adjacent cuts and, eventually, true penetration) are considered in determining the cutting forces. These parameters are components of a cylindrical coordinate system ( The procedure permits the identification of potential problem areas where a cutter could be overloaded due to the lacing pattern, and can thus provide a warning. Overloading of a particular cutter can happen despite the fact that the overall thrust and corresponding estimated average cutterloads are well within the thrust limits and nominal capacity of the cutters, as set by the machine manufacturer. In the model, the cutting forces are estimated, a full vector analysis of the forces is performed, and the amount of eccentric forces and moments can be determined. This modeling system also allows for full rotation of the head relative to a reference line in the face, and provides a powerful tool for cutterhead optimization. The model runs for full rotation of the head by changing the value of The ideal situation and best cutterhead design are when the amount of eccentric forces ( Cutterhead balancing at this stage is performed by evenly distributing the cutters around the head in order to achieve minimum eccentric forces; this is often achieved using cutterhead symmetry. For this purpose, cutterhead simulation allows fine tuning of the location of the gage cutters to achieve a balanced cutterhead in case of any interference with muck buckets or cutterhead joints. Detailed cutterhead modeling permits the objective evaluation of various designs and head patterns. It allows quantitative comparison between different designs in any given geological setting. Although the variation of forces for a well-balanced cutterhead in a uniform face is minimal, the variability of forces and moments in mixed ground conditions could be significant. A major advantage of cutterhead modeling is its simulation of mixed ground conditions, in which dissimilar materials (soft and hard rock or rock and fault gouge, etc.) are present at the face. Programming the individual cutters allows the cutting forces in each rock type to be estimated, and thus provides the designer with actual forces in each section of the face. The highest contrast can be observed when the face is split between two formations (with highest differential strength) at the center. In this situation, the components of the eccentric forces and moments are at their maximum. An example of such a condition is given in A quick look at the figures shows that the lacing can impact the magnitude of the eccentric forces and moments, especially when dissimilar materials are cut at the face. In reality, it is very common to have some dissimilarity in the material at the face due to different lithologies, different locations of a joint or a joint set, variability in the strength of the rock, directional properties, anisotropy, and so forth. A comparison of This paper is a summary of the principal concepts involved in the design of cutterheads for hard rock TBMs. The general approach for developing an optimum design has been described in a step-by-step manner. Some design patterns were presented and their implications shown using various examples. It is necessary to keep in mind that the cutterhead will experience unbalanced forces and moments irrespective of the head design; however, uniform distribution of the cutters will minimize the variation of the eccentric forces and out-of-axis moments. An optimum design of the cutterhead will reduce the out-of-axis loading of the bearing, reduce the side forces on the cutters, and generally improve the performance of the machine; it will also reduce the maintenance requirements of the cutters, cutterhead, and drive system. The importance of cutterhead balance is paramount, and design optimization can be done using computer models that allow for variation of the design and evaluation of the forces and moments acting on the cutterhead. These models permit the simulation of various cutting scenarios and their impact on the forces, torque, power, and cutterloads. They can be used to compare various cutterhead design patterns for application under certain working conditions, and to identify possible modifications. These models also allow the estimation of the anticipated forces acting on individual cutters as well as examination of the forces and moments (including cutterhead torque) acting on the entire cutterhead or main bearing under various conditions. The result of a well-designed cutterhead is improved machine performance through higher ROP, low cutter and cutterhead maintenance, and higher machine utilization. Jamal Rostami and Soo-Ho Chang declare that they have no conflict of interest or financial conflicts to disclose.