The effect of blending polyglycols (F150 and DF250) with alcohols (MIBC and pentanol) on bubble size, gas holdup and froth height in a two-phase system has been determined. A synergistic effect on froth height was observed accompanied by a change in bubble size: below the alcohol critical coalescence concentration (CCC) the addition of small amounts of polyglycol decreased bubble size and, unexpectedly, above the alcohol CCC the polyglycol increased bubble size. Gas holdup confirmed the bubble size response. No explanation of the latter effect is immediately apparent. Implications for possible independent control of froth stability and bubble size as a reason for using frother blends are discussed.Frothers are typically non ionic surfactants, commonly alcohols and polyglycols, used in flotation to help reduce bubble size and stabilize froth. This action is related to modification of the air–water interfacial properties but there is no consensus on the mechanisms, particularly with regard to bubble size control ( The observation is that the average bubble size decreases with increasing frother concentration to become approximately constant above a certain concentration ( The second function, froth stabilization, is measured several ways; in this paper we use equilibrium froth height. To refer to both froth stability and gas dispersion the term ‘hydrodynamic properties’ has been suggested ( Rather than single frothers blends sometimes prove more effective ( As a working hypothesis we suggest an advantage of blends is to provide some independent control over the two frother functions, that one frother may control bubble size and a second manipulate froth stability. The dosage of a single frother, arguably, seeks a compromise between these functions. From our knowledge of frothers, alcohols give excellent bubble size reduction with little froth stabilization (in absence of particles) while polyglycols can provide both properties ( The test rig was based on a 3.5 The frothers employed are listed in  The effect on bubble size of adding small amounts of F150 (i.e., well below the F150 CCC) to MIBC compared to MIBC alone is shown in The same behavior is revealed for pentanol in place of MIBC ( As an example, froth height with F150 and pentanol alone and as blends with pentanol as base is shown in The frother blends were characterized using bubble size, gas holdup and froth height. The ambition was to test the independent control hypothesis as the reason blends may offer an advantage over single frothers. Knowing the properties of frothers, alcohols were selected to control bubble size with polyglycols to control froth height. The anticipated demonstration of independence was to keep bubble size constant with alcohol while manipulating froth height with small additions of polyglycol. The blends displayed the synergy on froth height reported by At alcohol concentrations below CCC polyglycol addition decreased bubble size ( An alcohol concentration a little above CCC is arguably the logical operating condition as this gives the minimum bubble size which maximizes bubble surface area flux and bubble size is not sensitive to minor excursions in dosage. At these alcohol levels small additions of polyglycol increased bubble size substantially, in the case of F150 with MIBC by ca. 40% ( Exploring the effect on bubble size above the alcohol CCC then became the focus. A corresponding decrease in gas holdup confirmed the increase in bubble size ( Various synergies are reported for mixed surfactants, including in flotation systems ( The observations are on the air–water system. Particles have a pronounced effect on froth stability ( Testing alcohol/polyglycol frother blends to explore independent control of froth stability and bubble size revealed an unexpected finding: an increase in bubble size with small additions of polyglycol to the alcohol above its critical coalescence concentration. This observation was supported by gas holdup data and was common whether the blend was MIBC or pentanol with F150 or DF250. No immediate explanation is apparent. The first author would like to thank the