Matrix vesicles are lipid bilayer-enclosed structures that initiate extracellular mineral formation. Little attention has been given to how newly formed mineral interacts with the lipid constituents and then emerges from the lumen. To explore whether specific lipids bind to the incipient mineral and if breakdown of the membrane is involved, we analyzed changes in lipid composition and extractability during vesicle-induced calcification. Isolated matrix vesicles were incubated in synthetic cartilage lymph to induce mineral formation. At various times, samples of the lipids were taken for analysis, extracted both before and after demineralization to remove deposited mineral. Phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylinositol both rapidly disappeared from extracts made before decalcification, indicating rapid degradation. However, extracts made after demineralization revealed that phosphatidylserine had become complexed with newly forming mineral. Concomitantly, its levels actually increased, apparently by base-exchange with phosphatidylethanolamine. Though partially complexed with the mineral, phosphatidylinositol was nevertheless rapidly broken down. Sphingomyelin and phosphatidylethanolamine also underwent rapid breakdown, but phosphatidylcholine was degraded more slowly, all accompanied by a buildup of free fatty acids. The data indicate that phosphatidylserine forms complexes that accompany mineral formation, while degradation of other membrane phospholipids apparently enables egress of crystalline mineral from the vesicle lumen.Matrix vesicles (MV) matrix vesicles phosphatidylserine transmission electron microscopy high performance thin-layer chromatography high performance liquid chromatography evaporative light scattering free fatty acids monoacylglycerols collagenase-released MV synthetic cartilage lymph phosphatidylinositol free cholesterol diacylglycerols phosphatidylethanolamine phosphatidylcholine sphingomyelin lysophosphatidylserine lysophosphatidylinositol lysophosphatidylethanolamine lysophosphatidylcholine Since previous work had shown that not all lipids were readily extracted from mineralizing tissues ( Our findings reveal that extensive phospholipid degradation occurred during MV calcification, and this was accompanied by a concomitant rise in the amount of free fatty acids (FFA) apparently released by phospholipases present in the vesicles. The breakdown of MV phospholipids was accompanied by a substantial reduction in the extractability of certain phospholipids, and the composition of MV lipids changed significantly during the process of mineralization. In particular, PS, which became progressively more tightly complexed with nascent mineral, could only be fully extracted after demineralization. It was not only protected from degradation, but was actually synthesized, apparently by a base-exchange mechanism. Large batches of collagenase-released matrix vesicles (CRMV) were isolated from the metatarsal growth plate cartilage of 6− to 8-week-old broiler strain chickens using previously described methods ( To have sufficient material for accurate lipid analyses, the large-scale preparations of CRMV (∼20 mg of protein) were allowed to mineralize by incubation in 600 ml of SCL at 37 °C. At each time point (0, 2, 4, 6, and 24 h) for lipid analysis a 110-ml sample was centrifuged at 100,000 × Lipids were extracted from the CRMV pellets, essentially as previously described ( For qualitative analysis, the pure lipids from the preceding steps were analyzed by HPTLC on Whatman LHP-K silica gel plates as described previously ( For accurate quantitative analysis, the lipids were analyzed using a Shimadzu HPLC (SCL-10A Systems Controller, SIL-10A Auto Injector, Dual LC-10AT Liquid Chromatographs to provide the gradients). The HPLC system was equipped with an Alltech Varex MKIII ELS detector system. Lipids were separated on a Lichrosorb SI-100 4.6 × 250 mm, 10 μm particle size, HPLC column supplied by Alltech Inc. Injection volume was 30−50 μl (autosampler). The two mobile phases used were as follows: A, methanol,water (80:20) (v/v); B, chloroform,methanol,0.1% formic acid (80:20:0.1) (v/v/v). The following gradient program was used: 1) 92% B,8% A for 6 min; 2) 92% B,8% A to 56% B,44% A in 21 min; 3) 56% B,44% A to 20% B,80% A in 2 min, 4) 20% B,80% A to 100% B in 1 min, 5) 100% B to 92% B,8% A in 3 min. Total run time was 33 min, with a solvent flow rate of 1 ml/min. Nitrogen gas, 11.6 pounds per square inch, was used as the carrier at a flow rate of 2.02 standard liters per min in the ELS detector, which was operated at 72 °C. Mineralization induced by the isolated CRMV was monitored by formation of mineral from the SCL during the incubation period. As had been previously observed, there was a progressive induction of mineral formation during incubation of the CRMV with SCL (Fig. Three different methods of analysis were used to assess the lipid composition of CRMV, both before and after incubation with SCL, which induced mineral formation. Initially, for qualitative analysis, HPTLC was used to analyze the various polar and nonpolar lipid classes present in extracts of CRMV made before and after demineralization. From these studies it was evident that significant changes in lipid composition were occurring during MV calcification. Most notable was the dramatic disappearance of PS and phosphatidyl inositol (PI) in extracts made before decalcification after only ∼2 h of incubation (Fig. While densitometric scans of the HPTLC plates afforded reasonable estimation of the levels of individual lipids present, we used HPLC to more accurately measure the quantitative changes in lipid composition. Initially, we employed a highly sensitive UV detection system at 205 nm to quantitate lipids present ( In general agreement with previous analyses ( However, these values were based on the analyses of lipids present in extracts taken at the successive points during MV calcification. During this period, changes in lipid composition were occurring due to both variable lipid degradation and to specific effects on extractability caused by the selective binding of certain lipids to the newly forming mineral. Because of this, an attempt was made to normalize the progressive changes occurring in total lipid composition by combining data on total polar and nonpolar lipids from extracts taken before and after decalcification at Combining data on lipids extractable before and after demineralization at each time point caused only modest (±10%) overall change in the total lipid (phospholipid + nonpolar lipid) content to occur during MV-induced calcification. However, when the fate of the total phospholipid was separated from that of the total nonpolar lipid, major progressive changes in each type of lipid were evident (Fig. Examination of the combined data on individual lipids extractable before or after demineralization revealed major differences in the stability of each class of phospholipid (Table As MV calcification progressed with time, the percentage of the total phospholipid extractable before demineralization decreased concomitantly, and correspondingly, the proportion extractable only after demineralization increased (Fig. Corroborating the impression gained by HPTLC, analysis by HPLC revealed that MV mineralization had a profound effect on the extractability and survival of the two principal acidic phospholipids, PS and PI. At A similar pattern of extractability was seen with PI, but as noted in Table In contrast to the acidic phospholipids, mineralization had only a minor effect on the extractability of the neutral phospholipids. For PE, about 90% of the original was extractable before demineralization at Essentially all (>95%) of the choline-containing phospholipids, PC and SPH, were extractable before demineralization, regardless of the length of incubation or extent of mineralization. Fig. Evident in all lipid extracts of MV were significant amounts of lysophospholipids. LPE, the monoacyl derivative of PE, was the most abundant form representing ∼6% of the total phospholipid for most of the incubation (Table Further insight into the lipid degradation process came from analyses of the nonpolar lipids. Initially at Lipids are integral components of the MV membrane that provides the barrier to confine the contents of the vesicles. MV contain significant levels of internal Ca While there is substantial evidence for the binding of mineral to acidic phospholipids in MV ( To address these issues, we performed detailed analysis of the changes in lipid composition that accompany the onset and progression of MV mineral deposition. Our initial studies using HPTLC (Fig. The decline in phospholipids appears to be due to the action of various phospholipases that degraded these lipids releasing FFA and 1,2-DG), thereby increasing the overall nonpolar lipid level. Which enzymes caused the degradation of the phospholipids that occurred during the mineralization process? Insight has come from consideration of the partial degradation products of these lipids. Action of phospholipase A Since LPE could be generated from the action of phospholipase A Another interesting feature of lipid breakdown during MV calcification was the rapid and almost complete loss of SPH. Classical sphingomyelinases cleave SPH, releasing ceramide and phosphoryl choline ( Comment needs to be made concerning the marked changes in extractability of certain phospholipids, particularly PS, during MV mineralization. PS is known to complex with Ca Another phenomenon that at first seemed improbable was the discovery that total PS levels in the MV actually rose between What type of phospholipase A activity is predominant in MV, A We thank T. K Yoshimori for assistance in the initial stages of the HPLC analyses and Stephen Welch for assistance in the HPTLC analyses.