Partially stabilized zirconia (PSZ) occupies an important application portion in ceramics materials and refractories materials. In this work, calcium oxide-partially stabilized zirconia (CaO-PSZ) ceramics were prepared from fused zirconia by microwave sintering, with its microstructure and stability properties characterized by XRD and SEM. Results indicated that the heating rate, cooling rate, quenching temperature and isothermal treatment time rendered different influence on the stability properties, which was mainly ascribed to the reversible martensitic transformation of zirconia ceramics. Additionally, a mixed-phase composed by cubic phase ZrO2 (c-ZrO2) and monoclinic phase ZrO2 (m-ZrO2) appeared after fused zirconia treated by microwave sintering at 1450 °C for 2 h, indicating the formation of CaO-PSZ ceramics, which the finding was consistent with the SEM and EDAX analysis. Meanwhile, CaO stabilizer precipitated behavior at the crystal boundary, with the formation of acicular grains and fine particles, further rendering a toughening effect to CaO-PSZ ceramics. This work can provide important theoretical and practical significance for applications of microwave sintering to prepare CaO-PSZ ceramics material, even extending further applications in functional materials and structural materials.Zirconia (ZrO Zirconia (ZrO The flexible applications of microwave heating instead of conventional heating have been reported continuously, in the fields of material preparation, chemical synthesis, and mineral processing, etc. [ In this work, calcium oxide-partially stabilized zirconia (CaO-PSZ) ceramics was prepared from fused zirconia by microwave sintering to replace conventional sintering. Meanwhile, the effects of heating rate, cooling rate, quenching temperature and isothermal treatment time on stability properties of the prepared CaO-PSZ ceramics samples were investigated. Moreover, the phase transformation and microstructure properties of fused zirconia and the prepared CaO-PSZ ceramics samples by microwave sintering were comparatively analyzed by XRD, SEM and EDAX. The fused zirconia was utilized as the raw material to synthesize partially stabilized zirconia (PSZ) ceramics; and the fused zirconia material is categorized as the full stabilized zirconia (FSZ) ceramics, received from a factory in Yingkou City (Liaoning Province, P.R. China). The component analysis results of fused zirconia were as follows (%/(w/w): ZrO The phase structure of fused zirconia was determined by XRD characterization, and the pattern was plotted in The characterized zirconia ceramics samples included the fused zirconia raw material and the CaO-PSZ ceramics prepared by microwave sintering. Wherein the crystal structures of zirconia samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (D/Max 2500, Rigaku, Japan) with CuKα Radiation analysis, and the stability properties of zirconia samples were analyzed based on the corresponded XRD patterns; additionally, the microscopic appearance of zirconia samples were performed using Scanning electron microscopy (XL30ESEM-TMP, Philips, Holland). Meanwhile, the attached Energy dispersion scanner spectrometer (EDAX) was utilized to determine the elemental semi-quantitative analysis of zirconia samples. The sintering preparation experiments for CaO-doped partially stabilized zirconia (CaO-PSZ) ceramics were performed in a box-type microwave high temperature furnace (HM-X08-16). The schematic diagram of microwave high temperature furnace was illustrated in Fused zirconia raw material was crushed to powder with a particle size of 10–20 mm, and then 100.0 g of the ground fused zirconia was weighed by an electronic balance (Tricle-QD-1) and introduced into a ceramic crucible and sintered by the box-type microwave high temperature furnace (HM-X08-16). During the preparation process of partially stabilized zirconia (PSZ), the controlled variables included sintering temperature, duration time, heating rate, cooling rate, quenching temperature, and isothermal treatment time, etc. Wherein the sintering temperature was 1450 °C with a duration time of 2 h; the heating rate was controlled at the regime of 100 °C/min to 450 °C/min, and the cooling rate ranged from 1 °C/min to 400 °C/min; the quenching temperature ranged from 25 °C to 1450 °C, and the isothermal treatment time was adjusted at the regime of 0–5 h. After attaining the specific process parameters, the CaO-PSZ ceramics samples were cooled with the microwave furnace and removed out to conduct characterization analysis, further to investigate the influence of microwave sintering on the stability properties and phase structures of CaO-PSZ ceramics. The stability properties of zirconia ceramics materials are usually measured by the stability rate, and the stability rate is defined as Eq. Based on the XRD patterns, the stability rate can be calculated by Eq. The effects of heating rate on the phase structures of the CaO-PSZ ceramics samples were shown in Based on the XRD pattern plotted in The effects of cooling rate on the phase structures of the CaO-PSZ ceramics samples were presented in Based on the XRD pattern plotted in The effects of quenching temperature on the phase structures of the CaO-PSZ ceramics samples were illustrated in Based on the XRD pattern plotted in The effects of isothermal treatment time on the phase structures of the CaO-PSZ ceramics samples were displayed in Based on the XRD pattern shown in SEM patterns of zirconia material before and after microwave sintering were illustrated in For the fused zirconia raw material, as observed from In addition, for the prepared CaO-PSZ ceramic samples, as displayed in The SEM pattern and EDAX spectra of the CaO-PSZ ceramics sample prepared at 1450 °C for 2 h by microwave sintering were displayed in In this work, the microstructure and stability properties of calcium oxide-partially stabilized zirconia (CaO-PSZ) ceramics were systematically studied, with fused zirconia as raw material prepared by microwave sintering. Results indicated that during the sintering preparation process, the intensity of the diffraction peak of cubic phase zirconia (c-ZrO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support from the