Synthetic industrial effluent was prepared by stabilising low concentrations of oil (Catenex 11, Shell, UK) in aqueous dispersion with a non-ionic surfactant (Span 20) and dissolved air flotation (DAF) was used to clarify this wastewater. Operating parameters including saturator pressure, recycle ratio, and air to oil ratio, were investigated to find conditions that would enhance the efficiency of the DAF separation. The zeta potential of the emulsion droplets and flocculated oil droplets was determined and aluminium sulphate and four different cationic polyelectrolytes were used to destabilise the system. Measurements indicated that a saturator efficiency of about 90% was achieved and it was found that increasing the working pressure of saturator had less effect in the separation of oil droplets than increasing recycle ratio. Optimum conditions for separation are obtained with an air to oil ratio of 0.0075 corresponding to a recycle ratio of 10%. The zeta potential measurements indicate that oil droplets are negatively charged between pH 5 and 10. In addition the zeta potential measurements of flocculated oil droplets were found to depend strongly on the concentration of the polyelectrolyte. Although an inversion of the oil droplets charge was observed even at very low polyelectrolytes concentration. The polyelectrolytes were ineffective in enhancing the separation. This effect can be related to the structure of the polyelectrolytes and to the adsorption mechanism. In contrast, when aluminium sulphate was used it was found that it is important to decrease the magnitude of zeta potential in order to decrease electrostatic repulsion so that the emulsion was destabilised prior to flotation. Under these conditions DAF yields near complete oil separation even at moderate working pressure and recycle ratio when the oil droplets are destabilised.Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is a process for removing suspended particles from liquid by bringing the particles to the surface of the liquid. Air is dissolved at high pressure in a saturator, and microbubbles are formed when water is released in the flotation cell at atmospheric pressure. The microbubbles become attached to the particles increasing their buoyancy and allowing them to rise to the surface. Three operating configurations have been described for DAF systems Full-flow pressure flotation, where the influent is pressurised and then released in the flotation tank where the bubbles are formed. This is commonly used for particles, which do not need flocculation but require large volumes of air bubbles. Split-flow pressure flotation, where part of the influent are pressurised and directly introduced to the flotation tank. This is employed in applications where suspended particles are susceptible to the shearing effects of pressure pump, also where suspended particles are at low concentration and thus have a low air requirement. Recycle-flow pressure flotation, where a portion of treated wastewater is pressurised and recycled to the flotation tank. This is generally employed where coagulation and flocculation are needed and the flocculated particles are mechanically weak. Recycle-flow pressure flotation is used more often than the others for applications including oil removal In the latter configuration small air bubbles of less than 100 μm are formed when air saturated recycle water is injected into the flotation tank through needle valves or specially designed nozzles. The bubble formation process is a two step process, first nucleation and the growth The production of microbubbles is considered to be important as the rising velocity of the bubbles is less than for larger bubbles. This ensures a longer residence time in the flotation tank allowing more opportunities for collisions between bubbles and particle. In order to produce microbubbles in the flotation tank, saturator pressure of 400–600 kPa are recommended The concentration of the supplied air bubbles resulting from mixing the pressurised recycle flow, or the saturated water flow, with the influent wastewater affects bubble–particle collisions and consequently the removal of the bubble–particle agglomerates. This is considered to be an important design and operating parameter in the DAF process Work by Zabel After considering the number and size of bubbles in batch operations, determined from video micrographs, it has been concluded that the average diameter of bubbles is constant regardless the size of the pressure reduction orifice and as long as the saturator pressure is greater than 392 kPa this also has no influence on the size of bubbles produced when it was over Recognising that small bubbles are required for an efficient separation process, since large bubbles create hydraulic disturbances whilst rising to the surface and also decrease the net surface area, it has been suggested that the optimum bubble size for most DAF systems is approximately 50 μm The quantity of air available for the DAF process is controlled by both the saturator pressure and the amount of recycled or saturated water. In water treatment applications, experiments where the recycle ratio and pressure are varied showed that the final water quality was only dependent upon the total quantity of air introduced to the system and not upon the individual values of the pressure or the recycle flow Edzwald et al. Coagulation and flocculation are very important as a pre-treatment process for DAF and an essential requirement for efficient flotation A bench scale DAF unit (Capital Controls, Oxfordshire, UK) was used. The unit, as shown in The in organic chemical coagulant used was aluminium sulphate (Analar, BDH Chemicals Ltd., Poole, UK), sodium hydroxide (SLR, Fisher Scientific, UK). A solution of 2 g l Hydrochloric acid (Analar, Fisher Scientific, UK) was used to adjust pH to desired values; while 0.1 M sodium hydroxide was used to maintain the pre-adjusted pH value during the coagulation stage and 1 mM sodium chloride (SLR, Fisher Scientific, UK) was used to maintain ionic strength. A solvent refined petroleum distillate manufactured from crude petroleum oil (Catenex oil 11, Shell, UK), was used to prepare wastewater samples. The non-ionic surfactant, sorbitan monolaurate, Span 20 with 8.6 HLB (Sigma–Aldrich Ltd., Dorset, UK), at a concentration of 0.3% by weight to produce stable emulsions. The desired amount of oil in the synthetic wastewater, 1630 ppm, was added to 1 l of de-ionised water and mixed at 18 000 rpm in a blender (Fisher Scientific, UK) for 4 min. It has been found that blending for 4 min using 0.3% Span 20 produces a stable, high turbidity emulsion The conditions in a typical DAF system where a recycle stream of clarified water is saturated before being injected to the flotation tank were simulated by adopting the following procedure. The saturator was two-thirds filled with de-ionised water, connected to the compressor, pressurised to the desired working pressure and shaken vigorously for 2 min to ensure that the air was more or less completely dissolved. The pressurised water was allowed to stand for 5 min before shaking again. This procedure was repeated until the pressure did not fall after shaking. At this stage the recycle water had a turbid milky appearance and as there was no further fall in pressure it was assumed that at this point the water should be saturated. In order to maintain the level of dissolved air, the saturator was shaken repeatedly after every water injection to the flotation cell. The pressure regulator on the inlet line from the compressor ensures that the working pressure is maintained. The saturator efficiency was determined using a procedure similar to that of Henry and Gehr Flocculation and flotation experiments were executed as follows: after pH adjustment, 1 l of the synthetic wastewater was introduced to the flotation cell and the wastewater was subjected to high shear by mixing rapidly at 200 rpm for 1 min. The required amount of aluminium sulphate or polymer under investigation was added at the start of the rapid mixing period and this operation was followed by a period of slow mixing at low shear (20 rpm) for 15 min. At the end of the low shear period, the mixer was switched off and the air-rich water from the saturator was injected into the flotation cell in quantities approximate to the required recycle ratio and at the desired working pressure. The volume of air-rich water was monitored using a calibrated scale attached to the side of the flotation cell. The cell contents were left for 7 min so that flotation could proceed before samples were taken for analysis. Measurement of the zeta potential and diameter of oil droplets was made using a Zeta-Sizer 3000 HS (Malvern Instruments, UK). Five and 10 replications were made for zeta potential measurements and size determination, respectively and mean values were obtained from these results. The zeta potential of oil droplets as a function of pH was measured after emulsification and before the addition of flocculent or coagulant. For these measurements the emulsion was diluted and the ionic strength was kept constant at 10 Samples of clarified water were collected from below the float layer at the upper sampling point in the flotation cell and about 8 cm above the base for analysis and appropriate dilutions were made where necessary. The turbidity of the sample that can be used to determine the oil concentration In order to investigate the effects of saturator pressure, recycle ratio and the air to oil droplets ratio on DAF performance, aluminium sulphate was used as the destabilising coagulant for oil droplets at three different dosages specifically: 20, 50, and 100 mg l For accurate measurement of the quantity of air injected into the flotation cell it was necessary to determine the saturator efficiency. Four trials were carried out and the averaged results indicate a final saturation of 88%. The amounts of air that can be released at 88% efficiency compared to the theoretical of 100% predicted by Henry's law at the different working pressures investigated are presented in The quantity of air that can be introduced to the flotation cell can be varied by changing the saturator working pressure or the recycle ratio or both. In order to investigate the effect of the saturator working pressure on DAF performance a recycle ratio of 1:10 was adopted. Results presented in Almost same trend is observed when 50 mg l The second parameter that plays an important role in quantity of air released to the flotation cell is the recycle ratio. To determine the optimum recycle ratio a constant saturator pressure of 80 psi was used and recycle ratios in range of 2–20% were employed. Samples of clarified water were taken for analysis at each recycle ratio interval. Results presented in It is evident that the removal of oil droplets stabilised by Span 20 can be obtained at 100 mg l Another important design parameter is the ratio of air to dispersed particles, that is oil droplets in the present case where DAF depends in this ratio. The emulsion was prepared at pH 3.6 and the zeta potential of the oil droplets in the prepared emulsion was −59.9±3.8 mV. This relatively high zeta potential can be expected to produce sufficient electrostatic repulsion between oil droplets to maintain the stability of the system. Measurements indicate that, in the initial emulsions, oil droplets are approximately 407 nm in diameter, which is clearly in the colloidal range of particle size and suggests that for the emulsions investigated, the separation performance of DAF is related to the physico-chemical properties of the system. The zeta potential of air bubbles was not measured in this work. However, literature indicates that air bubbles have a large negative zeta potential It is evident that the flotation of oil droplets that is stabilised by Span 20 depends on the physico-chemical properties of the system. That is chemical pre-treatment of an oil emulsion is based on the addition of chemicals that destroy the protective action of the emulsifying agent and to over come the repulsion effect of the double layer and allow the oil particles to form larger drops On the other hand, addition of polyelectrolyte to increase oil removal efficiency by flotation can be attributed to different mechanism: flocculation of the oil droplets, reduce electrostatic repulsion between the air bubble and oil droplet and increase oil droplet hydrophobicity Results for low molecular weight polyelectrolytes Hydrocol 852 and 1142 are presented in Elsewhere, this effect has been attributed to the adsorption of an excessive amount of polyelectrolytes onto oil droplets surface, which can cause both steric and/or electrostatic restabilisation Other workers Oil droplet flocculation was seen when aluminium sulphate was added and visible large flocs were observed. While standard double layer theory qualitatively explains improvements in clarification produced by aluminium sulphate, it does not appear to explain the lack of improvement when the polyelectrolytes were used. Additional explanation is required. Although, little is known about the effects of adding polymers to surfactant–water–oil systems In addition, the ineffectiveness of oil droplet aggregation and flotation induced by cationic polymer could also be attributed to the characteristics of the polymers. All polymers used in this work are polyacrylamide-based copolymers containing quaternary ammonium groups, which are water soluble and very hydrophilic in nature. Adsorption of the polymer on oil droplets indeed increases the zeta-potential and renders them cationic. But on the other hand, the polymer layers prevent the hydrophobic interaction from being effective. Both charge interaction and hydrophobic attraction appear to be important in the current system, particularly because the air bubble is claimed as one of the most hydrophobic materials. Moreover, the hydrophobic interaction is mainly a long-range force From the above, it is seen that charge reversal alone does not mean that oil droplets will flocculate, because the adsorption of polymer could alter oil–water interfacial properties, which will prevent oil droplet coalescence. The destabilisation of oil droplets using aluminium sulphate has been conducted with different coagulant dosages at optimum pH of 8 in order to determine air requirements for DAF. The zeta potential measurements indicate that oil droplets are negatively charged over a range of pH and its magnitude is large enough to stabilise oil droplets. The negative zeta charge could be contributed from the adsorption of hydroxyl ion on the surface of the oil droplets where some pH dependence was observed. Measurements of dissolved air content indicate that about 90% saturator efficiency can be achieved. The performance of DAF for separation of oil–water emulsion can be improved within certain limits by increasing working pressure where micro-bubbles can be produced. The recycle ratio of about 10% at high working pressure remove almost all oil content when oil droplets are chemically destabilised at 100 mg l Although negative results reported with all polyelectrolytes investigated, it was found that DAF yields nearly complete oil separation even at moderate working pressure and recycle ratio when oil droplets destabilised using aluminium sulphate. Relatively poor separation was observed when low aluminium sulphate dosage was employed, even at high working pressure and recycle ratios only about 72% oil removal efficiency was achieved. Thus, it can be concluded that it is important to decrease the electrostatic repulsion barrier in the emulsions systems stabilised by Span 20 by using aluminium sulphate prior to flotation as this has a greater effect on the quantity of air supplied. While standard double layer theory qualitatively explains improvements in clarification produced by aluminium sulphate, it does not appear to explain the lack of improvement when the polyelectrolytes were used. It can be concluded that reducing zeta potential of oil droplets alone using polymers does not mean that oil droplets will flocculate in all cases, because the adsorption of polymer might change the oil–water interfacial property which might prevent oil droplet coalescence as it has been observed in this work.