The effect of carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC) on the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite using sodium oleate as collector was studied in this work. The results of flotation tests indicated that CMC could selectively depress the flotation of calcite. However, the addition of calcite strongly strengthened the depressing effect of CMC on scheelite flotation. The addition of sodium carbonate could eliminate the adverse impact of calcite on the performance of CMC in scheelite flotation, and a concentrate with both high grade of WO3 and scheelite recovery could be achieved under CMC in the presence of sodium carbonate. Zeta potential results indicated that CMC adsorbed more strongly on calcite surface than that on scheelite surface, and the addition of CMC prevented the adsorption of the sodium oleate on the calcite surface.Scheelite (CaWO The most widely used reagent in scheelite flotation is fatty acid or fatty acid derivatives ( It has been found that the dissolved mineral species could interfere the selective interactions between the reagents and minerals ( Scheelite and calcite used for all experiments were obtained from Yunnan Province, China. The chemical analyses of scheelite and calcite were shown in The samples were ground and then sieved to collect the −106 μm fraction for the microflotation tests. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as pH regulators. Sodium oleate, sodium carbonate and carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC) were used as collector and regulators, respectively. The degree of substituent of CMC is 0.9 and the molecular weight is 700,000. All the reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Deionized water was used for all tests. Flotation tests were carried out in a XFG flotation machine with a 40 mL plexiglass cell, at an impeller speed of 2000 rpm. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 g of minerals to 40 mL of distilled water. The pH of the mineral suspensions was first adjusted by adding NaOH or HCl. Once the desired reagent was added, the suspension was agitated for 2 min and the pH measured before flotation. The flotation lasted for 4 min. For single mineral flotation tests, the flotation products were collected, dried and weighed, and the recovery was calculated. For mixed binary minerals, the flotation concentrates and tails were assayed for W and Ca. The FT-IR spectra were obtained by a Spectrum One FT-IR spectrometer. Approximately 1% (mass fraction) of the solid sample was mixed with spectroscopic grade KBr. The wave number of the spectra ranged from 400 to 4000 cm Zeta potential measurements were performed using a Coulter Delsa440sx Zeta analyzer instrument. The suspensions (0.01% mass fraction) with small amount of minerals in a 1 × 10 Single mineral flotation tests were conducted as a function of CMC dosage using 1.5 × 10 The flotation recoveries of scheelite and calcite as a function of pH in the absence and presence of CMC are presented in The aforementioned single mineral flotation results indicate that CMC can act as an effective depressant of calcite in scheelite flotation. The flotation tests of mixed minerals were carried out to further investigate the selectivity performance of CMC because the surface properties of salt-type mineral are affected greatly by each other in solution. Flotation results of scheelite recovery and WO In order to eliminate the adverse effect of calcite on the CMC performance in scheelite flotation, the effect of Na  It can be concluded from  It can be seen from The effects of calcium ions and carbonate ions on scheelite flotation in the presence and absence of CMC are shown in In order to further study the effect of calcium ions on the depressing effect of CMC on scheelite flotation, the FTIR spectra of reagents and scheelite treaded with CMC and Ca On the basis of flotation tests and IR studies, the possible effect of calcite on the scheelite flotation in the presence of CMC can be concluded as shown in In the presence of Na Zeta potential results demonstrate that carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC) adsorbs more strongly on calcite surface than that on scheelite surface, and the addition of CMC before sodium oleate did not prevent the interaction of sodium oleate on scheelite surface while it prevents the adsorption of sodium oleate on calcite surface, therefore, CMC exhibits selective depressing effect on calcite in scheelite flotation. However, the existing of calcite increases the calcium ions concentration, which significantly strengthens the depressing effect of CMC on scheelite flotation. The addition of sodium carbonate can eliminate the adverse impact of calcite on the performance of CMC in scheelite flotation, and concentrate with both high grade of WO The authors acknowledge the support of