In the present work, a grinding rate constant, i.e., a selection function was measured for five solid materials using a tumbling ball mill, and effects of a grinding ball diameter and a feed particle size on the grinding rate constant of the materials were investigated. The tendency in the variation of the grinding rate constant with the feed size was similar in the all materials used, but was independent of the ball diameter. These relations for all materials can be expressed by modifying Snow's equation. In addition, we examined the descriptions of the grinding rate constant using two kinds of selection functions derived theoretically by Tanaka.Comminution is an important operation and is widely utilized in many industries in which raw materials are converted into intermediate or finer sized products. For a long time, grinding processes, especially on tumbling ball mills, have been subjected to statistical and kinetic analysis According to the comminution kinetics, a batch grinding process can be expressed by using two basic functions, i.e., the selection function which indicates the fracture probability of a particle, and the breakage function which shows the size distribution of fractured particles.  Additionally, it is often the case for The selection function  In the previous papers Austin Snow This equation enables us to be consistent with the experimental results, so that we have proposed Tanaka has derived two kinds of theoretical formulas for the selection function in ball media mills. One is the formula based on the consideration of the effective breakage at the normal grinding stage which is performed by the action of the impact force of a ball to particle bed These can be described by It is necessary to consider simultaneously the influences of the impact force of ball media to particles and the contact between particles and impacting balls on the breakage rate in a ball mill. From the points of view mentioned above, the geometrical mean of these relations can be shown as  The materials used in this experiment were five kinds: silica glass, quartz, limestone, gypsum and talc. Physical and mechanical properties of the materials are listed in The grinding machine is a laboratory scale mill made of alumina with an inside diameter of 144 mm and an inner volume of 2,100 cm Batch grinding tests were carried out for 1, 3 and 5 min with silica glass, quartz and limestone, for 1, 2 and 4 min with gypsum and talc. The ground product of the materials was sieved with the shaker, and then the mass of unground feed particles was measured and put them back into the mill, to continue the grinding again up to the prescribed time.   As shown in    These constants in The values for the above constants are summarized in    The results in In this study, we performed batch grinding tests of five kinds of materials with a ball mill and investigated the influences of ball diameters and feed sizes on the grinding rate constant, i.e., selection function. The results were summarized as follows. The correlations were observed between the optimum feed size and the ball diameter, and between the maximum grinding rate constant and the ball diameter for the materials used. The empirical equations of the grinding rate constant for the solid materials were obtained as a function of the ball diameter and the feed size. It was confirmed experimentally that the variation of dimensionless grinding rate constant with feed size was roughly analogous irrespective of ball diameters and kinds of materials, and the revised Snow's equation was useful to explain experimental results. The empirical equation based on Tanaka's theories was roughly possible to estimate the grinding rate constant when varying with not only the ball diameter and the feed size but also the property of material. constant in fraction of broken particles of size j which falls into the particle size i (–) constant in constant in constant in constant in constant in constant in ball diameter (mm) grinding rate constant of feed size reduction (= calculation value of experimental value of maximum value of constant in mass fraction of maximum particle size at time mass fraction of particle component mass fraction of particle component constant in Gaussian distribution function (–) mass fraction of feed size (= selection function of maximum particle size (min selection function in selection function in selection function of particle component selection function of particle component maximum value of grinding time (min) Young's modulus (GPa) feed size (mm) feed size for which the rate constant dimensionless parameter (=ln( constant in feed size at standard deviation of the probability function (–)