No water – no paper. This statement still holds true today. On the other hand, freshwater is a scarce resource that entails high costs. The pulp and paper industry has managed to use water efficiently in the past few decades. Nevertheless, the challenge of a zero effluent system has not been satisfactorily tackled up to now. Optimization of existing water circuits and the development of new treatment concepts are currently the principal tasks motivated by the pressure to minimize costs, increase productivity, and ensure product quality requirements.Paper is currently a commodity product. The worldwide consumption of paper is growing steadily and it is hard to imagine the world without paper. Papermaking is based on a principle that is roughly 2000 years old. Today, in principle, the same process steps, which were used in the past, are included. The papermaking process can be divided into four main process steps ( pulp production (chemical or mechanical pulp and recycled fiber pulp (RCF)), stock preparation, paper machine, and coating and finishing. Papermaking starts with the provision of the stock components such as fibers, fillers, and chemical additives. Primary fibers (chemical and mechanical pulp) are obtained from wood and annual plants by chemical pulping or mechanical defibration. Secondary fibers are produced from recovered paper. All these components have to be properly prepared for optimum use in papermaking. Stock preparation is followed by the approach flow system, which links stock preparation to the paper machine. Paper or board is produced at the paper machine. In doing so, a sheet is formed from a highly diluted fiber suspension and dewatered by means of filtration, pressing, and thermal drying. Coating and calendaring improve the surface quality of the paper and board. The final steps include slitting, sheeting, and packaging of the final product for shipment. Water is one of the key components in pulp and papermaking. Without water, the production of paper would be unthinkable. Water performs numerous functions in the papermaking process. It is used as medium for suspension, dwelling, and transfer processes, and it serves to separate as well as to restore the bonds between fibers. Other uses include showers in the wire and press sections, sealing of pumps, and cooling and cleaning purposes. Furthermore, water in the form of steam is used as an energy carrier. According to At the onset of industrial papermaking, paper was produced with high specific water consumption. The pulp and paper industry has improved the processes in the last few decades for economical and ecological reasons and, as a result, was able to reduce water consumption significantly. This was only possible because of increasing closure of in-mill water circuits and consistent reuse of clarified process water by former freshwater consumers. A survey conducted by the Papiertechnische Stiftung (PTS) and the German Pulp and Paper Association (VDP) showed that the average specific effluent volumes of Germany's pulp and paper industry decreased from 46 to approximately 10 The consumption level in the different pulp and paper mills can vary because of both general and process-related reasons such as raw materials used, paper grades produced, and plant structure. Furthermore, local boundary conditions, such as requirements on wastewater discharge, have an impact on the consumption level. High specific effluent volumes occur particularly in specialty paper grades. These mills are often faced with structural handicaps that cause increased specific effluent volumes: small and obsolete paper machines, low production rates, frequent grade changes, and often very high quality requirements on the final product. The lowest water requirements can be found in mills that produce packaging papers, such as corrugated base paper or board. Some of these mills have already managed to close their water circuits completely, resulting in a zero effluent production. Depending on the availability and local conditions, either surface water or groundwater is used as freshwater. Drinking water is used for certain purposes, such as trim squirts. In the German pulp and paper industry, roughly 80% of the freshwater is taken from surface waters ( high- and low-pressure showers for felt conditioning and wire cleaning, trim squirts, sealing water for liquid-ring vacuum pumps and packing glands, and additive preparation and dilution. In view of the limited freshwater volume available, it must be used efficiently. Hence, freshwater used for cooling purposes (oil coolers and steam condensers) should be collected and reused as fresh warm water in the paper machine. Process water should be used for all other purposes, such as stock dilution, consistency control, or cleaning. Typically, approximately 40% of the entire freshwater volume is used for the high- and low-pressure showers in the wire and press sections. Depending on the paper grade and the nozzles used, different flow rates are used for showers in the wire and press sections. The entire consumption in the European paper industry for both showers in the wire section and showers in the press section averages out to approximately 1.0–2.5 The sealing water consumption in liquid-ring vacuum pumps is highly dependent on the installed system. If a sealing water circuit is installed with a cooling tower, the freshwater can be less than 0.5 Sealing water is needed in packing glands to lubricate the sealing faces and to remove solids. According to In papermaking, it is quite important to provide both adequate water quality and the required volume of water for every single consumer. Using freshwater for all purposes would consume several 100 Process water is mainly used for pulping and consistency control in the individual process steps. It is also used to a greater extent for purposes for which freshwater was formerly used, such as (low-pressure) showers, foam destruction, sealing water of liquid-ring vacuum pumps, or additive preparation. Process water is produced in the thickening and dewatering stages of the papermaking process by separating liquid phase from solid phase. In the stock preparation loops, this is done by disk filters, screw and double wire presses, and drum thickeners. Wire section, press section, and savealls provide the required process water volumes at the paper machine. If water quality achieved is still inadequate, advanced treatment technologies such as membrane or ozone treatment can be employed. The possibilities for designing water circuits greatly vary and depend on a number of parameters. One important parameter is the grade of paper being produced and the corresponding raw material being used. Based on the connection to the core process (sheet formation on the wire), it is generally possible to differentiate between three categories of water circuits: primary, secondary, and tertiary water circuits. The primary circuit consists of white water 1 originating from the wire section. This circuit is the largest as far as the volumetric flow rate is concerned. The circulating flow rate depends on the retention in the wire section and the consistency in the headbox. Its objective is to dilute the main stock flow after the machine chest in the approach flow system to a consistency of approximately 0.7–1.5%. The excess flow rate is part of the secondary circuit. Besides the excess flow rate of white water 1, the secondary circuit originates from the forming section and from the press section (see A tertiary circuit is required when, at least, a part of the treated wastewater is recirculated. In zero effluent systems, all treated wastewater is recirculated. In order to eliminate detrimental substances from the papermaking process, the recirculated wastewater should undergo full biological treatment. Possible fields of application of the recirculated wastewater are manifold and depend on the water quality attained. Besides being used as pulping or cleaning water, it may also be used as sealing water or as spraying water in showers after adequate pretreatment. Attention must be drawn to the danger of scale formation as biologically treated water often has a high calcium concentration ( Due to the increasing use of recovered paper and the reduced freshwater consumption, constituents known as detrimental substances have accumulated in water circuits, leading to growing problems in the papermaking process. Detrimental substances are substances that have a negative impact on the papermaking process and on product properties. Auhorn defined them as follows: “Detrimental substances are dissolved or colloidally soluble anionic oligomers or polymers and non-ionic hydrocolloids” ( a reduction in additive efficiency, a reduction in optical and strength properties, negative effects on drainage and paper drying, negative impacts on sizing, odor formation, deposits, and/or foam generation. The content of detrimental substances is typically measured using sum parameters, such as anionic trash, cationic demand, or chemical oxygen demand (COD). Inorganic dissolved substances are measured as increased conductivity (  There are two general principles used in designing water circuits that are described on the basis of this simplified model mill: loop separation and countercurrent arrangement. Water circuits can be subdivided into separate loops by installing thickening units such as screw presses or double wire presses. In many cases, these thickening units are also necessary for downstream units such as dispergers. At the same time, soluble detrimental substances will be retained in the stock preparation water system. An increase of up to 30% in the transfer consistency between stock preparation and the paper machine results in a significant reduction in the exchanged water volume. As the wastewater is still being discharged from the paper machine loop, there is no sink for the detrimental substances in the first loop (stock preparation). Detrimental substances build up in the stock preparation loop, resulting in a COD concentration of 4.9 A countercurrent arrangement ( Strict separation of the stock preparation water loops from the paper machine loop combined with a well-designed countercurrent arrangement is essential to meet high runnability and quality requirements because this strategy keeps detrimental substances out of the paper machine. Unlike the countercurrent dewatering arrangement in paper mills, a countercurrent washing arrangement is typically installed in chemical pulp mills. Substances that are dissolved during digestion, delignification, and bleaching are carried along into the next process steps together with the fibers. To accumulate and recirculate these substances to the digester, the washing liquor passes through a countercurrent washing arrangement within the different process steps ( Complete closure of water circuits implies eliminating any sort of effluent discharge. For some mills, it is the last resort to be able to continue production at that particular location. Motivating factors include costs of discharging effluents, absence of receiving waters, or the necessary discharge rights if the mill is moved to a new location. The specific effluent volume in the case of closure is 0 In order to be able to optimize a water circuit, it must first be clarified whether or not the following conditions are fulfilled: freshwater should be used effectively and not passed directly to the wastewater treatment plant, the contaminant load at the paper machine should be as low as possible, and contaminants should be discharged wherever possible using the smallest effluent volumes.    The above definitions apply exclusively to simple systems with one stock preparation system and one paper machine. In more complex systems, characterized by more than one line or loop in stock preparation or more than one paper machine, the COD loading of the wastewater, stock preparation, and paper machine loop are calculated as the weighted average of the individual COD loadings determined.  The circuitry status and the optimization potential that exists can be visualized as the In general, wastewater in the pulp and paper industry is produced in the form of excess process water, which is displaced by the freshwater input. The wastewater is loaded primarily with organics that enter the production process together with raw materials and additives. Effluents from the pulp and paper industry are still not completely understood in terms of their chemical composition ( As far as organic loads are concerned, COD, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD raw materials, paper grades, specific freshwater consumption, and available installations. The assessment of the biodegradability of effluents is based on parameters such as BOD Moreover, some important inorganic effluent parameters, such as salt loads, have to be taken into consideration. Calcium and sulfate concentrations play a special role in the operation of anaerobic treatment plants. When treating effluents with a high calcium content, poorly soluble calcium carbonate may be precipitated. In plants employing carrier material, such precipitation products may cause deposit formation. In mixed reactors, precipitation products tend to accumulate in the sludge, impeding thorough mixing of effluents and sludge and finally reducing the share of active biomass. When treated effluents are recirculated back into production, additional precipitation problems may arise in the consumers due to the pH shift of the decreased buffer capacity. The growing use of calcium carbonate as a filler and coating pigment and the ever-tighter-closed water circuits increase the calcium concentrations in circuit water and the wastewater. This applies in particular to mills that convert recycled paper. In the case of high sulfate concentrations, anoxic conditions may trigger sulfate reduction and lead to sulfide formation. This may disturb the degradation processes (methanogenesis) in anaerobic treatment plants, whereas in aerobic biological treatment such high sulfate concentrations may foster the growth of undesirable filamentous microorganisms. As an additional drawback, the hydrogen sulfide that forms may give rise to bad odors and corrosion phenomena. Sulfate concentrations up to 600 Depending on the treatment process used, other parameters such as pH, conductivity, and temperature are important for operational safety. Normally, in paper industry effluents, phosphorus and nitrogen compounds serving as nutrients for microorganisms are either absent or only available in insufficient quantities ( In the German pulp and paper industry, most effluents undergo full biological treatment. Ninety-five percent of the production volume is produced in mills with an integrated biological wastewater treatment plant or mills that discharge their wastewater to municipal wastewater treatment plants; 4% of the annual production volume is produced in mills with a closed water circuit; and only 1% of the production volume comes from mills that discharge their effluents without biological treatment ( As mentioned in Objectives of freshwater treatment in the pulp and paper industry include removal of solids, removal of color and organic substances, decrease in hardness and removal of other dissolved salts, and, in some cases, the disinfection of the water. Predominantly mechanical or chemical–mechanical treatment technologies are used for freshwater treatment in the pulp and paper industry. According to a survey conducted by PTS and VDP, more than 90% of the surface water used as freshwater for the papermaking process is treated by filtering. An additional 75% of this water is conditioned by chemical coagulation, flocculation, and subsequent sedimentation. The volume of freshwater treated with biocides has increased significantly, whereas the use of chlorine has decreased in the past few years ( At the beginning, the objective of circuit water treatment was primarily to recover fiber furnish from papermaking effluents. Under the economic and ecological necessity of reducing effluent volumes and loads, the circulation water treatment process took on ever-greater importance and function: circuit water treatment must provide clarified water with a predefined quality and has to remove interfering substances from the system. In doing so, circuit water treatment became responsible for removing not only insoluble and colloidal components but also dissolved substances. Therewith, circuit water treatment helps to stabilize production processes and ensures product quality. The objectives of circulation water treatment include recovery of raw materials, production of mill water with a low solid concentration available, and reduction of contaminants in the circulation water. Sedimentation, flotation, and filtration methods in particular are employed in mechanical circuit water treatment. These techniques can also be used in combination with one another. Methods for screening and classification are mainly used in stock preparation. The market share of the individual types of savealls moves in the direction of a two-part system, as sedimentation is steadily declining, whereas filtration and flotation are both expanding due to innovations and technical improvements ( Hydraulic surface load, solid surface load, and purification performance are the key parameters for the layout of the treatment units. Other parameters that have to be considered are the concentration of suspended solids in the feed, presence of colloidal and dissolved substances, additive demand, available space, and overall energy consumption. Two of the most important factors are the investment and operational costs. Cost effectiveness is obtained by reducing raw material losses, increasing process performance, and the benefits arising from stable and efficient paper production ( The fiber recovery unit, or synonymously the saveall, is supplied with the excess from the primary circuit (wire pit overflow) and water removed from the wire and press sections by the vacuum system. In rare cases, water from the floor channels or from the wet broke, for example, is supplied to circuit water treatment. The process connected to the saveall has to be designed so that a constant feed flow is maintained.  A general disadvantage of sedimentation plants is a low density of the sediment. Hydraulic retention times are very long in some cases and can also provoke anaerobic degradation accompanied by the correspondingly disadvantageous consequences (odor, microbial contamination, etc.) that affect the entire water circuit. Long hydraulic retention times also become a problem if rapidly changing production programs are to be run on the paper machine.  Different flotation processes vary according to how bubbles are introduced into the suspension. Dissolved air flotation (DAF) has established itself in circuit water treatment. In this process, water is supersaturated with compressed air and then supplied to the flotation chamber ( A general problem associated with flotation units is a sharp fluctuation in inflow loadings. Fluctuations both in the volumetric flow rate and in the solid surface loading produce poor results.  In the pulp and paper industry, disk filters ( As an alternative to disk filters, drum filters can be used, which usually reduces the cost factor. However, for most applications, the hydraulic capacity of drum filters is too low and only one filtrate quality is produced. This normally makes them unsuitable for saveall application. Drum filters are often used as simple but reliable thickeners, for example, in the broke-handling system ( As a result of an increasing closure of water circuits, the use of freshwater for a steadily growing number of consumers in a system must be restricted. In order to replace the freshwater at these locations, the clarified water must be of high quality. In many cases, complete elimination of solids is required, especially for showers in the high-pressure range and sealing water. Large volumes of clarified water needed in a closed or virtually closed system that at the same time places high requirements on clarified water quality for only very few consumers have promoted the use of multistage treatment processes. Methods for fine cleaning of pretreated circuit water are based on filtration. The objectives include continuously improving the water quality and serving as a police filter, if any upstream treatment method fails. A wide variety of methods are employed, including drum filters with very fine filter media (microfiltration), cartridge and backwash filters, sand filters, and membrane technology. The treatment units for elimination of dissolved substances accomplish important tasks in narrowing water circuits. They relieve the water circuits of detrimental substances and therewith avoid production restrictions due to limited freshwater capacities. The so-called kidney technologies, such as integrated biological treatment, softening, membrane technology, and ozonization, are promising approaches for obtaining effluent-free paper production by way of circuit closure. Combinations of treatment technologies make it possible to provide optimized solutions for different objectives. The decisions as to which concept and which treatment technology is to be used depend on specific boundary conditions.  Biological processes are state of the art in paper-mill wastewater treatment plants and are suitable for the elimination of biologically degradable substances, the reduction of sulfates, and the preliminary purification for nanofiltration and reverse osmosis. Biological treatment of process water has been carried out within a very wide range of operating conditions. Both anaerobic and aerobic process designs have been shown to be successful. Thermophilic treatment of process waters ( A biokidney improves runnability due to a better overall quality of the process water caused by a decrease in soluble organic matter. Using biological treatment for COD reduction has allowed some packaging paper mills to operate with zero effluent systems (see, e.g.,  Membrane technology typically improves the quality of process waters substantially, since it removes suspended solids, microorganisms, and colloidal COD. Even salts can be separated out using reverse osmosis. Ultrafiltrated water is free of suspended solids and colloids. Bacteria, latex, and other micro-stickies are removed, for example. As anionic trash is cut to approximately half of its original level, the quality of the filtrate makes trouble-free recirculation back into the process possible ( Fields of application for membrane technology in the pulp and paper industry are numerous and may offer many advantages, depending on treated partial flow such as reduction in volumes of freshwater and effluent, increased product quality due to reduced system loading, recovery of raw materials from the effluents (e.g., coating color pigments), enhanced possibilities for the recirculation of biologically treated wastewater, and compliance with statutory limits on effluent concentrations.  Effluents from pulp and paper mills contain solids and dissolved matter. The principal methods used to remove solids from pulp and paper mills effluents include screening, settling/clarification, and flotation. The choice of method depends on the characteristics of the solid matter to be removed and the requirements placed on the purity of the treated water. The separation of solids from the effluents is accomplished with the help of screens, grid chambers, and settling tanks. Screens are units which operate according to the sieving/filtration process. The function of the screens is to remove coarse, bulky, and fibrous components from the effluents. If necessary, fractionated particle separation can be achieved by graduating the gap width (bar screen, fine screen, inlet screen, and ultrafine screen). For reasons of operating reliability of wastewater treatment plants, it is also necessary to separate the grit transported with the effluents and other mineral materials from the degradable organic material. Grit separation from effluents can prevent operational troubles such as grit sedimentation, increased wear, and clogging. The grit separating systems currently in use are subdivided into longitudinal grit traps, circular grit traps, and vortex grit traps, depending on their design and process layout. Sedimentation technology is the simplest and most economical method of separating solid substances from the liquid phase. High efficiency is achieved in subsequent effluent treatment processes when the solid substances suspended in the effluents settle in a sedimentation tank as completely as possible, and settled sludge is removed from the sedimentation tank. Sedimentation tanks must be appropriately designed and operated. Alternative sedimentation equipment, with sets of lamella-shaped passages, is employed in the paper industry, especially for effluents with high fiber concentrations. Mechanical effluent treatment alone, however, is not sufficient to keep lakes and rivers clean, since it is incapable of removing colloidal, suspended, and dissolved substances. Biological wastewater treatment is designed to degrade pollutants dissolved in effluents by the action of microorganisms. The microorganisms utilize these substances to live and reproduce. Pollutants are used as nutrients. A prerequisite for such degradation activity, however, is that the pollutants are soluble in water and nontoxic. Degradation process can take place either in the presence of oxygen (aerobic treatment) or in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic treatment). Both these naturally occurring principles of effluent treatment give rise to fundamental differences in the technical and economic processes involved ( The paper industry uses a variety of effluent treatment systems. The preferred process combination for each individual case depends on the grade-specific quality of the effluent that is to be treated. Experience shows that multistage processes based on an aerobic–aerobic or anaerobic–aerobic processing principle enable significantly more reliable operation of the plant. The same effect can be achieved through a cascade system, which allows a graduation of the loading conditions. Among the German pulp and paper mills with onsite wastewater treatment plants, 60% have only aerobic treatment (operated as one- or two-stage processes) for their effluents, whereas 40% have an additional anaerobic stage (  Before discharge into surface waters, anaerobically treated effluents have to undergo aerobic posttreatment, because – according to the current state of the art – fully biological degradation of paper-mill effluents is not feasible ( When introducing anaerobic technology into the pulp and paper industry, operational problems and their possible consequences, shown in Among different types of anaerobic reactors, IC® reactors (internal circulation) have achieved a share of more than one-third of the operating reactors and are currently the most frequently used reactors in the German pulp and paper industry. The rest of the market is shared by Biobed® and UASB reactors (UASB, Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket) as well as reactors operating according to the contact sludge principle.  Aerobic treatment allows fully biological degradation of paper-mill effluents. The BOD Among different types of aerobic treatment technologies, activated sludge processes are currently the most frequently used treatment technologies in the German pulp and paper industry and have achieved a share of three-quarters of the operating reactors. Both moving-bed bioreactors (MBBRs) and biofilters represent another 10% of the reactors used (  As far as activated sludge process is concerned, secondary clarification determines the bioreactor performance. Separation and thickening of the recirculated sludge are crucial for sludge volumes in biological treatment and for the potential sludge loading as well. Correct dimensioning of secondary clarification is therefore of great importance for overall plant performance. Tertiary and/or advanced wastewater treatment is used to remove specific wastewater constituents that cannot be removed by secondary treatment. Different treatment processes are necessary to remove nitrogen, phosphorus, additional suspended solids, refractory organics, or dissolved solids. Sometimes it is referred to as tertiary treatment because advanced treatment usually follows high-rate secondary treatment. However, advanced treatment processes are sometimes combined with primary or secondary treatment (e.g., chemical addition to primary clarifiers or aeration basins to remove phosphorus) or used in place of secondary treatment (e.g., overland flow treatment of primary effluent). The reasons for advanced effluent treatment include reduction in costs (discharge fee), compliance with limit values, and increase in production. Advanced wastewater treatment in the pulp and paper industry is mainly focused on additional biological membrane reactors, membrane filtration techniques such as micro-, ultra-, or nanofiltration, and ozone treatment. Due to the relatively limited full-scale experience, relatively high costs, and greater complexity of water treatment, there have been only few full-scale applications of tertiary treatment of mill effluents up to now. The method that is ultimately chosen depends on the treatment aim and economic efficiency of the method in a given application. When reducing specific effluent volume within the framework of water circuit optimization, typical limits occur that usually require considerable investment to ensure that they will not be exceeded ( A limit encountered in narrowing water circuits that is similar to the cooling water requirements discussed above are the rejects that accumulate when discharged with the paper mill effluent. The proportion of effluents contained in the rejects compared to the total effluent volume may amount to 40–50% of the total effluent volume, especially in paper mills with an integrated deinking plant. If the effluent volume of such a plant is to be reduced drastically, water volume added to the effluents together with the rejects constitutes a lower limit. If a further reduction in the specific effluent volume is intended, then the rejects must be dewatered and part of the filtrate returned to the water circuit. Low specific effluent volumes result in growing system loads in process waters in terms of dissolved and colloidal material ( If specific effluent volume is to be reduced successfully, the impact of such measures on the papermaking process must also be taken into consideration. Only if we succeed in reconciling the goal of preventing effluent production with the goal of reliable production and satisfactory product quality, can the narrowing and ultimate closure of water circuits come about successfully. Narrowing and closure of water circuits lead to increased temperatures in the stock and water systems of paper mills, taking a constant energy input into account. Nowadays, temperatures of 40–50 Loop separation and the countercurrent arrangement enable the paper mills to reduce the transfer of detrimental substances coming from highly loaded loops (e.g., stock preparation) into the subsequent process steps, thus relieving paper machine loop. Regarding heat balance of the stock and water system, this is disadvantageous as the highly loaded loops are typically also the hottest (e.g., thermomechanical pulp plant). Heat with quite a high-temperature level is transferred to the effluent. However, at the paper machine, a higher-temperature level would be desirable to improve mechanical dewatering and in turn decrease the energy consumption for thermal drying. Besides the above-mentioned effects, there are other positive and negative impacts of higher process temperatures: The solubility and activity of most functional chemicals increase with increasing water temperature. The consumption of certain additives such as wet strength agents may increase due to increased temperatures in the water circuit. Slime formation can be restricted by increasing the process temperature above a certain limit. There might be greater formation of anaerobic metabolic products such as hydrogen sulfide. High water temperatures in the papermaking process reduce the energy consumption for pulping and increase the cleaning efficiency of showers. On the other hand, high water temperatures have negative impacts on the energy efficiency of liquid-ring vacuum pumps and the hall climate. Finally, high process temperatures lead to high effluent temperatures. Without any countermeasures, this can cause problems in aerobic effluent treatment plants (poor oxygen solubility) and with the statutory temperature limits. Integration of waste heat streams is one possibility for paper mills to reduce their energy consumption, but presents them with the conflicting challenges of ensuring both maximum waste heat utilization and safe compliance with statutory limits on effluent temperature. Heat integration measures help optimizing heat balance of paper mills and are a cost-effective way to reduce the specific energy demand of paper mills, thus achieving a productivity increase. Apparently, conflicting objectives, such as increased process and decreased effluent temperatures, may be achieved by appropriately selected measures for heat-balance optimization. Based on available heat sources and sinks and considering other boundary conditions, there are several potential scenarios for heat integration and utilization of waste heat by means of water–water heat exchange or air–water heat exchange. Pinch analysis and process simulation are useful tools for an evaluation of the individual scenarios and an optimization of heat balances. Studies have shown that the replacement of steam used for process- or freshwater heating yields particularly profitable energy savings ( There are many reasons to reduce the specific effluent volume. One important reason is the reduction in water-related costs. In the German pulp and paper industry, the costs of discharging effluents into receiving waters are high and average €0.40 Despite the above-mentioned problems encountered in narrowing the water circuits, potentials for a reduction of the effluent volume have been discovered in many paper mills studied by PTS in the past few years ( Besides water-related costs, another possibility is to reduce energy-related costs by reducing energy consumption due to increased process temperature. As a rule of thumb, every 10° increase in process temperature equals approximately 1% increase in dryness after mechanical dewatering in the wire and press sections. This allows energy consumption in the drying section to be reduced by up to 4%. Water is one of the key components in papermaking. Using more than 1 billion m Attention to water scarcity and pollution results in new legislative directives, forcing industries to reduce water use and pollution, and motivating them to implement innovations and carefully observe the impact of measures. The Water Framework Directive (WFD) is one of the main drivers for sustainable water use in Europe, which forced the member states to pay more attention to sustainable and efficient water use. Competent decision making at the top management and well-trained and motivated staff delivered substantial progress in reducing the water consumption in the pulp and paper industry: high competence in closing water circuits, substantially supported by process modeling and automation, and kidney technologies as internal process water treatment, lead to a significant decrease of the average specific effluent volume in the past 30 years. The European collaborative research project, AquaFit4Use, started in 2008, focuses on optimization of existing water circuits and development of new treatment concepts to support the European sustainability policy, such as reducing the use of scarce freshwater, improving the water quality (micro-pollutants, salts, etc.), and sharing corresponding experiences with other sectors.