This paper is concerned with the free vibration problem of multiply connected bar-chain (MCB) system with direct and indirect neighbouring interactions. MCB is a line of rigid bars connected by multiple elastic rotational springs. The so-called direct or indirect neighbouring interactions are realized by connections between two adjacent bars or two distant bars by the rotational springs. The free vibration frequencies of two-neighbouring interacted and p-neighbouring interacted MCB are analytically obtained for simply supported end restraints. A nonlocal continuum model is built based on this lattice model by continualizing the discrete equations. This continualized nonlocal model (CNM) is found to be equivalent to the Eringen’s stress gradient nonlocal model. The expression of the length scale of CNM is figured out and it is found to be dependent on the rotational spring stiffnesses of MCB. Exact nonlocal vibration frequencies are predicted with the calibrated length scale. The comparison between CNM and MCB shows that the scale effect of a generalized lattice system including multiple interactions could be captured by the simple nonlocal continuum model.This paper is concerned with the vibration behaviour of a multiply connected bar-chain (MCB) system with direct and indirect neighbouring interactions. This lattice system with discrete short and long range interactions can be considered as the generalization of the so-called Hencky bar-chain system. In fact, Hencky [ In this paper, we will deal with the vibration problem of a generalized Hencky bar-chain system composed of direct and indirect bending interactions. This model composed of multiple bending short and long range interactions is the bending generalization of the finite generalized axial lattice, recently studied by Challamel et al. [ The natural frequencies of a fixed-fixed finite generalized axial lattice (with direct and indirect neighbouring interactions) were obtained by Pipes [ Consider a simply supported MCB with two neighbouring interactions as shown in The potential energy of the MCB due to the deformed rotational springs could be written as: In view of the geometric property that The kinetic energy of the transversely moving lumped masses in MCB is given by By applying Hamilton’s principle In addition, it is assumed that the weighting coefficient For the two neighbouring interactions, the constraint Equation Note that the bending moment could be rewritten as It is interesting to find that Eq. In addition, by taking The coefficients of second order central finite difference method (FDM) for approximating the fourth order derivative d For Regarding Eq. Later on, a CNM will be established so that the vibrating behaviour of the two neighbouring interactive bar-chain system could be efficiently approximated. The continualization is processed by letting Next, we approximate the neighbouring points By adopting A Taylor-based expansion of the pseudo-differential operator in Eq. By applying Padé’s approximation, Eq. It is interesting to find that Eq. It can be shown that the continualization of the discrete model leads to an Eringen-type nonlocal model irrespective of the interaction considered. Note that Eq. Back to MCB, if we continualize Eqs. By substituting Eq. The substitution of Eq. The boundary conditions for continualized system with simply supported ends should take the following form: which is the same as Note that Eq. The general solution for Eq. By substituting Eq. The CNM for the multiply interactive bar-chain system has a length scale factor that increases with respect to the number of interactions, as follows:  With same Consider the internal segments of MCB with It is worth noting that The generalized potential energy of the deformed and further simplified to The kinetic energy For The By applying the Padé’s approximation, Eq. Finally, Eq. For the special case of direct neighbouring interaction, we have For the special case of two closest neighbouring interaction, we have By substituting the general solutions for   The analytical vibration solutions for simply supported MCB with two-neighbouring and