Alumina production through Bayer Process is limited by the instability of soluble sodium aluminate in the supersaturated solutions used by the alumina refineries. The precipitation of aluminum hydrate can occur in equipment not designed for this purpose, causing significant loss of production. The stabilization of sodium aluminate in solution results in a decrease of the supersaturation, reducing the driving force for precipitation of aluminum hydrate. The reduction of supersaturation can be achieved by the application of stabilizing substances, known as nucleation inhibitors. This study has the objective of evaluating the effect of the concentration of a polymeric type nucleation inhibitor on the productivity of the Bayer Process. A set of experiments was executed in the laboratory, for the evaluation of the influence of the quantity of inhibitor and of the concentration of solids on the stability of the green liquor that feeds the filtration step. It was generally observed that supersaturation was significantly reduced. The amount of inhibitor used made little difference to the stability, whereas the concentration of solids was shown to have a strong influence. The implementation of the results of this work in an industrial plant resulted in an increase of alumina production of 100,000ton/year.Processes based on supersaturated solutions frequently present production limitations due to the increasing instability that these solutions demonstrate with increases in the degree of supersaturation. Alumina production from bauxite ore (Bayer Process) is a perfect example of an operation with supersaturated solutions and of the special care that the instability of such solutions demands. Bauxite is subjected to high-temperature digestion in a concentrated caustic solution in high-pressure reactors. The resulting liquor, termed pregnant or green liquor, which is supersaturated in sodium aluminate, is then clarified and filtered to remove mud and other insoluble residues. The clarified pregnant liquor is then cooled and seeded to precipitate aluminum hydroxide, which is calcined to yield the alumina product. The resulting spent liquor is concentrated by evaporation and recycled for further bauxite digestion. The precipitation potential is a variable used for expressing the instability of the green liquor in the Bayer Process and is directly related to its level of supersaturation. This potential is calculated by the relationships that exist between all the variables that affect the saturation of the green liquor, as they impact on the solubility of alumina. These variables are temperature, concentration of soda, concentration of alumina and impurities. The precipitation potential, The exponential term represents the kinetic contribution, whereas the supersaturation term represents the thermodynamic contribution. At low temperatures the kinetic contribution is very small, whereas the thermodynamic term is large. On the other hand, at high temperatures the thermodynamic contribution is small and the kinetic term is large. Thus, in these ranges of temperature, the resultant potential is low, since the contributions practically cancel themselves out. However, there exists an intermediate range where both contributions are significant and their summation can result in an elevated precipitation potential. It is exactly in this range that the operation temperature is held, since it corresponds to the best temperature according to other characteristics of the Bayer Process. Alumina concentration impacts only on thermodynamics; as the alumina concentration increases, the precipitation potential also increases. The caustic soda concentration also impacts only on the thermodynamics. However, this effect is opposite, that is, as the soda concentration increases, the precipitation potential decreases. Caustic soda is the chemical species that reacts with alumina, rendering it stable in solution. From a practical point of view, the ratio between the caustic soda and alumina concentrations, as given in Eq. Alumina indicates the number of equivalents of sodium aluminate in solution, expressed as grams of Al The impurities react with alumina, stabilizing it in solution; that is, they also affect the thermodynamics. However, the presence of impurities compromises the precipitation yield, showing the necessity for their removal. The use of nucleation inhibitors presents a significant potential for increasing the stability of the green liquor in the Bayer Process and, consequently increasing alumina production. However, very little has been published in the (open) scientific literature regarding these substances and their effect on the Bayer Process. It is known that they inhibit nucleation and, consequently, the growth of the aluminum hydrate crystals through stabilization of aluminate ion in solution. On the other hand, once the seeds are formed, the inhibitors will lose efficiency with the increase in concentration of seeds. Therefore, high efficiency is expected for solutions with concentration of solids of the order of milligrams per liter. Preliminary studies have shown that calcium and organic polymers show high efficiency, attaining the desired stabilization level for green liquor ( This study has the objective of evaluating the effect of the concentration of a polymeric type nucleation inhibitor on the productivity of the Bayer Process. A set of experiments was planned and executed in the laboratory to evaluate the influence of the quantity of inhibitor and concentration of solids on the stability of the green liquor that feeds the filtration step. The results of this work have been implemented in an industrial plant and produced a significant increase of alumina production. The Bayer Process is composed of various steps: Grinding, Digestion, Decantation, Filtration and Precipitation. Calcination is an essential part in the production of alumina, yet does not form part of the Bayer Process. The block diagram shown in In the extraction process of alumina, the production is directly related to the supersaturation level of the green liquor ( The filters operate under pressure and the relationship (pressure The time required to recover the performance of the filters is long, since to remove the hydrate plaque from inside the filters it is necessary to wash each filter with a sufficiently concentrated solution of caustic soda followed by heating for some hours. Besides this, due to the hardness of hydrate plaques, the filter material suffers damage and may need to be changed. The combination of all these factors represents a loss of some millions of dollars in production, raw material and labor. The elevation of resistance imposed by crust as a function of time for a normal situation and for a situation where precipitation occurs is shown in The stability control of the green liquor is measured by its precipitation potential, more specifically, by ratio In order to increase plant production it is necessary to work with higher alumina concentrations in the green liquor, but without increasing the risk of precipitation, i.e., operating with high concentrations of alumina but still maintaining the same precipitation potential. This is possible by using substances that inhibit the nucleation. The principal variables which influence the precipitation potential, that is, impact on kinetics or on the thermodynamics of the precipitation reaction are considered in these experiments. The studied variables were the concentration of solids and the concentration of inhibitor. The experiments were performed in duplicate in order to obtain two sets of data for the same situation, and thus confirm the observed behavior. The variables temperature and concentration of impurities were not included, since they show very little variability, and their control is sufficiently effective. The tests for stabilization of the filtration liquor were given priority due to their higher impact on the profit, since any gains are directly related to a high potential for production increase. Typically, the filtration liquor is composed by 210 In practice, the ratio The response variable for all the experiments was the difference between the initial ratio The laboratory tests were carried out according to the scheme shown in In order to perform all the experiments with the same residue, thus maintaining the same concentration of seeds, a sample of the paste from the final stage of the digestion was collected on the first day of the tests. This sample was labeled and then centrifuged. The solids were washed with caustic solution to remove all the alumina impregnated in the mud then the solids were washed with a large volume of deionized water in order to remove the soda before being finally dried in an oven. The tested liquor is unstable at high temperature so the time between collection and preparation of samples was the smallest possible. Therefore, all the laboratory equipment was prepared in advance with the intention of reducing the manipulation time of the liquor. All the drains were kept open for 1 The polymeric inhibitor is available commercially in the form of an aqueous solution. The polymer solution was prepared using water from the wastes pool. The use of this water source was done with the objective of simulating as closely as possible the conditions of the industrial process. The concentration of the solution used was low, with the objective of reducing the viscosity and thus improving the mixing efficiency of the polymer in the liquor ( To avoid loss of water through evaporation, the stability test was performed in Nalgene bottles, maintained at 95 It is important to emphasize that the interval of time under consideration is that normally observed in practice, when the precipitation of alumina occurs. The precipitation occurs due to the supersaturation and results in a decrease of the ratio The substantial stabilizing effect of the inhibitor is shown in The liquors with solids always showed greater reduction in the values of the ratio It can be seen from The laboratory scale studies provided positive results in respect to the effect of the polymer on the stabilization of the liquor. The study was extended to verify its applicability on an industrial scale. The following procedure was adopted for execution of the tests in the industrial plant: The amount of the polymer used initially was the highest tested on the laboratory scale (20 The concentration of the solution to be added was kept low to maintain low viscosity of the polymer, thus increasing its mixing efficiency. On the other hand, the flow rate was kept high. Thus, the concentration of the tested solution was defined by the pumping capacity of the system. The polymer solution was added at the point where the suction pump fed to the filtration stage. The start-up of the test was done on the eve of a planned stop of the industrial plant for maintenance. In this way, any unexpected negative result could be by-passed without major consequences. With the objective of increasing significantly the driving force for the occurrence of precipitation in the filters, the ratio R of the digestion step was increased by about 0.015 points above its typical value, a value which definitely promotes auto-precipitation in the filters. Before beginning the auto-precipitation, the performance of the filters was normal; the resistance values did not reach 50 The values of resistance depend on filter area, filtration rate and the pressure drop between input and output. As shown in The material taken out of the filters ( After verifying the beginning of the auto-precipitation event, the work in the presence of the polymeric inhibitor was begun. Before this, the filters were washed with caustic solution to remove the hydrate plates, then replaced. As the high ratio R was still maintained, it was expected that the increase of resistance would once more occur, if the inhibitor failed to prevent the effect. However, the performance of the filters was maintained without any significant increase of resistance caused by cake in the filter. The flow rate through the filters did not fall to values smaller than 200 The tests performed showed the positive effect of the nucleation inhibitor from tests on the stability of soluble alumina in the Bayer Process liquor. The results demonstrated that the use of the polymeric type inhibitor gives rise to an increase in the stability of the alumina solution, representing an extraordinary potential for increase in production. The polymer showed a high power of stabilization and very little dependence on its concentration. This behavior permits operation with very low amounts of polymer, reducing the cost of introduction of this substance in the process. The effect of the polymer on the stability of soluble alumina is profoundly affected by the presence of aluminum hydrate seeds. This conclusion shows that the polymer is an excellent inhibitor of nucleation, but does not present high efficiency for the inhibition of the growth of crystals. Thus, its application, in spite of presenting very great benefit, remains restricted to feeding at the filtration stage, due to the low concentration of solids and hence seeds at this point in the process. Its use for improving stability at the decantation step becomes unfeasible due to the high concentration of solids feeding these tanks. However, the most important outcome of this work was its successful implementation on an industrial scale. It was verified that an increase in liquor supersaturation generated an increase in its alumina concentration, therefore, increasing the production rate of alumina in about 7% a year, while assuring the given specification of the product. The authors are grateful to Alumar Consortium for the support to publish this work.