Clinical trials have not provided evidence for a role of statin therapy in reducing aortic valve stenosis (AVS) severity in patients with documented AVS. However, whether statin therapy could prevent the onset of AVS is unknown. Our objectives were (1) to compare the incidence rates of AVS among patients treated with high-dose versus usual-dose statin or placebo and (2) to identify clinical risk factors associated with the development of AVS. We conducted post hoc analyses in 23,508 participants from 3 large-scale multicenter atorvastatin randomized blinded clinical trials: Treating to New Targets, the Incremental Decrease in End Points Through Aggressive Lipid Lowering, and the Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels. The main outcome measure was the incidence of clinical AVS over a median follow-up of 4.9 years (82 cases). Among patients who developed AVS, 39 (47.6%) were treated with atorvastatin 80 mg and 43 (52.4%) were treated with lower dose statin (atorvastatin 10 mg in Treating to New Targets, simvastatin 20 to 40 mg in Incremental Decrease in End Points Through Aggressive Lipid Lowering, or placebo in Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol Levels; hazard ratio [HR] 0.91, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.59 to 1.41, p = 0.67). In multivariate analyses forcing treatment, sex, and race into the model, factors that were significantly associated with AVS included age (HR 2.17, 95% CI 1.61 to 2.93, p <0.0001 per 1-SD increment), diabetes (HR 1.67, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.80, p = 0.05), vitamin K antagonist use (HR 3.25, 95% CI 2.06 to 5.16, p <0.0001), and previous statin use (HR 2.65, 95% CI 1.54 to 4.60, p = 0.0008). In conclusion, random allocation to high-dose versus usual-dose statin therapy or placebo did not impact the incidence of AVS among patients without known AVS. Age, diabetes, vitamin K antagonists, and previous statin use were significant predictors of incident AVS in these high-risk patients.Aortic valve stenosis (AVS) is a complex disorder that is present in more than 2% patients aged >65 years, and it is the most frequent indication for surgical heart valve replacement. The study protocol and results of the Treating to New Targets (TNT) trial have been published previously. Patient characteristics at randomization were compared between patients who did develop AVS versus those who did not develop AVS during the study follow-up using a chi-square test for categorical variables and a Wilcoxon rank-sum test for continuous variables with either normal or non-normal distribution. Candidate variables that could be related to AVS risk were selected a priori based on the previous literature and known risk factors and included sex, race, smoking status, age, body mass index, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, detailed cardiovascular history (previous myocardial infarction, angina, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, congestive heart failure, arrhythmia, angioplasty, and/or coronary artery bypass grafting), concomitant medication, estimated glomerular filtration rate, and plasma lipoprotein-lipid levels including apolipoprotein B and A-1, glucose, log-transformed white blood cell count, uric acid, lactate dehydrogenase levels, and blood urea nitrogen. The association of each of the candidate variables with the risk of AVS was assessed by univariable Cox proportional hazard models to calculate the hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Next, statistically significant variables that were associated with AVS risk at a p value of <0.05 in the univariable analyses were then entered into the multivariable model before and after forcing age, sex, and treatment into the model. Baseline characteristics of all study participants are listed in In univariable analyses ( In multivariable analyses forcing treatment, sex, and race into the model, age (HR 2.17, 95% CI 1.61 to 2.93, p <0.0001 per 1-SD increment), diabetes (HR 1.67, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.80, p = 0.05), vitamin K antagonist use (HR 3.25, 95% CI 2.06 to 5.16, p <0.0001), and previous statin use (HR 2.65, 95% CI 1.54 to 4.60, p = 0.0008) remained significantly associated with incident AVS, as listed in Results of this post hoc analysis suggest that in stable patients with cardiovascular disease without known AVS, treatment with atorvastatin 80 mg/day did not reduce the risk of developing AVS compared with treatment with usual-dose statin or placebo. These results are in line with those of 3 randomized clinical trials that have found no benefits of statin therapy in the progression of AVS among patients with known mild-to-moderate AVS Although all statin trials that have tested the hypothesis that statin therapy could be beneficial in patients with AVS reported negative results thus far, A recent large-scale genetic association study identified a single nucleotide polymorphism strongly associated with lipoprotein(a) levels to be significantly associated with the presence of aortic valve calcium and AVS incidence. We found that age and diabetes were significantly and independently associated with the onset of the disease, which confirms findings from earlier prospective studies on AVS risk. We found that vitamin K antagonist use at baseline was a strong predictor of incident AVS. Interestingly, vitamin K antagonists such as warfarin are often used in experimental animal models to induce an AVS phenotype. Unexpectedly, we also found that the previous (nonrandomized) use of statins before randomization was positively associated with AVS risk. This finding could be attributable to the fact that some patients who had mild aortic valve sclerosis may have received statin prescriptions, despite the lack of evidence for this indication, and were more likely to develop AVS during the course of the trials because they had an underlying disease. This could also be true with calcium channel blockers. In addition, it is possible that statins were prescribed more frequently to symptomatic patients, and symptoms are more likely to occur in patients with coronary heart disease with concomitant mild AVS. Similarly, the reported association between vitamin K antagonists and AVS risk could be to a certain extent explained by the fact that these drugs could have been used by patients with atrial fibrillation, such patients being at higher AVS risk, and therefore an ascertainment bias cannot be excluded. Additional limitations of the study include that the number of incident AVS cases was rather small and that AVS was not a prespecified outcome measure in these trials. We identified patients with incident AVS by screening the list of potential adverse events and did not obtain standardized measurements of aortic valve area, pressure gradient, or aortic jet velocity by echocardiography. It was therefore not possible to determine at the beginning of the follow-up who did versus who did not have mild or moderate AVS. The TNT, IDEAL, and SPARCL studies were funded by  Supplementary data related to this article can be found, in the online version, at