This paper proposes a novel process for the simultaneous removal of ammonia–nitrogen and phosphate from simulated swine wastewater using modified zeolite. The natural zeolite was modified by magnesium salts as the adsorbent material for ammonia–nitrogen from wastewater. Mg2+ released from the adsorption process served as the magnesium source in struvite crystallization. The treatment of simulated swine wastewater using modified zeolite at pH 8–9.5 showed much better efficiencies of ammonia–nitrogen and phosphate removal than those by natural zeolite at the same pH. The high nutrient-removal efficiencies were mainly achieved because of cooperation between adsorption by modified zeolite and struvite crystallization. When the reaction condition was controlled at 110g/L of modified zeolite and 40min of reaction time, the ammonia–nitrogen and phosphate-removal efficiencies reached 82% and 98%, respectively. The individual presence of K+, Ca2+, Na+, and Mg2+ had a significantly negative effect on the removal of ammonia–nitrogen in the order of preference of Ca2+
                     >Mg2+
                     >K+
                     >Na+ at identical molar concentrations. Nevertheless, the presence of these ions, except for Na+, had a positive influence on the removal of phosphate. In addition, investigation of the effects of organic acids on the process showed that the removal of nutrients could be significantly reduced by inhibiting struvite crystallization by citric acid present in the simulated swine wastewater. However, the presence of acetic acid had no effect on the proposed process. An economic evaluation revealed that the treatment cost of the proposed process was 3.65$/m3 of simulated swine wastewater.In recent years, with the rapid economical development in developing countries, the demand for pork is also increasing, resulting in the generation of enormous amounts of swine wastewater, which generally contains high concentrations of the total ammonia–nitrogen (TAN) and the total orthophosphate (P Usually, biological process is accepted as the most common and economical method to treat wastewater In separate consideration of TAN removal, adsorption of TAN on zeolites is gaining attention because of its low market price and relative simplicity of application and operation The main objective of this study was to investigate the mechanisms for simultaneous removal of TAN and P The natural zeolite media used in this study were supplied by a mineral processing plant located in the Henan province, China. The media was ground and sieved to a particle size range of 0.18–0.35 Experiments were first performed to investigate the behavior of removal of nutrients from simulated swine wastewater at different pHs using modified zeolite. Subsequently, the experiments were conducted to obtain optimal conditional parameters such as contact time and reagent dosage. Finally, the experiments for the effects of individual cations (K TAN and P The XRD patterns for natural zeolite and its modified form are shown in Removals of nutrients from simulated swine wastewater using natural and modified zeolites were observed at the pH range of 5–10. In addition, in order to compare the removals of TAN and P In this study, the removals of TAN and P Struvite crystallization was another important contribution to the removal of nutrients. It is significantly controlled by solution pH and can proceed over a sufficiently wide pH range of 7–11 As the reaction in Eq. The formation of struvite can effectively reduce the concentration of Mg For further confirming our above-mentioned analysis, the precipitates obtained under the optimal reaction conditions were collected and sieved through a 200-orders screen, and then the screened solid was characterized by SEM-EDS, FTIR and XRD. In the SEM image ( The results of batch experiments to determine the optimum contact time and adsorbent dosage are shown in  In the published literature, Song et al. Swine wastewater commonly contains abundant cations such as potassium, calcium, sodium, and magnesium ions, which may hinder the removal of nutrients using modified zeolite. Therefore, in this study, the effects of individual K Similarly, the removal of nutrients from simulated swine wastewater was mainly achieved by the adsorption of modified zeolite and the crystallization of struvite. When these cations were present in the solution, competitive adsorption occurred between the metal cations and NH The experiments for the effect of organic acids were performed at pH 8.5 for 40 Citric acid (C In this study, the residue resulting from the proposed process included the brine after modification of zeolite and the adsorbed zeolite solids. Since these zeolite solids were rich in nitrogen and phosphorus, they can be used in agriculture and as a raw material in fertilizers In this research, the simultaneous removal of nutrients from simulated swine wastewater was investigated using MgCl The proposed process for the treatment of simulated swine wastewater is feasible. The mechanism of simultaneous removal of TAN and P The authors would like to appreciate the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions that significantly improved the manuscript. This work was financially supported by the