Prosthetic radial head replacement is a well-documented procedure; however, loss of elbow flexion after radial head arthroplasty has only recently been reported. This study reviews 6 patients who received modular prosthetic radial heads and had a clinically significant decrease in elbow flexion. The implant was removed in 4 of these patients because of reduced elbow motion and pain. This clinical finding is correlated with biomechanical data obtained by use of matched-pair, fresh-frozen upper extremity specimens loaded to 330 N with the forearm in positions of neutral, pronation, and supination for each of three elbow positions (0°, 90°, and 135°). The radiocapitellar gap was monitored and was significantly smaller under load during elbow flexion compared with extension. This study indicates the need for verification of the radiocapitellar gap throughout elbow range of motion in order to prevent these complications.The frequency of radial head and neck fracture has been reported to be between 1.7% to 5.4% of all fractures and accounts for 33% of elbow fractures. The structures critical for postresection stability include the posterolateral ligament complex at the elbow, the anterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament, the interosseous membrane (IOM) of the forearm, the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) at the distal radioulnar joint, and an intact coronoid. This study retrospectively reviews 6 patients after prosthetic radial head replacement who were found to have a clinically significant decrease in elbow flexion after this procedure requiring removal of the prosthesis in 4 patients. This clinical finding is correlated with biomechanical cadaveric data demonstrating a decreased radiocapitellar gap under load in flexion compared with extension. The study hypothesis is that the clinical loss of flexion after prosthetic radial head placement is a result of a decrease in radiocapitellar gap under load in flexion as compared with extension. From 1997 to 2001, 22 radial head replacements were performed in 22 patients (16 men and 4 women). The indications for radial head arthroplasty in this patient population were an unreconstructable radial head that consisted of 4 or more fragments of the articular surface and one of the following coexisting factors: (1) persistent humeral-ulnar instability despite osteosynthesis of the olecranon (n = 12), (2) persistent posterolateral instability after radial head fracture and resection (n = 6), and (3) longitudinal instability of the forearm resulting from coexistent interosseous ligament and triangular fibrocartilage ligament injury (n = 4). Sixteen patients were followed up clinically for a mean of 1.5 years. Physical examination was performed with a goniometer by a certified occupational therapist. The mean loss of extension in these patients was 28° (range, 22°-48°). The mean loss of elbow flexion was 15° (range, 6°-60°). All patients had the rotational arc of motion restored to within 10° of the contralateral side. Of the 16 patients, 6 complained chiefly of loss of elbow flexion after radial head replacement. The arc of motion was measured and compared with the contralateral side. The mean arc of motion of these 6 patients was only 79°, with the loss of flexion averaging 49°. The indication for the original radial head replacement in these patients was instability after osteosynthesis of the olecranon in complex fracture dislocations. All patients had had high-energy injuries resulting in comminuted fractures of the olecranon with associated unreconstructable radial head fracture dislocations. All patients were treated with osteosynthesis of the olecranon by use of 3.5-mm reconstruction plates and had associated repair of the coronoid fracture. All cases were noted to have persistent instability after stabilization of the olecranon as a result of failure of the lateral ligamentous complex to stabilize the residual proximal radius adequately after radial head resection. A modular designed radial head (Wright Medical, Arlington, TN) was sized and implanted. The radial head was replaced via the posterior approach while plating the olecranon in all 6 cases. Attention was paid to repairing the lateral ulnar collateral ligament to bone when possible. Protected range of motion was initiated at 3 to 5 days postoperatively in all cases. This consisted of active assisted range of motion from 90° to as much flexion as could be obtained. By 1.5 weeks postoperatively (range, 3-20 days), full range of motion was permitted in all patients. Six pairs of fresh-frozen cadaveric upper limbs were examined by fluoroscopy to eliminate any specimens with bony pathology from testing. After testing, the IOM was explored and data from any specimen with disruption of the central band were excluded. An experimental testing apparatus was designed to support the cadaveric arm with the elbow at positions of 0° to 135° of flexion ( Specimens were prepared by transverse osteotomy 25 cm proximal to the elbow joint. Soft tissues were removed from the humerus 5 cm proximal to the elbow joint, which allowed placement of the denuded humerus on a split resin mold to secure the arm in the testing apparatus. Three half-pins were then inserted at 5-cm increments, starting with the first pin 2 cm proximal to the radiocarpal articulation, ensuring that the pins passed through both cortices of the radius. These pins were attached to the external fixator and transmitted the load to the radius. Two additional half-pins were placed, one in the proximal radius 1.5 cm from the radiocapitellar joint and one in the lateral distal humerus. The additional radial pin was used to measure radial displacement, and the additional humeral pin was used to measure minimal displacements of the humerus with loading. The specimens were then placed in the testing apparatus, and baseline measurements with 90° elbow flexion were obtained in neutral, 60° supination, and 60° pronation positions. Seven millimeters of radial head was resected from each specimen. Axial forces were applied incrementally to a final load of 330 N, a load chosen to simulate the activities of daily living at one-half body weight. Repeated-measures analysis of variance was used to detect differences in radial displacement under load resulting from forearm position (neutral, supination, and pronation) and degree of elbow flexion (0°, 90°, and 135°). A compound symmetry covariance structure was used to model observations. Models examined included all main effects plus all 2-way interactions. The best predictors of radiocapitellar gap were determined by use of backward stepwise elimination. The final model chosen contained only those terms significant at the The implant was removed in 4 patients ( Biomechanical data demonstrated a significantly smaller radiocapitellar gap in full flexion (135°) than in full extension (0°) with a load of 330 N ( Patients often have decreased elbow range of motion after major surgery; however, the preferential loss of elbow flexion after a radial head resection with replacement is not expected. In this clinical study 6 patients who had modular prosthetic radial heads placed were evaluated because of loss of motion and pain. Four of these patients had their implants removed as a result of these complications. This study correlates the clinical finding of decreased flexion after prosthetic radial head replacement with biomechanical data demonstrating a decreased radiocapitellar gap under load with the elbow in full flexion compared with full extension regardless of forearm position. Moro et al Among authors advocating prosthetic radial head replacement, the type of prosthesis (silicone vs titanium) also has been a subject of debate. Many studies have modeled sequential injury to the IOM, central band, and TFCC, Anatomic studies The greatest decrease in radiocapitellar gap under load occurs in full elbow flexion, whereas in extension, the radiocapitellar gap remains the largest. Measurement of the radiocapitellar gap in extension may lead to overstuffing and predispose to decreased radiocapitellar gap during elbow flexion after prosthetic radial head placement ( We thank Julia T. Rushing, MSTAT, for assistance with statistical analysis and E. Stanley Gordon, BS, for technical assistance with biomechanical testing.