Mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanopowder was synthesized by hydrothermal method at 130°C for 12h. The samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), selected-area electron diffraction (SAED), HRTEM, and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area. The as-synthesized sample with narrow pore size distribution had average pore diameter about 3–4nm. The specific BET surface area of the as-synthesized sample was about 193m2/g. Mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanopowders (prepared by this study) showed higher photocatalytic activity than the nanorods TiO2, nanofibers TiO2 mesoporous TiO2, and commercial TiO2 nanoparticles (P-25, JRC-01, and JRC-03). The solar energy conversion efficiency (η) of the cell using the mesoporous anatase TiO2 was about 6.30% with the short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 13.28mA/cm2, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.702V and the fill factor (ff) of 0.676; while η of the cell using P-25 reached 5.82% with Jsc of 12.74mA/cm2, Voc of 0.704V and ff of 0.649.In the past decade, mesoporous materials have been of great interest as catalysts because of their unique textural and structural characteristics. Much effort has concentrated on the important metal oxides such as TiO In this study, mesoporous anatase TiO Titanium (IV) butoxide (Aldrich) was mixed with the same mole of acetylacetone (ACA, Nacalai Tesque, Inc., Japan) to slowdown the hydrolysis and the condensation reactions The crystalline structure of the samples was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU RINT 2100). The microstructure of the prepared materials was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6500FE), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-200CX), and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED). The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface area was determined by the nitrogen adsorption (BEL Japan, BELSORP-18 Plus). The photocatalytic activity was measured through the formation rate of I TiO The thickness of the TiO The amount of adsorbed dye was determined by desorbing the dye from the titania surface into a mixed solution of 0.1   SEM and TEM images of the as-synthesized sample showed nanoparticles size about 5  The BET surface area of the nanorods TiO The average crystal sizes was estimated from the line broadening of X-ray diffraction reflections using the Sherrer formula Increasing in preparation temperature resulted in higher crystallinity, indicating the grain growth of TiO The I  In summary, high surface area (about 180 The authors would like to express gratitude to Profs. S. Isoda and H. Kurata, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of TEM apparatus Prof. T. Yoko, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of XRD equipment and Prof. Mochizuki at AIST for the kind supply of Pt counter electrode. We would like to sincere thank to Assist. Prof. Dr. Yoshikazu Suzuki for his valuable comments. We are also grateful to the Geomatec Co. Ltd. for providing a part of conducting glass. This work was supported by grant-in-aids from the Ministry of Education, Science Sports, and Culture of Japan under the 21 COE program, the Nanotechnology Support Project, NEDO under high-performance dye-sensitized solar cell project, and from JSPS research fellow. We acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for the helpful discussion to improve the manuscript.