The creation of practical paper-based electronics requires secured conductivity with conductive silver tracks fabricated on a paper substrate. Various paper properties were explored for obtaining the key parameters intimately related to printed circuit qualities. A comparison of the resistance of silver tracks printed by ink-jet with a tetradecane-based ink of silver nanoparticles among four substrates—photo-quality ink-jet paper, matte-type ink-jet paper, coated offset paper, and uncoated laboratory sheets—implied the importance of pore size, porosity, surface roughness, and surface energy. Paper surface layers with small pore sizes and high porosities produced highly conductive, narrow silver tracks because of quick ink absorption, as observed in the photo-quality ink-jet paper. The surface roughness induced a high resistance to peel-off force at the expense of conductivity, and this improvement in the peel-off resistance is considered to be achieved because of the anchor effect of silver nanoparticle inks which fell into dents present on the rough paper surfaces. The widths of the silver tracks were significantly reduced by controlling the surface energies of the paper sheets. This tendency was remarkable, especially for uncoated laboratory sheets, and thus the conductivities of the silver tracks were successfully improved.There has been impressive progress in printing technology regarding the performance of inks, printing presses, and paper in recent years. This has enabled the printing of functional micro-structures known as printed electronics, for example, electrical circuits. Printed electronics is a comprehensive set of promising technologies that has gathered tremendous interest as a mass production process for low-cost electronic devices because it increases manufacturing flexibility and decreases production costs There are some reports on paper electronics such as organic field-effect transistors The selection of a paper substrate is crucial for the successful manufacture of stable micro-structures. In order to select the most suitable paper substrate, it is necessary to reveal the effect of various paper properties, for example, porosity, pore sizes, roughness, and surface energy, on the printed circuit quality. Several pioneering groups have reported on the effects of the surface properties of polymeric substrates like poly-ethylene terephtalate or polyimide to produce narrow conductive silver tracks In our research, conductive ink tracks were printed on various paper sheets and the effects of their surface properties on the shapes and conductivities of the printed circuits were evaluated. Furthermore, a method for inhibiting the lateral spread of conductive inks by controlling the surface energies of papers will be presented. Several types of paper samples were compared in order to evaluate the relationship between the paper property parameters and printed circuit qualities. Photo-quality IJ paper (Photolike QP, KONICAMINOLTA, Japan), matte-type IJ paper (Super-fine paper, EPSON, Japan), high-gloss-type offset paper (Mirror coat, Oji paper, Japan), and laboratory sheets were used, as listed in A silver nanoparticle ink (NPS-J, Harima chemicals, Japan) was chosen as the conductive ink for patterning. It contains silver nanoparticles of approximately 12 The line patterns of conductive inks were IJ-printed on the paper samples. Uniform line patterns of the silver nanoparticle ink were printed with a laboratory ink-jet printer (Dimatix DMP2831, Fujifilm, Japan) equipped with a head to eject ink-droplets with a volume of 10 The resistances of the printed silver tracks were measured using a digital multimeter (U1253A, Agilent Technologies, USA) in the two-point measurement mode. The four-point measurement mode is desirable; however, for very high resistance levels as silver tracks on paper in this experiment, the two-point measurement mode also provides some reasonable data that are not much different from those in the four-point measurement mode. The measured span was 10 In order to improve the silver nanoparticle ink printability of the paper, the surface energies of the paper samples were controlled using a fluorinated polymer solution (Novec EGC-1720, Sumitomo 3 For the evaluation of the altered surface energy, the contact angles  The optical microscopic images of the silver tracks after the resistance measurement are shown in the top images of To determine the reason for the low peel-off resistance, three-dimensional profiles of the silver tracks were measured by confocal laser scanning microscopy, as shown in the images at the bottom of The measured Although the fluorinated polymer treatment altered the silver-track morphologies of the two types of IJ paper slightly, the treatment successfully decreased the width of the silver tracks on the two non-IJ papers, as shown in The fluorinated polymer treatment provided a certain level of conductivity to the silver tracks on the laboratory sheets, which would otherwise have no conductivity, as shown in The relationship between the parameters of paper properties and printed circuit qualities were investigated. The effects of four kinds of paper parameters—pore size, porosity, surface roughness, and surface energy—were evaluated. The small pore sizes and high porosities of the paper surface layer led to a narrow width and high conductivity of the printed silver tracks because of the quick absorption of the silver nanoparticle inks. The surface roughness provided resistance to peel-off force in spite of reduced conductivity. This improvement in the peel-off resistance is thought to be due to the anchor effect of the silver nanoparticle inks falling into dents present in rough paper surfaces. The widths of the silver tracks were significantly reduced by controlling the surface energies of the paper sheets. This tendency was especially remarkable in uncoated laboratory sheets, and the conductivities of the silver tracks were successfully improved. As far as the results are concerned, rough surfaces are probably the best choice for creating practical conductive silver tracks with adequate peel off resistance on paper substrates with small pores and high porosity. In addition, surface energy control could be an effective method when printed electronics are fabricated on uncoated paper. However, note that these rules apply to only pigment type inks with low surface energies on porous substrates and do not always apply to aqueous inks, polymer solution inks, and impervious substrates. The authors thank the