In this paper, a novel surfactant, 2-amino-6-decanamidohexanoic acid (AHA-10) was synthesized and used as a collector for flotation separation of diaspore and aluminosilicate minerals. The adsorption mechanism of AHA-10 onto diaspore was also evaluated by FTIR spectra, zeta potential, XPS and solution chemistry. The flotation results demonstrated that AHA-10 exhibited superior collecting power to diaspore and good selectivity against kaolinite and illite, and could effectively recover diaspore from bauxite ores contained aluminosilicate minerals at pH around 10. The analyses of FTIR spectra, zeta potential and solution chemistry inferred that at pH around 10, AHA-10 might chemisorb on diaspore surfaces by formation of AlO and AlN bonds. AHA-10’s unique properties, such as characteristic bond model to Al atoms on diaspore surfaces, double hydrophobic groups and intermolecular hydrogen bonds between neighboring AHA-10 molecules coated on diaspore surfaces, rendering a weakening surface energy and enhancing hydrophobicity of diaspore particles.Bauxite is an economically important mineral used in the extraction of aluminum and in the manufacture of ceramics and refractories. In China, bauxites are generally diasporic resources with a low Al Amino acids are of important raw materials for biocompatible system, and have been established as natural building blocks for surfactants. The amino and carboxyl groups of amino acids are active sites for synthesizing anionic, cationic, and amphoteric surfactants ( One purpose of this paper is to develop new surfactants as flotation collectors and to investigate the structure-activity relationship of collector molecule. As we know, the cost for collectors in the mineral processing only takes a very small part in the whole production cost, and the value created by a collector is far higher than its cost. So, we think that it might be worthy to develop expensive collectors. Herein, a modified carboxylate surfactant, 2-amino-6-decanamidohexanoic acid (AHA-10), which contains amide, amino and carboxyl groups, was first introduced as a flotation collector. Its flotation performances for diaspore, kaolinite and illite were evaluated by single and bench-scale flotation tests. Its adsorption mechanism to diaspore was also investigated by FTIR spectra and zeta potential. The understanding of the role of amide, amino and carboxyl groups in flotation separation of diaspore from kaolinite and illite provided a new insight into the structure-property relationship of flotation collectors. Hand-picked diaspore (Mianchi, Henan province), kaolinite and illite (Qingtian and Ouhai, Zhejiang province) were obtained from the Geological Museum of China (Beijing). The X-ray diffraction of diaspore, kaolinite and illite was listed in AHA-10 was synthesized in our laboratory, and its structure was confirmed by IR, Micro-flotation tests were carried out by using a XFG5-35 flotation machine (mechanical agitation) ( Bench-scale flotation tests were performed in XFD-63 flotation cells (self aeration) whose volume was 1.0 The infrared spectra of experimental samples were recorded by an AVATAR360 FTIR spectrometer. 50 Zeta potentials of diaspore particles were measured by JS94H electrophoresis apparatus trophoresis (Beckman Coulter INC, America). 40 2-Amino-6-decanamidohexanoic acid (AHA-10) surfactant was synthesized by using lysine, n-decanoic acid as starting materials and its synthesis route was listed in Product characterization: 2-amino-6-decanamidohexanoic acid (AHA-10), a light yellow solid, yield 56.8%. 400  The flotation response of diaspore, kaolinite or illite as a function of the initial concentration of collectors under pH 10 was presented in The results of locked-cycle flotation tests were presented in The FTIR spectra of AHA-10, and diaspore, kaolinite and illite before and after AHA-10 treatment were presented in  The zeta potential of diaspore particles as a function of pH values in the absence and presence of AHA-10 was presented in Diaspore [α-AlO(OH)] is composed of hexagonal close-packed oxygen sheets with aluminum atoms filling two-thirds of the octahedral interstice sites ( AHA-10 contains three hydrophilic groups ( In the acidic pulp (pH Under pH 6.0–12.0, AHA-10 mainly exists as its amphoteric species with negatively charged carboxyl The main compositions of the diaspore/water interface in aqueous solutions (pH In this paper, a novel surfactant, 2-amino-6-decanamidohexanoic acid (AHA-10) was synthesized and its flotation performance and adsorption mechanism to diaspore were first investigated by FTIR spectra, flotation tests, zeta potential. Based on the experimental findings, the following conclusion may be drawn as: The flotation results demonstrated that AHA-10 exhibited superior collecting power to diaspore and selectivity against kaolinite and illite and could effectively recover diaspore from bauxite ores contained aluminosilicate minerals under pH around 10. The analyses of FTIR spectra, zeta potential and solution chemistry inferred that at pH around 10, AHA-10 might chemisorb on diaspore surfaces by formation of Al AHA-10’s unique properties, such as characteristic bond model to Al atoms on diaspore surfaces, double hydrophobic groups and intermolecular hydrogen bonds between neighboring AHA-10 molecules coated on diaspore surfaces, rendering a weakening surface energy and enhancing hydrophobicity of diaspore particles. The authors express their appreciation for the financial support from the