The gas permeability of coals varies with effective stress increase, matrix shrinkage/swelling due to gas desorption/adsorption, gas slippage and other factors. In this paper, the nature of helium permeability change was primarily investigated on 14 coal cores under a varying effective stress from 4 to 12 MPa in laboratory. Results show that, for the High-rank Series (five low-volatile bituminous to semi-anthracite cores) and Referee Series (a high volatile bituminous, a moderate volatile bituminous, and a semi-anthracite coal), coal permeability declined exponentially with the rise of effective stress. Under 4–8 MPa confining stress conditions, the permeability declines dramatically; while for 8–12 MPa conditions, the curve of permeability reduces slightly. Gas slippage effect plays a positive role in improving permeability for all the cores, of which the Klinkenberg permeability shows a positive linear relationship with the total permeability, and becomes much more influential for low initial permeability cores. The Heterogeneity Series (samples cut parallel to face and butt cleats, and perpendicular to bedding plane) revealed that the butt cleat has the highest stress sensitivity and the highest cleat compressibility. The permeability rebound happened for all the three direction cores, and the butt cleat direction cores showed the lowest irreversible permeability loss through the 4–12–4 MPa effective stress cycle. Cleat compressibility decreases linearly with the increase of effective stress for all the coal cores, and the higher vitrinite content results in a higher decrease rate.Coalbed methane (CBM) production and CO During continued CBM production, two opposing effects, matrix shrinkage and swelling which are accompanied with volumetric strain in coals are believed to influence the permeability: (a) permeability increase caused by matrix shrinkage associated with methane desorption and (b) permeability decreases due to effective stress increase as with the pore pressure reduction, followed by cleat compaction ( A variety of factors controlling coal reservoir conditions during permeability simulation have been discussed, including the uniaxial strain, constant volume, and constant confining stress ( A total of 10 coal blocks from 8 active coal mines located in the Ordos basin (Liaoyuan, Shengjie, Nangouyi, Sangshuping, Xiangshan and Zhungeer mines), Qinshui basin (Tang'an mine), and Qianxi-Diandong coal bearing area (Enhong mine) of China was conducted for experimental research ( In order to understand the impact of effective stress on coal permeability, ascending and descending effective confining pressures were used to simulate the changes of coal seam effective stress, and to determine the air permeability behavior under a varying effective stress. An AP-608 automated permeameter–porosimeter was used, which includes a stand-alone grain volume chamber with directly measuring the cores' volume and density. Porosity was measured using a Boyles's law technique. For the measurement of pore volume and the absolute permeability of the coal cores to gas, helium was used as the gas phase, as it does not adsorb on the coal surface. Because of its high diffusivity and being non-toxic and non-damaging to the coal cores, pore fluid was set at a constant value (max 3 MPa) ( In the experiment, the effective confining pressure was used as effective stress, whereby the inlet air pressure was kept at 3 MPa thoroughly and the effective confining pressure was increased to 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 MPa by adjusting the pressure gauge for the High-rank Series and Referee Series. For the Heterogeneity Series, the confining pressures used in the flow runs were also selected at an equal interval, i.e., six test pressure points between 3.5 and 12 MPa during pressure loading, and five test pressure points during pressure unloading. To express the permeability behavior, a concept of permeability loss rate (PLR) was introduced, defined as follows. The experiment results of the 8 High rank and Referee samples are shown in Further, the results for the Referee Series have also been discussed. These three cores (CZ3, CE9 and CH15) have different metamorphic grades, varying from high-volatile A bituminous to anthracite rank, with a maximum vitrinite reflectance of 0.97, 2.53 and 4.23%, respectively. Permeability test results showed that core CZ3 has the highest permeability and core CH15 has the lowest permeability for the same experimental conditions (confining stress of 4 MPa). In general, the permeability values ranged from 0.428 to 1.374 mD (averaging 0.787 mD), from 0.015 to 0.036 mD (averaging 0.024 mD) and from 0.001 to 0.005 mD (averaging 0.002 mD) for cores CZ3, CE9 and CH15, respectively. Naturally fractured networks within the coals directly influence the permeability dramatically, and coals with well-developed fractures will show high gas permeability. In this series, the low rank coal core (CZ3) with much more fractures is of much higher permeability than the high rank cores. Further, it can be neglected that low rank cores is much more sensitive to the increasing effective stress than the relative high rank cores as shown from the porosities declining rate. The permeability difference between each of the three cores drilled from the same source coal is shown in The increase in effective stress will result in the closure of the cleat of coals as shown in Gas pressure, gas type, and temperature may all influence the results of the measured coal cleat compressibility. It is generally reported that A power function was used to fit the permeability-effective stress data to describe the impact of effective stress on permeability, which shows a higher fitting degree than the usual chosen exponential relationship. As shown in The gas slippage effect is shown to be significant ( The Key parameters representative of the effective stress on the permeabilities of different core drilling directions was presented in For the three Referee cores and SL3 ( This study has shown that the gas porosity and permeability of different rank coals under confining stress ranging from 4 to 12 MPa, even for same rank coals from the same coal filed, varied widely under the same confining stress condition. Porosity is generally of a higher decrease rate than the permeability under the same effective stress change, but the variation rates are quite different for different coal cores, which may be affected by initial permeability, coal rank and other coal properties. Abnormal porosity and permeability may appear at higher effective stress condition, with the tendency of not only creating new fractures but also connecting isolated pores. Cores cut from different directions show a similar permeability variation trend. However, the face and butt cleat direction cores can weaken the effective stress damage to permeability to some extent, with the cores cut perpendicular to the bedding surface showing the highest lost permeability (permeability compared at 4 MPa after the 4–12–4 MPa effective stress cycle). Cleat compressibility decreases linearly with the increase of effective stress, however, the variation rates are quite similar for different rank coal cores (even the initial permeabilities of great difference). Vitrinite content of the coal cores may be one of the most important factors controlling the variation of cleat compressibility, with the higher vitrinite content cores showing a higher decrease rate. Butt cleat direction cores are generally of the highest stress sensitivity compared to the other direction cores, and show the highest rebound permeability during the pressure cycle. The positive effect from the gas slippage on permeability can be uniformly expressed as a power exponent function at the same confining stress, and usually become much more significant at a confining stress less than 8 MPa. The Klinkenberg permeability shows a positive linear relationship with the gas permeability constantly, even in higher effective stress conditions. This work was supported by the