Certain extremity injuries presenting to the ED or Trauma Unit warrant increased suspicion for underlying arterial trauma. Such injuries include knee dislocations, displaced medial tibial plateau fractures and other displaced bicondylar fractures around the knee, open or segmental distal femoral shaft fractures, floating joints, gunshot wounds in proximity to neurovascular structures, or mangled extremities. Once the diagnosis of arterial trauma is made, a multi-disciplinary approach is warranted.
                  The diagnostic strategies for vascular injury have undergone an evolution over the past 2 decades. One and a half percent to 4.6% of patients hospitalized with blunt extremity trauma have associated vascular compromise [Bunt TJ, Malone JM, Moody M, et al. Am J Surg 1990;160(2):226-8; Reid JD, Weigelt JA, Thal ER, et al. Arch Surg 1988;123(8):942-6; Applebaum R, Yellin AE, Weaver FA, et al. Am J Surg 1990;160(2):221-4; discussion 224-5; Dennis JW, Frykberg ER, Veldenz HC, et al. J Trauma 1998;44(2):243-52; discussion 242-3]. An efficient and effective evidence-based approach to diagnosing vascular injury is necessary, as the difficulty in diagnosis, the multiplicity of diagnostic strategies, the limited time frame in which to initiate appropriate treatment, the limb threatening complications of a missed diagnosis, and the increased awareness of health care expenditures make this entity an intimidating diagnostic challenge [Johansen K, Lynch K, Paun M, et al. J Trauma 1991;31(4):515-9; discussion 519-22; Lynch K, Johansen K. Ann Surg 1991;214(6):737-41; Walker ML, Poindexter Jr JM, Stovall I. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1990;170(2):97-105; Kendall RW, Taylor DC, Salvian AJ, et al. J Trauma 1993;35(6):875-8].
                  The purpose of this article is to present an evidence-based algorithm for patients who present with either arterial injury or a high-risk of arterial injury. A diagnostic algorithm will be presented, and the rationale for diagnostic interventions will be discussed in the context of current medical literature.The 4 “hard signs” of extremity vascular injury include pulsatile hemorrhage, an expanding hematoma, a palpable thrill or audible bruit, or a pulseless limb. When a patient presents with any of the 4 hard signs of vascular injury, immediate surgical exploration and vascular repair are warranted A more difficult diagnostic problem occurs in patients who present with more subtle clues of vascular injury. These “soft signs” might include a history of severe hemorrhage at the accident scene, subjectively decreased or unequal pulses, decreased 2-point discrimination testing of an anatomically related nerve deficiency, or a nonpulsatile hematoma The physical examination alone is often inadequate for accurate diagnosis and therefore is not a reliable predictor of arterial trauma Expeditious diagnosis is essential, given the urgent time frame in which to treat a patient with an arterial lesion. An extended diagnostic interval may result in the manifestations of arterial damage. A warm ischemia time interval of less than 6 hours is generally accepted as the standard interval within which arterial continuity must be restored to avoid permanent damage to the soft tissues Because of the inadequacy of the physical exam and the need for prompt diagnosis and treatment, on-call and ED physicians must prioritize patients who require evaluation for possible arterial injury from extremity trauma. A safe, efficient, cost-effective, and evidence-based algorithm is required. For over 2 decades, it has been recognized that physical examination alone is not a reliable method to detect the presence or absence of arterial injury. Different methods of screening have been developed according to historical context, technology, cost, and efficiency. Each screening test's limitations led to the next diagnostic modality. Initially, nonoperative screening was used with an emphasis on observation before further treatment. In time of war, operative exploration based solely on proximity of the injury to vascular structures became the screening method of choice. This aggressive and invasive approach occurred most often in the context of marked soft tissue destruction that accompanied high-velocity missile damage Arteriography as a screening tool (exclusion arteriography) became popular in the late 1970s and 1980s as its techniques were continually refined. With a published sensitivity of 95% to 100%, and a specificity of 90% to 98%, arteriography quickly became the gold standard The duplex ultrasound was developed next, which seemed to fulfill criteria for speed and accuracy, and its effectiveness was demonstrated in multiple studies Determination of the API, also known in the literature as the ankle brachial index or ankle arm index, requires the use of a Doppler machine and a blood pressure cuff. It has been investigated as a screening tool for clinically significant arterial compromise In a controlled trial of 100 consecutive limbs, Lynch and Johansen Before this study, the API was primarily used on patients with penetrating injuries. Orthopedists and other practitioners were left to question the usefulness of the API in the bluntly injured limb, such as a fracture or dislocation. More recently, its efficacy has been extended to the management of blunt extremity injury. In a controlled trial of 75 consecutive blunt high-risk orthopedic injuries, the negative predictive value of a Doppler API of greater than 0.9 was 100%. Seventy percent of the 75 injured limbs had an API of greater than 0.9, and clinical follow-up revealed no major or minor arterial injuries. Among the 30% with an API of less than 0.9, 70% had lesions detected by arteriogram, and half of the patients had the lesion surgically repaired Certain fracture patterns around the knee have a high associated incidence of arterial injury. The popliteal artery is tethered at the adductor hiatus in the medial distal thigh, and again distal to the knee joint at the soleus arch. The tethered artery becomes vulnerable to stretch, tear, or intimal damage when the knee becomes displaced by dislocation or widely displaced fracture. The clinician should have a high index of suspicion in the young patient who has sustained a knee injury from high-energy trauma. Suspicion should be further heightened with radiographic evidence of marked fracture displacement and/or comminution. It should be kept in mind that the displacement of the fracture was likely much worse at the time of injury than the static x-ray shows, as the soft tissues return the fragments toward their original position during recoil. The tibial fractures that have a particular propensity for association with arterial damage include the isolated medial tibial plateau (Schatzker IV) fracture, as well as the associated medial and lateral plateau fractures that dissociate the articular surface from the tibial diaphysis (Schatzker VI). The medial plateau fracture can behave in a similar manner as a knee dislocation. While the typical medial tibial fragment is attached to the distal femur by the medial collateral and cruciate ligaments, the shaft of the tibia displaces freely with its lateral plateau and endangers the popliteal artery ( A purely ligamentous knee dislocation is associated with a high risk of arterial injury, despite having no sharp fracture fragments ( The widely displaced distal femur fracture yields a similar threat to the vascular tree because the popliteal artery is tethered to the femur at its transition from the femoral artery in Hunter's canal. The open femur fracture ( The entity of the floating joint is defined as ipsilateral long bone fractures occurring on both sides of a joint ( Gunshot wounds are also associated with an increased incidence (around 20%) of arterial injury ( Another situation of concern regarding limb viability is the mangled extremity ( The use of the API should be approached with certain caveats in mind. It may not detect injuries to the profunda femoris, profunda brachii, or peroneal arteries, as no direct extension of flow is measured in the distal arteries The API has fulfilled the requirements of a useful screening tool, is both sensitive and specific with an outstanding negative predictive value, and is reproducible, noninvasive, and inexpensive. The clinician should approach the patient who has a high-risk vascular injury with a clear diagnostic algorithm ( In addition to patients with one of the 4 hard signs of vascular arterial injury, a patient's API should dictate the next step. If the API is greater than 0.9, the patient may be followed clinically without further workup. If the API is less than 0.9, an arteriogram or duplex ultrasound should be completed and will dictate the final plan of action. It is impossible to define every possible clinical scenario that could manifest arterial trauma. However, if the clinician bears these red flags in mind, the vast majority of vascular problems are likely to be detected.