A Donnan Dialysis based process utilizing cation exchange membranes to separate and recover lithium, nickel, cobalt, and manganese during hydrometallurgical recycling of lithium ion battery cathodes is proposed. Compared to conventional processes, the process has the potential to achieve higher lithium recoveries and to recycle lixiviant. The present work introduces the process, develops mathematical equations to describe it, presents experimentally found cation mass transfer coefficients through cation exchange membranes, and uses the experimental data and equations to predict theoretical kinetics and recoveries achievable by the process.
                  The simulation predicts that in two days, utilizing 5000dm2 of CMS C-1805 Neosepta monovalent CEM and 2000dm2 of CMX C-1586 Neosepta polyvalent CEM, the proposed process is capable of processing 1000L of leachate containing 285mol of lithium, 95mol each of cobalt, nickel, and manganese. 94.1% of the lithium can be recovered as high purity lithium carbonate and 99.4% of the transition metals as mixed sulphates ready for solvent extraction. At a minimum 422.6mol of pure sulphuric acid and 268mol of potassium bicarbonate are needed.Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are widely used in modern electronics and are the battery of choice for electrical vehicles now and into the foreseeable future ( Hydrometallurgical recycling of LIBs conventionally proceeds in four steps. The first is to deactivate the batteries, dismantle or shred them, and isolate the cathode powder ( The advantage of inorganic acid lixiviants is that they are cheap; while their disadvantages are that they are corrosive, produce noxious gases, and the leachate residue obtained after solvent extraction is hard to remediate ( In the present paper, we introduce a new method to recover cobalt, nickel, manganese, and lithium from organic acid leachate. The method has the potential to enable leachate reuse, to achieve metal recoveries and lithium carbonate purities comparable to the highest ones reported in literature, and to reduce the amount of heat used to precipitate lithium. The method relies on two processes: Donnan dialysis with cation exchange membranes and precipitation of lithium carbonate by depressurization of a saturated lithium carbonate solution under elevated carbon dioxide atmosphere. In the remainder of the introduction, we briefly review Donnan dialysis, which is basic, but has not been reported in hydrometallurgical literature previously. In Donnan dialysis is a simple, equilibrium based method for the separation and concentration of ions, in the present case cations, from aqueous solutions. A cation exchange membrane separates a feed solution containing one group of electrolytes and a stripping solution containing another group of electrolytes. Since the electrolytes are different, there exist multiple concentration gradients across the membrane. Cations from solutions on both sides of the membrane counter diffuse until the chemical potentials of both solutions are equal. Electroneutrality is maintained in the bulk of both solutions at all times. As an example, suppose there are two solutions of equal volume separated by a cation exchange membrane: one with 1 In practical applications, it is time consuming to wait for equilibrium to be achieved and therefore it is the rate of mass transfer that is of interest. Mass transfer through a CEM during Donnan dialysis is exactly described by the Nernst-Plank equation for cation fluxes, the law of electroneutrality, and mass balances ( J Eq. Values of P The proposed process is given in In step 1 lithium cations are stripped from the leachate while the other cations are left behind. This is possible by using a monovalent CEM, which is only permeable to monovalent cations. In order to maximize lithium recovery, the feed vessel (where the leaching solution is) is operated in batch mode. As Donnan dialysis proceeds, hydrogen ions diffusing into the feed solution from the stripping solution immediately react with conjugate base anions to remake un-dissociated organic acid. The pH in the feed vessel is therefore essentially constant. Once the desired/maximum recovery of lithium has been achieved, the feed solution is sent to a holding tank and then to step 2. The stripping solution is sulphuric acid at the lowest possible pH the membrane can tolerate. The stripping vessel is operated semi-continuously: the pH in the vessel is maintained constant by a pH controller that adds concentrated sulphuric acid as needed. The inlet and outlet flowrate, which are equal, are continuously varied such that, as Donnan dialysis proceeds, the lithium concentration in the vessel stays constant. The former is done to maximize flux while the latter is done to minimize use of acid and ensure a consistent lithium concentration for downstream processes. The effluent stripping solution is collected in a holding tank and serves as feed for step 3. As is the case for all three membrane steps in the proposed process, both feed and stripping vessels are stirred well enough such that the only spacial concentration gradients present are across the membrane. The lithium flux through the membrane is given by Eq. The mass balance on Li in the feed vessel is: The mass balance on H Q is the flowrate of stripping solution through the stripping vessel. ṅ The mass balance on Li in the stripping solution is: These are all the equations necessary to determine completely concentrations of mobile cations and associated anions in the first step. All that is needed is the setting of 4 controllable parameters: V It is evident from the equations that, as the feed vessel becomes depleted in lithium, the amount of concentrated sulphuric acid that needs to be added to maintain the pH of the stripping vessel decreases. Therefore, ṅ The stripping vessel is not emptied in between batches since it is desirable to maintain a constant concentration of lithium in the lithium effluent. If fresh stripping solution was used with every batch this would not be possible. For the very first batch, the stripping flowrate should be set to zero until the lithium concentration in the stripping vessel has reached the desired level. Step 2 proceeds identically to step 1 with the following differences: The feed input is leachate that has been delithiated and partially reprotonated. The membrane used is a polyvalent CEM, which allows cations of any valance to pass through it. The flowrate in the stripping vessel is continuously adjusted such that a constant sulphate concentration is maintained. As will be seen in Flux of M, which is either Co, Ni, or Mn, is given by: The mass balance on M in the feed vessel is: The mass balance on H The mass balance on sulphate in the stripping solution is The sulphate concentration in the vessel is given by a charge balance. Rearranging Eq. The mass balance of M in the stripping vessel is Initial values of [M These are all the equations necessary to describe the concentrations of all mobile species in step 2. There are five controllable parameters: V H In step 4, the neutralized lithium sulphate solution from step 3 is stripped of lithium by potassium ions from a potassium bicarbonate solution. There are some differences in step 4 from steps 1 and 2. In the feed vessel, the concentration of the stripping ion increases as dialysis proceeds since there is no reaction to remove it. By law of electroneutrality though, the total cation concentration stays constant. In the stripping vessel, there is no potassium sensor to monitor its concentration or a controller to add fresh potassium to maintain a set concentration. Instead, the lithium concentration in the feed chamber is monitored continuously, such as with a lithium ion selective electrode for example, and is used to determine the inlet stripping solution flowrate necessary to maintain constant lithium and potassium concentrations (see Eq. The flux of lithium through the CEM is given by Eq. The mass balance of lithium in the feed vessel is given by Eq. These are all the equations necessary to know all concentrations and flowrates in step 4. All that is needed are four specified variables, V As lithium concentration in the feed tank decreases to a point at which it is no longer practical to recover it, the batch is discarded and a new batch is introduced. The discarded batch is rich in potassium sulphate. It may be of economic interest to recover it, since it is a fertilizer, or to react it chemically into fresh potassium bicarbonate to make new stripping solution with. Lithium bicarbonate does not exist as a stable solid. Once the activity of lithium exceeds its solubility, supersaturated lithium precipitates as lithium carbonate ( H     The equilibrium equations are combined and Eq. Since carbon dioxide is a product in the precipitation reaction, Le Chatelier's Principle dictates that as the partial pressure of carbon dioxide increases the solubility of lithium increases. Using the five equilibrium equations and charge balance equation, solubilities of lithium in potassium bicarbonate solutions at elevated carbon dioxide partial pressures were calculated. It was found that at P The concentration of lithium in the stripping chamber of step 4 is maintained higher than the solubilities at ambient carbon dioxide partial pressure but lower than the solubility at 1 In industry, a very similar process is used in the purification of lithium carbonate. Crude lithium carbonate from a brine operation is dissolved by pressurizing with carbon dioxide. Impurities are filtered out. The remaining solution is vented and heated to 95 Kinetics of the precipitation reaction have been investigated for a system free of potassium ( In step 6 the solution remaining after lithium carbonate has been precipitated and filtered is re-pressurized with carbon dioxide, replenished with potassium bicarbonate, and re-used in its entirety as fresh stripping solution in step 6. Since it is reused in its entirety the percent of lithium that precipitates during step 5 does not affect the lithium recovery of the whole process but only affects carbon dioxide and energy requirements. The only factors that affect lithium recovery is the amount of lithium that does not make it through the CEMs in steps 1 and 4. P The membranes used were CMS C-1805 Neosepta monovalent CEM and CMX C-1586 Neosepta polyvalent CEM; both from Astom Corporation of Japan. The membrane thicknesses, electrical resistances, and burst strengths, as reported by the manufacturer, were 0.15 The reagents used were lithium sulphate monohydrate, min. 99.0% w/w; cobalt (II) sulphate heptahydrate, min. 99.0% w/w; nickel (II) sulphate hexahydrate, 99.0 to 102.0% w/w; manganese (II) sulphate pentahydrate, min. 99.0% w/w; potassium hydrogen carbonate, 99.3 to 100.5% w/w; 10 Three sets of experiments were conducted, all at 27 In the second set of experiments, Co, Ni, and Mn sulphates in a 1:1:1 molar ratio were used and the total dissolved cation concentration was varied between 0.015 In the third set of experiments, lithium sulphate solutions of between 0.015 and 0.285 In all three phases, both sides of the membrane were well stirred to ensure that the only significant resistance to mass transfer was diffusional resistance through the membrane itself. In order to test that this was achieved the stirring power was reduced by half in the middle of one of the replicate experiments from every phase to see what effect, if any, the change had on flux. As can be seen from the linear plots in A mass balance on cation M diffusing into the stripping vessel was given by Eq. The flux term was replaced with Eq. Since the concentrations of M in the stripping vessel remained very low during the experiments, the term to the right of the minus was zero for all practical purposes. The concentration of M in the feed was chosen high enough that it would not measurably diminish over the course of an experiment. Therefore, flux was constant and the derivative in Eq. Phases A and B consisted of seven experiments each: three midpoint replicates and four corner experiments from a two factorial experimental design examining the effects of total cation concentration in the feed chamber and acid concentration in the stripping chamber (see  The flux of divalent cations through the monovalent CEM was < The P All parameters in the model were statistically significant. The predicted vs. actual plot in A comparison of the above empirical model was made with literature. In another study the feed contained 3.03·10  As in Phase C consisted of five experiments where lithium concentration in the feed was 0.015 The intercepts obtained, unlike in the previous two phases, were not close to zero. It is most likely this was an artefact of the dilution of the samples. This hypothesis was supported by the fact that the samples with the highest dilution showed the highest intercepts: all samples in The fluxes of lithium and potassium from the [ An unexpected result was that the flux of potassium ions was consistently higher than the flux of lithium ions, circa 20% higher. As previously explained, the theory predicts that these should be equal in order to maintain the electroneutrality of the solutions. With the fluxes equal and the feed solutions initially pure solutions, the P A simulation was conducted to determine the kinetics and theoretical recoveries of Li, Mn, Ni and Co during the three Donnan dialysis steps of the proposed process. The basis of the simulation was: 1) a 1000 The membrane surface area to feed volume ratios examined in the step 1 simulation were 1, 2, and 4 The final concentration in all cases was 6.23 The kinetic trends in The feed in the step 2 simulation was the same as for step 1 except that there were no lithium ions. The sulphate concentrations in the stripping vessel investigated were 0.6, 0.75, and 1.05 The kinetic trends were the same as in Based on preliminary results, an abridged analysis was performed for step 4. V Higher lithium concentrations in the feed and, to a lesser degree, the stripping vessel slowed down Donnan dialysis. Ultimate lithium recovery was not affected by initial concentration of lithium in the feed vessel. The ultimate recoveries were 98.52, 97.09, and 95.69% when stripping vessel lithium concentrations were 0.03, 0.06, and 0.09 The simulations showed that the slowest Donnan dialysis step in the proposed process was step 4; it is therefore the rate-determining step of the proposed process. Looking at a timeframe of 2880 The simulation predicted that in two days the proposed system is capable of processing 1000 A novel process for separating and recovering lithium from organic acid leachate has been proposed. The process uses Donnan dialysis and precipitation by depressurization of carbon dioxide. The governing equations of the process have been developed. Overall mass transfer coefficients have been found by experiment. Using the equations and experimental results, the process has been simulated and the predictions are promising enough to warrant its further investigation. The authors gratefully acknowledge Sho Yoshida, Naoki Ninomiya, and Ryo Suzuki for their assistance with ICP-OES measurements and conducting the experiments. The authors also thank the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at