In this paper, we study the theoretical models for effect of various parameters used for predicting viscosity of magnetite ore slurry. These models are fitted using data collected from experiments conducted. These viscous slurries of magnetite ore have up to 30% solids (by weight). We prepared the slurry samples of magnetite in aqueous solutions of high viscosity powder of sodium salt of carboxy methyl cellulose (CMC) and guar gum. Average particle sizes of the four solid samples used were of 50, 52.3, 58.4 and 74.8μm. The viscosity of slurry samples was measured using Brookfield DV-III+programmable rheometer. Once the experimental data was collected, we selected six different models for predicting viscosity; also we used artificial neural networks (ANN) for fitting the experimental data, and, trained the neural networks to predict viscosity for unknown samples. We have finally computed the root mean square errors (RMSE) between model predictions and corresponding measured value of viscosity. The conclusions drawn and certain observations made are reported.The measurements of physical properties of solid–liquid slurries needed for several reasons. Flow of these complex fluids are frequently encountered in many applications in industries and nature. Design and operation of slurry process calls for understanding the mechanism involved. The effect of slurry parameters is required to design such physical and engineering systems. We also note that for most of the slurry transport applications, the prediction of deposition velocities and rheological properties is essential in analysis of fluid transport and flow behavior. The recent studies have focused on preparing the slurries with maximum solid concentration, transportability of solids through pipeline, and the pressure drop and flow sampling There is a significant effect of solids concentration upon the slurry viscosity. At high solid concentrations, the rheological behavior of the slurry becomes complex. Several studies have shown the viscosity of slurry increases exponentially with solids concentration and become infinite at the maximum packing fraction An extended validity of the Einstein's formula applicable to slurries with higher solid concentration can be discussed in terms of various theoretical and empirical equations. The theoretical models in case of more complex fluids needing a deeper insight into the fluid behavior in general are usually variants of the Einstein's relation. This extended form of viscosity relation is expressed as a power series of higher order in Here k The maximum volume fraction of solids is a physical state or condition of any slurry at which the effective viscosity approaches infinity and the slurry behaves like a solid. As a general observation, only two extreme conditions can exist for the slurries. The first extreme condition is a suspension without particles, implying the effective viscosity is the same as the fluid viscosity. Another extreme condition occurs for a suspension without fluid, which would then theoretically behave as a solid with infinite viscosity; the characteristic value and a constant Chong et al. Modeling can be done by deriving useful theoretical relations or collecting required data from laboratory experiments, to establish an empirical relation between variables in these mathematical equations. This empirical relation usually is a relation between viscosity as a function of system variables and parameters appearing in the model, which describe characteristic fluid behavior. Later we can select an appropriate numerical method of parameter estimation to get the parameters of the model being validated. In case of a complex fluid exhibiting a different behavior other than that modeled by standard correlations, we use different theoretical models for predicting viscosity that are macroscopic equations to describe the flow behavior. In case of the numerical computing of theoretical models, if properly derived and are well focused on details of analysis, usually will not miss the microscopic details. Numerical methods are inexpensive when compared with laboratory experiments. The numerical simulations using various models (with select features intended for parametric study) also serve as a benchmark for these theoretical models. These simulations then can address various details of a complex phenomenon that can be difficult to analyze using standard and elementary forms of models. The outcome of these numerical simulations will remain however subject to certain uncertainties that arise within the framework of the model and the limitations of numerical methods and computing experiments devised Recently various ANN models are being frequently used as a reliable modeling tool for accurate prediction and then become applicable to on-line monitoring of actual process data, which arise to various chemical engineering applications. Derived from their biological counterpart, ANNs are based on the concept that a highly interconnected system of simple processing elements, can learn from complex interrelationships between dependent and independent variable. ANN offers an attractive approach to black box modeling of highly complex, nonlinear system having large number of inputs and outputs. The ANN model can learn from examples, incorporate a large number of variables and provide a useful measure to learn from any new information, which was not previously used to train them The ANNs have been successfully applied to problems in various fields of chemical engineering, such as modeling of multiphase reactors In this paper, we measured and studied relations such as viscosity-solids concentration data and this was later tested for six empirical models, which were obtained as standard results from literature review. The ANN model we employed was initially trained using collected experimental data and tested for unknown samples and this prediction was confirmed using actual measurement. We then compared the results of prediction of trained ANN with the best fitted model from selected ones. In the present work, we have considered magnetite ore slurries for developing a neural network model for prediction of the effective viscosity. Magnetite is one of the most commonly occurring iron minerals. Main use of magnetite is in the production of iron and steel. As an industrially important mineral, the magnetite ore slurry is used as a dense medium in mineral processing, and very commonly in coal preparation. Its suitability for this application is due to its high density and recoverability by magnetic separation. Magnetite is also used as an agent for increasing the density of drilling fluids. The magnetite ore slurries show shear thinning behaviour for the solids concentration above 10% by weight The main objective of this study is to describe the application of an ANN to the problem of effective viscosity prediction of magnetite ore slurries and to compare the results with the available models. The properties of the magnetite ore, which was obtained from Ispat Industries Limited, Geetapuram, Dolvi, Maharashtra (India) are reported in the The average sizes of − The 1.1% (by weight) aqueous solutions of CMC and guar gum were used to prepare magnetite ore slurries of all four solid samples. The slurries were prepared with 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30% (by weight) solid concentrations in the suspending mediums. The apparent viscosity of the slurries was measured using a computer controlled Brookfield DV III It has been observed that at 1.1% (by weight) aqueous solutions of CMC and guar gum, used to prepare slurry, exhibit shear thinning behaviour. The apparent viscosity of the solutions as well as the slurries is therefore considered to calculate their effective viscosity. The suspending medium apparent viscosity at the given shear rates were 838  It is observed that, for all the slurries prepared in both the solutions at any given solids concentration, the effective viscosity of slurry increases with the size of the solid particles (see According to Ghanta and Purohit One of the physically significant parameters affecting the slurry viscosity is ( Liu At maximum solid volume fraction ( The The Liu's equation is This in logarithmic form can be written as Graph of ln (μ The logarithmic form of the Krieger–Dowarty's equation is  The slurry viscosity is then predicted by using six models discussed earlier. The comparison of predicted μ Where Experimental value of effective viscosity Predicted value of effective viscosity Number of data points RMSE values of the predictions by various models are compared as the results of numerical computations are shown the The back-propagation In the present work back-propagation ANN with sigmoid transfer function was used for training and testing of effective viscosity data considering different architectures. For the entire slurries three inputs i.e. solids volume fraction, shear rate and particle size were used and the output was the effective viscosity. All the input and output parameters in the training and testing were normalized. These were normalized between 0 and 1 by using the following equation: Where, Any value of a particular variable. Maximum value of that variable. Normalized value of that variable. Different architectures were tested for varying iterations, number of hidden layers and number of neurons in hidden layers. It was observed that the prediction error shows decreasing trend with increase in number of hidden layers. During the ANN training it also has been observed that, the prediction error changes with number of iterations. Out of the eight slurry systems data set six were used for training and two for the testing and validation of the ANN. By trial and error procedure, a two hidden layers ANN model of the architecture 3-30-30-1 was obtained as the best model for prediction of effective viscosity of slurries prepared in CMC solutions. For slurries in guar gum solutions a single hidden layer model of the architecture 3-30-1 was selected. Using these models, effective viscosity of six data sets of slurry in CMC solution and six data sets of slurry in guar gum solution was predicted. The RMSE values of predictions using ANN and Liu's model are reported in the For magnetite ore slurries in the present studies, it has found that the slurry viscosity increases exponentially with the solid volume fraction and the size of the solid particles. The effective viscosity of the slurries was predicted by using six different models available in the literature. It has found from extensive numerical computations the Liu's model is best among all six models tested to predict the slurry effective viscosity. The relationship between the slurry parameters and its effective viscosity is learned by using back-propagation ANN model. The trained ANN applied to experimental data and successfully predicted effective viscosity of the magnetite ore slurries. On comparison of ANN model with the Liu's model, the effective viscosity values predicted by ANN model were found more close to the experimental data. Authors thank Dr. G. M. Deshmukh (Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere-Raigad) for providing the experimental facility to carry out this research work. Authors are also thankful to Dr. S. H. Sonawane (Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune) for his help during this work.