Accurate quantification of folpet is problematic because it degrades into phthalimide during sample preparation and analysis by gas chromatography (GC). Thus, EU regulation was recently modified to include phthalimide in the folpet residue definition. However, recent studies have shown that phthalimide could also be generated from different sources, which could lead to an overestimation of the phthalimide content and therefore to false positives. GC coupled with either negative chemical ionisation and single quadrupole mass spectrometry, or electron ionisation with triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (GC-EI-MS/MS), were evaluated for the determination of folpet and phthalimide in food. Both methods were validated in 4 different matrices namely apple puree, rice flour, raspberry puree and infant formula. Better selectivity and precision were obtained with GC-EI-MS/MS. Negligible amounts of phthalimide was found in blank matrices, and validation results met the SANTE/11813/2017 criteria in all matrices at the LOQ concentration levels by using GC-EI-MS/MS.Folpet ( GC coupled to either mass spectrometry (MS) or electron-capture detection (ECD) are the techniques of choice for the determination of folpet in food matrices ( The aim of this study was the development and validation of two analytical methods for the quantification of folpet and phthalimide. Two platforms, based on GC-NCI-MS and GC-EI-MS/MS, were selected according to the current common practices in routine laboratories in order to check the reliability of quantification of folpet and phthalimide at low concentration levels. Sample preparation was based on a modified QuEChERS procedure, which was previously optimised in our laboratory with the aim of avoiding phthalimide contamination and degradation of folpet ( Individual standards of folpet (99.9%), phthalimide (99.9%) and folpet-d4 (99.8%), were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Buchs, Switzerland). Phthalimide-d4 (99.0%) was obtained from CDN Isotopes (Pointe-Claire, Quebec, Canada). Ethyl acetate for residue and pesticide analysis grade was obtained from Acros organics (Geel Belgium). Acetone and Before use, all materials and reagents required for sample preparation were treated as described elsewhere ( All solutions were prepared by dilution with a mixture of acetone and The GC-NCI-MS system consisted of an Agilent 7890A GC (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) linked to an Agilent 5975C MSD equipped with a chemical ionisation source operating in negative mode, with methane as chemical reagent (Carbagas, Gümligen, Switzerland). For the GC-EI-MS/MS analysis an Agilent 7890B GC was linked to an Agilent 7010 triple quadrupole equipped with an electronic ionisation source (70 eV). For both platforms, sample extracts were injected using a 7693A autosampler (Agilent Technologies) with a 10 µL syringe, into an Agilent split/split-less injector equipped with a single tapper liner (78.5 × 6.5 × 4.0 mm, Supelco, Buchs, Switzerland). The injection of sample extract (2 µL) into the chromatographic system was performed in the pulsed splitless mode. The injector temperature was constantly held at 250 °C while a pulse pressure of 25 psi was applied for 1 min. Subsequently, the injector was purged during 1 min at a flow rate of 50 mL/min. GC separations were achieved using two Agilent J&W VF-5MS capillary columns (15 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 µm film thickness), connected by means of a purged ultimate union (Agilent Technologies) in order to perform backflush of low volatile material and reduce the contamination of the analytical column and ionisation source. In addition, a precolumn (J&W VF-5MS capillary column, 2 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 µm film thickness) was connected to the first analytical column. Helium 99.9997% (Carbagas, Lausanne, Switzerland) was used as carrier gas under constant flow rate of 1.4 and 1.5 mL/min in the first and second column, respectively. The oven temperature was programmed as follows: 60 °C held for 1 min, ramped to 170 °C at 40 °C/min and then to 310 °C at 10 °C/min which was finally held for 1.2 min. After the run (18.9 min) the oven temperature was set at 325 °C and a backflush pressure was held at 50 psi for 3 min. Total run time was 21.9 min. The analytical method was retention time locked using folpet as a locking compound. For the GC-NCI-MS, the auxiliary temperature was 310 °C, and both the ion source and the quadrupole temperatures were set at 150 °C. Each target compound was monitored in the selective ion monitoring mode (SIM) according to its retention time, with one quantifier ion and a second qualifier ion (Supplementary Table S1). For the GC-EI-MS/MS, the auxiliary temperature was 280 °C, and the MS parameters were set as follows: electron ionisation energy was 70 eV, the ion source temperature was 280 °C, and the quadrupoles temperatures were 150 °C for both of them. Each target compound was monitored in the multiple reactions monitoring (MRM) mode using time segments, with two transitions per compound, used for both quantification and identification purposes (Supplementary Table S2). Samples (around 1 kg) of rice flour, semolina wheat, apple puree, tomato paste, red bell pepper, carrot, sweet potato, pineapple puree, banana puree, onion, raspberry puree, blueberry puree, strawberry puree and 3 different infant formulae were obtained from production facilities. After homogenisation, 5 g ± 0.05 g (1.7 g in the case of onion) portion was weighed into a 50 mL PTFE centrifuge tube. 25 µL of the mix IS solution (10 mg/L) were subsequently added. The tubes were vigorously shaken and allowed to stand open at room temperature for 10 min. Two ceramic homogenisers were then added to each tube, followed by 10 mL of cold water (4 °C) containing 1% of formic acid. The mixture was then vigorously shaken manually and with the help of a vortex. Ten mL of MeCN containing 0.1% FA were added and the tubes were vigorously shaken using a mechanical shaker (Geno Grinder 2010, SPEX SamplePrep LLC, Metuchen, NJ, USA) at 1500 rpm for 1 min. Then, 4 The validation of the methods was performed according to SANTE/11813/2017guidelines ( The selectivity of the methods was assessed by analysing blank reagents as well as blank samples of each matrix considered for this study, and checking for the absence of interfering peaks in the retention time of each target analyte. Confirmation of the analytes was based on the criteria specified in SANTE/11813/2017guidelines ( Solvent procedural calibration curve was used for quantification with isotopic dilution. It was constructed daily by using water containing 1% formic acid (5 mL) as matrix surrogate, spiked at different concentration levels (5, 10, 20, 50, 100 and 200 µg/L; the ISs were spiked at the concentration of 50 µg/L) and processed according to the sample preparation described previously (Section The linearity of each calibration curve within the selected working range was firstly evaluated by visual inspection of the plotted data (area ratio and concentration ratio of analytes and isotopically labelled standards), and then by the residual plots and calculation of the determination coefficient (r The LOQ of the method was selected as the lowest concentration for which trueness was confirmed to be in the range of 70–120% and precision lower than 20%. Trueness of the method was assessed by spiking experiments at two different concentration levels (LOQ and 50 µg/kg). Precision of the method was evaluated in terms of both repeatability and intermediate precision. With this purpose, 3 different matrix blank samples were spiked at the LOQ concentration level, processed and analysed on three different days. The results were evaluated by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The following formulae described elsewhere were applied ( Measurement uncertainty estimation was based on the bottom-up approach together with the validation data and the use of formal error propagation principles ( In order to study the stability of folpet in solvent and in different samples during sample preparation and GC injection, folpet and folpet-d4 were spiked according to the graphical schema shown in GC-NCI-MS and GC-EI-MS/MS were initially considered, as they are the techniques of choice for folpet and phthalimide quantification in routine laboratories ( In order to set up the ions monitored by GC-NCI-MS, individual standard solutions of each analyte at the concentration of 10 mg/L were injected and their scan spectra in the range 50–400 For GC-EI-MS/MS method set up, MRM transitions were transferred from the Agilent G9250AA database of pesticides and environmental pollutants into the acquisition method. Two transitions were selected based on their sensitivity and selectivity in different matrices, one for quantification and another for confirmation purposes. The transitions for each analyte and the corresponding ISs are listed in Supplementary Table S2. Sample preparation was based on a modified QuEChERS procedure optimised with the aim of minimising folpet degradation and phthalimide contamination from materials and reagents, as described elsewhere ( The selectivity of the method was evaluated by the analysis of 6 different blank samples of matrices for which the method was validated and 2 different blank samples of matrices for which the method was checked. Strawberry proved to be the dirtiest and most complex matrix included in this study and quantification of phthalimide by GC was therefore not possible at low concentration levels. However, the MRL established for this matrix was much higher than the targeted LOQ (500 times), which could be increased significantly to meet specifications (e.g., by dilution) while complying with current regulation requirements. As mentioned before, folpet and phthalimide yielded only 2 ions by GC-NCI-MS, therefore it was not possible to meet the SANTE/11813/2017 requirements ( In order to quantify the natural occurrence of folpet and phthalimide in the matrices under study, different blank samples were extracted and simultaneously analysed by GC-NCI-MS, GC-EI-MS/MS and additionally by LC-HRMS ( Different quantification approaches were tested. Neither external calibration nor standard addition provided good results in terms of trueness based on spiked samples using either GC-NCI-MS or GC-EI-MS/MS, even when isotopically labelled ISs were used, probably because native folpet and folpet-d4 did not behave the same under same conditions. Matrix-matched calibration and procedural solvent calibration corrected by isotopically labelled ISs provided acceptable trueness for both analytes using GC-NCI-MS and GC-EI-MS/MS. From these two options, procedural solvent calibration was selected for quantification because of its simplicity and because it can be applied to matrices belonging to different commodity group within an analytical batch. Calibration curves were obtained as described in section The LOQs of both methods in different commodity groups were estimated as the lowest concentration level at which the method was successfully validated, with trueness within 70 and 120% and precision lower than 20%. No significant differences were observed in terms of sensitivity between the two methods, and general LOQs for both methods were set at 0.01 mg/kg for all the matrices belonging to high water content (except onion with an LOQ of 0.03 mg/kg), high acid and water content, and high starch and water content commodity group, and an LOQ of 0.03 mg/kg for matrices belonging to dairy products commodity group. Results obtained from trueness studies carried out at two different concentration levels are summarised in Better results were obtained with GC-EI-MS/MS, probably because of its higher degree of selectivity. Good trueness and RSDs were obtained for folpet in all the matrices, except in sweet potato with trueness slightly above the limit (120.5%). Repeatability and intermediate precision obtained for the two analytes were below 20% for the four matrices validated at LOQ, with the exception of raspberry puree for which the intermediate precision for phthalimide was slightly out of specifications at this concentration level (25.7%), thus complying generally with SANTE criteria ( The uncertainty budget estimated for each analyte is presented in It is known that folpet degrades to phthalimide in the GC-injector and during sample preparation ( Two methods based on GC-NCI-MS and GC-EI-MS/MS have been evaluated for the quantification of folpet and phthalimide in food matrices. Sample preparation was based on an acidified QuEChERS extraction optimised in order to minimise folpet degradation and phthalimide contamination from materials and reagents during sample preparation. The amount of phthalimide found by GC-EI-MS/MS in the matrices under study was negligible. However, higher amounts were found by GC-NCI-MS, in some cases close or above the method LOQ. This was attributed to the lower selectivity of this platform. The methods were validated in 4 matrices from 4 different commodity groups and checked on 12 other matrices from the same commodity groups. Validation results showed that GC-EI-MS/MS performed better than GC-NCI-MS in terms of trueness, precision and selectivity. Finally, it was demonstrated that different kinds of matrices play an important role in the degradation of folpet into phthalimide either during sample preparation or GC injection. The GC-EI-MSMS method allowed the accurate quantification of folpet and phthalimide in diverse food commodities at trace concentration levels, meeting the EU SANTE/11813/2017 requirements, and therefore it should be the method of choice for routine analysis. This method showed minimal analytical artefact on the samples studied thanks to a dedicated sample preparation. However, it is noteworthy that other possible sources of phthalimide such as food processing (i.e. drying) could lead to false positive results. Therefore, future work should investigate broader range of matrices including dry commodities. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 