This study was conducted to determine thermal decomposition of gypsum (CaSO4
                     ·2H2O) and celestite (SrSO4), to examine the effect of heating on grindability and the possibility of celestite–gypsum separation by differential grinding after heating. The results indicated that no significant decomposition reaction was observed in celestite up to 900 °C whereas the decomposition of gypsum occurred within 100–450 °C.
                  Work indices (W
                     i) of celestite and gypsum were found as 6.76 and 5.18 kWh/shton, respectively. W
                     i of celestite did not change significantly after heating at 200 °C where that of gypsum decreased to 4.00 kWh/shton. The difference in grindabilities makes it possible to separate celestite from gypsum by differential grinding. This method has the advantage that celestite–gypsum beneficiation and production of plaster of Paris are achieved in a single stage.Celestite–gypsum ore in Ulas-Sivas basin, East-Central Turkey is mined and beneficiated to obtain celestite and gypsum concentrates by gravity separation methods. Gypsum is then heated to produce plaster of Paris. Comprehensive studies on dehydration of gypsum have revealed that gypsum transforms into hemihydrate (CaSO The structural change due to dehydration can improve the grindability of gypsum. Since celestite is not affected from heat treatment up to 1140 °C ( The aim of this study is to determine thermal decomposition of celestite and gypsum, to examine the effect of heating on grindability and the possibility of celestite–gypsum separation by differential grinding after heating. Handpicked celestite and gypsum samples from Ulas-Sivas were used in this study. The samples of lump size were crushed to produce −1.168 The thermal decomposition reactions on the samples were assessed via thermogravimetric-differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA) technique. The heating studies were performed in a muffle furnace equipped with a microprocessing temperature control system. The effect of heat treatment on the grindabilities of celestite and gypsum was determined by Hardgrove Grindability Test Differential grinding was carried out with 500 g of −1168 The separation tests were performed with artificial mixtures (1:1 by weight) of heated celestite and gypsum samples. The efficiency of separation was determined in terms of celestite distribution in each size fraction. No appreciable decomposition reaction was detected in celestite up to 900 °C in the DTA curve. This behavior agrees with the results given by  In case of gypsum, In order to see the grinding behavior of heated celestite and gypsum, individually, ball-milling tests were carried out. Particle size distributions are given in Particle size distributions of unheated celestite and gypsum samples were very similar however, as seen from For separation by differential grinding tests, celestite-gypsum mixture prepared in 1:1 ratio by weight from heated samples were ground under the grinding conditions mentioned above. Grinding time of 5 min was chosen to keep the amount of celestite fines minimum. Celestite distribution at each size fraction is given in As seen from Heating does not affect celestite but decomposes gypsum by transforming the structure into plaster of Paris at 200 °C. The structural change improves the grindability of gypsum and makes it possible to separate celestite and gypsum by differential grinding. This method has the advantage that celestite–gypsum beneficiation and production of plaster of Paris are achieved in a single stage. The authors thank to The Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey, TÜBİTAK, for financially supporting this research (YDABÇAG 100Y018).