Several options exist for the management olecranon fractures. These include tension band, plate and intramedullary fixation techniques as well as fragment excision with triceps advancement and non-operative management. No one technique is suitable for the management of all olecranon fractures. In deciding how to treat this common trauma presentation, the surgeon needs a good understanding of the anatomy, different fracture morphologies, surgical options and potential complications. With appropriate management and early mobilisation good functional results can be expected in the majority of patients.Olecranon fractures comprise approximately 10% of all fractures around the elbow The elbow is a complex hinge joint capable of a flexion arc of 0–150°. The joint is stabilised by a number of factors including the anterior coronoid process and posterior olecranon process which resist the translational forces of the humerus on the ulna. Resistance to valgus stress is provided by the anterior band of the ulnar collateral ligament and the radial head. Varus stress is countered by the lateral collateral ligament complex. The articular surfaces are lined with hyaline cartilage. The trochlea notch of the ulna, which articulates with the trochlea of the humerus, has a characteristic transverse “bare area” at the junction between the anterior third and the posterior two thirds. This area varies in size between individuals, but in one cadaveric study of 39 elbows was shown to have a mean width of 5.3 The triceps brachii inserts into the posterior third of the olecranon and the proximal ulna, blending with the aponeurosis overlying anconeus and the common extensor mechanism. The olecranon process periosteum and triceps tendon are closely associated. The brachialis inserts into the coronoid process of the ulna and along with the triceps helps to produce compressive forces across the elbow joint during contraction. Olecranon fractures can occur as a result of either direct or indirect trauma. The subcutaneous location of the olecranon makes it susceptible to injury by direct trauma. Laboratory studies have shown that the degree of elbow flexion at the time of direct trauma affects the subsequent likely fracture pattern. Radial head and coronoid fractures occur at flexion of less than 80°, olecranon fractures at 90° of flexion and distal humeral fractures at greater than 110° Multiple classification systems have been devised for olecranon fractures, although none have gained widespread acceptance. Colton et al. The assessment of patients with a suspected olecranon fracture should begin with a careful examination of the skin for evidence of an open fracture. The olecranon is subcutaneous and it is often possible to carefully palpate the fracture. A full neurovascular assessment of the upper limb should be documented. Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs should be obtained of the elbow. Although olecranon fractures are usually isolated injuries, careful assessment of the radiographs should be made to exclude coronoid fractures, radial head fractures and Monteggia fracture dislocations which have a significant impact on elbow stability. Olecranon fractures are all intra-articular injuries. The aims of treatment, as defined by the AO group, are to restore the articular surface, achieve absolute stability of the fracture, and commence early active motion Patients with undisplaced olecranon fractures can be treated non-operatively with immobilisation at 45–90° of flexion for approximately 3 weeks before commencing limited flexion (90°) exercises until radiographic evidence of union is achieved Four principle methods of operative management of olecranon fractures are in use: tension band fixation, intramedullary fixation, plate fixation and excision of the proximal fragment with triceps advancement. Tension band wire fixation is by far the commonest technique of internal fixation used for the treatment of non-comminuted olecranon fractures. The tension band technique involves converting the distracting (tension) force of the triceps into a dynamic compressive force at the articular surface. We perform a modified version of tension band wiring technique as taught on AO courses. We use two 1.6 or 2.0 The tension band wire technique has been studied more than any other internal fixation technique for olecranon fractures and a great deal of variation exists between individual surgeons practice. Tension band wiring can be performed without the use of K-wires, but is technically more difficult and in a study by Karlsson et al. The choice of material used to form the figure of eight has been investigated by a number of groups. Prayson et al. Intramedullary screws and nailing systems have been used by some authors for the treatment of olecranon fractures and osteotomies. A single intramedullary cancellous screw can be used with or without tension band wiring to treat simple transverse or oblique olecranon fractures. Although one study showed a greater loss of fixation when using an intramedullary screw alone compared to tension band wiring Ex vivo studies have shown intramedullary nailing systems offer greater fracture stability than tension band wiring Plate fixation has been used principally for the management of comminuted olecranon fractures in which tension band wire fixation is not appropriate. Other indications include oblique fractures distal to the midpoint of the trochlear notch, co-existing coronoid fractures and olecranon fractures associated with Monteggia fracture dislocations of the elbow Plates are most commonly applied to the dorsal surface of the ulna. This is the tension side of the olecranon which makes the construct most biomechanically sound, furthermore screws can be passed into the coronoid or inserted along the medullary canal for extra stability. In severely comminuted fractures the use of plate fixation offers the option of bone grafting to support depressed articular fragments ( The subcutaneous nature of the plate has led to concerns about the prominence of the hardware. However the incidence of symptomatic hardware protrusion is lower in plate fixation than tension band wiring In elderly patients with osteoporotic bone, extensive comminution or a fragment too small for internal fixation, excision of the fracture fragment with triceps advancement can be a useful option. The technique has significant advantages as it avoids the possibility of non-union and traumatic arthritis due to irregularity in the articular surface. Fragment excision can only be performed if the coronoid, medial collateral ligament, interosseous membrane and distal radio-ulnar joint are intact to prevent instability McKeever and Buck In general, fragment excision and triceps advancement is considered in cases where open reduction and internal fixation is unlikely to be successful. Internal fixation offers the advantage of early mobilisation and bone to bone healing as opposed to immobilisation and suture fixation. The technique can be used as a salvage procedure at a later stage if internal fixation fails. The exact post-operative regimen will be determined by the stability of fixation, wound healing and patient compliance. However, in our experience patients should be splinted in 45–90° of flexion to help manage post-operative pain. The splint should be discontinued after 5–7 days, passive and gentle active movements are commenced at this point. Active movements against resistance should be avoided until there is evidence of callous formation at approximately 6–8 weeks. In the case of fragment excision and triceps advancement, resistance exercises should be delayed until approximately 12 weeks. The functional outcome following olecranon fracture fixation is generally good or excellent whatever method of fixation is used. A review of 73 cases by Karlsson et al. The main complication following internal fixation of olecranon fractures is related to irritation caused by hardware. This is mostly related to tension band wiring although has been reported with the use of plate fixation. Loss of motion is commonly encountered after simple olecranon fracture fixation, but is rarely significant with patients typically losing 10–15° of extension. The loss of elbow motion is worse in cases associated with fractures of the radial head, capitellum, coronoid or Monteggia fracture-dislocations Non-union has been reported in 1% of cases. Options for management include fragment excision, compression plate or lag screw fixation with or without bone graft and elbow arthroplasty. Papagelopoulos and Morrey Fractures of the olecranon are a common trauma presentation and multiple options exist for the management of these injuries. In general, internal fixation by tension band wiring is preferred in the majority of patients with simple fractures and good or excellent results can be expected as long as the surgeon ensures a good anatomical reduction of the articular surface. Intramedullary fixations with screws or nails are less commonly employed but are acceptable alternatives in experienced hands. Dorsal plate fixation can be used in simple fractures of the olecranon, but is particularly indicated in comminuted fractures and fracture-dislocations. Fragment excision and triceps advancement can offer good functional results in patients with failed internal fixation or who are unsuitable for internal fixation. Significant complication rates following internal fixation are low, but patients should be warned of the potential need for hardware removal. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.