In this paper we used UV/Visible method to study the effect of solute concentration on fibroin regulated biomineralization of calcium phosphate. During the reaction process, ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometer was used to track the extinction in the reaction solution. It is found that kinetics of the biomineralization can be strongly affected by the presence of fibroin. Fibroin with higher concentration has more positive effect on the biomineralization process. Under the appropriate reaction conditions, wave crest and wave trough appear in the kinetic curves of fibroin biomineralization. The wave crest and wave trough phenomenon is mainly related with the process of phase separation. X-ray Diffraction (XRD) result shows the calcium phosphate before the wave trough is mainly amorphous calcium phosphate, while after the wave trough crystal of hydroxyapatite (HA) and brushite (DCPD) are the mainly ingredients.It is well known that collagen and calcium phosphate are the major constituents of human bone. Based on the idea to mimic the composition of the natural bone and its structure, bone implant materials consisting of these substances have been extensively developed recently In our previous research, we have showed that silk fibroin plays an important role in regulating the mineralization of hydroxyapatite nanocrystals by strong chemical interactions According to the result of preliminary experiment, the concentrations of 10.0 mmol/L Ca For the following reaction, a calcium-containing fibroin solution and a phosphate-containing neutralization buffer were prepared separately at a temperature of 21 °C. The Ca For other fibroin concentrations corresponding volumes of fibroin solutions and of H After the turbidity detecting, the deposition from the cuvette was studied by SEM ( LEO 1530, Germany). The samples were prepared by the method described by Bradt et al. Ca For X-ray Diffraction (XRD), three groups of parallel experiment were started simultaneously. One was used to track the kinetic reaction process of mineralization in the photometer. The other two were used to separate calcium phosphate before wave crest and after the wave trough (see The change of absorbance with time is known as a kinetics assay. It gives information about the rate at which a reaction proceeds. In In  Contrasted the curves around the wave crest and wave trough in The direct information based on the  In In this study, UV/Visible method was employed to study the fibroin regulated biomineralization of calcium phosphate. Under the appropriate reaction conditions, wave crest and wave trough appeared in the kinetic curves of fibroin biomineralization. The very sudden change from wave crest to wave trough indicates that the rapid increase of the turbidity is caused by a fast growth and/or aggregation of the crystallites. The wave crest and wave trough phenomenon is mainly related with the process of phase separation. Fibroin can accelerate the phase transmittance of amorphous calcium phosphate to the crystal hybrid of DCPD and HA. The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 50402001), Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (20030003029), and the Laboratory Fund of Tsinghua University.