The mechanisms and the reaction products for the oxidation of sulfide ions in the presence of pyrite have been established. When the leach solution contains free sulfide ions, oxidation occurs via electron transfer from the sulfide ion to dissolved oxygen on the pyrite mineral surface, with polysulfides being formed as an intermediate oxidation product. In the absence of cyanide, the polysulfides are further oxidised to thiosulfate, whilst with cyanide present, thiocyanate and sulfite are also formed from the reaction of polysulfides with cyanide and dissolved oxygen. Polysulfide chain length has been shown to affect the final reaction products of polysulfide oxidation by dissolved oxygen.
                  The rate of pyrite catalysed sulfide ion oxidation was found to be slower in cyanide solutions compared to cyanide free solutions. Mixed potential measurements indicated that the reduction of oxygen at the pyrite surface is hindered in the presence of cyanide. The presence of sulfide ions was also found to activate the pyrite surface, increasing its rate of oxidation by oxygen. This effect was particularly evident in the presence of cyanide; in the presence of sulfide the increase in total sulfur from pyrite oxidation was 2.3mM in 7h, compared to an increase of <1mM in the absence of sulfide over 24h.Most metal sulfides decompose in aerated, alkaline cyanide solution to form metal ions, metal oxides or metal cyanide complexes and various sulfur-containing species including thiocyanate, sulfide and thiosulfate ions, with polythionates and polysulfides having also been detected ( Reactive sulfides such as chalcocite undergo non-oxidative dissolution in cyanide solutions to form copper cyanide and sulfide ions in solution ( During cyanidation of gold ores containing reactive sulfides it is likely that semi-conductive gangue minerals such as pyrite will be present in the ore. Thus, where reactive sulfide minerals dissolve, resulting in the formation of sulfide ions in solution, there is the potential for these semi-conductive minerals to catalyse sulfide ion oxidation via a similar mechanism to lead sulfide. Previous electrochemical studies have reported on the oxidation of sulfide ions on a range of semiconducting substrates, including pyrite, chalcopyrite and galena ( The pyrite sample was a selected mineral specimen ground to fine and intermediate particle sizes before use (see Unless stated otherwise, batch experiments were carried out in an enclosed 500 Solutions were prepared from analytical grade reagents and DI water. Where required, cyanide and mineral samples (pre-treated samples if needed) were added to the solution before a concentrated sodium hydrosulfide solution (sulfide ions added to simulate the rapid dissolution of a reactive metal sulfides such as chalcocite) was added to the reactor to start the experiment. The DO was monitored and the pH maintained at 11 for the duration of the experiments using a DataTaker and Metrohm Dosimat to dose NaOH. Samples (1 Pre-oxidation (where indicated) was undertaken for 3 The pyrite electrode was prepared from a natural massive specimen of the same origin as the ground material used. A selected piece was cut from the specimen, mounted on a stainless steel stub and encapsulated in an epoxy resin. A fresh surface was produced before each electrochemical run by wet polishing on 300 grit silicon carbide paper and rinsing with DI water. The freshly polished surface was then transferred immediately to the electrochemical cell and the experiment promptly started. The electrode was rotated at 300 Experiments were carried out in solutions of: (i) 1000 For the previous investigation of the lead sulfide catalysed oxidation of sulfide ions ( A Waters 2695 HPLC separation module was used for the analysis of the non-UV active sulfate, by suppressed conductivity detection (Dionex AMMS 300 suppressor and Water 431 conductivity detector). The separation was effected using a Dionex IonPac AS17 anion exchange column equipped with a Dionex IonPac AG20 guard column. A pump flow rate of 1 The quantification of the UV active sulfur species (sulfide, sulfite, thiosulfate, thiocyanate and trithionate) was conducted as detailed previously ( An initial test found that the homogeneous oxidation of sulfide ions by oxygen alone is relatively slow, with a 60% reduction in the sulfide ion concentration after 3  Based on the data shown in Analysis of samples with time for the experiment conducted without cyanide ( Another important aspect of the data shown in An interesting observation in the pyrite catalysed oxidation of sulfide was the distribution of the reaction products, with thiosulfate being predominant, and very little sulfite being detected. This is in contrast to the PbS catalysed oxidation of sulfide ions, where both sulfite and thiosulfate were observed to be the major reaction products ( Given that polysulfides were also measured as an intermediate during the pyrite catalysed experiment, it was initially not clear why only minor sulfite was detected in solution. Therefore a study of the effect of polysulfide chain length on the products formed from the homogenous oxidation of polysulfides by oxygen was carried out. The polysulfides were prepared by dissolving sulfur into a sodium sulfide solution, and Another important point to note from When cyanide is present in solution the major sulfide ion oxidation product is thiocyanate, along with some sulfite and thiosulfate ( Most notable from this investigation was the formation and detection of a significant concentration of sulfite, when compared to the pyrite experiment in the absence of cyanide ( Another observation of note is the stability of the sulfite ion under conditions where the dissolved oxygen concentration was greater than 20 The rate of sulfide ion oxidation in the presence of cyanide is also shown in  Pre-oxidation is typically used to reduce the reactivity of sulfide minerals during cyanidation. In the case of pyrite, an iron hydroxide precipitate forms on the surface, though the formation of this layer has been found to not passivate the pyrite surface towards further oxidation ( A comparison of the sulfide ion oxidation rates shown in It should also be noted that the rates of sulfide ion oxidation in the presence of pyrite and cyanide for the experiments shown in  In contrast, in the presence of cyanide it was observed that the concentration of sulfite, thiosulfate and thiocyanate all increased with time after the addition of sulfide ions ( Comparison of the thiosulfate and sulfite concentrations in    A final observation that can be made from the electrochemical data relates to the effect of sulfide ions on the oxidation of pyrite by oxygen. In The oxidation of sulfide ions by oxygen is catalysed by pyrite, which acts as a conductive surface for electron transfer between the dissolved oxygen and the dissolved sulfide ions present in solution. This process generates a reaction intermediate identified as polysulfides. In cyanide free solutions, the polysulfides are further reacted with dissolved oxygen to form thiosulfate, with minimal sulfite generated. In the presence of cyanide, thiocyanate was the major reaction product identified, with some formation of both sulfite and thiosulfate. The development of a conductivity-anion suppression ion chromatography methodology has confirmed sulfate is not a major product of sulfide ion oxidation under the conditions investigated. The polysulfide chain length was shown to be a factor in the reaction products generated from the oxidation of polysulfides by oxygen, particularly in the absence of cyanide. Homogenous studies of polysulfide oxidation confirmed that the longer polysulfide chains were preferentially oxidised to thiosulfate, whilst the oxidation of the shorter chained polysulfides produced sulfite and thiosulfate. This suggests long chained polysulfides are formed on the surface of the pyrite during the oxidation of sulfide ions. The pyrite itself is also oxidised during sulfide ion oxidation, in both cyanide and cyanide-free solutions. Passivation of pyrite in the presence of cyanide once the sulfide ion oxidation reaction had reached completion suggested that either sulfide ions and/or polysulfides activate the pyrite surface, leading to an increased rate of pyrite oxidation. This is in contrast with standard electrochemical measurements in which the increased reactivity at the pyrite surface in the presence of sulfide ions occurred under conditions where the pyrite should be cathodically protected. Electrochemical measurements also showed that oxygen reduction at the pyrite surface is hindered in the presence of cyanide, therefore resulting in a decreased rate of sulfide oxidation. The implications from the results presented here and in the previous paper is that during cyanidation of ores containing soluble sulfide minerals, such as chalcocite, which form sulfide ions in solution, a conductive surface is required to catalyse the oxidation of sulfide ions and avoid passivation of the gold surface. Typically pyrite (or other conductive minerals) will also be present in such ores and thus any dissolved sulfide ions will be rapidly oxidised. Pre-oxidation has no effect on this process but may still be warranted to reduce the impact of sulfide minerals on gold leaching. If sulfide ions are detected and persist in solution then the addition of lead(II) ions or blending of ore with that containing conductive minerals will be required.