Image processing sensors are emerging as an important measurement option in mineral processing, mainly due to their non-intrusive characteristics. Their principal application areas have been the determination of ore size distributions in grinding and froth features in flotation. The incorporation of visual information in control loops is the logical step. However, the excessive processing required brings a new problem that must be solve: to count with a strategy able to provide a measured value for each visual sensor in the plant. A first approach is to assign one computer to each sensor yielding a distributed architecture, but this means the implementation of a huge computer network. A more efficient alternative is alternated sampling, but the succeed of this option is limited to the existence of virtual sensors capable of give accurate values that must be use during the unsampled period. In this paper we begin by reviewing classical image processing algorithms used in flotation froth feature extraction. Then a new method is introduced for the characterization and recognition of visual information using dynamic texture techniques. Finally we developed a dynamic texture based virtual sensor for the prediction of froth speed in the unsampled period, tested with industrial data.The aim of mineral processing is to concentrate raw ore in preparation for the subsequent metal-extraction stage. Usually, the valuable minerals are first liberated from the ore matrix by comminution and size-separation processes and then separated from the gangue using processes capable of selecting the particles according to their physical or chemical properties. These include characteristics such as surface hydrophobicity, specific gravity, magnetic susceptibility and color Over the last two decades, image-processing sensors have emerged as an interesting measurement option in mineral processing, mainly due to their non-intrusive characteristics. The principal application fields of these sensors are the grinding and flotation stages. In the grinding process, the most successful application of visual sensors is fragmentation measurement in traditional mining operations with large crushing and milling circuits that require efficiency in comminution to maximize profit on the final product. With the help of on-line image analysis systems, operators can actively monitor the various stages in the comminution circuit to ensure their operation is running within specification. Regarding the flotation process, it is widely known that the color, morphology and speed of the froth are closely related to mineral concentrations, process status and recovery, respectively. As a consequence, operators often make operating changes based on the visual appearance of the froth as well as past experience. Image processing sensors provide quantitative measures of some representative froth characteristics and also offer the option of making control decisions independently of the operator, resulting in a control law that depends exclusively on these measures. Most popular automatic control strategies that incorporate image processing sensors measures have been expert systems. In most flotation plants it is customary for plant operators to monitor the surface froth visually and make adjustments to process parameters based on their interpretation of the surface appearance. To this end, operators categorize froths mentally into a number of distinct types and develop appropriate operating strategies for each one, looking for the ideal froth appearance. Visual information on surface froth from operating flotation plants has not been systematically catalogued. The interpretation of this information is based on intuitive experience and tends to vary from one operator to another. As a result, achieving optimal control with human operators is often not possible. Operator control decisions are based on surface properties such as froth stability, froth speed, bubble size, bubble shape, bubble density and froth color Since automatic control algorithms must include these surface features in control law determination, a quantitative measurement system is needed. Several automation companies have developed specialized industrial sensors that apply image processing techniques to produce quantitative measures of froth features (e.g., Frothmaster™, Visiofroth™, JKFrothcam™). These measures can be classified as Static features Bubble size Bubble count Bubble density Dynamic features Froth speed Froth stability Statistical features Bubble size distribution Bubble shape analysis Froth color histogram Section The most important step in froth image processing and analysis is to delineate every bubble. In most actual industry cases the froth images are difficult to segment, however. The number of bubbles can be as high as 2000 and the bubbles often touch each other, with no void space between them. Moreover, the illumination on the bubble surface is uneven. The edges between bubbles are normally weak, whereas strong edges are found on the border of specularity regions (referred to here as white spots) on top of almost every bubble. All of these characteristics complicate the development of a segmentation algorithm. Intensity similarity cannot be used to segment the bubbles and ordinary edge detection functions fail to segment froth images properly. Morphological segmentation algorithms, particularly watersheds The purpose of a grayscale watershed is to extract watershed lines, that is, contiguous lines of high-intensity pixels separating local intensity minima in the image. Once the segmentation process is complete we can extract the image features. The per-bubble segmentation yields a tessellation of the surface froth image in which all the pixels belonging to a specific bubble are tagged as such in an array of two dimensions corresponding to those of the image. We use this array to obtain the froth features as follows. Bubble area is calculated by counting the exact number of pixels contained in the array’s tessellated two-dimensional projection. This is done for each and every bubble in the image. Bubble count refers to the total number of bubbles present in a specific froth image and is obtained by counting the white spots or markers. The resulting figure serves as an indicator of froth stability when continuous video is analyzed. A bubble count that exhibits dramatic variations in sequences of consecutive images indicates that the froth is unstable. The horizontal and vertical differential motion pair is a two-element vector describing how many pixels the markers have moved in the time interval between the two input images. This vector is a measure of froth speed. Color information corresponds to the average of the red, green and blue components in each frame. A first approach for incorporating visual characteristics in control is an expert system. An expert system is a computational algorithm that simulates the control decisions of a “best operator”, using a knowledge base. Using analyses of captured images and information provided by expert flotation operators, control engineers design a rule-structured knowledge base that determines the operating point of each flotation cell based on the static, dynamic and statistical froth feature values outputted by the specialized sensor. A color analysis is undertaken to obtain the processed ore’s coloration characteristics. A geometric analysis allows several types of froth to be defined such as fine, coarse, dense or others. A dynamic analysis characterizes the froth speed and stability, distinguishing between cases such as slow or fast froth, quiet or turbulent froth, and stable or unstable froth. If the identified operating point indicates abnormal operation, the expert system searches for the possible causes. These may include inappropriate reagent dosages, froth contamination by external agents (petroleum, oil, detergents, etc.) or inaccurate classification during the previous comminution process. The expert system then suggests what corrective actions should be taken by the plant operator, such as adjusting reagent dosage, the aeration rate, pulp level, or reducing the water supply In this section we introduce a new method for modeling visual processes known as dynamic texture analysis. The aim is to obtain a model that captures the spatio-temporal characteristics of the visual process under analysis. Dynamic textures are sequences of images of moving scenes that exhibit certain stationary properties in time There are several criteria for choosing a suitable class of filters, ranging from physical motivations to computational efficiency. In the simplest case, Let us now consider the dynamic texture as a second-order stationary process with arbitrary covariance. It is well known that such a process can be modeled as the output of a linear dynamic system driven by white, zero-mean Gaussian noise. We can then approximate the visual process with the following ARMA model: The associated identification problem consists in estimating the model parameters Let Now let Given Finally, the input and process noise covariance matrices can be estimated from It should be noted that Once the different froth types have an associated ARMA model, we can characterize them using the ARMA model matrices A and C. Below we describe an approach to classification and recognition of dynamic textures based on distances defined in ARMA model space, which has been used for nearest-neighbor classification or To compute distances between dynamic models the so-called Binet-Cauchy kernels are used The Binet-Cauchy kernel of order q is defined as From the Binet-Cauchy kernel we may define a distance as In this section we test the exposed algorithms, using data obtained from two different industrial plants.    In this section we develop a model for froth dynamics that will be use as virtual sensor for the unsampled visual sensors. The portion of the plant under analysis is rougher flotation stage. Consist in four rougher lines, each line formed by nine flotation cells grouped in five banks. For control purposes, the VisioFroth sensor of each bank is sampled for 15 For modeling purposes we use visual information obtained at a rate of 10 frames per second and a resolution of Using the model learned from the real 150 frames, we predict 150 frames and applying classical image processing algorithms we obtained froth speed of the predicted sequence. Our results show that is possible to model and identify visual processes following standard procedures based on input–output data. The dynamic texture-based models we obtained are able to capture froth dynamics, with the option of characterizing the different froth types via an associated ARMA model. The speed predictor developed has the capability of predict froth speed temporal evolution, giving a virtual measurement for expert control. Future research should incorporate the effects of process variables on froth behavior, yielding an ARMAX model with better prediction capabilities, and should also address the incorporation of virtual measurements in expert control loops.