Flotation beneficiation of ores containing fibrous minerals is highly problematic due to transport of such gangue minerals from pulp to the froth phase. Earlier studies have attributed such transport to the entrainment of fibrous minerals. In this work, this problem is investigated for the case of flotation of ultramafic Ni ore with fibrous serpentines (Mg silicates) interfering with their separation. Serpentines are proposed to form large (~1–2cm) networks in pulp and thus unlikely to be transported by entrainment. Various simulation based studies suggest that the networks are stable under the dynamic flotation conditions. Furthermore, the pores in the networks are relatively small (e.g. <20μm—SEM studies) for the bubbles (1–2mm) to penetrate through the network of fibers in the pulp. This leads to the hypothesis that bubbles which cannot penetrate through the network accumulate below the network in the pulp with the buoyancy force of the bubbles thrusting the network to the froth phase. Model system studies were carried out with nylon fibers of size similar to that of serpentines. The phenomenon of bubble-flux driven transport of fibrous serpentines was clear from the model system studies, and is proposed to be the key mechanism of transport of fibrous serpentines to flotation concentrate.Economic beneficiation of the Ni ores containing large amounts of serpentines (Mg silicates) has been a longstanding challenging problem in the mineral industry ( In this investigation, the transport behavior of serpentines, especially ultramafic ores containing fibrous minerals, is examined. The transport rates of serpentines showed a linear trend irrespective of the reagent and condition schemes used in flotation tests. To understand such trends, the physicochemical aspects of the serpentines in the pulp and froth phase were studied using optical microscopy, SEM and EDX techniques. Model system studies were carried out with nylon fibers in a micro-flotation cell to phenomenologically simulate the trend observed in transport of serpentines to the froth phase. Ultramafic Ni ore samples were supplied by Vale Technical Services in Mississauga, Canada. Based on MLA (mineral liberation analysis) and XRD, the ore samples contained approximately 1% (by weight) pentlandite and 60% serpentine. Nylon fibers with dimension of 1 Ore ground at 50% solids used for flotation tests. Flotation tests were carried out with ultramafic Ni ores at 25% solids in a Denver cell using a dithiophosphate-based collector (40 Pulp phase samples were collected before and after the flotation test using a plastic dropper. Samples were also collected from the top half of the froth phase at regular intervals during the flotation test. Samples were immediately transferred to be observed under the optical microscope (Olympus BH-2). The samples viewed were as collected and also after 5 times dilution. For SEM studies the samples were collected in 10 Micro-flotation tests were carried out in 100 According to It can be seen from the optical microscopic images ( It is clear from the optical and SEM images that the serpentines do not exist as individual particles in the suspension but rather exhibit a macro-network like structure and their transport by entrainment is an unlikely mechanism. In fact it seems that it is indeed the network of serpentines that is transported through the suspension-bubble three phase system to the froth phase. To develop an understanding of the mechanism of transport of such a macro-network our approach was to study the impact of the pore size of the network and the effect of bubble buoyancy using systems comprising of either chrysotile fibers or nylon fibers. Results with nylon fibers are reported here. SEM micrographs ( Typical bubble size in flotation is 1–2 The transport of nylon fibers was studied in a micro-flotation. It was observed that layers of nylon fibers reported to the froth phase ( Even though bubble entrapment in the fibrous network phenomenon has been widely studied, bubble flux driving a network from pulp to froth phase is largely unknown. Based on the above, the predominant mechanism in transport of the serpentines is proposed to be the bubble-flux-driven upward flow of the network of serpentines. Bubble-flux driven lift of the fibrous serpentine network contributes significantly to the transport of serpentines to the froth phase. The fibers entangle and form a network with an effective pore size much smaller than the bubble size which restricts percolation of the bubbles through the network. Thus, a swarm of bubbles is proposed to build up at the base of the network in the pulp, resulting in enough buoyancy thrust to enable the network to be transported from the pulp to the froth phase. It is also important to note that other non-fibrous minerals can be expected to be trapped in the network and transported to the froth phase. The authors would like to express their thanks to Zongfu Dai, Manqiu Xu, Andrew Lee and Ken Scholey at Vale Technical Services for their support of the collaborative program between Columbia University and Cytec Industries and for their input. We also acknowledge the Industry/University Co-operative Research Center (IUCRC) at Columbia University for their support of the program.