WC–Co composites with a gradient of cobalt content can offer an improved performance as a cutting tool. During liquid phase sintering, a Co gradient can be created through Co redistribution induced by pre-designed gradients of WC grain size and/or C content in green parts. The driving force of Co redistribution is migration pressure, which is dependent of three factors – liquid Co volume fraction, WC grain size, and C content. In order to obtain a desired Co gradient, it is necessary to quantitatively understand the dependence of migration pressure as a function of the three factors. This study experimentally established the dependence of migration pressure as a function of C content and liquid Co volume fraction. Combining this result with the previously obtained dependence on WC grain size and liquid Co volume fraction enables the design of Co gradient via controlling carbon content and WC grain size.Functionally graded cemented tungsten carbide (WC–Co) is a typical example of functionally graded materials with improved engineering performance due to the existence of a compositional gradient. For example, a WC–Co material with cobalt enriched surface offers an optimum combination of wear resistance and fracture toughness required for coated cutting tools. However, the manufacture of WC–Co with graded cobalt compositions via liquid phase sintering process is a difficult challenge, because the liquid cobalt phase tends to migrate from the locations with higher liquid Co volume fraction to the locations with lower liquid Co volume fraction during liquid phase sintering, which results in a homogeneous cobalt distribution within the material even if there was a Co gradient at the beginning of sintering During liquid phase sintering, WC–Co system is a two-phase system consisting of solid WC grains immersed in liquid Co. Liquid Co redistribution or migration is an interfacial-energy-driven liquid flow phenomenon. This phenomenon is termed liquid phase migration whose driving force is termed migration pressure The dependence of migration pressure on WC grain size and liquid Co volume fraction has been reported previously Lisovsky However, as pointed out by Suresh and Mortensen It has been demonstrated that Eq. In order to determine exact values of Using Eq. For the stoichiometric samples labeled as 6Co, 10Co and 16Co (where 6, 10 and 16 denote Co content, wt%), powders of WC and Co were mixed to prepare samples; for sub-stoichiometric ones labeled as 6CoA, 8CoA, 10CoA, etc., WC, Co and W were mixed; while for over-stoichiometric ones labeled as 6CoB, 8CoB, 10CoB, etc., WC, Co and graphite were used. Powders were mixed together with 2% paraffin wax, and then the powder mixture was milled in heptane in a Nalgene bottle containing WC balls for 14 Liquid phase sintering experiments were carried out in a vacuum furnace. WC–Co bi-layer samples were heated up at a rate of 10 It is worth noting that the holding time of 5 Another issue concerning the dependence of cobalt migration on carbon content is that the difference in carbon content within the sample is expected to decrease with time. Based on the result of a separate study of the diffusion of carbon in WC–Co bi-layers It was also found that the average WC grain size after sintering in each layer of the samples varied between 0.92 and 0.97 The composition of liquid Co, including molar fractions of C and W, was determined from the isothermal section of ternary Co–W–C phase diagram at 1400 In  It is known that the shrinkage of WC–Co is dependent on C content Using Eq. The dependence of The model can be considered as valid under the following conditions: (a) 1400 For simplification, the model was established by assuming that there are no coupled terms of C content effect, WC grain size effect and liquid volume fraction effect. Therefore, the C content effect obtained in this study for a fixed WC grain size was assumed to be applicable to other grain sizes. The effect of WC grain size on cobalt migration as reported in a previous study The establishment of the dependence of liquid migration pressure as a function of the volume fraction of the liquid Co phase, C content and the WC particle size is valuable for the design and manufacture of functionally graded WC–Co composite materials. As mentioned in Section 2, the equilibrium liquid distribution is reached only when the liquid migration pressure is uniform throughout the composite material. For any given value of liquid migration pressure, the volume fraction of liquid Co phase varies with C content and WC particle size. A desired Co gradient can be acquired by pre-designing a suitable gradient of C content and WC particle size. This approach can be readily used to design various bi-layer, multi-layer, or continuously graded structures of WC–Co. To illustrate the utility of Eq. Similarly, contour plots of It is possible to design and fabricate WC–Co with Co gradient via controlling both C content and WC particle sizes. For this purpose, contour surfaces (rather than contour lines) of From a manufacturing perspective, the temperature gradients within a production size vacuum furnace would require sintering hold time of much more than 5 During liquid phase sintering, a Co gradient can be created through Co redistribution induced by pre-designed gradients of WC grain size and/or C content in green parts. The driving force of Co redistribution is migration pressure, which depends on three primary factors – liquid Co volume fraction, WC grain size and C content. The present study experimentally established the dependence of migration pressure as a function of C content and liquid Co volume fraction. The result, in combination with the previously reported study on the dependence cobalt migration on WC grain size and liquid Co volume fraction, enables the establishment of the dependence of