Inorganic nanomaterials are at the heart of some of the most exciting research developments of the day. Their synthesis with high control over their size, shape, and composition is essential to achieve the desired properties. Recently mechanochemistry and aging have emerged as powerful methodologies to produce such nanomaterials. Interestingly, methods relying on molecular precursors, as opposed to bulk or micro-sized phases, allow the seeding and growth of nanoparticles in the absence of solvent, with remarkable control, to achieve unusually small size and monodispersity. These emerging methods are reviewed in this opinion article.The use of solvent is ubiquitous in modern chemistry Nanoparticles (NPs) have also been used throughout human history. Accounts of colloidal gold solutions used as prophylactics by Ancient Egyptians, or gold/silver NPs embedded in the Lykurgos cup, a well-known roman artifact with dichroic properties, are only but a few examples of their prevalence The synthesis of metal NPs in the liquid phase typically relies on the use of metal salt precursors, reduced The research on Au NPs has been driven by seminal solvo-thermal syntheses In 2017, our group reported a novel aging method to produce NPs of Bi In 2009, the group of Geckeler introduced a full solid-state synthesis of Au NPs by mechanochemistry using a bottom-up approach While polymers are good stabilizers in mechanochemistry, they cannot completely prevent size polydispersity. Small molecules were thus explored to enhance size control. Our group reported in 2014 the synthesis of 1.5–2 nm Au NPs with excellent size distribution using long chain amines as stabilizer ( Mechanochemical methods were also redeveloped for the synthesis of supported NPs. In 2018, Wang, Huang and coworkers reported the synthesis of supported <2 nm Au NPs by mortar and pestle mixing for 0.5–3 h of a Schiff-base-modified-silica support, HAuCl The use of mechanochemistry and aging techniques to produce NPs of metal and binary compounds is emerging as a powerful method with a few key advantages. (1) The early examples demonstrate the ability to achieve precise size control, especially with small molecule stabilizers Nothing declared. We thank the