Algae have been extensively explored for the production of useful bioactive compounds and biofuels. The photosynthesis-mediated conversion of carbon dioxide into biochemicals for the synthesis of biofuels, food, and highly valuable bioactive compounds are the drivers of the escalating interest in algae. Even though algae possess some advantages over other biofuel resources, the high cost involved in algal processing continues to be a challenge to commercial-scale development. Large-scale dewatering and drying of algal cultures for biomass generation involve high operation costs, resulting in significant challenges to the development of commercially viable production technologies. Centrifugation, flocculation, filtration, gravity sedimentation, flotation, and electrophoresis techniques are the conventional dewatering methods widely used. Similarly, solar, convective, spray-, and freeze-drying are the conventional methods used to dry algal cultures. Each method has specific pros and cons, requiring proper operational optimization and management to achieve improved dewatering and drying outcomes. Emerging methods such as bio-flocculation, membrane separation based dewatering techniques, and roller/drum and fluidized-bed based drying techniques provide further opportunities for integrated dewatering and drying technologies to improve efficiency and economics. This chapter discusses various dewatering and drying technologies of algal cultures along with their merits and demerits and makes proposals for enhanced dewatering and drying technologies for commercial applications.   Flocculation Centrifugation Filtration Gravity sedimentation Flotation Electrophoresis methods  Solar drying Convective drying Spray-drying Freeze-drying Other drying methods     Algae have been extensively explored for the production of useful bioactive compounds and biofuels ( Algal culturing starts with the inoculation of desired algal species into the culture medium, which contains the required nutrients for their growth. Antibiotics are also added to avoid the growth of bacterial contaminants in the culture media. The culture media with the inoculum is maintained at ambient conditions for growth, and algae can be harvested after cultivation ( As shown in The high cost of harvesting and dewatering algal cultures hinders the developmental of algal products such as biofuels as an alternative to conventional fuels. There are several dewatering methods such as centrifugation, flocculation, filtration, gravity sedimentation, flotation, and electrophoresis that are currently used for algal culture ( Flocculation is usually considered as a primary harvesting method to increase the particle size of algae cells before dewatering and drying ( The separation of solids from liquids using centrifugal forces based on the particle size of the solid and the density of the liquid is called centrifugation. Centrifugation is classified under secondary dewatering processes as the algal culture is transformed into a slurry form at the primary stage (e.g., flocculation). Thus, high energy is required at this stage, compared to primary processes, and this increases the cost involved in the dewatering process ( Filtration uses a permeable medium to separate a suspension where the liquid passes through the medium and the solids are retained. A pressure-drop applied across the medium via gravity, vacuum, or centrifuging, is essential to force the liquid through the filtering medium. Surface and depth (or deep bed filters) are the two major types of filtration, where a thin film is used as a filtering medium to deposit solids, and where the solids are deposited within the filter medium, respectively ( Generally, coagulation and flocculation steps are followed by gravity sedimentation, which separates the algal suspension into clear liquid and concentrated slurry. Sedimentation tanks and lamella separators with recovery efficiencies of 1.6% and 3%, respectively, are widely used for the dewatering of algae larger than 70 In this method, the suspension of solid-liquid algae culture is interacted with gas or air, where the solid particles surface is attached with gaseous molecules and the particles are carried to the liquid surface and float ( Recently, The addition of chemicals for algae dewatering increases the concentration of total dissolved solids in water and may result in water pollution and environmental toxicity ( Dewatering processes separate water from algal cells, and drying is used to remove water completely to generate a dry biomass. The drying process is another crucial step that determines the yield of value-added products from the algal culture. Increasing the temperature of dewatered algal slurry by heating it via various sources such as solar and convection are the conventional drying methods used in large-scale production of algal biomass. Spray-drying, freeze-drying, roller/drum drying, fluidized bed drying, and infrared light-mediated drying methods are used to address the drawbacks of conventional drying methods and to enhance the yield of value-added products from algal biomass ( Drying of algal cultures in direct sunlight in an open area is called solar drying, and is considered the simplest and cheapest drying method. However, this method requires a large drying surface and longer duration for drying completion ( Algal dehydration is another name for convective drying. This method uses convective hot air drying such as oven drying or microwave drying ( Spray-drying is highly recommended for drying high-value products from algae. It possesses the ability to generate algal biomass with high yield and quality. Further, this method can also retain more nutrients, especially proteins, compared to convective drying ( Freeze-drying can preserve the biomolecular contents of the algal biomass without disrupting their cell wall. Generally, the algae or algal products are frozen for 24 In addition to these drying methods, there are some further novel and hybrid methods that are used to dry and obtain high-value products from algae. For example, roller/drum ( The recent advancements in nanotechnology have made it possible to use nanosized particles and materials in most of the commercial algal processes to enhance dewatering and drying. Nanoparticles are widely used in dewatering, as the large surface area of the nanosized particles binds with algal cells and removes water molecules from them. The binding of nanoparticles with algae is facilitated via electrostatic force of attraction, which increases their aggregation capacity and enhances separation. Several magnetic nanoparticles are used for magnetophoretic separation of algae and water molecules in dewatering processes. Recently, surface functionalized iron oxide nanoparticles were used to enhance the separation of In filtration-based dewatering processes, nanofiltration using a filter membrane with nanosized pores is widely used to remove water from algae cultures ( Similar to flocculation and sedimentation, flotation based on magnetic nanoparticles is also used in the dewatering process of microalgae ( Conventional dewatering methods possess several drawbacks, which are being addressed via the introduction of novel hybrid methods such as forward osmotic dewatering ( This chapter gave an overview of the most common and the emerging dewatering and drying processes used to process algal biomass to yield high-value products. Improvements in conventional algal dewatering and drying processes can help in meeting the commercial demand of algal products. The latest reports of the advancements in algal dewatering and drying technologies forecast a better future to offer more effective algal dewatering processes under optimum economy. The introduction of nanotechnology has also enhanced the efficacy of algal dewatering processes.