Known for its high strength, ductility and durability, ultra-high performance concrete (UHPC) is a topic of interest in recent years for scientists and civil engineers. Great potential application of UHPC has driven increasingly more investments and research into this industry. In recent studies, taken advantage of the nanotechnology, novel UHPC material with nano material addition was developed. Great static performance improvement was observed when compared with normal strength concrete. To obtain full understanding of material properties, especially dynamic performance, Split-Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) tests were conducted on this new concrete material. For comparison purpose, static properties from uniaxial compression and split tensile tests are obtained and discussed. In this paper, effects of nanomaterials on behaviour of UHPC are assessed through group comparison. Dynamic increase factor (DIF) values for both the dynamic compressive strength and tensile strength are generated. It is found that the strength of UHPC increases with the rising of strain rates and dosage of nano material influences UHPC dynamic properties. However, UHPC is noted to be less rate sensitive comparing with normal strength concrete. Microscopy analysis including Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Analysis, X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) Analysis and X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Analysis are conducted to understand the macroscopic failure phenomenon, element composition and concrete hydration process.Ultra-High Performance Concrete (UHPC), also known as reactive powder concrete (RPC), is a relatively new material formulated by combining Portland cement, silica fume, quartz flour, fine silica sand, high-range water reducer, water, and steel or organic fibres. Compared with normal strength concrete material, UHPC is known for its high strength, high ductility and high durability. It allows construction of sustainable and economic buildings with extraordinary slim design. Its high strength and ductility makes it an ideal building material for bridge decks, storage halls, thin-wall shell structures, and highly loaded columns. Some pioneering applications of this material such as a hybrid (steel and UHPC) pedestrian bridge in Germany Fibre reinforcement is one of the most important composites of UHPC. The concept of using fibres is not new. In the ancient time, horse hairs were used in mortar and straw to construct mud bricks. Modern versions of concrete fibre were not widely used until 1960s when steel, glass and synthetic fibres took the stage. After mixing with fibrous material, material integrity increases. Some types of fibres like steel fibres produce great impact, abrasion and shatter resistance in concrete Recently, development of nanotechnology has attracted great scientific attention. It was observed that several phenomena including statistical mechanical effects and quantum mechanical effects become pronounced as size of the system decreases. Due to their ultra-fine size, addition of nanoscale particles results in significantly improved material properties without change of the material composition. As a consequence, researchers and engineers are exploring feasibility of re-engineering many existing materials like concrete by adding nanoscale particles into the matrix to get new and novel material which has unprecedented performance. Li et al. Despite great advantages and potentials, concerns remain for wide utilization of nanoscale particles in structural construction. Firstly, toxicity and environmental impact of nanomaterials should be well addressed In recent research, a newly designed UHPC material with both steel fibre reinforcement and nano material addition was experimentally tested. The nano materials used in the concrete had been applied in industry for years because of their reasonable price. Static material tests such as uniaxial compression test and split tensile tests were conducted to get basic material properties of the newly developed UHPC. It was noted that the UHPC with nano-additives has much improved compressive strength as well as tensile strength which indicates good potential of utilizing such material in protective design against dynamic loads such as blast load, seismic load and impact load. However, it is commonly acknowledged that concrete material is sensitive to rate of loading. Both compressive strength and tensile strength of concrete increase with loading rate. Under this condition, it is imperative to conduct dynamic tests on the newly developed UHPC to obtain complete knowledge of material constitutive relationship including both the static and dynamic properties. Conventional screw-driven or servo-hydraulic methods of material testing had been utilized in determining the material property at high strain rate. However, these methods may not be perfectly adequate as the strain rates in the test is limited and oscillations and emerging stress wave exist in the testing apparatus In the present study, SHPB test results of 94 UHPC samples including 41 compressive tests and 53 split tensile tests are summarized. Dynamic compressive strength and tensile strength of these samples are compared and discussed. Dynamic Increase Factors which are important describing the material under high loading rate are generated and plotted in charts, and the influences of different nano material additions and dosages on the dynamic properties of UHPC material are discussed. Furthermore, UHPC samples after SHPC tests are analysed under microscopy Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Analysis to explain the macro failure in micro scale. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) Analysis and X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Analysis are carried out to further understand the failure element composition and strength development of this novel material. In the current research, nano materials including Nano-CaCO Nano material in the current study was mixed at a constant weight dosage of 3%, and this amount of mixture was determined in order to achieve a balance of performance and cost-effectiveness. The addition of nano material affects material hydration process. When a small quantity of the nano-particles were uniformly dispersed in the cement paste, the nano-particles located in the cement will promote and accelerate cement hydration due to their high activity. However, when the nano-particles cannot be well dispersed, as in the case of extensive nano-particles content addition, these nano-particles will create weak zones. Consequently, the homogeneity of microstructure cannot be reached, and low strength will be expected. In a relevant study  All UHPC samples were produced by mixing silica fume, fine sand and powder materials which consisted of cement and nanoparticles, in a laboratory concrete mixer. They were firstly dry mixed for 5 min before any water addition. Then 70% water was added and mixed for 3 min to fluidise the mix. Superplasticizer was added before the other 30% water was finally mixed. The mixing process was then continued for another 5 min before steel fibres were added and manually dispersed in order to avoid clumping and guarantee the fibres were uniformly distributed and randomly oriented. Slump tests were carried out to assess the workability of the UHPC material immediately after concrete mixing. It was noted the concrete in the current study had good workability with a slump exceeding 250 mm and slump spread exceeding 900 mm diameter. After proper curing in wooden moulds, specimens are prepared by cutting them to the specified length and are thereafter grinded and measured. There are high requirements on the flatness of end surfaces in order to obtain an even load distribution in the load tests. The specimens used for static compression test were 100 mm cubes, and the samples used in the following split tensile and SHPB tests were cylinders with 75 mm diameter and 37.5 mm height. Uniaxial compression tests and split tensile tests were conducted to determine static uniaxial compressive strength and split tensile strength of UHPC. The experiments were carried out on a number of 100 mm*100 mm*100 mm UHPC cubes using a 3000 kN capacity computer-controlled electromechanical servo hydraulic pressure testing machine as shown in  Static compressive stress–strain curves obtained from samples with different nano additions are shown in The static compressive strengths for UHPC with different nano-additives are averaged and listed in Static split tensile tests were conducted on cylindrical UHPC specimens with diameter of 75 mm and height of 37.5 mm, as shown in The split tensile strength was calculated according to The static split tensile strengths for UHPC with different nano-additives are then averaged and listed in It is noted that, all UHPC samples have greatly improved split tensile strength compared with their normal strength counterparts. UHPC sample with 3% volume dosage Nano-CaCO From the uniaxial compressive and split tensile tests shown in the above sections, it is clearly observed that addition of different nano materials has a great influence on the mechanical properties of UHPC, given that UHPC samples have the same steel fibre material and fibre volume dosage. Generally speaking, UHPC material with nanomaterial addition outperforms the conventional strength concrete. For cement based material like concrete, calcium silicate hydrate (C–S–H) is the main product during the hydration process and is primarily responsible for the material strength. Nano material like CaCO  In the current study, the dynamic tests were conducted on SHPB test specimens with 75 mm diameter and 37.5 mm height. The experimental systems of SHPB compressive and split tensile tests are sketched in In SHPB tests, the specimens were placed between the ends of two straight bars, called the incident bar and the transmitted bar. At the end of the incident bar (some distance away from the specimen, typically at the far end), a stress wave is created which propagates through the bar toward the specimen. This wave is referred to as the incident wave, and upon reaching the specimen, split into two smaller waves. One of them, the transmitted wave, travels through the specimen and into the transmitted bar, causing plastic deformation in the specimen. The other wave, called the reflected wave, is reflected away from the specimen and travels back down the incident bar. Strain gauges were then placed on the bars to measure strains caused by the waves. Assuming deformation in the specimen is uniform, the stress and strain can be calculated from the amplitudes of the incident, transmitted, and reflected waves. Based on one dimensional stress wave propagation theory For SHPB split tensile test, the compressive stress along the split bar length direction and tensile stress perpendicular to the bar length direction can also be calculated following the theory of elasticity. In SHPB test, it is critical to conduct longitudinal stress equilibrium check. Equation    Dynamic strengths of UHPC samples under various strain rates are plotted in The dynamic increase factors (DIF) for UHPC compressive strength including all test samples are plotted in Comparison is made between the normal strength concrete (NSC) without fibre reinforcement and nano material addition and UHPC material used in the present study. For comparison purpose, the NSC material has a static compressive strength of 52.5 MPa, and its dynamic increase factors are calculated based on the formula discussed in Ref. For normal strength concrete compressive strength: As displayed in Low porosity microstructure is another possible reason for low rate sensitivity of UHPC. As listed in After dynamic compressive tests, SHPB split tensile tests were carried out. Tension testing in a Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) is more complex due to a variation of loading methods and specimen attachment to the incident and transmission bar  The failure modes of the specimens are investigated from two perspectives. Firstly, it is necessary to check the location of crack initiation, whether the failure is initiated from the centre of the disc is of vital importance. Secondly, the route of crack propagation is important, and the failure path should be along the loading diameter. In order to investigate these two phenomena, high speed camera was used in the SHPC split tensile tests, and sample responses at 155, 310 and 465  Similar with SHPB dynamic compressive strength, the DIF values of the UHPC materials are compared with those of the normal strength concrete material at the same loading rate. The dynamic increase factors of NSC which are obtained from formulae proposed by Malvar and Crawford The DIF for normal strength concrete in tension can be calculated as: As shown in In the split tensile test of the current research, two more sets of UHPC samples with the same type of nano particle CaCO After completing the SHPB tensile tests, it can be generally concluded that when compared with normal strength under dynamic tensile loads Microscopy analysis was conducted to provide explanation of macroscopic failure phenomenon at micro-scale. Morphology of the samples was observed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) using LEO 1550 Scanning Electron Microscope. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) instrument Bruker D4 ENDEAVOR was used for phase analysis and semi-quantitative analysis. Elemental analysis was conducted by X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) of Bruker Handheld XRF Spectrometry. Specimens after SHPB split tensile tests were knocked into small pieces, soaked in ethanol for a week, and ethanol were renewed 3 times in this period; and then were put into a vacuum desiccator (about 40 °C) for drying. Finally samples were stored in a desiccator with limestone inside to keep dry and anti-carbonation. Pictures of matrix and interfacial transition zone (ITZ) taken from the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) tests are listed in In The interfacial transition zones between the steel fibre and cement paste in post-damage UHPC samples are also shown in The X-Ray fluorescence (XRF) test results of UHPC samples are shown in X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) Analysis was used to identify the polycrystalline phases of cement and hardened cement paste through recognition of the X-Ray patterns that are unique for each of the crystalline phases Diffraction patterns were collected in the range of 10–80° 2θ, 0.02°/step, 2°/min as continuous scans. After data collection, all patterns were processed through Jade 5.0 software. Diffractograms are shown in Following Assuming  According to Equation The influence of nano material addition on UHPC long-term hydration process is illustrated in For the newly designed concrete materials with both steel fibre and nano material additions, great static strength improvement was observed. Split-Hopkinson-Pressure-Bar tests were conducted to get full understanding of the material constitutive relationships especially under dynamic loading condition. It was observed that with the same fibre reinforcement, different nano materials additions seem to have insignificant influence on the material dynamic strengths. However, material strength could be increased with the increase of nano material volume dosage. Comparing with the traditional normal strength concrete, UHPC with fibre and nano material addition has less strength increment under the same loading rate when compared with normal strength concrete. In SEM tests on post-damage UHPC samples, different damage modes at ITZ are identified, XRD and XRF analysis confirmed the filling and pozzolanic effect of nano particles addition. The research presented in this paper jointly supported by the