Nano-structured Half-Heusler TiNiSn thermoelectric bulk was prepared by microwave-assisted rapid solid-state synthesis and sintering. The mixture of powders of Ti, Ni, Sn was cold pressed before being heated by microwave irradiation. A microwave susceptor material rapidly heats the elemental starting materials inside an evacuated quartz tube resulting in near single phase compounds in 4 min 20 s. The synthesized sample was milled for 30 min in an agate mortar and cold pressed for the following sintering. An 86% density of TiNiSn thermoelectric bulk contains ∼100 nm pore and nanocrystal was sintered in 20 min. For TiNiSn bulk, low thermal conductivity of 2–3 W/m·K at temperatures in the range of the room temperature to 773 K. The ZT values of around 0.3 are found, with the microwave-prepared sample displaying noticeable superior properties over conventionally prepared half-Heuslers due to inclusion of nanopore and In-situ nanocrystal.The thermoelectric (TE) alloy is one of energy materials which can convert heat to electric or electric to heat basing on the Seebeck and Peltier effects The dimensionless value of thermoelectric figure of merit, ZT, describes the performance of the thermoelectric materials as ZT = S TiNiSn is a Half-Heusler structure thermoelectric material, belonging to narrow-band semiconductor with a merely band gap of 0.1–0.5 eV Nowadays, the conventional preparation methods of TiNiSn alloy include arc-melting or solid-state synthesis combined with hot pressing or spark plasma sintering and so on The earliest research on the application of microwave heating technology in materials is in 1980s In the past five years, there are still some on-going researches on the microwave synthesis or microwave sintering of thermoelectric materials. For example, the microwave solid-state synthesis combined with hot press sintering or spark plasma sintering of Pb-Te Hence, we propose an efficient recipe to prepare TiNiSn Half-heusler thermoelectric bulk by employing microwave synthesis and sintering, without annealing. Therefore, we can have a nanocrystallization microstructure. The effect of irradiation time on phase composition of TiNiSn was discussed. The electrical resistivity, Seebeck coefficient and thermal conductivity were also systematically investigated in the temperature range from room temperature to 773K. The following metal powders were used as starting materials: Ti (∼45 μm, 99.99%, Aladdin), Ni (∼40 μm, 99.9%, Aladdin) and Sn (∼75 μm, 99.99%, Aladdin). The synthesis process includes the following steps: 1) the three powders were weighed at stoichiometric ratio of 1:1:1 and then mixed adequately in agate mortar; 2) the acetone was added during mixing; 3) the mixed powder was dried in vacuum drying oven and subsequent pressed by powder compressing machine (10–40 MPa, FDY-60, Tianjin); 4) the cylindrical piece was put into the quartz tube and heat sealed with vacuum degree of less than 0.1 Pa; 5) the sealed quartz with sample was put into corundum crucible, the silicon carbide particles as microwave susceptor was evenly spread between quartz tube and crucible; 6) the corundum crucible was put into the microwave oven (G70F20CN1L-DG (B0), Galanz), and the synthesis was conducted under 100% microwave power level (700 W). The synthesis time is 4 min, 4 min 20 s, 4 min 40 s, and 5 min respectively; 7) the synthesized sample was milled for 30 min in agate mortar; 8) we repeat the cold pressing, sample load and vacuum heat sealed; then, we sintered the synthesized sample in microwave oven with 100% microwave power level too. The cylindrical TiNiSn bulk with 16 mm in diameter was obtained after about 20 min sintering. The phase composition of synthesized and sintered sample was analyzed on X-ray diffractometer (XRD-6100, Shimadzu). The scanning step is 0.02°, and the angle is from 20 to 80°. The microstructure of sintered sample was analyzed on field emission scanning electron microscopy (JMS-7001F, JEOL). The Seebeck coefficient and electrical resistivity was tested on the thermoelectric test system (Namicro-III, HUST). The thermal diffusivity was tested on the Laser flash thermal analyzer (LinseisLFA-1000, Linseis). The density was measured basing on the Archimedes method. The thermal conductivity was calculated as κ = DdCp, where D is thermal diffusivity, d is sample density, Cp is specific heat capacity. The electronic thermal conductivity was calculated as κ  A very small amount of Sn appears as impurity at this time. The presence of Sn is un-avoidable during high temperature synthesis  The typical preparation of TiNiSn or other half-heusler thermoelectric bulk by using combination of arc-melting or solid-state synthesis and spark plasma or hot-press sintering needs two weeks to complete the alloying reaction The actual density of TiNiSn bulk identified by Archimedes method is ∼86%.  The Seebeck coefficient of TiNiSn bulk is shown in The electrical resistivity of TiNiSn bulk is shown in The total thermal conductivity, electronic thermal conductivity, and lattice thermal conductivity of TiNiSn bulk are shown in The temperature dependence of ZT for TiNiSn is shown in We propose an efficient recipe to prepare TiNiSn half-heusler thermoelectric bulk by employing microwave synthesis and sintering, without annealing. The This work was supported by