Four hundred and seventy-two generic Escherichia coli isolates were recovered from ground and whole retail beef, chicken, pork, and turkey obtained from Greater Washington, DC, USA during the years 1998 to 2000. Many of the isolates displayed resistance to tetracycline (59%), sulfamethoxazole (45%), streptomycin (44%), cephalothin (38%) and ampicillin (35%). Resistance was also observed, but to a lesser extent, to gentamicin (12%), nalidixic acid (8%), chloramphenicol (6%), ceftiofur (4%) and ceftriaxone (1%). Sixteen percent of the isolates displayed resistance to one antimicrobial, followed by 23% to two, 23% to three, 12% to four, 7% to five, 3% to six, 2% to seven and 2% to eight. Three E. coli isolates were shown to possess Shiga toxin genes (stx2) via PCR; all were O non-typeable and were recovered from ground beef samples purchased on the same day at the same supermarket. One of the Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC) isolates was susceptible to each of the antimicrobials tested, whereas one displayed resistance to cephalothin and sulfamethoxazole, and one displayed resistance to ampicillin, cephalothin, gentamicin, streptomycin, sulfamethoxazole and tetracycline. Findings from this study indicate that retail raw meats may often be contaminated with antimicrobial-resistant E. coli.The use of antimicrobial agents in any venue, including therapeutically in human and veterinary medicine, or as prophylaxis for growth promotion in animal husbandry, ultimately exerts selective pressure favorable for the propagation of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria  Continued surveillance of the antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of foodborne pathogens, including A total of 1025 raw meat samples were purchased from retail supermarkets in Greater Washington, DC Twenty-five grams of ground meat was placed into a sterile plastic bag containing 225 ml of brain heart infusion broth (Difco, Sparks, MD) and homogenized at 230 rpm for 2 min using a stomacher (Seward Medical, London, UK). From the homogenate, 100 μl aliquots were plated onto MacConkey's agar (Difco) and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C. Following incubation, three to five lactose-fermenting colonies from separate regions of multiple plates were subcultured onto eosin-methylene blue agar (Difco) and violet red bile agar (Difco). Presumptive Antimicrobial susceptibility profiles were determined via broth microdilution with either the PASCO MIC/ID (Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD) or Sensititre (Trek Diagnostic Systems, Westlake, OH) systems. Both of these systems follow the standards and guidelines described by the In some instances, multiple All isolates were assayed for the presence of the Shiga toxin genes Shiga toxin-producing Incidence data for On average, the incidence of The results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing are shown in Three (1%) of the 213 In a recent study, In humans, infection with Shiga toxin-producing The high frequency of multiple antimicrobial resistance among the Antimicrobial-resistant bacteria in foods may serve as a source of resistance genes, which may then be transferred to human intestinal flora We thank Cuiwei Zhao, Juan De Villena, Robert Sudler, Emily Yeh, and Shenghui Cui for the help with sample collection and processing. We also thank Robert Walker, Shabbir Simjee, Steven Foley, and Janice Derr for the comments that improved various aspects of the manuscript prior to submission. Support was provided in part by a grant from the Maryland Agricultural Experimental Station, and by the University of Maryland/Food and Drug Administration Joint Institute for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition.