This paper describes a study of the relationship between the physical, chemical and mineralogical parameters of cement products obtained by different grinding mechanisms namely high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) and ball milling, and their effects upon the properties of cements prepared from the ground clinker. Samples were prepared as narrow size fractions and also as distribution samples. Characterization parameters were ascertained by using XRF, laser sizing, Blaine and BET surface area and image analysis methods. HPGR grinding resulted in higher degrees of liberation of clinker phases arising from the intergranular breakage along the grain boundaries compared to ball mill grinding. As for service properties, water demand of HPGR products was higher than ball mill products resulting from high micro fissured structure. Despite high liberation of particularly alite mineral in HPGR grinding, the compressive strength of ball mill products was slightly higher than HPGR products for narrow size samples. Finally, particle size distribution effect on strength was more obvious for distribution samples; generally ball milling gave higher strength values.Besides ball mill, different types of mills which have different grinding mechanisms such as high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR), vertical mill and Horomill are being used in cement industry. Particularly HPGR has a great acceptance in cement industry for almost 20 years because of its ability to reduce specific energy consumption up to 40%. In recent years HPGR is also being used in the mineral industry as it improves liberation of constituent minerals giving rise to mineral recovery in addition to the energy savings. Liberation improvement with HPGR grinding and its effect on downstream processes with some types of ores such as copper, gold, diamond and iron are reported in literature Not only are the fineness and particle size distribution parameters effective on service properties of cement, but also the chemical, mineralogical and micro structural parameters have an important role, particularly on strength development. Many research studies investigating these parameters separately or in combination have been completed up to date Essentially microscopic analysis can be applied to cement powder, but few studies have appeared probably because of technical difficulties such as etching and processing of micron size material. In these studies only morphological parameters including shape properties were examined by SEM because of complex composition of cement It is well known that the properties of cement products of HPGR and ball mill show considerable differences since breakage mechanisms are quite different. This difference is reflected in particle size distribution and particle geometry. Consequently some service properties such as water demand, reactivity of C Samples were collected from HPGR feed and product clinker (with no gypsum) streams in an industrial cement plant in two different sampling periods. In the first sampling period HPGR feed clinker was ground in a laboratory ball mill to give approximately the same percentage of − In the second sampling period samples were prepared similarly but this time as distribution samples such as − Chemical characterization of narrow size and distribution samples was performed by XRF analyses to check if any variation occurred due to particle size and mode of grinding. As HPGR was reported to cause some extra cracks in particle structure, it was expected to see this effect firstly on specific surface area values. Blaine and BET (N Mineralogical study was carried out only for narrow size fractions of both grinding modes to facilitate the determination of liberation. By using Clemex Vision PE 3.5 apparatus and its software, image analysis was applied on polished and etched samples. It was obvious that etching was required for differentiating clinker minerals, particularly the calcium silicates. By using nital (HNO Cement quality properties such as water demand, setting time, soundness and compressive strength tests were performed according to Turkish standards The goal was to compare service properties of products of different grinding modes, so it was expected that the chemical compositions of size fractions should be similar. As can be seen from Similar results were seen in the chemical compositions of distribution samples. The values in  As for Blaine measurements of distribution samples, specific surface areas of ball mill fractions have higher values of about 7%. While BET values of HPGR products were much higher in narrow size fractions, that difference closed up in distribution samples because of existing fine particles. It indicates that HPGR mechanism produces much fissured particles and it was supported by SEM photographs as presented in a previous study As clearly illustrated in The greatest interest in this study was obviously to determine if there were any differences between grinding mechanisms in terms of mineral liberation; and their influences on main cement service properties. Clinker minerals, mostly C Breakage mechanism in ball mill grinding is known to be more repeated random fracturing across mineral grains. But the stress in high compression is much intensive along grain boundaries. This may be regarded as an answer of high liberation in HPGR products. Also it was thought that transgranular fracture in ball milling might have an effect on shape of particles. As can be seen in Service properties such as water demand, setting time, soundness and compressive strength were studied for the samples, including 5% percent of gypsum, in comparison with image analysis results. The results for closely sized fractions given in The results of setting time, water demand and soundness tests for distribution samples are given in Compressive strength tests were performed on narrowly sized fractions on 2nd, 7th and 28th days to see if any relationship existed between liberation and strength development. HPGR products were expected to give better strength values by virtue of having more liberated alite surfaces. Contrary to our expectations, although no big differences were observed, ball mill fractions gave slightly higher strength values in all ages particularly for − Standard compressive test results of HPGR and ball mill distribution samples for 2nd, 7th and 28th days were given in Although the products of HPGR and ball mill have similar particle size distribution and chemical compositions, ball mill products gave higher strength values. Similar results were reported in literature by Müller-Pfeiffer and Clemens In view of investigating different grinding mechanisms in terms characterization and downstream service properties, following conclusions can be deduced: Despite having no variation in chemical compositions, mineralogical compositions of the narrow size fractions indicate variations depending on the fineness. High compression grinding resulted in micro fissured structure of particles; hence higher BET results have been obtained. HPGR grinding gave better liberation of particularly alite mineral compared to ball milling due to intergranular breakage along grain boundaries. Water demand of HPGR products was higher than ball mill products resulting from rough surfaces and fissured structure. No appreciable difference was observed in setting times and soundness results of fractions due to different grinding modes. In narrow size fractions, compressive strength values of ball mill products were slightly higher than HPGR products. In distribution samples, probably the lower specimen compaction of the HPGR samples might have affected the strength adversely. Compressive strength was much more in favor of ball milling except for − Finally; particle size distribution, particularly minus 30 μm fraction, had most important impact on service properties. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK), Project MAG 104M381 and OYAK Bolu Cement Plant, for their financial support and cooperation.