The production of blended cements involves grinding raw materials such as cement clinker, pozzolan, blast furnace slag, limestone and gypsum, within the same mill. This is known as intergrinding. However, it is not possible to control the product fineness of each component separately in the multicomponent system and this results in overgrinding of relatively softer components. Since each component exhibits different breakage characteristics, the fineness of the components around the closed grinding circuit will vary depending on relative grindabilities and the overall fineness of the cement will then depend on the ratio of the components in the blend with different grindabilities. This paper aims to examine the size by mass distribution of each component around a closed circuit ball mill during cement production by intergrinding. For this purpose, a ball mill with an air classifier in a cement plant was sampled and size by assay analyses of the samples was carried out to calculate the particle size distribution of each component around the circuit. The results indicated that the size distributions of the components in each stream vary depending on their grindabilities and the final product comprises components with different fineness. The breakage rates of the components were calculated and it was seen that the breakage rates of the relatively softer components are higher than that of harder ones.For cost-effective operation in cement milling, materials exhibiting cementitious properties are partially replaced with cement clinker and the product is known as blended cement. The amount and the type of the materials replaced with cement clinker determine the quality of the final product and it is referred to European Standard for Cements ( Grinding a mixture of components with different grindabilities has been studied by several researchers and the main aim of the studies was to investigate the interactions between the harder and softer component. Most of the published works in literature involves the grinding of mono-size components in a binary mixture and alone in a laboratory scale mills, and the results were discussed in terms of grinding kinetics and specific grinding energy. This paper presents the results of component analysis around the cement mill during quaternary-mixture grinding of cement clinker, pozzolan, limestone, and gypsum for blended cement production. A sampling campaign was performed around the cement grinding circuit, during the CEM II B-M (P–W) 32.5R type blended cement production. In accordance with The samples collected from each sampling point for the steady state condition of the operation were then subjected to particle size analysis. The appearance functions of the raw materials were also determined for modeling studies. The main objective of the study is to calculate the particle size distribution of each component in each stream. Therefore, after particle size analyses, samples were sieved into size fractions to perform size by assay analysis in accordance with Refer to The perfect mixing ball mill model ( The required appearance function of the components was determined by the impact bed breakage test method proposed by Mass balancing around the circuit was performed using the measured size distributions and the measured feedrate to the circuit. All the flowrates around the circuit were calculated by mass balancing as well as the PSD of the missing streams. Calculated and measured particle size distributions are given in A total of thirty samples were subjected to multicomponent analyses and three separate methods were applied to each sample in order to determine the limestone, pozzolan and gypsum content. The remaining part of the sample was referred to as clinker. Then a size by assay mass balance around the circuit was performed. The agreement between the experimental and calculated assays obtained after size by assay mass balance is presented in The accuracy of the size by assay analysis of the components was checked by comparing what goes into the circuit and what comes out from the circuit.  Material contents of the size fractions shown in  The breakage rates of the components were calculated using Eq. As can be seen from  Multicomponent analysis in a blended cement production, which was performed by intergrinding of clinker, pozzolan, limestone and gypsum, was carried out. The components were regarded as softer and harder. The gypsum and limestone were the softer ones while the clinker and pozzolan were the harder. Multicomponent breakage modeling was performed for the materials using perfect mixing ball mill model and the breakage rate of the components showed that the harder components have relatively smaller rates of breakage compared to the softer ones. This resulted in coarser clinker and pozzolan in mill discharge with respect to gypsum and limestone. Different grindabilities have an impact on the composition of the final product. Since the final product is the separator fine, the composition of the final product is also affected by the specific gravity difference of the components. Varying grindabilities and specific gravities of the components makes it difficult to control the composition of the final product in terms of fineness. In this study, it was not possible to assess the difference between the breakage rates of the components when they are ground in mixture and alone. However, size by assay method gave the opportunity to investigate the breakage behavior of the components when they ground in a quaternary-mixture in industrial scale ball mill. Authors would like to thank to Cimentas Izmir Cement Plant for their cooperation and Hacettepe University Comminution Group members for their support during the sampling campaign.