Scaphoid fractures are very common in young, active individuals. Most fractures are nondisplaced and can be treated with cast immobilization; however, there is a strong demand to return to function as early as possible. Scaphoid fractures with displacement >1 mm can lead to nonunion and late carpal osteoarthritis. Displaced scaphoid fractures require anatomic reduction and rigid stabilization to optimize outcomes. Surgical fixation can be achieved from either the dorsal approach or the volar approach. The location of the fracture, the presence of comminution, the amount of displacement, and associated injuries will determine the best surgical approach for the patient. There has been a tremendous improvement in surgical instrumentation and implants that allows patients the ability to return to function expeditiously and reliably.Scaphoid fractures account for nearly 71% of carpal bone fractures and predominantly occur in young, active individuals in the second and third decade of life. The scaphoid is an irregularly shaped bone with a palmar- and ulnar-directed concave surface. Gelberman et al A scaphoid fracture is suspected based on the mechanism of injury and on clinical signs and symptoms at presentation. Clinically, the patient may exhibit swelling, loss of wrist motion, tenderness in the anatomic snuffbox and over the scaphoid tuberosity, and pain with pronation and ulnar deviation. The diagnosis is confirmed with standard radiographic series consisting of posteroanterior (PA), oblique, lateral, and scaphoid views. The scaphoid view, a PA view with 30° of ulnar deviation, places the scaphoid in a more vertical position and can allow for easier visualization of the fracture. There are various classification systems to describe scaphoid fractures based on location and stability. The most common system describes the fracture based on anatomic location, such as the waist, proximal pole, the distal pole, and tuberosity. Accurate and prompt diagnosis of stable, nondisplaced scaphoid waist fractures can lead to union in >90% of fractures with immobilization. We recommend open reduction and internal fixation for unstable or displaced scaphoid fractures. As a general rule, the dorsal open approach should be used for proximal pole fractures, whereas a volar approach should be used for distal scaphoid fractures. However, the surgeon must be able to change the approach and surgical technique based on the fracture characteristics and surgical findings. Surgical intervention is performed under regional or general anesthesia. Perioperative antibiotics are given within an hour of making the skin incision. The patient is positioned on the operating room table with a well-padded nonsterile tourniquet applied to the arm with a radiolucent arm table. The C-arm image intensifier is brought in from the end of the arm table extension, and the viewing screen is positioned so the operating surgeon is able to have an unobstructed view with comfort. We prefer to use the mini C-arm to minimize the radiation exposure. The operating surgeon sits so the dominant operating hand is at the outer end of the table for a volar approach, and for a dorsal approach the situation is reversed. The incision is centered over the scaphoid tuberosity. The distal limb of the incision is gently curved toward the base of the thumb metacarpal, and the proximal limb of the incision is carried over the radial aspect of the flexor carpi radialis (FCR) tendon for about 2 cm ( The capsule is incised longitudinally in line with the skin incision from the radius proximally to the scaphoid tubercle distally. The capsule is lifted with forceps and divided sharply with great care taken to avoid damaging the underlying articular cartilage of the scaphoid. Proximally, there is a thickening of the capsule with the confluence of the radioscaphocapitate and long radiolunate ligaments, which is divided to expose the proximal pole of the scaphoid. Distally, the capsule is divided up to the scaphotrapezial joint while taking care not to dissect too deeply to avoid disrupting the blood vessels entering the scaphoid at this level. A self-retaining retractor is placed along the incised capsule providing direct visualization of the scaphoid. The scaphoid is irrigated to remove any hematoma and any intervening synovium trapped within the fracture site. The fracture site is inspected closely, and any loose fragments are repositioned if possible. The wrist is placed through a range of motion to assess the degree of instability at the fracture site. Next, accurate fracture reduction is performed to correct any step-offs and rotational or angular deformities. The wrist is positioned in extension over a bump of rolled up sterile towels. Kirschner (K) wires may be placed into the proximal and distal fragments, respectively, and used as joysticks to assist with proper fracture reduction if necessary. If there is significant bone loss or comminution, consideration is given to placing a corticocancellous bone graft from the iliac crest to prevent collapse during screw placement. Provisional fixation can then be secured with a 0.045-inch K-wire that is placed out of the way for definitive fixation with a cannulated screw. The provisional K-wire maintains reduction and serves as a derotation wire. To place a screw in the center of the scaphoid along the long axis, it is critical to take a rongeur and remove a small portion of the trapezium volarly. A cannulated guide wire is then placed from the scaphoid tubercle and aimed dorsally and radially from distal to proximal towards the apex of the proximal pole. Understanding that the scaphoid typically lies 45° radially deviated in the coronal plane and 47° flexed in the sagittal plane can assist with appropriate guide wire placement. The position of the wire is confirmed on orthogonal fluoroscopic images. The cannulated drill is then used to drill over the guide wire, and an appropriately measured compression screw is placed making sure that the screw is buried deep to the articular surface. The fracture site must be visualized as the screw is placed to confirm that the reduction is not lost during this process. The position and the length of the screw are verified on orthogonal fluoroscopic images, and once that is confirmed to be satisfactory, the initial provisional K-wire may be removed. At this time, the tourniquet is released, and meticulous hemostasis is achieved with bipolar electrocautery. The wound is copiously irrigated, and the capsule is reapproximated with interrupted figure-of-8 absorbable sutures. The closure is initiated proximally at the radius to reapproximate the radioscaphocapitate ligament and carried distally toward the thumb. Once the capsule is closed, the wrist is placed through a range of motion to assess the closure. The wound overlying the capsule is irrigated again, and the skin is closed with interrupted nylon sutures in a horizontal mattress fashion. A xeroform sterile dressing with gauze is applied. A standard 3-cm longitudinal incision is made over the dorsum of the wrist centered over Lister's tubercle over the third dorsal compartment. Superficial dissection is performed with care to protect the branches of the radial sensory nerve. The retinaculum is divided longitudinally, and the extensor pollicis longus (EPL) tendon is released from its sheath and the EPL is retracted radially and the common extensor tendons are retracted ulnarly. The wrist capsule is incised longitudinally with attention to raising full-thickness flaps for later repair. Great care must be taken to protect the scapholunate ligament, which lies directly deep to the capsule at this level. The capsule overlying the waist of the scaphoid should not be violated to preserve the blood supply of the scaphoid. Once the joint is entered, the hematoma is removed, and the fracture site is exposed. Any intervening synovium is debrided, and reduction is performed with the wrist held in flexion, pronation, and ulnar deviation over a stack of sterile towels ( The reduction is provisionally held with a 0.045-inch K-wire that is directed along the ulnar border of the scaphoid under fluoroscopic guidance ( The tourniquet is released, meticulous hemostasis is achieved, and the capsule is closed with absorbable interrupted sutures. The extensor retinaculum is repaired, and the EPL tendon is left in its transposed position over the retinaculum. The skin is reapproximated with nylon sutures, and a sterile dressing is applied. A bulky soft dressing is applied, and a radially based plaster splint is applied with the digits free to allow for active motion until the first postoperative visit at 2 weeks for suture removal. Once the sutures are removed, the patient is encouraged to work on active digit and wrist motion. Patients are allowed to return to work with light duty without any heavy manual work or contact sports for at least 6 weeks. During this time, patients are fitted with an orthoplast thumb spica splint with the thumb interphalangeal joint free. Patients are allowed to come out of the splint for range of motion exercises as tolerated. Radiographs are obtained at 6 and 12 weeks postoperatively ( Complications are rare after open reduction, internal fixation of scaphoid fractures. Extreme care must be taken while drilling over the guide wire when using cannulated systems to prevent bending or breaking the wire. These guide wires tend to be small and are therefore susceptible to breakage. Always examine the wire before using it to confirm that it is not bent or damaged because this will increase the possibility of breakage. If the guide wire is placed all the way through the scaphoid and penetrates the joint, wrist motion must be limited to avoid breaking the tip of the wire. Also, care must be taken to ensure that the final screw is buried beneath the articular surface ( Scaphoid fractures are very common in young, active individuals. Prompt diagnosis and early treatment are critical to improved outcomes. The location of the fracture, the presence of comminution, the amount of displacement, and the associated injuries will determine the best surgical approach for the patient. There has been a tremendous improvement in surgical instrumentation and implants that allows patients the ability to return to function expeditiously and reliably.