For the vast majority of ounces of gold produced, comminution costs in the form of power, grinding media, and liners represent the single largest cost category of milling. Since, semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) ball-mill circuits represent the single largest type of gold milling comminution circuits, the chapter focuses on SAG. At mines, where ore has become more competent during the life of the mine (and ore rarely gets softer as the mines go deeper) or at operations, where the SAG mill was undersized during design, operators find themselves limited by a SAG mill's throughput capacity. The chapter describes SAG mill configuration and operation, ball-mill circuit operation, gold recovery in comminution circuits, alternate grinding technologies, and ore sorting in detail.For the vast majority of ounces of gold produced, comminution costs in the form of power, grinding media, and liners represent the single largest cost category of milling. Heap leach operations, of course, have a substantially lower milling unit cost. The top 20 producers of gold in 2003 (see Since SAG ball-mill circuits represent the single largest type of gold milling comminution circuits, such circuits will be the focus of this chapter. Much has been written about SAG milling, and readers are referred to the volumes of the three SAG conferences (conducted in Vancouver in 1989, 1996, and 2001; University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada) for an in-depth discussion of various topics. A broad overview of various grinding circuits is presented by Most aspects of SAG mill circuit design are well covered in the literature; however, the unit power requirement for SAG milling (both individually and as a fraction of the total circuit power) is worthy of additional discussion. Unlike ball-mill circuits, it can be very difficult operationally to trade grind for throughput in a SAG circuit. Once designed and constructed for a given ore type, a SAG mill circuit has only limited flexibility to deliver varying product sizes. This is particularly true for those SAG circuits designed with a coarse closing size. As a result, undersizing a SAG mill has disastrous results on throughput, while oversizing a SAG circuit results in a poor utilization of capital. Traditionally, many engineers have approached SAG circuit design as a division of the total power between the SAG circuit and ball-mill circuit, often at an arbitrary power split. While this approach may result in a successful design, it ignores the critical decision of determining the correct power split between the SAG and ball-mill circuits. An illustration of the extremes in SAG circuit design is gained by comparing single-stage autogenous milling in a circuit closed with cyclones to a high ball-charge SAG circuit closed with screens. In many cases, the selected circuit configuration can be used as a guide to tailor the power input required for the application. Because the design of SAG mills often control circuit throughput, it is essential to install sufficient SAG power for the ore's unit power requirement. Rather than design the SAG circuit with an arbitrary fraction of total circuit power, it is more useful to base the required SAG mill size on the product of the unit power requirement for the ore and the desired throughput, and then size the ball mills based on the required finish grinding. Once operational, the selected SAG mill size and operating conditions primarily control circuit throughput, while the ball-mill circuit installed power controls the final grind size. Particularly at mines where ore has become more competent during the life of the mine (and ore rarely gets softer as the mines go deeper) or at operations where the SAG mill was undersized during design, operators find themselves limited by a SAG mill's throughput capacity. The SAG operator who has not been asked to ‘find a way’ to ‘push ore’ through the SAG mill is rare indeed! As a result, many (if not most) operators view the SAG mill as a restriction in the grinding circuit that must be overcome, instead of a comminution unit operation required to prepare ball-mill feed. Clearly, a SAG circuit design that has sufficient capacity and flexibility to attain design throughputs with the projected material types is essential. There are a number of small-scale tests in wide use that are designed to determine breakage characteristics and facilitate circuit design. All the tests balance compromises between the sample size required (in terms of both mass and top size), the modes of breakage evaluated, the utility of the test data for various design methods, ability to interpret the effect of steady-state conditions, as well as test complexity and convenience. Traditionally, the benchmark for determining the unit power required is pilot-scale testing; however, even pilot testing is limited by mill configuration and scale effects, and constrained by sample availability ( Despite the differences in scale between the 450 Improved fragmentation due to either more aggressive or more effective drilling and blasting operations can improve downstream comminution performance. At PTFI and other minesites around the world, operators have seen that the benefits of increased fragmentation in blasting extend beyond increased mill throughput. Improved fragmentation can also lead to higher shovel and haul truck productivity, reduced boulder handling/secondary blasting costs, and higher primary-crusher utilization. As the first step in comminution, drilling and blasting should be viewed holistically with the rest of the process. The obvious focus area is to minimize the overall cost of drilling, blasting, crushing, and grinding. The best approach, however, is not total comminution cost minimization, but overall revenue maximization. In evaluating the drill and blasting/comminution process, this implies that inclusion of recovery models is required to evaluate the true optimum. Of course, it is important to keep in mind that more blasting is not always better. High fines generation can lead to excessive dust losses, and a lack of coarse, top-size material can limit grinding efficiency in autogenous or nearly autogenous circuits. As with most other processes, there is a point of diminishing returns for increased drilling and blasting effort. Typically, blasting imparts roughly three times the unit energy of primary crushing. Efforts to improve blast fragmentation should include evaluations of pattern geometry, drill-hole size and spacing, stemming material, blast size (with larger blasts generally minimizing edge effects), powder factor, explosive type, and detonation timing. Of course, execution of the appropriate design is required for the best results. Having a blast design tailored for categories of material types and rock joint geometries will result in improved drill and blast performance while allocating assets to those materials that require them most; in many cases, additional costs for improved fragmentation in some areas can be balanced by cost savings in others. Finally, a feedback system for monitoring blast performance and improving future blast designs is required to close the loop. Numerous case studies now exist in the literature detailing the effect of finer blasting on subsequent milling process. However, in many operations, particularly those with multiple ore sources or types, discerning the effect of feed size on mill throughput can be problematic. PTFI mills, for example, open-pit ore classified into five material types along with underground ore with two material types in four different concentrators. On a given day, open-pit ore comes from multiple shovels and is fed to one of three primary crushers. Underground ore from a block cave operation with a large number of draw points is also blended to selected mills. While the number of ore sources and mills at PTFI complicates destination tracking of discrete blocks of ore beyond that of most operations, separating the effect of material type and feed size on throughput is always challenging. Well-planned, rigorous, and well-executed campaigns are the best way to evaluate the effect of feed size on throughput. The complexity and operational disruption of such campaigns, however, make these campaigns difficult to be accomplished. Nonetheless, trends can be mined from plant data. Notwithstanding the correlation of material type to plant throughput as observed in Despite a lack of sensitivity to feed size with softer ore types at PTFI, a significant correlation is seen with harder ores and blends. Reflecting the importance of primary-crushing performance on the milling process, many operations have transferred primary crushers from the operational control of the mine to the mill. Regardless of who operates the equipment, primary crushing has two customers: serving the mine to maximize load and haul equipment utilization, and also serving the mill to maximize overall comminution efficiency. Many mines select primary crushers based on top size of the designed or anticipated run-of-mine (ROM) ore. This can result in a substantial excess of primary-crushing capacity for smaller operations. Frequently for large operations, though, primary-crushing capacity becomes an issue not only for milling operation (in terms of capacity and unit power input), but also for mine productivity. As primary crushing becomes taxed, issues that are conventionally dealt with in secondary, tertiary, or pebble-crushing roles become more critical. Management of gap setting, power draw, predicting and extending liner life within a specified performance envelope and productivity issues all become important to the overall comminution process. As with other crushing operations, employing stockpiles (or ore pockets), reclaim, or bins can maximize equipment productivity and efficiency. Most large gyratory installations are designed to accept direct dumping. While this minimizes the capital of the primary-crusher installation, it is inevitable that there is a trade-off with reduced primary-crusher utilization and crusher efficiency. This is a result of feeding the primary crushers based on the frequency that haul trucks present themselves to the crusher, instead of based on optimum crusher operation. Management of the mill stockpile is critical to maintaining consistent throughput. Most operations reclaim from a stockpile of primary-crushed material. There is generally some degree of stockpile segregation, with coarse material preferentially accumulating towards the outside of stockpiles. Maintaining a live stockpile and balancing multiple reclaim feeders result in the highest average (and most stable) throughput. Maintaining the stockpile at reasonable levels minimizes the effect of load and haul equipment shift changes on downstream operations. The size of the stockpile should be based on anticipated fluctuations in production of primary-crushed material as a result of primary-crusher maintenance, load and haul asset maintenance, mill maintenance downtime requirements, and normal fluctuations due to mine planning and sequencing. Natural stockpile segregation can also offer opportunities to improve overall circuit operation, either via balancing the SAG mill and ball-mill circuits, or in cases, by preferential milling of ore from different feeders. Over the past few years, there have been a number of focus areas in optimizing SAG mill operations. A major evolution in mill-shell lifter design has occurred, and much work has been done in the area of pulp lifters and slurry discharge. Progressively, more computationally demanding models (among them discrete element analysis and computational fluid dynamics) have been developed to complement more traditional, mathematically fitted, and population-balance models ( Shell-lifter design embodies many interrelated facets of mill operation: overall life (dictating scheduled downtime), charge trajectory (effecting both performance and liner protection), and the change in performance over the life of a liner. Several developments in SAG mill operation combined to make lifter face-angle a focus area: mills grew rapidly to 11.6 and 12.2 As mills and media size grew, and mills were operated at relatively faster speeds, the potential for liner damage increased. Work by many researchers indicates that the face angle was less critical with smaller mills, from both a performance and liner damage standpoint ( Most operators reported that the more relaxed lifter face angle and wider spacing improved mill performance. There is little consensus, however, on whether improved performance was due to reduced lifter packing at start-up with new lifters, or due to improved process performance in terms of steel impacting the toe of the charge. After starting with 12° lifters, PTFI installed 18° then 25° lifters. Little or no throughput benefit as a result of the face-angle change was observed, but the relaxed angle decreased lifter packing, and therefore increased the total tonnage over the life of a liner set ( Much of the benefit of relaxed face-angle appears to stem from a reduction in lifter packing. Packed lifters are depicted in An analysis of published lifter trials and PTFI's experience allows drawing of some general conclusions concerning lifter spacing-to-height ratios. Lifters starting with a new spacing-to-height ratio of less than 1.5:1 are most prone to packing, while those with a new ratio of 2.0:1 or more show substantially less packing. While there are indications that liner life tends to be shorter for liners with a new ratio greater than 2.0:1, maintenance life cycle should not be the only consideration ( The trade-off evaluation between higher operational productivity and increased maintenance downtime for lifter change-out can be readily conducted and evaluated, and it is often worth selecting and changing liners based on maintaining a performance envelope than on the basis of the more traditional metrics of liner life and scrap weight. As a guideline, mill throughput is maximized between ratios of 2.5:1 and 5.0:1. It is evident from calculations based on lifter profiles that some lifters (particularly those prone to packing at start-up) will wear to the point that they lose lift before attaining the 5.0:1 ratio. These guidelines are stated without reference to face angle; in general terms, and at equivalent spacing-to-height ratios, lifters with greater face-angle relief will have less packing problems but experience greater wear than those with a steeper face angle. The options for lifter spacing are limited without redrilling a mill shell, and only limited changes can be made with lifter height before the reduction in lifter life decreases plant production capability. Of course, lifter spacing, height, and face angle must be considered along with the SAG speed and operating mill volume at a given operation. Shell-lifter design remains an area of research and plant trial effort. As mills have increased in size, the effect of the SAG mill discharge end design on throughput and grinding efficiency has been given a great deal of attention. Particularly for large mills, the volumetric efficiency (or pumping) has great importance. There has been a substantial study concerning backflow in pulp lifters; backflow potentially reduces throughput and milling efficiency and increases pulp-lifter wear. Such backflow can easily be seen in the conventional 4-into-1 pulp lifters, with chambers one and four (in a bi-directional mill) wearing prematurely due to slurry backflow. This wear pattern is depicted in To minimize backflow, PTFI has progressively opened the discharge end of the pulp lifters in its 11.6-m (38′) SAG mill to reduce slurry constriction and to limit the potential for backflow. Initially, this was achieved by adding 100 In addition to work with conventional pulp lifters, curved pulp lifters have been demonstrated to improve discharge efficiency. They have been installed at a limited number of operations, and have been observed to reduce wear. The major drawback of curved pulp lifters is the loss of the ability to operate a mill bi-directionally. While shell lifters can be designed to overcome this and retain all or most of the life with a bi-directional set, it often requires re-initiation of a liner development program. Several operations have experimented with progressively larger ball sizes in efforts to improve SAG throughput, particularly with hard, coarse ores. While the energy of individual impacts increases with larger balls, the number of impacts for a given load (or volume filling of ball charge) decreases. The optimum ball size for a given operation is a function of feed size, ore size, and competency, as well as mill operation conditions (speed, steel charge, and total mill volume). There is little consensus in this area. This may be a function of the difficulty in conducting and evaluating plant trials with ore of various feed characteristics (a relatively small performance benefit), or relate to the ore-specific nature of the optimum steel size. Alumbrera Mine reported trials of 140- and 152-mm-sized SAG steel compared to a 127-mm make-up ball, and indicated that 152 No discussion of milling, and particularly SAG milling, would be complete without some mention of relining. Unlike a concentrator with multiple grinding lines, conducting SAG mill maintenance shuts down an entire concentrator, so there is rightly a tremendous focus on minimizing required maintenance time; reline time represents the majority of scheduled maintenance requirements. Reline times are a function of the number of pieces to be changed, and the time required per piece. Advances in casting and development of progressively larger lining machines have allowed larger and larger liners. Like many operations, PTFI has devoted substantial resources to a liner development program to reduce the total number of liner pieces and fasteners. Vendor benchmarking has established that PTFI's 11.6-m (38′) SAG mill, for example, has nearly 40% fewer liner pieces than similar installed 11.6 There are two primary mechanisms for classifying SAG mill discharge: screens and trommels. Due to a reduction in the required capital costs and space required for screens, trommels enjoyed a period of popularity, but the most favourable method of preparing SAG circuit oversize for pebble crushing is screening. All things being equal in terms of ore character and pulp density, screening produces a cleaner, drier oversize with much less fines carryover than does a trommel. This is particularly true for large SAG installations. As mill diameter increases, the volumetric throughput increases substantially faster than the effective screening area of a trommel. Trommel oversize like pebble-crusher feed has caused problems with pebble crushing at a number of operations. This is due to carryover of fines and moisture, which results in crusher chamber packing and ring bounce. Operations including Newmont's Batu Hijau have retrofitted SAG screens to supplement trommels, while Newcrest built and commissioned a circuit screening trommel oversize at Ridgeway after the trommel-only circuit at Cadia resulted in difficulties with the pebble-crushing circuit ( As most SAG circuits are now designed for the inclusion or subsequent addition of a pebble-crushing circuit, a design that incorporates screens allows maximum future flexibility. The method of returning the classified oversize to the mill requires mention. Some large SAG operations have been designed and built with water cannon return, including Kennecott Utah Copper and Alumbrera. With this system, the trommel oversize is returned directly to the mill with a water jet. Of course, the ability for these plants to retrofit pebble crushing into the circuits is significantly more complicated than if an external method of recycling oversize had been employed. It goes without saying that the oversize from the SAG mill classifier oversize must be returned to the mill via a belt system to use a pebble-crushing circuit. The use of screens is not without complications. Attaining even feed distribution to multiple screens can be challenging, the maintenance requirements of screens requires that stand-by units (either installed stand-by, for use in a rotating spare program, or both) be used. The first consideration when discussing pebble crushing is why there is a need for the unit operation. Secondly, the configuration of the overall pebble circuit merits discussion. Pebble crushing, almost a standard for SAG circuits today, was controversial early in the development of autogenous grinding (AG) SAG milling. This was largely due to the fear of failing to efficiently separate grinding steel from the recycle load, with subsequent crusher damage. Magnet and metal detector manufacturers have minimized this difficulty, and today, more SAG circuits are constructed with pebble-crushing circuits than without. Making an efficient steel–magnetite separation, however, remains problematic for some producers. The need for pebble crushing stems from two factors: a depression in SAG grinding rates at certain particle sizes, and the accumulation of a harder fraction in the mill load. These factors typically result in a mill throughput increase with the installation of pebble crushing that is larger than would be expected purely on the basis of the additional power. Overall, pebble crushing can increase throughput as well as decreasing the total power required to grind to a given size. Typically, pebble crushing also coarsens ball-mill circuit feed, a consideration if a ball-mill circuit is already taxed. The first case for pebble crushing, in order to compensate for decreased SAG grinding rates in the area between which impact or abrasion breakage dominates, deals with what is often referred to as the The second type of build-up of critically sized material is based on having a combination of rock types in the feed that have different breakage properties. In this case, the harder fraction of the mill feed builds up in the mill load, again restricting throughput. Examples of materials in this category include diorites, chert, and andesite. When build-up of these materials does occur, pebble crushing can improve mill throughput even more dramatically than when the critically sized fraction results from size alone. The definition of There are several critical design elements of a successful pebble-crushing circuit, including: material handling/diversion capabilities, metal removal, belt loading, pebble-crusher feeding, and return of crushed material to the circuit. After classification, the SAG discharge oversize is conveyed to the pebble-crushing circuit. The conveyors should have provision for returning the oversize to SAG feed (during pebble-crusher maintenance, for example, or during periods when metal is detected). Additionally, the ability to reject oversize material can also be useful. This is useful for diverting material after metal detects (discussed below), for sampling, or in cases where metallurgical work confirms grade depletion, and allows rejection of the stream to waste. A travelling chute (as opposed to flop gates) to separate the stream between pebble-crusher feed and return to SAG feed offers the greatest flexibility. The design of an efficient metal-removal system is critical. The risk of inefficient metal removal from the pebble-crusher feed is obvious, and allowing excessive mill balls to the pebble crusher will rapidly damage both crusher manganese and other crusher components. The present industry standard for metal removal is the cross-belt magnet. In design of cross-belt systems, sufficient belt capacity should be designed so that belts can be run with lower volumetric loading. In other words, at a fixed belt size and loading, metal separation is better with relatively faster belt speeds versus relatively higher belt loadings. Designing to a Conveyor Equipment Manufacturers Association (CEMA) belt loadings of 65% or less has worked well at PTFI, with peak loadings of up to 85%. PTFI has used belt speeds up to 3.8 For the most efficient operation of a pebble-crusher, provision for a surge bin should be included. The use of a surge bin to allow full-choke feeding improves crusher performance and helps ensure that crusher components wear more evenly. Far steadier operation (in terms of maintaining high power draw without power spiking) can be maintained with a surge bin than without. Perhaps the ultimate ‘surge bin’ is a pebble stockpile with reclaim feeders. In addition to the advantages of surge bins, the use of a stockpile of sufficient capacity can allow the benefit of not having to recycle pebbles back to SAG feed during periods of crusher maintenance, and can allow mill throughput to be maintained at high levels even if the pebble-crushing circuit capacity cannot keep up. The pebble accumulation can then be worked through during periods of increased SAG capacity (due to softer, finer ore, or other reasons). Obviously, the pebble stockpile must stay in balance. Asarco's Mission Complex South Mill used a pebble stockpile; other operations have since followed this lead ( The last major decision for a pebble-crushing circuit is where to put the pebble-crusher product. Conventionally, crusher product was returned to SAG feed. Some designs, however, now allow pebble-crusher product to be returned to the SAG screens/discharge (allowing operation of the pebble crusher in closed circuit) or even to the ball-mill circuit. There is no ‘right’ answer for where the crusher product should be put 100% of the time. Sending the pebble-crusher product to the SAG discharge allows the material to be classified prior to going to the ball-mill circuit, and relieves the SAG mill of loading. Sending the pebble-crusher product back to the SAG circuit allows for attaining a finer SAG circuit product, and can relieve the ball-mill circuit. Sending the pebble-crusher product directly to the ball-mill circuit can reduce SAG discharge screening requirements, but if pebble-crusher product size is not well controlled, ball-mill scatting problems could result. Given sufficient screen capacity, perhaps the best combination is to allow for directing the crusher product either back to the SAG feed, or to the SAG discharge screens. PTFI's C4 concentrator, with twin MP1000 pebble crushers, has the capability to send pebble-crusher product back to the SAG screens to allow crushing in closed circuit (and relieving the SAG mill), or to return crusher product to SAG feed (when the circuit is ball-mill limited). While the standard mode of operation is to return pebbles to the SAG screens for maximum throughput, the flexibility to return SAG feed is an excellent option to balance the SAG and ball-mill circuits during periods of ball-mill limitations. The circuit is depicted in Very often in SAG circuits, the ball-mill circuit is neglected. In many operations where economics dictate that throughput is worth more economically than the required sacrifice in grind, the focus shifts to throughput so much that the available ball-mill power is not used to the fullest extent. Even in those operations where a firm grind target is not adhered to and attainable throughput governs the balance of the circuit, it is foolish not to take full advantage of the installed grinding power. Ores for which recovery is grind insensitive in the range of the typical operation are unusual. Given that mills are charged to the target ball charge with reasonably sized media, and the feed to the ball-mill circuit is not so coarse as to cause constant scatting, the key to efficient ball-mill circuit operation is efficient classifier operation. The standard classifier for ball-mill circuits is the hydrocyclone. Ensuring that the finest and most efficient cyclone cut involves selecting the appropriate cyclone configuration for the ranges of grinds that will be encountered. The apex (spigot) size can be manipulated to deliver the maximum underflow density at the target operating conditions, with the vortex finder tailored for the desired product size. With a given configuration, adding the maximum amount of water (subject to cyclone feed-pump limitations, the minimum overflow density, and cyclone pressure) will generally result in attaining the finest possible grind. Employing a control system to maximize water addition to the cyclone feed pump (subject to pump capacities and downstream densities constraints) is often employed successfully to maximize ball-mill circuit grind. There is strong evidence supporting the concept of using a mixed-size make-up ball to attain incremental grinding efficiencies in ball mills. There is little reason to believe that the steady-state media size distribution resulting from the wear rate of the make-up ball size corresponds to the optimum ball size based on the mills’ feed and target grind. Nonetheless, most operations tend to use a single-sized make-up ball for reasons of convenience. There is less conclusive evidence for the removal of fine steel from ball charges. While some operations claim an anecdotal benefit from removal of fine steel, unpublished studies by the author indicate a substantial benefit from the use of fine media (less than 12 Hydrocyclones demonstrate a trait that is useful for gold mills – minerals with higher specific gravities having a progressively finer cut-size (whether this is desired or not). In plants with free-milling gold, this leads to gold concentrating in the milling circuits (see There are a number of considerations for gravity circuits fed by bleed streams. First is the effect on the overall circuit water balance. As the gravity tailing (which represents nearly 100% of the feed mass) is typically returned to the ball-mill discharge sump, any water addition in the gravity circuit will affect the grinding circuit's overall water balance. In most cases, the water balance can be adjusted with other streams in the ball-mill circuit, but the overall water balance should be carefully considered. Most circuits treat cyclone underflow, but ball-mill discharge is also sometimes used as gravity-circuit feed. In either case, feed to the gravity circuit can be pre-concentrated to a certain extent. For cyclone underflow streams, weirs can be constructed in the underflow tubs. In this case, cyclone underflow is fed to a weired area in the underflow tub, and gravity-circuit feed taken from this area. Slurry excess to the capacity of the gravity circuit overflows back to ball-mill feed. For those circuits treating ball-mill discharge, a sluice can often be arranged to provide some pre-concentration for the gravity circuit. Flash flotation is also used in comminution circuits for gold recovery, and is covered in detail in Chapter 14. The application on cyclone underflow is generally similar to integration of a gravity circuit. Flash flotation can be used solely, as at Louvicourt ( Milling-in-cyanide is also conducted by many operations. Cyanide and lime are added to the grinding circuit, often with trimming of both pH and cyanide levels during the subsequent leach process. There is relatively little information published concerning leach kinetics, but the addition of cyanide to the milling circuit clearly initiates the leach process earlier. This practice is not recommended for those ores that contain No discussion of comminution and classification circuits would be complete without some mention of process control (further details may be found in Chapter 9). Process control consists of a variety of levels, starting with instrumentation and basic regulatory controls. Expert systems and model-based controls generally fall into the category of Thankfully, the literature now has many examples of the clear benefits of installing expert systems. The overriding principle is to control the circuit at peak conditions for nearly all of the time, instead of only a portion of the time. To attain high utilization, process-control systems must be easily understood, have a good user interface, and be flexible enough to be run during the majority of conditions encountered in routine operation. PTFI's location, staff, and maintenance considerations demand a standardized, robust system ( Perhaps as important as the control system is a data historian such as OSIsoft Inc.'s PI system. It is difficult to place a direct process benefit on a data historian, yet when conducting data analyses of plant operating performance and reviewing trends, it is invaluable. Applications include maintenance troubleshooting, condition monitoring, identification of root causes, development of models, regression analyses of different operating regimes, and so on. Dry grinding is an important, albeit niche, application in gold-ore processing. For any pyrometallurgical operation, dry grinding is an obvious consideration. Newmont's Carlin mill and Barrick's Goldstrike mill both have roaster facilities fed by Krupp double-rotator dry mills. The double rotator mills consist of a twin-chamber mill (with sides for coarse and fine-milling), with both sides discharging to a common air-classification system. Operation of Goldstrike's system is well described by High-pressure grinding rolls are an advancing comminution technology with a number of potential applications. Several studies have considered high-pressure grinding rolls (HPGRs) for applications including inclusion in conventional crushing circuits as well as for secondary pebble-crushing. An interesting feature of HPGR crushing for gold applications is the potential to increase gold recovery in leach as a result of micro-fracturing. This effect is discussed in detail by Ore sorting implies coarse-ore separation by a number of technologies designed to reject coarse gangue particles prior to processing. Of course, the oldest technology is hand sorting. Sorting has a number of advantages, not the least of which is eliminating the cost of milling non-value-containing material. Circuit capacity for ore also increases as gangue material is rejected. Another form of sorting based on selective grinding has also been employed either full-time or occasionally at a number of different operations – rejection of pebbles generated in the pebble-crushing circuit. Pebbles are often less than head grade, and in some cases, barren. In order for this to be economic, the pebbles must typically be quite low grade, as all of the mining, haulage, and a portion of the comminution costs are already sunk, and the contained values must only carry the balance of costs associated with further processing. In some cases, particularly for mill construction or major haul road construction, the pebbles (assuming that there are no environmental considerations) can have significantly higher value as aggregate than as ore. The contribution of various parties at PTFI to optimize the comminution circuits has been broad based, and includes mill operations, maintenance, and technical services staff, as well as contributions from staff at both the Grasberg open pit and DOZ underground mines. The combined efforts of staff past and present, and the direct support of Armando Mahler, Rick Coleman, and Darin Lee, have established PTFI as a world leader in comminution practice as well as the world's number one gold producer in 2003.