Calcium based sorbents are effective for CO2 capture. In this work, a modified grain size model has been developed to simulate the carbonation behavior of a calcium–magnesium based sorbent used for CO2 capture in the calcium looping process. The sorbent particle is comprised of CaO fine particles supported on porous magnesium oxide (MgO) (CGMG) framework. The model is based on the reversible reaction between CaO and CO2 and can predict the overall calcium oxide (CaO) conversion and temperature variation inside the sorbent particle under the calcium looping conditions. The overall conversion obtained by the model shows good agreement with experimental data. The effect of several parameters is also numerically analyzed on the dynamics of CaO conversion inside the particle. The conversion of CaO mainly depends on particle size, reaction temperature, CaO content and its porosity for this particular CGMG sorbent. The carbonation reaction does not generate a significant temperature increase inside the particle with a maximum increment of below 20K. Moreover, the CGMG particle carbonation shows a two stage control behavior while the heat transfer due to convection is significant.defined factor heat capacity, J/g K gas concentration, kmol/m particle diameter, m grain size, nm effective diffusivity, m gas diffusivity, m Knudsen diffusion coefficient, m molecular diffusion coefficient, m diffusion coefficient of product layer, m volume fraction of solid volume fraction of solid in the particle weight fraction of CaO in the particle heat transfer coefficient, W/m carbonation rate constant, mol/m mass transfer coefficient, m/s de-carbonation rate constant, mol/m molecular weight, g/mol Nusselt number pressure, MPa partial pressure, kPa equilibrium pressure, kPa Prandtl number radius of initial grain, m local reaction rate of CaO, mol/m local reaction rate, mol/m grain size, m radius of un-reacted grain core, m pore radius, m radial coordinate, m radius of particle, m Reynolds number initial specific surface area, m Schmidt number specific surface area of the solid, m Sherwood number specific surface of the inert phase, m time temperature, K initial reaction temperature, K initial reaction temperature in the bulk phase, K temperature at the surface, K molar volume, m weight fraction of CaO conversion wall energetic criterion molar fraction of gas aspect ratio of a particle volume ratio for product to reactant porosity initial particle porosity tortuosity of the porous medium true density of CaO average true density effective thermal conductivity of the particle, W/m K thermal conductivity of gas, W/m K thermal conductivity of solid, W/m K reaction heat, J/mol diffusion volume for molecule CO The emission of greenhouse gases, in particular carbon dioxide, plays a key role in the global warming. Thus, the mitigation of CO The performance of calcium-based sorbents affects the economics of calcium looping significantly ( The effect of particle size, temperature, porosity of the sorbent and CaO content on the carbonation reaction of the sorbent is numerically investigated, which is difficult to analyze by experiments ( Three mathematical models have been reported in literature, i.e. the random pore model ( The physical model of the CaO-based sorbent is depicted schematically in The outer radius of CaO particle remains constant during reaction. Although particle size has been generally found to shrink up to 10% ( The heat balance accounts for heat transfer by convection and by conduction inside the particle, without considering radiation around the particle due to little temperature difference among particles. The chemical reaction between CaO grains and CO The support material has the same thermal conductivity as CaO grains, which yields about 3% thermal conductivity difference given in the experiment ( The diffusion of gas through the product layer around the grains is developed as a function of diffusivity and conversion. This is attributed to the fact that product layer has been found to greatly barricade the carbonation ( The pore structure of the support material does not change during carbonation and the support material does not react with CO The fresh particle of CaO is produced from calcium carbonate grains. Therefore, there are spaces between the grains and the support material at the beginning of the carbonation. Only when 100% CaO is converted that the voids are completely filled. This assumption follows the porosity change trend during the carbonation and calcination ( The carbonation of the CaO grains by CO Initial and boundary conditions are The relation between mass transfer coefficient and Sherwood number is given by The Sherwood number can be obtained by the empirical equation ( The set of equations above determine the CO The carbonation/de-carbonation reaction in the particle is Thus, the reaction rate per unit of particle volume can be calculated as follows The carbonation reaction rate constant Here, the activation energy is set as 24,000 The de-carbonation reaction rate constant The initial specific surface area of CaO with The change of un-reacted CaO radius is calculated in Eq. The grain size CaO can be calculated as where The effective diffusivity, offering the impacts of product layer and porosity on gas diffusion, is calculated as The product layer barricades the CO The porosity changes inside the particle during reaction as a function of the initial porosity, which can be calculated by The molecular diffusivity of gas CO The Knudsen diffusivity is calculated from And the pore radius is defined as The specific surface area of the sorbent is Finally, the local conversion of CaO and the mean conversion at each time in the whole particle can be calculated as follows, respectively For a spherical particle, the unsteady-steady heat transfer can be written as with initial and boundary conditions being given as follows The heat convection coefficient in Eq. The thermal conductivity for solid phase is considered and precisely correlated with porosity as suggested below (Garcia-Labiano et al., 2005). Here, the thermal conductivity between the above specific porosity values is obtained by interpolation. For the sorbent, the thermal conductivity is developed as a function of the volume fraction of the components in the particle The thermal conductivity of a mixture of N The model in this paper is developed to investigate the carbonation/de-carbonation of a CaO-based sorbent. The model integrates the changing grain size model (CGSM) ( In order to test the model, the overall CaO conversion was calculated and then compared with experimental results obtained in the laboratory in the University of Queensland. The experimental conditions are shown in   It is interesting to note that the typical two stage behavior of CaO conversion with time, i.e. initial fast reaction stage followed by a much slower reaction stage, is predicted well by the model as shown in The particle temperature during the carbonation is introduced as a key factor in calcium looping system ( Porosity in the particle generally decreases as the carbonation progresses ( The carbonation performance of calcium–magnesium based sorbent with CO The particle size of the sorbent could affect mass and heat transfer significantly. This analysis studies the particle size ranging from 0.4 The grain size determines the reaction interface in the carbonation process ( The porosity of the sorbent particle has great influence on the carbonation performance of calcium based sorbent particles. An optimum porosity will provide simultaneously good mechanical properties (high strength and attrition resistance) and chemical characteristic (low resistance to diffusion). The weight fraction of metal oxide inside the particle can influence both carbonation performance and cost, especially for the synthetic calcium based sorbent. The previous studies on CO   Normally, heat transfer resistance rather than mass transfer resistance plays the dominant role in the carbonation process ( During the carbonation reaction, the generated heat is either stored in the sorbent or carried away by the gas stream through convection. The amounts of energy generated, stored and transferred are shown in The grain size model developed in this study can be regarded as a shrinking core model ( The results obtained in this work are very useful in understanding the carbonation behavior of the synthetic sorbents and thus allowing us to develop high performance sorbents. A particle reaction model was developed for the carbonation process of a calcium–magnesium based sorbent (CGMG). With this model, the conversion of CaO, CO Financial supports of the