Mineralized collagen provides new solutions in the manufacture of porous scaffolds for tissue engineering. In this research, the use of biomimetic mineralization, the process of mineralization of acid soluble collagen (ASC) type I extracted from white fish (Rutilus frisii kutum) scales, in a body simulated fluid (SBF) in the presence and absence of an anionic surfactant, sodium dodecyl benzene sulphonate (SDBS) was thoroughly investigated. The formation of β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP) nanocrystals in mineralized nanocomposites was detected by XRD, TGA, and FT-IR techniques. The denaturation temperature (Td) of mineralized ASC was determined at 42.87 °C without surfactant, and at 70.2 °C with surfactant using DSC technique, which indicated a higher thermal stability of ASC without the SDBS surfactant. TEM images illustrated that the formation of β-TCP crystals on collagen nano-fibrils was in an irregular form in the absence of surfactant while it was more regular and in the form of rectangular sheets in the presence of surfactant. The results of UV/Vis spectrophotometer for turbidity measurements during the initial step of biomineralization revealed that SDBS while accelerating the self-assembly process of collagen nano-fibrills, delayed the process of nucleation and the growth of calcium phosphate nanocrystals by increasing the kinetic energy barrier.It is generally assumed that natural compounds like collagen of marine organisms can be synthesized in the form of mineralized nanocomposite. Some marine organisms like bivalves and diatoms naturally contain silica and calcium phosphate in their shells, which can help new mineralized nanomaterials to be designed It is thought that biopolymer collagen exists in the extracellular substrates in both vertebrates and invertebrates. In extracellular matrix, collagen molecules are self-assembled in the form of fibrils in nano, micro and macro scales, depending on the different structures of the tissue and its physiological function [ In nature, calcification involves a procedure in which the organic-inorganic interface presumably plays a crucial role. In mineralized collagen tissues, the mineralized collagen fibril is the primary functional and structural unit. Therefore, the Developing new strategies to prepare hierarchical self-assembled structures in the mineralized collagen fibrils is of great importance in both remodeling and repairing the bone tissues. In addition, one of the most efficient ways to get diverse structures during crystal growth is to insert different additives into the crystal-growing system because the subtle changes during the nucleation stage can cause prominent alterations in structures. Anionic surfactants can have an effect on the particle size distribution, and are used to control the growth rate and particle size of minerals [ The aim of this study was to synthesize the simultaneous fibrillation and biomimetically mineralization of ASC from Caspian white fish scale and to develop nanocomposite scaffolds in bone engineering application. It is assumed that white fish collagen is an alternative source since it can decrease the potential for disease transmission. Also, we aimed to study the influence of anionic surfactant, SDBS, on the synchronized nucleation of calcium phosphate and collagen turbidity using UV/Vis spectrophotomety technique. It is worth mentioning that more regular calcium phosphate nanocrystals can be synthesized on collagen nano-fibrils in the presence of SDBS, and in this study, we strove to investigate the effect of SDBS on the overwhelming kinetic energy barrier of the nucleation mechanism of calcium phosphate. All the materials used in this study were of analytical grade. The Caspian white fish ( The procedure used to extract ASC from white fish scales was reported earlier [ 100 ml of SBF solution (NaCl 0.799 g; NaHCO The X-ray diffractometer (PW1730, Philips) with Cu kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) was used to achieve the XRD pattern of mineralized ASC scaffold nanocomposites and determine the particle size of calcium phosphate crystals. Scans were also performed over 2θfrom 20° to 40°. The mineralized ASC scaffold nanocomposites were separately mixed with about 50 times of vacuum dried KBr and pressed into a disk using a hydraulic press. Then, Fourier transform IR spectrophotometer (Bruker Tensor 27) was carried out in the range of 4000 to 400 cm The TGA of mineralized ASC nanocomposites were undertaken in the vicinity of the inert gas of argon from 25 °C to 600 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C/min using TGA instrument (TA Instruments, STA 504 model, New Castle, USA) to determine the degree of mineralization. The aluminum powder was applied as a standard. DSC (DSC 200 F3 Maia) was used to determine the thermal stability of the mineralized ASC scaffold nanocomposites. The samples were weighed and carefully sealed into aluminum pans. An empty aluminum pan was used as a reference. After the baseline acquisition, the samples were heated from 0 to 300 °C, with a heating rate of 1 °C/min in a liquid nitrogen atmosphere. The mineralized ASC scaffold nanocomposites were examined using TEM (EM10C, Zeiss) at the accelerating voltage of 80 kV. TEM samples were obtained through grinding the freeze-dried nanocomposites and deposited on form var carbon coated Cu grids. Turbidity measurements were carried out using a UV/Vis spectrophotometer (PG Instruments Ltd. T80-UV/Vis). 10X phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 0.012 N HCl and 0.1 N NaOH (8:1:1) were used in subsequent experiments. The ASC mineralization process was investigated in SBF solution in the absence and presence of SDBS. The variation of turbidity during the initial stage of collagen fibrils and calcium phosphate formation was monitored at 313 nm, The XRD patterns of mineralized ASC scaffold nanocomposites are observed in The FT-IR spectra of mineralized ASC scaffold nanocomposites are shown in The FT-IR spectrum of mineralized ASC shows the same phosphate peaks found in mineralized salmon collagen [ The results from our pervious study on pure ASC extracted from white fish scale demonstrated that the peak positions of amide I, amide II, and amide III were located at 1649 cm The thermal analysis of mineralized ASC scaffolds was determined by TGA/DTA. A high mineral content of up to 69 and 64 wt% was achieved after 14 days of immersion in SBF and in SBF in the presence of SDBS, respectively. The first step of weight loss of 2% in mineralized ASC scaffold immersed in SBF was attributed to the evaporation of water molecules ( The denaturation temperature, T TEM images show that there are β-TCP crystals on ASC fibrils ( The initial stage of mineralization of ASC was simultaneously investigated with the immersion of ASC in SBF solution in the absence and presence of SDBS surfactant. The variation of turbidity during the formation of collagen fibrils and calcium phosphate nucleation and the formation of mineralized collagen scaffold was recorded at wavelength of 313 nm, In order to investigate whether the mineral phase itself contributes to the UV/Vis spectra, the calcium phosphate formation from aqueous solution was also performed by turbidity. Equal volumes of two aqueous solutions of CaCl The variation of turbidity in the process of mineralization of ASC shows that in the first stage, the rapid increase in turbidity is primarily due to the growth and accumulation of calcium phosphate crystals on collagen fibrils in solution ( The ASC biomineralization process in the presence of the anionic surfactant, SDBS, shows that up to 40 min, the self-assembly processes of collagen nano-fibrils and the formation of inorganic phase can occur ( In the process of biomineralization, in particular heterogeneous nucleation can play a major role in the synthesis of complex structures. Since foreign bodies, micro-clusters and macromolecules of biological membranes are present in biological systems, biological nucleation is heterogeneous in most cases. The driving force behind the biomineralization process is supersaturation, S. From a themodynamic point of view, this driving force is expressed by the chemical potential difference of the soluble and crystalline phases. Eq. In nature, nucleation as the first stage of mineralization is controlled by a kinetic process in which the growth and fluctuation of crystalline cluster overcomes the kinetic energy barrier at a specific thermodynamic driving force, Δ One of the merits of synthesizing mineralized ASC nanocomposites in laboratory conditions is the capability to produce biocompatible and biodegradable scaffolds for repairing bone defects in dental and orthopedic applications. In this study, mineralized ASC scaffolds were prepared by immersing the extracted white fish ASC in SBF solution in the presence and absence of SDBS surfactant. The characteristics of the mineralized ASC structure demonstrate that there are β-TCP nano-crystals on the fibril network, and that β-TCP particles can bond with ASC fibrils without any interface. Also, a higher thermal stability of mineralized ASC scaffold is achieved in the presence of anionic surfactant, SDBS. The turbidity-time curves show that the presence of SDBS, can not only accelerate the self-assembly process of collagen nano-fibrils, but also delay the process of growth and nucleation of β-TCP crystals by increasing the kinetic energy barrier. Finally, based on the results, mineralized ASC scaffold immersed in SBF in the presence and absence of SDBS surfactant can exhibit a bone-like structure. This work was supported by the Department of Marin Chemistry, Faculty of Marine & Oceanic Sciences, None declared. The solubility product of β-TCP as a function of temperature is [ At To obtain the activity of species, we calculate the ionic strength, I, according to Eq. In the presence of SDBS, the ionic strength is:  In SBF solution: In SBF in the presence of SDBS solution: Thus, the activity of the ions can be obtained by Eq. Then, the thermodynamic driving force, ∆μ, can be calculated as follow: References in Appendix A: [1]T. M. Gregory, E. C. Moreno, J. M. Patel, W. E. Brown, Solubility of β-Ca [2] Harris, D. C.