The work in this paper examines the effect of schwertmannite on the ferric sulphate/sulphuric acid leaching of copper from chalcopyrite ‘concentrates’ at 60°C.
                  Pyrrhotite, which is present in the Cobar concentrate, is more reactive than the chalcopyrite and it releases iron and consumes significant acid. Most of the leached iron precipitates as schwertmannite, which coats the Cobar chalcopyrite and other minerals present in the residue. For the MIM concentrate, jarosite is the main iron-containing precipitate.
                  Copper leaches more rapidly from the Cobar concentrate than the MIM concentrate, at a solids loading of 5.0% w/v. This occurs despite the significantly higher iron precipitate weight. Furthermore, similar copper extractions are obtained upon leaching the Cobar concentrate in the range 1.0–2.5% w/v, despite the schwertmannite concentrations ranging from ∼6% to ∼33%, respectively. These data suggest that schwertmannite does not hinder the rate at which copper leaches from chalcopyrite in ferric sulphate solutions.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The chemistry of chalcopyrite leaching in ferric sulphate media is generally well understood. However, the leaching rates are lower than those in chloride systems ( Gangue mineralogy is known to affect the leaching chemistry (Tiller-Jeffery, unpublished data). This raises the possibility that concentrates with different gangue minerals may yield different amounts, and phases, of iron precipitates, which could then affect the rate at which copper is extracted from chalcopyrite. This paper examines the initial stages (i.e. first 48 Mount Isa Mines Ltd. (MIM) and Cobar concentrates were used, the former as supplied, the latter ground in a ring mill five times, each time for 5 Leaching tests used the methodology described by The elemental compositions of the final partially-leached residues were determined by ICP-AES after fusion with a 12:22 lithium borate flux and dissolution. Sulphur analyses were determined by a LECO carbon and sulphur analyser, which combusted the sample and analysed the offgases. Sulphide analyses were obtained at a commercial laboratory. Elemental analyses of the concentrates are presented in Ammonium oxalate leaches were conducted using the procedure reported by Quantitative XRD (QXRD) analyses were conducted as described in Rietveld analysis used the commercially available TOPAS software (Bruker Advanced X-ray Solutions). Crystal structures for use in the Topas refinements were checked for accuracy by preparing mixtures of the pure phase with fluorite and comparing the calculated and actual concentrations. Crystallographic models used for these refinements were chalcopyrite ( The accuracy of the Rietveld methodology was further confirmed by analysing sulphide-specific standards. These results highlighted the effect of micro-absorption, and the importance of micronising the samples to obtain accurate QXRD data for phases such as pyrite. Compositional data for the poorly crystalline phases were obtained from QXRD analyses by comparing the observed elemental assays with those calculated from the Rietveld-derived mineralogies. The results are shown in SEM/EDS analyses were conducted as described in The mineralogical reactivities were estimated from QXRD data by using silicon as a tie element; variations in silicon wt% values quantified changes in mass that occurred due to dissolution and precipitation. Estimates of the error in the reactivity data were calculated from estimates of the errors in the QXRD data and the silicon-derived tie ratio. A reactivity value was deemed significant if it was outside the range spanned by the upper and lower limits of the error. QXRD analysis indicates the MIM concentrate and the ground Cobar concentrate consist predominately of chalcopyrite. Quartz and pyrite are the main accessory minerals in the MIM concentrate, while the Cobar concentrate contains significant pyrrhotite with minor sphalerite. The concentrate mineralogies are presented in SEM indicates that some of the pyrite is located within the MIM chalcopyrite grains. For the Cobar concentrate, the pyrrhotite and sphalerite particles generally appear as separate entities. This reduces the significance of a galvanic corrosion mechanism, which requires that sulphides of different reactivity are in electrical contact (see, for example, QXRD analyses indicate the partially-leached MIM residues contain none of the original gypsum and hexahydrite, which are water soluble at the pulp densities used ( QXRD analyses indicate the partially-leached Cobar residues all contain chalcopyrite and quartz, in addition to elemental sulphur and substituted jarosite, and possibly pyrrhotite and sphalerite ( The deficiencies in iron and sulphur in the QXRD calculated elemental analyses suggest the presence of schwertmannite. Ammonium oxalate leaching of the partially-leached Cobar concentrates, which form at 2.5% and 5.0% w/v, yield molar Fe/S ratios of 3.1 and 10.4; respectively. These ratios are outside the range observed for natural samples, although higher Fe/S ratios can occur in synthetic schwertmannite; SEM images ( The data in The reactivity data in The graphs in The actual pH at any given time depends both on the acid consumption of gangue minerals and pulp density and reaction rate. Leaching the MIM concentrate at 5.0% w/v results in a gradual increase in pH to ∼2.1, while the pH of the comparable Cobar leach solution rapidly increases to 2.2 then gradually decreases to 1.8 ( There are also significant differences between the iron concentration profiles because of the presence of reactive pyrrhotite. Leaching the MIM concentrate results in a gradual increase in iron concentration during the first eight hours, whereas leaching the Cobar concentrate results in a rapid increase in iron concentration and a subsequent decrease ( The leaching of chalcopyrite can be represented by Eqs. Pyrite leaches to ferrous iron and sulphate (Eq. At pH The schwertmannite coating forming on the Cobar concentrate may hinder the chalcopyrite leaching. However, the SEM images cannot indicate whether the schwertmannite coherently coats the chalcopyrite during leaching or during subsequent filtering and drying of the sample. It is therefore necessary to compare the copper extraction data. Differences in ferric concentration may affect the relative extraction rates for the MIM and Cobar experiments at 5.0% w/v, since the peak iron concentration for the 5% w/v Cobar leach was higher than that from the 5% w/v MIM leach ( If the iron precipitates hinder copper extraction by reducing the chalcopyrite surface area, then the chalcopyrite:iron precipitate ratio ( Comparing copper extraction data from Cobar concentrate, leached at 1.0–2.5% w/v, removes the difficulty of comparing extraction data from chalcopyrites with potentially different surface areas. These Cobar runs yield similar 48 These data suggest that the schwertmannite coating is sufficiently porous to allow ready access of reactants, regardless of whether it forms directly on the chalcopyrite surface or not. This paper examined the ferric sulphate/sulphuric acid leaching of two chalcopyrite concentrates at 60 This work was funded by CSIRO Minerals and the Parker Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions. The authors acknowledge the initial work conducted by Rachel Tiller-Jeffery, which examined the effect of gangue mineralogy on chalcopyrite reactivity, upon which this work was built. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Ian Davies, Milan Chovancek, Darren Atheis and Tuyen Pham, for obtaining the XRD traces and chemical analyses and Jian Li, for conducting some of the ammonium oxalate leaches and MIM, for supplying the concentrate.  