Surface nanobubbles have been identified to play an important role in a range of industries from mineral processing to food science. The formation of surface nanobubbles is of importance for mineral processing in the extraction of complex ores, such as those containing rare earth elements. This is due to the way minerals are extracted utilising froth flotation. In this study, surface nanobubbles were imaged using non-contact atomic force microscopy on a polished cross section containing rare earth minerals. Nanobubbles were found on synchysite under reagent conditions expected to induce hydrophobicity in rare earth minerals, which is required for efficient processing.
                  Synchysite –(Ce) is a rare earth fluorcarbonate mineral containing over 30% rare earth elements. Relatively little research has been conducted on synchysite, with only a few papers on its surface behaviour and flotation. The resulting nanobubbles were analysed and showed an average contact angle of 24° ± 8. These are in line with contact angles found on dolomite and galena by previous studies.Nanobubbles are tiny gaseous bubbles on the surface of hydrophobic materials. They have unusual properties including very small contact angles compared to macroscopic bubbles and extremely long lifetimes Recent challenges in mineral processing include the processing of finely grained complex ores for minerals containing key materials such as rare earth elements Rare earth elements (REE) are a critical material identified by the European Union as vital to future development Synchysite- (Ce) (CaCe(CO The effect of mineral processing reagents on nanobubbles have previously been investigated by a selection of work, focusing on a range of minerals In this paper, we investigate surface nanobubbles on the synchysite ore under defined aqueous reagent conditions including surfactant-type collectors. Although studies have investigated complex ores Non-contact atomic force microscopy (NC-AFM) was conducted at the Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology on a Park Systems (South Korea) XE100 AFM. Dynamic mode, amplitude modulated non-contact-AFM with the addition of Raman spectroscopy allowed the classification of different minerals, identifying synchysite and carbonatite gangue minerals within the ore sample. Nanobubbles were produced by the air water supersaturation method, i.e. cooling and then heating the aqueous solution to induce oversaturation. The solution was cooled to 5 °C and was then heated to between 30 °C and 40 °C on top of the mineral sample whilst located within the liquid cell. Collectors, used in froth flotation, including fatty acid (sodium oleate) and hydroxamic acid (AM810) in dosages and ratios favourable for bastnäsite flotation were included in the reagent mix, although the exact makeup of the aqueous solution is subject to non-disclosure. Methodology and experimental setup are the same as Owens 750 µL of aqueous solution was added to the liquid cell by injecting with a disposable plastic nozzle attached to a pipette. Although plastic contamination has been found in nanobubble research The ore containing synchysite from Songwe Hill, Malawi was provided by Mkango Resources Ltd. Songwe Hill is a carbonatite deposit within the Chilwa Alkaline Province, the main ore minerals are apatite and synchysite with the main gangue minerals being ankerite and calcite. For more details of the Songwe Hill deposit geology see Al Ali In The presence of nanobubbles on synchysite surface indicates that the surface was highly hydrophobic under this reagent regime. Nanobubble formation has previously been linked to reagents effecting the pinning of the nanobubbles both experimentally The number of images acquired was affected by the extreme topography of the sample. During the cleaning protocol of rubbing with DiaPro ¼ µm suspension the mineral sample had the strong possibility of splintering, causing gaps in the sample of over 30 µm. This splintering in the mineral caused extreme topography for NC-AFM imaging of holes in the sample between 50 and 500 nm. The splintering often caused resolution on the image to be lost. However, increased surface roughness has previously been shown to enable nanobubbles to survive under increased tapping force The contact angle can be calculated from the height and lateral length extracted from the spherical cap fitting. The contact angle of the nanobubbles has been linked to the oversaturation within the liquid by The average contact angle of the nanobubbles measured on synchysite was 24° ± 8° standard deviation. The large standard deviation in contact angle could be due to variation in line pinning highlighted by Ditscherlein Although the surface tension of macroscopic bubbles is affected by chemical reagents Recent studies of bastnäsite have shown it has similar surface behaviour under flotation conditions to synchysite Nanobubbles on the surface of hydrophobic synchysite provide an extension of earlier work on nanobubbles under reagent regimes In this work, we show the first results of nanobubbles in aqueous reagent regime, using anionic surfactants selectively adsorbing on the surface of a synchysite containing mineral sample. Synchysite is a rare earth fluorcarbonate mineral, which is economically important in a broad selection of deposits, located in countries ranging from Malawi to India. However, synchysite has previously been relatively unstudied. Nanobubbles were selected on the basis of height and their fit to a spherical cap model. The average contact angle of the nanobubbles on synchysite was 24°. This work builds on previous work on the size and distribution of nanobubbles at the surface of minerals under reagent regimes in order for selective hydrophobization. This adds to previous knowledge on other naturally hydrophobic surfaces such as graphite. These results are applicable for both nanobubble and rare earth processing research. This research was conducted thanks to funding by the Original data from this publication is available via open access at the British Geological Survey National Geoscience Data Centre, United Kingdom (NGDC) No conflicts to declare. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: