In mineral beneficiation, grinding is the final stage in the process of size reduction. The power consumed in this stage is higher when compared to other stages, owing to increased size reduction ratio. The primary purpose of grinding is to reduce the particle size to optimum so that mineral particles can be extracted more economically. Decision making plays an important role here, as it involves determining and comparing the energy that is required to perform the grinding process and also determining the amount of minerals lost as the coarser size particles are arrived at in mineral beneficiation. In general, Bond's work index is used to determine the grinding efficiency and also to calculate the power requirement. The process is very time consuming and it requires skilled labor and specialized mill. A systematic investigation was carried out to predict Bond's work index using simple field measurable properties of rocks. Tests were conducted on Basalt, Slate and Granite using a laboratory scale ball mill and rock properties namely density, Protodyakonov's strength index and rebound hardness number were determined. The results were analyzed using artificial neural networks and regression analysis. Mathematical equations were developed to predict Bond's work index based on rock properties using regression analysis, which resulted a very good correlation co-efficient values.In the current scenario, it is observed that around 70% of the required energy for the functioning of the typical mineral processing plant is being utilized for comminution process. In the developing countries around 5% of the total energy produced is consumed in the process of comminution ( In the recent years, mathematical models and simulation techniques have been developed by many investigators to replace or expand the Bond design method ( There are also various studies done by researchers to find the role of different design and operating parameters on the efficiency of ball mills and rod mills.  As there are various factors that influence the BWI, it is not possible to include all the parameters to derive a simple mathematical formula to find BWI. So, various researchers have tried to predict the BWI more accurately using some physical and or mechanical properties of rocks.  The following relationships listed in     Energy-size reduction relationship, i    As various researchers have used different properties, it is not possible to compare them directly. But mathematically an equation which gives higher r All the equations mentioned in Systematic laboratory investigations were carried out on three different rock types namely basalt, slate and granite. Eight samples of each kind were collected from different quarries. During sample collection, each rock block was inspected for macroscopic defects so that test specimens are free from fractures and joints. To determine the Bond's work index, the samples were prepared by crushing large lumps of basalt, slate and granite in a dodge type jaw crusher. A gape of 4.8 Determination of BWI is a three stage process which includes sieve analysis of feed product, determination of grindability index and the last stage comprises of sieve analysis of ground product of 3 consecutive stages which should have constant grindability index. Prior to carrying of the test, sufficient amount of − Fresh 700 Finally the finished product of the 3 consecutive cycles (almost constant G values) was taken and mixed. Further by using coning and quartering method a representative sample of about 250 Density of the rock samples was found according to International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) suggested method for porosity/density determination using saturation and buoyancy technique ( If the saturated-surface-dry mass of the samples is M Protodyakonov's strength index test was performed using standard procedure. A vertical cylinder apparatus which was 78 If h is the measured particles height in volume meter, n is number of impacts, then Protodyakanov's Strength Index (PSI) of the sample can be found by using the following equation: Rebound hardness test was performed according to ISRM suggested method ( Summary of the various tests conducted on all samples are given in Two approaches were used to analyze the laboratory experiments, namely Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and regression analysis. The ANN approach was used to validate the reliability of the data obtained from experiments and the regression analysis was used to find correlating mathematical equations. Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) known to be more accurate in data prediction based on effectiveness of training of network. However, a mathematical model cannot be developed from ANNs. But in order to ensure that the data obtained from laboratory experiments is error free, ANN approach is used here. A feed-forward backprop type ANN model was developed in Matlab R2015a software using nntool with input variables as density, PSI, RHN and the target variable as BWI. The Model was consisting of 2 layers one hidden layer with 10 neurons and one output layer ( The percentage of error between the actual values from laboratory experiments and ANN predicted values of BWI are given in Regression analysis is a statistical process of finding the relationship between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables. The coefficient of correlation was determined for individual relation such as density, Protodyakonov's strength index (PSI) and rebound hardness number (RHN) with the BWI as well as a combined relationship between BWI and all other parameters using Origin Pro 9 software. It was found that the second order polynomial correlation was giving the best result for individual relationships and a linear correlation was the best for combined relationships. Before proceeding to establishing correlations among variables, statistical analysis was conducted. The summary of statistical analysis is shown in Analysis of variance (ANOVA) technique was used to find the more influencing parameters and also to obtain desired response. The ANOVA analysis is shown in As the combined model has the lowest sum of squares as well as mean square values, this model will give better performance. Different regression models were developed correlating Bond's work index and density of rock (  Similarly, regression models were developed to correlate the BWI with Protodyakonov's strength index ( where, BWI The plot of BWI vs Protodyakonov's strength index (PSI) is shown in  A plot of BWI with rebound hardness number (RHN) is shown in The actual values and the predicted values of Bond's work index, along with the percentage of error for the Eqs.  The t-value with 95% of confidence level for all the independent and/or dependent parameters was analyzed. To authenticate the accuracy of the developed models, an attempt is made to validate them with the previous researcher's work. But none of the researchers have used density, PSI and Rebound hardness number to correlate with BWI. The In this validation the average PSI of the experimental data of different types of rock is converted into UCS by using following equation:  In two cases the percentage of error is less than 10 and in one case it is more than 10. In general, in any engineering applications up to 10% error is acceptable. In one case higher percentage of error also may not be significant because Haffez equation R Some more laboratory experiments were carried out using limestone. Same methodology was followed as explained in previous section. Details of various properties are given in In this study an attempt is made to predict the Bond's work index using simple rock properties such as density, Protodyakonov's strength index and rebound hardness number. These properties can be determined at the site as there is no need to carry the blocks to the laboratory to prepare the suitable samples. Experiments were conducted based on the defined standards and the subsequent analysis was carried out using Artificial Neural Network model and regression analysis. It was found a good correlation between Bond work index and the variables such as density, Protodyakonov's strength index and rebound hardness number. Equations were developed using three types of rock and validated with fourth type of rock. The following equations were the outcomes of the study carried, that have a correlation coefficient of 0.95, 0.91, 0.98 and 0.98 respectively, which are higher compared to the outcome of many other previous researcher's studies, indicating these equations can predict the BWI in a better way. BWI BWI BWI where, BWI ρ PSI RHN