A better understanding of the nanostructure of chitin in marine organisms has made possible new approaches to the production of items of biomedical interest capable of enhanced performances, in more eco-friendly and energy-saving ways than in the past. A new technique, electrospinning, intended to impart large superficial specific area to manufactured chitin/chitosan items, is also being developed.The author is grateful to Marilena Falcone, Central Library, Polytechnic University, Ancona, Italy, for assistance in handling the bibliographic information, and to Maria Weckx for help with the preparation of the manuscript. The structural characteristics The constant presence of chitin in the organic matrix associated with mother-of-pearl emphasizes the homology of the chitinous structure in the whole phylum of Mollusca. Chitin amounts to 12% of the organic matter in Polyplacophorans, or chitons, are an important group of molluscan invertebrates deemed to have retained many features of the molluscan body plan. Chitons, like limpets (Gastropoda), feed on microorganisms that they take from the rocks by the scraping action of the radula, a ribbon-like organ endowed with many transverse rows of mineralized teeth. The cusp epithelium is a specialized branch of the superior epithelium that surrounds the developing teeth of chitons and delivers the elements required for the formation of biominerals within the major lateral teeth. These biominerals are deposited within specific regions of the tooth in sequence. The onset of iron mineralization within the teeth is associated with dramatic changes in the ultrastructure of the apical cusp cell epithelium: the presence of ferritin-containing siderosomes, the position and number of mitochondria, and the structure of the cell microvilli are each linked to aspects of the mineralization process. The radular teeth of While the skeletons of demosponges are made of spongin, glass sponges (hexactinellids) possess silica-organic composites as the main material for their skeletal fibers. Both demosponges ( The natural associations of chitins with other biopolymers often recur in the literature: for example, most preparations of hyaluronan have chitooligomers at their reducing end that act as templates for hyaluronan synthesis. In this chapter, some of the most impressive chitin-based nanostructures of living organisms are concisely described with mention to their performances, as well as the advances in the exploitation of the nano-sized chitinous renewable resources. At the time of biosynthesis, the nascent chitin is amorphous but crystallizes as soon as conditions recur for the formation of the tissue, which are requirements for either α- or β-polymorph dictated by stiffness or flexibility, need for controlled partial deacetylation, linking to other biopolymers, mineralization, and quinone tanning. Chitin nanofibril deposition is tuned to permit morphogenesis and tissue growth: as a consequence, the microfibers are made of chitin nanocrystals regularly arranged in a chitin matrix of lower degree of crystallinity. Chitin synthase, being a processive enzyme, remains bound to the polymer through the polymerization steps that add single GlcNAc units to the nonreducing end of the growing polymer. Such a chain-extension mechanism, which has also been demonstrated for cellulose and hyaluronan, is general for glycosyltransferases that belong to the glycosyltransferase 2 family. β-Chitin is found in association with proteins in squid pens: the structural characteristics of chitin from β-Chitin also occurs in the tubes synthesized by pogonophoran and vestimentiferan worms ( The pens of the squids With a view to fibrillation of β-chitin, cationization of the amino groups present on the crystallite surfaces of the squid pen β-chitin, under acid conditions was adopted as a valid approach: nanofibers 3–4 A particularly pure form of β-chitin is found in the crystalline spines of the marine diatom The mechanism of hemostasis induction by chitin microfibrils is redundant insofar as various biochemical reactions are involved simultaneously and therefore the While the Cultures of Native diatom-derived pGlcNAc fibers have average length dimensions of ∼80 The α-Chitin is the most abundant polymorph; it occurs in fungal and yeast cell walls, in the arthropod cuticle in general, including insects, chelicerates, and myriapods. Studies on the crystallographic texture of the crystalline α-chitin matrix in the biological composite material forming the exoskeleton of the lobster The hard chitinous tissues found in some invertebrate marine organisms are paradigms for robust, lightweight materials. Examples are the oral grasping spines of Chaetognaths, In the crystal structures of α- and β-chitins, the chains are organized in sheets where they are tightly held by a number of intrasheet hydrogen bonds. This tight network, dominated by the rather strong C–O… NH hydrogen bonds, maintains the chains at a distance of about 0.47 The main constituents of the beak of the jumbo squid, Chitin fibers in crustacean shells are associated with carbonate that diffuses and precipitates after the fibrous component has been excreted and stabilized; carbonic anhydrase is synthesized in relation with the control of calcification: maximum activity is attained during the initial stages of calcification in producing carbonate ions. Analogous phenomena occur with collagen fibers and calcium phosphate in bones where the supporting organic component is made of preformed nanometer- to micrometer-size elongated particles arranged into supramolecular structures with geometry analogous to that of some liquid crystals. The arthropod cuticle is a multilayered extracellular matrix produced by the epidermis during embryogenesis and molting. To trace the cellular mechanisms of cuticle differentiation in the crustacean The smallest subunits in the structural hierarchy of the cuticle of the lobster The characteristic for the lobster cuticle is the presence of a well-developed pore canal system with many such canals penetrating the plywood structure. The pore canals contain long soft tubes. The fibers of each chitin–protein plane are arranged around the cavities of the pore canals, building a structure that resembles a twisted honeycomb. In the hard parts of the lobster, the exo- and endo-cuticles are mineralized with calcium carbonate in the form of small crystallites a few nanometers in diameter. The beak hardness and stiffness are at least twice those of the most competitive synthetic organic materials and comparable to those of The current knowledge of cuticle derives from the application of biochemistry to the structure formation and from the application of principles of materials science to the natural structures. The study of the chitinous nanostructures inspires artificial chemical and biochemical devices useful in the medical and veterinary fields. Crustacean chitins were submitted to regiospecific oxidation at C-6 with NaOCl in the presence of the stable nitroxyl radical 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (Tempo®) and NaBr at 25 6-Oxychitin was tested in the regeneration of bone The nanochitin denomination used here indicates chitin nanocrystals, otherwise called nanofibrils or whiskers, the main crystalline constituents of α- and β-chitin. The experience gained with 6-oxychitin stimulated several researchers to take advantage of the negatively charged carboxylate group as an aid for the transformation of chitin into nanochitin, thanks to the electrostatic repulsion expected to contribute to loosening chain-to-chain associations. Chitin nanocrystals dispersed in water were prepared with the aid of Tempo®. When the amount of NaClO added as co-oxidant in the oxidation was 5.0 The same procedure was applied to β-chitins from tubeworm and squid pen, to prepare chitin nanofibrils. Water-insoluble fractions of the Tempo®-oxidized β-chitins were obtained in various ratios by controlling the addition level of NaClO used as the primary oxidant in the oxidation. The water-insoluble fractions of the partially oxidized tubeworm β-chitins, when they had carboxylate groups of 0.18–0.25 Certain pretreatments of the original chitin (soaking in warm water or reacetylation or reprecipitation) changed its crystal structure from α to β. After pretreatment, the oxidation of the chitin was easier to effect and the yield increased from 36% to 97%, while the molecular weight was about 40 As opposed to the behavior of chitins, the modifications of chitosans presented many difficulties and showed the adverse effect of the amino groups of chitosan on this reaction. The specific oxidation of a bioactive derivative of chitosan was then achieved by the oxidation of For cellulose and chitin, the monocrystals appear as rod-like nanofibrils whose dimensions depend on the biological source (in the case of starch they consist of platelet-like nanoparticles). Titrations of suspensions at 0.6 and 3.1 Since the time of the early isolation of chitin nanofibrils, the recipe based on boiling 3 In line with the approach illustrated above, finely milled α-chitin powder (< The advantageous features of the newly developed α-chitin nanofibrils are as follows: (1) commercially available pure α-chitins can be used as the starting materials; (2) nanofibrils are obtained in high yields (85–90%); (3) the rod-like morphology of the nanofibrils supports the high yields, because α-chitin nanofibrils prepared by acid hydrolysis or Tempo®-mediated oxidation have spindle-like morphologies with a larger distribution range of widths; (4) the α-chitin nanofibril dispersions developed in this study had high UV–vis transmittance hence high transparency, indicating individualization of α-chitin fibrils; and (5) the procedure is simpler and safer compared with the traditional one and with the Tempo®-based procedure; hence, considering the higher yields, potential applications can be expanded to numerous fields. It should be remarked that the most recent approaches resulted in the preparation of nanochitosan, besides nanochitin: in fact, Watthanaphanit The data on nanochitin inspired applications in the area of wound dressing. The never-dried chitin nanofibrils in suspension were incorporated into chitosan glycolate by adding to the suspension the desired amount of chitosan powder and glycolic acid crystals. No aggregation or precipitation of chitin nanofibrils was observed in this medium even after several months from preparation. Thus the dressing included a flexible support made of dibutyryl chitin nonwoven (0.8 Many kinds of chitosan nanoparticles have been developed: they are far from being crystalline as a point of difference from nanofibrils, but are certainly suitable as drug vehicles. For example, the association of an active molecule to a nanocarrier allows the molecule to intimately interact with specific ocular structures, to overcome ocular barriers, and to prolong its residence in the target tissue. Those nanosystems have been adapted specifically for the delivery of hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs and also polynucleotides onto the eye surface. The results confirm the potential of this delivery platform and the subsequent need of a full preclinical evaluation in order to satisfy the specific regulatory demands of this mode of administration. Chitosan composites result in a new class of biomaterials that possess mechanical, physicochemical, and functional properties, which have potential for use in advanced biomedical imaging applications. The strengths, limitations, and challenges of molecular imaging as well as applications of chitosan nanoparticles in the field of molecular imaging have been discussed. Reviews on spinning methodologies and electrospun fibers were published. Chitin dissolves in Electrospun chitin/poly(glycolic acid) blend nanofibers in hexafluoro-2-propanol were investigated to fabricate biodegradable nanostructured scaffolds: the nanofibrous mats, particularly the one that contained 25% PGA and 75% chitin with bovine serum albumin coating, offered excellent cell attachment and spreading for normal human fibroblasts. Almost all sutures in current usage only play one role, that is, to mechanically tie wound tissues together. Composite nanofibers obtained through coaxial electrospinning initiated the development of a new type of biodegradable sutures. Electrospun poly( On the other hand, the preparation of a nanoscaffold is based on the morphology change of chitin whisker to chitosan nanoscaffold with degree of deacetylation as high as 98%. The deacetylation of chitin whiskers gives a colloidal solution of chitosan. The viscosity increase of a chitosan nanoscaffold as compared to that of the chitin whiskers suggests that the scaffold network performs as a polymer bulk in the solution. Surface functionalization of the chitosan nanoscaffold with lactose or maltose via a heterogeneous system in water at room temperature results in a soft and cotton-like modified chitosan containing mesopores suitable for tissue engineering. The incremented surface area, pore volume, and pore size, studied by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller gas adsorption, provided information about the porous structure of chitosan. Further utilization of chitosan nanofibrous mats electrospun from chitosan solutions in trifluoroacetic acid with or without dichloromethane as the modifying cosolvent was found to be limited by the loss of the fibrous structure when the mats were in contact with neutral or weak basic aqueous solutions due to complete dissolution of the mats; The cases described in this chapter demonstrate that the treatment of chitin underwent a critical evaluation based on convergent cultural interests in marine biology and materials chemistry. As a consequence, new products derived from chitin have been added to the relatively long list of chitin-based commercial products for biomedical, veterinary, biotechnological, and innovative uses. Among the latter are those in the form of nanochitin/nanochitosan from crustaceans and the diatom microfibrils. Artificial nanofibers are also being produced by electrospinning chitin and chitosan solutions. All of these recent products have in common unmatched large specific surface area that greatly enhances their biochemical and technical performances. More or less directly, these findings have stimulated interest in chitin/chitosan nanoparticles that assume various shapes as elaborated as those of liposomes. In all cases examined in this chapter, substantial reductions in energy expenditure and in environmental impact have been obtained. The same could be said for chitin-derived biosensors, biofuel cells, and bioelectronic devices.