The experimental value of Avrami exponent during polymorphic nanocrystallization deviates from the theoretical prediction of the Kolmogorov–Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (KJMA) isothermal kinetics. The assumption of negligible nuclei volume, implicit in KJMA, is violated for all such transformations involving nano-sized grains. A discrete adaptation of the KJMA model is used to study the effect of the non-zero nuclei volume on nanocrystallization kinetics. Transformations initiated by homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation are analyzed under constant nucleation and growth rate conditions. For homogeneous nucleation, a universal scaling relation with respect to finite nuclei size is found. In contrast to this, for the heterogeneous case a series of linear scaling relations are observed with respect to the nucleation conditions.Recent studies on the nanocrystallization of bulk metallic glasses have shown that the transformation, in many cases, is polymorphic The KJMA model considers transformation in an infinite medium. The linear size of the system is much larger than the distance between the nuclei of the new phase. The nuclei, assumed to have negligible initial radius, are randomly formed over the volume of the system. Stable nuclei of the product phase undergo isotropic growth at a constant rate. Therefore, each nucleus gives rise to a single grain. A growing grain may encounter impingement with other grains. Growth ceases at the point of impingement. To avoid the complexity of monitoring such an impingement process, the KJMA model uses a novel concept of extended volume ( There are two assumptions of Eq. The significance of nuclei volume contribution to The condition Discrete models provide an attractive way for studying the effect of finite volume of the nucleus through spatial discretization. The process of phase transformation being continuous, discrete time steps ( In this paper we present a discrete adaptation of the KJMA model under constant We succinctly deal with the terms that are relevant to discussion of results of computation. Most of these are available in any standard textbook of phase transformation To study the effect of The homogeneous nucleation rate The form of Eqs. All computations are done in terms of In case of transformation by homogeneous nucleation the phantom nuclei concept is used For particular For heterogeneous nucleation the nuclei are formed only in the untransformed volume containing the unutilized nucleants in the parent phase. The corresponding nucleation rate is defined as the number of nuclei per unit time per unit untransformed volume As mentioned earlier, we assume that the nucleants are distributed randomly in the volume of the system. Each nucleant provides a site for only one nucleation event. The total number of nuclei formed in heterogeneous nucleation is always smaller than that possible by homogeneous nucleation. Nucleation rate assumes meaning till nucleants are available. Further, the growth of nuclei is computed assuming their growth to retain the shape till the end of transformation. If we denote The corresponding Computations are done for systems with We first determine the magnitude of The values of the parameters All computations for systems with  From For this case too, the magnitude  To quantitatively delineate the effect of finite  We observe that the value of As mentioned earlier, deviations in early stages of transformation have been reported in literature during experimental investigations The scaling relations given by Eqs. The shapes of plots in Different intercepts are obtained in We have studied the effect of discretization and non-zero critical nuclei radius on KJMA kinetics under homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation conditions. To determine the limit of time discretization for continuous growth, the scaling relation describing the convergence of One of the authors (I. Sinha) thanks the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi, India for financial support of this work under SERC Fast track scheme. RKM acknowledges the support received from DST, New Delhi under NSTI scheme. We thank Professors K. Chattopadhyay (IISc, Bangalore), S.N. Ojha, G.V. Sastry, N.K. Mukhopadhyay (BHU) and Dr B.N. Sarma for their interest in this work. We express our gratitude to Professor S. Lele, Rector (BHU) for his encouragement.