For guidance on relationships between caving depth and surface subsidence, a comprehensive database was developed after an exhaustive search of published data from cave mining operations from around the world. The distribution of data was found to largely focus on caving angles and macro deformations; very little empirical data exists on the extent and magnitudes of smaller surface displacements. The data clearly show that caving-induced surface deformations tend to be discontinuous and asymmetric due to large movements around the cave controlled by geologic structures, rock mass heterogeneity and topographic effects. The data also show that as undercut depth increases for a given extraction volume, the magnitude and extent of the caved zone on surface decreases. However, numerical modeling indicates that this is only the case for macro deformations and the extent of smaller displacements actually increases as a function of undercut depth. The results presented caution against relying on existing empirical design charts for estimates of caving-induced subsidence where small strain subsidence is of concern, as the data being relied upon does not properly extrapolate beyond the macro deformations (i.e., caving angles) that make up the majority of the observations. The findings also suggest that the extent and magnitudes of subsidence may be underestimated if the analysis adopted neglects the influence of geological structures and assumes symmetrical surface displacements above the undercut.Block caving is increasingly being favored as a mining method for maximizing net present value (NPV) from large, lower grade ore bodies, especially as companies target deeper resources or transition underground from open pits that have reached the end of their mine life. As a mass mining method, block caving results in significant ground collapse and extensive surface deformations. Yet despite having been in use for more than 100 years, there has been limited research conducted regarding the impact of caving on surface subsidence. Of concern is the locating of mine infrastructure on surface or the impact ground deformations may have on protected areas neighboring the mine property. Damage of surface infrastructure, together with increased dilution due to larger than expected caving angles, is often the cause for additional capital and operation expenditures. To better understand and assess these potential geo-risks, a database has been developed based on a thorough review of public domain sources reporting subsidence values related to both historic and present-day cave mining operations (including block, panel and sub-level caving). Empirical databases provide a means to learn from case histories, discover causal relationships between different contributing factors, establish guidelines for design, and to help provide a starting point to undertake more sophisticated analyses like numerical modeling. One of the most commonly cited is Laubscher’s method The caving angle referred to by Laubscher is defined by Van As et al. The empirical database presented here was developed to more fully examine the relationships between these zones of surface subsidence and depth of undercut, together with the key factors that influence them. Data relating to geology, topography, orebody type and undercut geometry were specifically targeted to analyze their effects in promoting asymmetry and discontinuous caving-induced subsidence. Where key relationships are revealed, illustrative numerical models are used to help draw conclusions to guide preliminary assessments during the planning stages of future new mining projects where surface subsidence is of concern. A thorough search of the published literature, university theses, and government reports (e.g., U.S. Bureau of Mines)  Based on these data, two interesting trends are evident. The use of block caving was first reported in 1895 in the Michigan iron and copper mines where large blocks of ore were undercut, allowing the ore to mine itself under gravity and crush through comminution to a size suitable for handling This is reflected in earlier databases on subsidence related to mass mining ( These existing databases were used as an initial starting point with each cited source (i.e., data observation) being consulted to independently review, confirm and extract additional data regarding caving angle asymmetry. One of the limiting factors of the previous databases is the consideration of only those sources that report subsidence data directly. This was seen to involve only 5% of the caving operations populating the UBC database. Closer inspection of the different published sources for each mine property revealed that in many cases, detailed cross-sections were provided that contained indirect information relating to the disturbance on surface caused by caving. In many cases, a caving angle could be measured from a scaled map or section and in some cases, a fracture initiation angle. The use of indirect data increased the number of mine properties accounted for to 44, with the number for block and panel caves (28) tripling those reported in previous databases. Furthermore, in several cases, multiple observations were provided for the same mine property, either for multiple blocks or different mine levels again almost doubling the number of data points considered (see totals in parentheses in  From the database, a subset of 47 direct and indirect subsidence observations were analyzed to determine the caving and fracture initiation angles for each. These are reported in Appendix A. References are provided for each data entry and a detailed background description for each is provided in Appendix B. Excluded from the analysis were those operations involving caving into a deep open pit. Where several angles are reported for different stages of cave development, only the greatest values (worst case) are reported. Emphasis was also placed on data provided in the form of cross-sections or plan view maps showing the extent of caving, surface cracks, or subsidence (see Appendix B for examples of data sources used). It was found that in many cases what was reported as a break angle or caving angle by the author(s) was actually the angle of draw (90° minus caving angle) estimated underground, as opposed to that considering the propagation of the cave to surface and the corresponding angle of its surface expression. Based on the definitions in  In each case, the extent of each line segment depicts the degree of asymmetry present when measuring the caving or fracture initiation angles from opposing sides of the undercut. Thus the range of angles reported in  The influence of topography can also be clearly demonstrated using comparative numerical models. Typical surface profiles relative to the location of the undercut beneath were derived based on inspection of those in the caving database (Appendix B). These were then examined using the 2-D finite-element code Phase2 The modeling results show that when assuming a flat topography ( As for the influence of faults, in cases where the surface topography above the caving area is symmetric ( Details of the site geology for the different cases populating the database were limited to that reported in the sources consulted. For a number of these, there was no geology data provided requiring alternative sources to be used to obtain basic geological information for the given mine property. The lack of detailed data prevented any extensive analysis into the influence of geological factors on caving angle, and instead, correlations were drawn using the only information that was consistently provided—that of the ore resource being mined. Further development of the database to populate it with more detailed geological data may make it possible to better clarify and separate relationships between undercut depth, caving angles and geological influences. However, for the purpose of the analysis carried out in this study, the ore body resource was used as a simple proxy for mine geology.  Using orebody type and mineral resource as a proxy for geology, A thorough examination of the block and panel caving subsidence data compiled shows that the distribution of data is heavily weighted towards caving angles and macro deformations, Very little data is reported on the extent and magnitudes of smaller surface displacements (also known as micro deformation). This empirical bias towards macro-deformations is largely a function of the state of practice and measurement resolution available at the time of the investigation. The majority of the detailed investigations reporting on caving-induced ground deformations are more than 50 years old, and as such, rely heavily on visual mapping observations and low-resolution levelling surveys. Furthermore, the focus of the reported investigations was primarily placed on the area immediately above the undercut, thus characterizing the caving zone, and in some cases extending the survey outwards towards the edges of mine property to incorporate the fracture initiation zone. To examine the potential impact of this sampling bias better, specifically with respect to the influence of undercut depth on the extent of surface subsidence, a series of conceptualized numerical models were developed. To be able to fully compare both discontinuous zones of macro-deformations (caving and fracture initiation angles) and continuous zone small strain micro-deformations (subsidence angles) a hybrid FEM-DEM approach incorporating brittle fracture capabilities was adopted using the commercial code ELFEN   Another key outcome from these results is the influence of undercut depth on the extent of smaller displacements. Here the opposite trend as observed for caving angle is seen with subsidence angles decreasing with increasing undercut depth. For the 500 This has important practical implications. If the location of critical infrastructure, or similarly a hazard assessment of the extent of caving-induced ground deformations, is based on empirical data then these will be biased towards observations of large-scale ground disturbance and collapse and would suggest that the impact of caving on surface is reduced for deeper undercuts. However, smaller subsidence may be of equal concern and its extent actually increases with undercut depth. These results therefore caution against relying solely on existing empirical design charts and databases for estimating the extent of caving-induced subsidence, especially where small strain subsidence is of concern, as the data being relied on does not correctly extrapolate beyond the macro deformations (i.e., caving angles) that make up the majority of the observations. A detailed and comprehensive database of cave mining operations and caving-induced ground deformation observations has been developed to guide empirical relationships between caving depth and its impact on surface. The data shows that asymmetry in caving-induced subsidence is prevalent and largely controlled by topography and geology of the ore deposit and host rock. Where design calculations are carried out using methods that assume, directly or indirectly, symmetrical ground deformations relative to the projection of the undercut footprint at surface, caution must be taken to not under-predict their magnitudes and extent. The availability and quality of subsidence data was also seen to be deficient as little attention has been paid to the measurement of subsidence angles compared to caving angles. The data on caving angles suggests that as undercut depth increases, the magnitude and extent of the caved zone on surface decreases. However, numerical modeling results indicate that the opposite is true with respect to smaller displacements and that subsidence angles increase and are farther reaching with increasing undercut depths. The results therefore caution against relying on existing empirical design charts and databases for estimating the extent of caving-induced subsidence where small strain subsidence is of concern, as the data being relied upon does not properly extrapolate beyond the macro deformations (i.e., caving angles) that make up the majority of the observations. Thus, with the new generation of deep block/panel caving projects being planned, and the higher geo-risk profiles being carried due to the capital investments and development times required, the need is clear for more detailed measurements to better understand cave–surface interactions as a function of undercut depth and potential asymmetry. This work was funded through a Collaborative Research and Development grant from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), in partnership with Rio Tinto, and a grant from the Centre for Excellence in Mining Innovation (CEMI). The authors would like to thank Dr. Andre van As (Rio Tinto Technical Services), and Dr. Peter Kaiser and Keith Bullock (CEMI), for their technical guidance and assistance. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at  