Dawson type heteropolyanions form complexes with transition metals. These mixed complexes possess some remarkable electrocatalytic properties. Being soluble in aqueous and organic phases, they are used in homogeneous catalysis. In the setting of the recuperation and the regeneration of these complexes, the extraction of a mixed heteropolyanion (α2P2W12Mo5O61Fe)7− is the subject of this work. This extraction was carried out by emulsified liquid membrane using (SPAN80) as surfactant and (TIBA) as extractant. Sulfuric acid was used as the internal phase. The stability of the emulsion was studied according to different parameters and the extracting efficiency in optimal conditions was found to be 70%.Since lately, polyoxometallates often known as heteropolyanions (HPA), are processing more and more applications well in homogeneous catalysis as in heterogeneous catalysis. The most utilized species are those of Keggin (PX The use of the polyanionic soluble species in homogeneous catalysis thus requires a treatment of recycling or regeneration adapted to separate catalyst from the products of the studied reaction. This operation constitutes a crucial stage in the continuation of the catalytic process. So the technique of separation by emulsified liquid membrane must be applied. From this point of view, an application was already carried out on the HPA of the type Dawson–Wells (α The process of extraction with emulsified liquid membrane (ELM) which was produced for the first time by N.N. Li in 1968 By means of an extraction process using emulsified liquid membrane, the objective of this study was to recover a HPA of the type Dawson–Wells (α To be ensured of the emulsion (W/O) stability, the method of the tracer which is in this case H The membrane intended to extract the complex (α Emulsions were carried out by means of an homogenizer ULTRA-TURRAX T 18-10; A volume of 10 According to the assessment matter (Eq. The heteropolyanion (α The selected membrane was made up 20% of SPAN80 and 25% of TIBA in heptane as solvent. The internal phase was a solution of H To determine optimal conditions giving a stable emulsion, the following factors were followed: concentration of the tracer, stirring velocity, ratio of the volume of the membrane on the volume of the aqueous phase interns (O/A), ratio of the volume of the external phase on volume of the emulsion ( The concentration of the acid from 0.5 to 2 The obtained experimental results ( Using fixed concentration of acid in the internal phase (1.5 The stirring velocity had not a great influence on the rupture rate; indeed, until a speed of 500 In the conditions chosen up to now, the effect of the ratio O/A of volumes (membrane: (O) and intern aqueous phase: (A)) was followed. The results which were obtained, showed that the increase in ratio O/A implies a reduction in the rupture rate ( For The increase in the mass of extractant which has a raised viscosity, improves the stability of the emulsion. Indeed, starting from 5 Values of 25% of TIBA and 20% of SPAN80 will be thus selected for the extraction. A comparative study between two thinners According to time of contact from 2 to 12 The extraction of the complex by emulsified liquid membrane has been studied according to the following factors: ratio of the organic phase on the internal phase (O/A), stirring velocity, ratio of the external phase volume on the emulsion volume ( In order to study the influence of the O/A ratio on the kinetics of extraction, different values from 1 to 3 of this active ratio have been reported. Results of the influence of the O/A ratio on the kinetics of extraction are represented by curves in Results showed that for ratios (O/A) higher than the unit, the kinetics of the extraction becomes slow, this phenomenon can be explained by the increase of the membrane thickness involving an increase of the thickness of the inter-facial film of the globules and consequently, it slows down the diffusion of the aqueous solution in the globules. The optimal ratio O/A of extraction is thus equal to the unit and the corresponding yield is equal to 65%. Speeds used were: 150, 200, 250, 300 and 350 The increase of stirring velocity beyond 250 In this experiment, ratios of volumes which varied from 3 to 10 (volume of the external phase on the volume of emulsion), have different effects on the extraction of iron ( The mass percentages of extractant in the membrane, tested were: 25%, 30%, 35%. The results obtained are illustrated in The mass of extractant increases the viscosity of the membrane that slows down the kinetics of extraction. The optimal mass in this case and which gives the best yield (70%), is 5 In this experiment the kinetics of extraction of iron was studied according to different pH ( The poor performance at low pH could be explained by the competition of H For a stirring velocity of 300 After using Dawson–Wells heteropolyanions (HPA) as catalysts, their recovery becomes an essential stage before a probable industrialization of the process. The extraction by emulsified liquid membrane of the HPA (α Concentration of the acid in the interne phase: 1.5 Stirring velocity: 250 O/A ratio: 1.  Percentage of extractant in the membrane: 25%. Percentage of surfactant in the membrane: 20%. pH of the external phase: 6. Thinner: