This study investigates the deformation and the resultant pressure relief of highly gassy coal seams where a double seam mining operation takes place at lower depths at the Wulan Coal Mine, China. In order to predict the depressurization effect in the overlying coal seams, we simulate the extraction process by constructing a scaled model in the laboratory using similar rock materials. Analyses of experimental results concluded that due to the mining-induced stress redistribution, the pressure within target coal seams, which were 109m above the mined seams, could be fully relieved to attain the statutory approval for gas drainage.
                  In addition to scaled-model studies, computational modeling studies were conducted using UDEC (Universal Distinct Element Code), which showed that the features of deformation resulting from the double-seam extraction were different from that of in the case of single-seam extraction. The results of the numerical studies revealed that in addition to the panel margin on the air return side, areas near the intake entry could also be considered as borehole drilling positions. Besides, it was found that the gob of the extracted seams below the gassy one provided a “buffering effect” for the would-mined protective coal seam and that the depressurization effect was largely weakened.
                  The laboratorial findings are instructive to the field practice of methane drainage. During the mining operation, a “displacement comparison method” was adopted to measure the dilated amount of protected coal seams, and as expected, the maximum dilation percentage was much more than 0.2% — the critical value upon which the target coal seam is appropriately depressurized to allow gas drainage to be safely and effectively implemented.The outburst of coal and gas is one of the most significant safety hazards in coal industry. One third of world's outbursts have occurred in China causing a large number of casualties and property loss ( There are several ways to control and prevent coal and gas outbursts such as dilution of methane through mine ventilation, drilling boreholes for gas drainage, water infusion and extracting protective coal seams ( Extraction of a protective seam results in redistribution and relieving of some of the stress around underlying or overlying rock mass, thereby establishing new stress equilibrium. Reestablishment of a new stress state will inevitably lead to the changes of structure and properties of rock masses ( In pressure relief using extraction of protective seams, the coal seam which overlies the target seam is designated as the upper protective seam, whereas the underlying coal layer is called the lower protective seam. After the mining of lower protective seam, the resultant rock strata subsidence above can be divided into three types of zones, in ascending order as caved zone, fractured zone and continuous deformation zone ( The fluid-flow network inside the fractured rock strata is effective to free the gas content of the seam and is permeable for its flow. Previous engineering practices have demonstrated that in many cases by employing the surface borehole drainage, or gob gas drainage, the methane that is contained within this zone can be effectively recovered and commercially utilized ( The first application of protective seam mining practice originated in the former Soviet Union. Since then, this technique has been the focus of many research studies to identify the mechanisms governing the onset of underground coal and gas outbursts and explore potential mitigation approaches. Especially in countries which suffer frequent underground coal and gas outbursts. Physical relationships regarding the impact of exploitation of lower protective seam and its benefits on gas migration has been investigated by computational or experimental methods ( As A protective coal seam, which is more than 50 In the case of a coal field with multi-layer protective seams, this effect needs to be maximized by extraction of multiple protective seams, if conditions permit. Presently, multi-seam extraction has been widely applied in Russia and China ( This paper introduces the methodology and the research findings concluded from the study on the prevention of coal and gas outbursts at Wulan mine operated by Shenhua Energy Group. In particular, we present an analysis of the predicted pressure relief effect that may be achieved by extracting distant double protective seams. A specific operation scenario was finally optimized for field practice after a series of investigation, and the in-situ measured data proved a dramatic reduction of coalbed pressure which is conducive to degasification. Wulan mine is one of the Chinese coal mines, which operates with potential of coal and gas outbursts and as such it is strictly monitored by the government. The mine is located in Inner Mongolia ( Wulan coal field stretches from South to North at length of 5.3 Among the most productive coal seams in this field the #2 and the #8 seams are most prone to outbursts, while the #3 and the #7 seams are not as much. The methane content of each coal seam is more than 10 In Wulan mine, the specific mining process was changed from the traditional mining sequence method, which was descending, to mining coal seams #7 and #8 first. With this change, the gas content and pressures of target coal seams #2 and #3 could be significantly reduced prior to their extraction in order not to threaten mining safety any more. The average vertical distance from coal seam #7 to coal seams #3 and #2 are 73 Traditionally, only the coal seams where coal and gas outbursts have occurred previously are defined as target coal seams. However, in this study, despite the absence of outburst occurrence, coal seam #3 was also considered as a target coal seam, because of its high methane content and the need for lowering it to a permissible level for safe mining. Therefore, an investigation was undertaken to find out pressure relief characteristics of #3 and #2 coal seams after affected by extraction of #7 and #8 coal seams. The principal objective was to investigate the pressure relief effect on coal seams #2 and #3 while working faces 5757 (in coal seam 7#) and 5857 (in coal seam 8#) were successively extracted. The lengths of coal seams #2 and #3 along the dip are 200 Due to the remoteness and inaccessibility of unmined coal seams, it was a challenge for us to observe the development of internal coal and rock fractures and record the depressurization process directly. To bridge this barrier, scaled laboratory models and/or computational numerical simulation methods were employed. A coal–rock mass physical model was constructed at a given scale by using the materials which have similar mechanical properties with the coal and rock masses underground to simulate the actual sequence of mining with the similar boundary conditions. This simulation was helpful to mimic and to directly observe the internal displacement and stress variation of the overlying rock strata during the coal seam extraction in a short test cycle. The scaled laboratory model was also attached with test devices to investigate the mechanisms that promote the depressurization effect of the target seams when the double distant protective seams are mined underneath. In order to quantify the development of inter-layer separations, Physical models can effectively simulate the large-scale engineering projects, if built correctly, and the tests provide the researchers with information that is inaccessible in field for observation and quantification. Physical model simulations have been widely applied in the geotechnical engineering as well as in mining research. Physical models for simulation of double protective seam extraction were constructed with a series of similarity standards such as geometry, mechanical properties materials and boundary conditions. The similarity criteria are principally expressed by the similarity coefficients, defined as the ratio of some important parameters to model parameters ( In this study, the geometric scale coefficient ( In these experiments, we only simulated the rock strata at depths from 95 In order to conduct the physical model tests, twenty two displacement sensors were placed along 4 parallel observation lines. These lines were close to the roofs and floors of coal seams #2 and #3 in order to measure the displacement of rock strata as shown in Initially, coal seam #7 was removed from the model to simulate its mining. The mining direction of coal seam #7 was downward from the return entry towards the intake entry of working 5757. Thereafter the model was allowed to rest for two days until the overlying rock of coal seam 7# had fully caved and the model regained its stress equilibrium. Then coal seam #8 was removed to simulate its extraction. Increase in thickness (dilation) of coal as a result of the external stresses indicates opening of the fractures of the coal seam itself. Based on the previous practices of protective coal seam exploitation that was attempted by Chinese coal mines, it was found that the gas permeability increased drastically to allow methane drainage from these seams, should if the thickened proportion (we term it dilation percentage hereinafter) of the coal seams exceeds over 0.2% ( After the successive extraction of coal seams #7 and #8 in the physical model as explained in previous sections, the development of fracture zones within the laboratory simulation model can be seen in Based on the observations of physical model tests, the fracture development in overlying rock strata, during extractions of coal seams #7 and #8, can be characterized as: fractures first expanding from bottom to upper layers with the lower caved volume gradually being compacted by fallen rock. Due to the stresses occur during the previous step, the deformation of coal seams prevail with generation of voids and fractures between neighboring strata. It should be mentioned that due to different rock properties and subsidence degree across various horizons, dilation or compression will occur across the deformation zone. The amounts of deformation are shown in   Experimental results showed that during extraction of coal seam #8, dilation continued in coal seams #2 and #3. However, the depressurization effect in target coal seams induced by the extraction of coal seam 8# differed from what it was when coal seam #7 remained intact. In order to investigate this difference, physical model tests were effective, but the cost and time spent on model reconstruction were both too much. Besides, the results obtained from the scaled models were insufficient to present the details of full range of displacements due to lack of installed displacement sensors with enough density. Therefore, we applied UDEC 3.1 (Universal Distinct Element Code), which is a computational analysis application package developed by The UDEC software is commonly used in mining engineering to simulate the caving, deformation and other nonlinear behaviors of discontinuous rock masses in two dimensions. The rock-mass system in question can be modeled more realistically using UDEC if joint configurations and related parameters can be input to the code system realistically. There are several optional constitutive models embedded in UDEC for analyzing joint or block material behaviors. In this paper, a Mohr–Coulomb criterion was applied to describe block deformation. The area contact mode with a Coulomb slip criterion was used for the joints, considering that blocks in our model are closely packed. The geological structure is described by joints that are set in the model, and are defined by dip angle, trace length, aperture, spacing and spatial location. In addition, materials' properties that are required by UDEC have been measured or estimated from previous engineering report archived by the coal mine, as are listed in Based on the geological and mining conditions of the Wulan mine, the boundaries of the numerical model were set beyond the physical boundaries of the strata, which would be affected by the underground mining activity so the numerical model results within the domain of interest would not be influenced by the boundaries. For this, the top boundary of the model was the surface while the horizontal and upper boundaries were fixed and the bottom boundary was free to move. The size of the numerical model was 350 The final displacements of the target coal seams were obtained when the model came to equilibrium after excavation of two protective seams. The differential displacement between the floor and roof of the coal seam was considered as the approximation of the amount of strata dilation. The results obtained from the physical model test and the numerical simulation have been compared in The comparison proved that the results carried out from two methods are consistent. Due to the limited precision of displacement sensors, the measured data of physical simulation was not as accurate as that of numerical one. Moreover, numerical simulation results specified the coal seam deformations as they were shown at the densified monitoring points. Hence, the numerical modeling was verified as an effective way to simulate the actual subsidence behaviors of the target coal seams when under two different excavation conditions. It should be noted that after the second protective seam was mined, the compression at the intake entry side of panel was reduced and was even transformed into dilation ( Numerical models were run for two different scenarios where, in the first one, both coal seam #7 and coal seam #8 are mined, and in the second scenario, only coal seam #8 is mined. The comparison of these two scenarios is given in Variations of dilation amounts presented in Buffer effect mentioned in the previous paragraphs as results of numerical simulations can be explained with the subsidence of the fragmented when the lower seam removed. This results in an increased bulking due to the voids in the disturbed strata. However, there is a limit of bulking potential for any rock masses ( The “buffer effect” will be more noticeable if we consider another factor which is likely to occur in the field. The caving or fracturing behaviors of roof material after working face advances may induce a microseismic activity in deep mines. The impact of the mining-induced seismicity will extend to the area of low depth and even the surface in the form of seismic wave propagation ( In this equation, The laboratorial simulation results helped us well forecast the deformation of the target coal seams prior to mining operation. The predicted dilation of coalbeds convinced us that the degasification would be achieved to eliminate outburst hazard. The simulation is also instructive. According to the two dilated areas of coal seam within coalbeds as laboratorial study predicted, we added 4 surface boreholes near the intake entry in addition to those near the return air entry. Besides, considering the “buffer effect” induced by the extraction of coal seam #7, the suction of gas drainage is intensified by adding an exhauster and raising the maximum allowable rate of volumetric flow while #8 was being extracted. A field trial on target coal seams on the use of extraction of double lower mining seams at the Wulan mine was conducted. During the extraction of protective seams, the “displacement contrast method”, which was derived from the use of the multi-point displacement meters ( The “displacement contrast method” involves drilling a borehole perpendicular to coal seams in overlying or underlying roadways and inserting two steel bars attached by wedge sets in their ends. These two wedges in each set are configured reversely and the diameter of their combination is slightly larger than that of the borehole, so that the wedge sets could be firmly fixed in the floor and roof of the coal seam due to their self-locking characteristics. Then, a mark is made on the observable part of each steel bar, and the relative movements of these two bars are measured. These measurements relate to the change of displacement and thus to dilation amounts of coal seams, as shown in In the field tests to measure the displacements, we arranged 4 boreholes in the return airflow roadway along the boundary of coal field were arranged for measuring the deformation of the target coal seams before the extraction of protective seams ( After working face 5757 advanced beyond measurement points, coal seams #3 and #2 began to dilate as a result of mining activities. As working faces 5757 and 5857 advanced further, the dilations responding to the change of distances between working faces and measuring points were recorded. These data are presented in The results showed that during mining of working face 5757, the maximum dilation amounts obtained by this approach were 106 From Aug, 2007 to Dec, 2009, an accumulative amount of 1461.31 The burst hazard of coal seam #2 was successfully eliminated. As for the coal seam #3, the methane content and pressure has also been lowered and the mine safety was much enhanced. All of these suggested that the extraction of distant double seams could fully relieve the pressure within target coal seams and created a favorable condition for methane drainage. The physical scaled simulation showed that the exploitation of distant protective coal seam (with more than 100 The laboratorial findings convinced us that the extraction of double protective seams at Wulan mine could well achieve the depressurization of target coal seams, and provide a good condition for gas drainage. Also, these findings are instructive to borehole configuration and drainage management, which were been well applied in our degasification operation. The “displacement contrast method” is applied in field experiment to measure the actual dilation percentage of coal seams resulting in maximums of 2.80% and 2.49%. It verified the laboratorial prediction. During more than 2 Financial support by the