The kinetics of the radical polymerization of acrylamide in aqueous solution using potassium persulfate as initiator has been investigated by the gravimetric technique. Up to 94% conversion was obtained. The rate of polymerization was governed by the expression at 55°C
                        
                           R
                                 po
                              =k[K
                              2
                              S
                              2
                              O
                              8]0.5[M]0
                              1.26
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The order with respect to initiator was consistent with the classical kinetic rate equation, while the order with respect to monomer was greater than unity. The effects of temperature and pH on the polymerization rate were also investigated. An overall activation energy of 45.1±0.1 kJ/mol was obtained over the temperature range 35–55°C. It was found that the rate of conversion increased with increasing polymerization temperature, while the polymerization rate was insensitive to the change of pH value when monomer and initiator concentrations, and temperature were all kept constant.In recent years, scientists and engineers working on environmental and industrial problems have renewed their interest in water-soluble polymers. The most important of these synthetic water-soluble polymers is polyacrylamide The previous workers Acrylamide was supplied by Aldrich Chemical Company, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin. This technical grade monomer contains an appreciable amount of impurities and needs to be purified by method as reported elsewhere For this study, a series of steps were carried out as follows: (1) The desired amount of purified acrylamide (monomer) was weighed out and transferred to a test tube which was then flushed with argon for one minute at a moderate gas flow rate. The tube was immediately capped with a septum and secured with a thin wire. (2) Water was deaerated by deaeration unit. A syringe was used to transfer the desired amount of water into the sealed tube containing the monomer. A second syringe needle was also inserted into the septum to release some pressure built up by positive volume replacement of the transferred water. (3) The tubes containing the dissolved monomer were then put in the constant temperature water bath at the desired reaction temperature for at least 10 min. (4) Steps (1) and (2) were repeated for the initiator. (5) The desired amount of initiator solution was then transferred to the monomer solution tube described in step (3). Polymerization was assumed to start at this time and could be stopped at any desired time as described below. (6) After the polymerization reaction was carried out for a certain amount of time, the reaction tube was opened and the polymer solution was poured out into a beaker containing cold methanol (twice the volume of the polymer solution) then the mixture was stirred immediately. (7) The methanol/water/polymer mixture was then filtered and dried in an oven for at least 12 h at 160°C. (8) The dry polymer was weighed and the conversion was obtained. The dependence of polymerization rate on initiator and monomer concentrations was determined by varying concentration of one species while keeping the other constant and vice versa. The effects of pH and temperature on the conversion were investigated by varying one condition at constant monomer and initiator concentrations, respectively. The influence of acrylamide on the polymerization rate was studied over a concentration range, 0.35–1.76 mol/l, the initiator concentration was kept at a constant value, 2.25×10 The initial polymerization rate,  The effect of pH on polymerization rate at various temperatures was shown in When the pH was decreased, the hydrogen ion would catalyze the reaction of thermal decomposition of potassium persulfate, which was different from the uncatalyzed reaction as indicated elsewhere The oxygen liberated by the uncatalyzed reaction comes from the water while the oxygen liberated by the acid-catalyzed reaction comes from the persulfate ion From An experimental investigation was made on polymerization of acrylamide in water with potassium persulfate as an initiator. Conversion of monomer to polymer was measured gravimetrically. Up to 94% conversion was obtained. The rate of polymerization is expressed by The dependence of initiator concentration on polymerization rate followed the classical kinetic theory. The dependence of monomer agreed well with polymerization initiated by other initiators where the order was always greater than unity. The overall energy of activation was found to be 45.1±0.1 kJ/mol for the present polymerization system. The monomer conversion increased as polymerization temperature increased, while the change of pH value did not have any significant effect on the monomer conversion at constant temperature. The author is grateful to the Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science for the financial support. The author also thanks Mr. Shyr-Jou Liou for his assistance in the experimental work.