Background
                  Bilateral posterior hip dislocations are very rare injury, requiring a very hight trauma energy.
               
                  Presentation of the case
                  We present a case of 40-year-old male who sustained bilateral posterior hip dislocation with associated right femoral head fracture Pipkin type II following a hight energy trauma without neurovascular deficit. A prompt closed reduction was made, it was successful in lift hip but incomplete in right one, therefore, an open reduction was indicated, performed through a modified Hardinge approach permitting internal osteosynthesis with two Herbert screws.
               
                  Discussion
                  Posterior hip dislocations are an orthopaedic emergency that must be reduced within 6 h to avoid sciatic nerve compression and avascular necrosis (AVN). They are most often associated with femoral head fractures commonly known as Pipkin’s fractures, that need anatomic reduction and osteosynthesis through posterior approaches, rarely external or anterior approaches.
               
                  Results
                  Anatomic and functional results were good at two years follow up excepting a right hip non-bridging heterotopic ossification; the patient returned to his work normally without any functional sequelae.Bilateral posterior hip dislocations are very rare injury, requiring a hight-energy accident during a dashboard mechanism. Associated femoral head fracture are frequent, they worsen the prognosis because of increased risk of osteoarthritis and avascular necrosis. Below we describe a case of young adult who underwent bilateral hip dislocation associated with Pipkin II femoral head fracture, we detailed the treatment protocols, short and long-term follow-up with literature review. This work was reported in line with the SCARE criteria [ A 40 years old man, was injured in a car accident as a front passenger, occurred during a frontal collision with another vehicle passing illegally in continuous white line down the center of a national road, the impact speed was 100 km per hour. Unfortunately, the patient was not restrained by seatbelt and sustained lower extremity and head impacts without loss of consciousness, he experienced a severe pain in his hips. On presentation to the emergency department, patient was hemodynamically stable and conscious, examination of the chest and abdomen was normal. However, both hips were deformed in flexion, internal rotation and adduction ( Bilateral posterior hip dislocation whether it's isolated or associated to the femoral head fracture is not common requiring a hight force to occur, the mechanism is a dashboard injury through adduction, internal rotation of lower limbs and flexed hips [ X-rays and CT scan evaluation were necessary to define the exact femoral head fracture dislocation pattern and to choose an ideal surgical approach. Thompson classified posterior hip dislocation into 5 types depending on the associated fracture, type I is associated with or without a small fracture, type II is associated with a large single fracture of the posterior acetabular rim, type III with comminution of the acetabular ring, type IV with a fracture of the acetabular floor, the fifth type is associated with femoral head fracture, this last entity was later subdivided by Pipkin into 4 types: type I, fracture inferior to fovea; type II, fracture superior to fovea; type III, fracture of both femoral head and neck; type IV, fracture of femoral head and acetabulum, usually the posterior wall [ Other classification systems were described to illustrate the femoral head fractures such as the Brumback classification, the OTA (Orthopaedic Trauma Association) and the Chiron classification, but the Pipkin classification is probably the best known and the most used in scientific papers [ It is an orthopaedic emergency, closed reduction must be carried out within 6 h postinjury. Delay in the reduction of a dislocated hip joint increases the risk of sciatic nerve palsy and the incidence of osteonecrosis, which develops in 9% of hip fracture dislocations [ There is a lot of controversy concerning the surgical management of Pipkin’s fractures, there is increased risk of coxarthrosis after conservative treatment versus operative one, however there is no difference in AVN risk. Many authors have recommended a surgical treatment for pipkin II and Pipkin I fracture if the fragment is large, even though it is located under the fovea, the fragment should be fixed, because it is intraarticular to avoid coxarthrosis. Some other ones recommend orthopedic treatment if the fracture fragment is reduced by closed means and if the hip joint is congruous and stable, Concerning the Pipkin III and IV fractures, they are treated conservatively through internal osteosynthesis or first intention hip arthroplasty [ We believe that if there are no vital contraindications, all Pipkin fractures should be operated by reducing bigger fragments and extracting smaller ones in Pipkin I and II fractures, try to preserve the femoral heads in young patients with Pipkin III fractures by osteosynthesis and for elderly patients with Pipkin III or IV fractures, primary arthroplasty is the best choice. Various operative approaches have been used for open reduction and internal fixation of Pipkin fractures, it depends on direction of the dislocation, associated acetabular fractures and the position of the femoral head fragment that can be anterior, posterior or medial. Through literature publications many approaches were used essentially posterolateral (Moor), anterolateral (Watson-Jones), iliofemoral (smith-Petersen), and more recently lateral (Hardinge) or anterior approaches (Heuter). While the Kocher Langenbeck, and the posterior approaches with trochanteric flip osteotomy were recommended by the earliest authors, their main arguments was the notion of traumatic posterior capsular lesion, and the presence of associated fracture of the posterior wall, posterior or transverse column of the acetabulum [ Our preference for the modified direct lateral approach to treat Pipkin II fracture was justified by the wide access to the femoral head fracture through this approach and the preservation of the pelvitrochanteric muscles and sciatic nerve. However, precautions should be taken in the lateral position to avoid contralateral hip re-dislocation by maintaining the contralateral leg in extension. Arthroscopy is an alternative and efficient emerging technique for extracting small intra-articular fragments [ Herbert or cancellous screws are most used, recently we found many other materials such as bioabsorbable screws, biodegradable polylactide pins, and osteochondral autografts for the treatment of femoral head defects [ Whatever the surgical technique or the approach used, complications are not inevitable and must be searched periodically, the main complications are avascular necrosis of the femoral head, heterotopic ossification [ Posterior dislocated hip is a rare injury, it should have a closed reduction within 6 h, aiming at anatomic restoration of joint congruity. CT-scan should be systematic to determine femoral head fractures pattern and surgical approach. A good final outcome does not necessarily follow a specific approach, but depends on the initial injury and subsequent treatments. All authors disclose that this manuscript didn’t received no specific grant from any funding agency. The study is exempt from ethnical approval in our institution. This is a case report and the patient give us informed consent for publication. Patient gives informed consent for publication. Abderrahim Zaizi, Hicham Ahmed Benomar and Talal Grimi make substantial contributions to acquisition of data, conception and design, and analysis and interpretation of data. Monsef Boufettal and Mohamed S. Berrada participate in revising it critically for important intellectual content and give final approval of the version to be submitted. This case report don’t need to be registered because is not first-in-man. Abderrahim Zaizi and Hicham A. Benomar are the guarantor of this publication. Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed. The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.