Fractures of the capitulum humeri are rare and challenging injuries to the elbow and outcome results are limited to case series, often with different fixation devices. This article aims to present 15 patients with a fracture of the capitulum humeri treated with the same implant, fine-threaded Kirschner wires (FFS). Besides range of motion and grip strength, outcome measurements include the following scores: the Mayo Elbow Performance index (MEPI); the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons’ Elbow Assessment (ASES) Form; the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) questionnaire; and the Broberg–Morrey score.
                  Using the modified Bryan and Morrey classification, there were seven type-I injuries, three type-II, two type-III and three type-IV fractures. In addition to fractures of the capitellum, five patients were diagnosed with a complex ligamentous injury and three had suffered radial head fractures. After a minimum follow-up of 12 months, we obtained a range of motion in flexion and extension of 124° and a pro- and supination of 173°. The mean DASH showed 10.84 and the Broberg–Morrey score reached 90.8. ASES and MEPI scores were 91.5 and 90, respectively. The mean grip strength of the injured side was 217.9N versus 236.4N on the healthy side.
                  The use of FFS for capitellar fractures of the humerus achieved good clinical results and these implants can be considered as a treatment option for this fracture entity.Capitellum fractures of the distal humerus are rare, accounting for 1% of all elbow fractures and 6% of distal humeral fractures. In recent years, several classification systems for capitellar fractures have been introduced. Currently, open reduction and internal fixation are regarded as the operative management option of choice. One of the main problems in the operative treatment of these osteochondral fractures is the very limited amount of subchondral bone, which is needed for hardware fixation. In addition, the entire fracture fragment is capped with articular cartilage, making it difficult to place screws for stable fixation. Kirschner wires, direct or indirect compression screws and plate fixation are several devices that have been used. Between 1996 and 2009, 15 patients (11 female, four male patients; average age: 35.7 years; range: 13–72 years) with coronal shear fractures of the capitellum were reviewed at a minimum of 12 months postoperatively (mean follow-up period: 58.5 months; range: 12–167 months). They were operatively treated at St. Elisabeth Hospital and St. Vinzenz Hospital, Cologne, Germany, with open reduction and internal fixation using the FFS system. Ten patients broke their left elbow. Twelve patients were right-hand dominant. In six cases, fractures had affected the dominant side. Preoperatively, anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the fractured elbow were taken. Preoperative computed tomography scans were not routinely performed. Fractures were classified according to Bryan and Morrey The mean time from injury to operation in 14 cases was 4.6 days (range: 0–7 days). One patient had a previous operation 1 month before in a foreign country, where she had been treated with Kirschner wires. All fractures were treated with open reduction through Kocher's approach. We used the FFS system (1.2, 1.6 and 2.2 Postoperatively, patients were placed in a long-arm posterior plaster splint for 6 days with 90° of elbow flexion before daily physiotherapy was initiated. Additionally, 50-mg Indometacin was prescribed for 4 weeks to reduce the risk of heterotopic ossification. The ranges of motion of the elbow and forearm, including the arcs of flexion – extension and pronation – supination, were measured with a standard hand-held goniometer at the time of the follow-up examination. Stability of the elbow was evaluated on the basis of the history as well as provocative physical examination manoeuvres for anteroposterior, mediolateral and posterolateral rotatory instability. Elbow and forearm muscular strength was tested against the examiner's manual resistance and was graded according to the system of the Medical Research Council. Additionally, the Vernier Radiographs in anteroposterior and lateral planes were performed to detect the presence of osteonecrosis, heterotopic ossification and post-traumatic osteoarthritis. Fracture union was defined as the absence of a visible fracture line on the radiographs and the lack of tenderness along the lateral column. Post-traumatic elbow arthrosis was graded according to the criteria of Broberg and Morrey. Fracture classifications are summarised in All fractures healed and no residual elbow instability was noted. All patients described a notable improvement of elbow function compared to the preoperative situation. All employed patients returned to their occupation. The average ASES score was 91.5 (range: 76–100). The mean MEPI score reached 90 (range: 70–100), including seven excellent results, seven good results and one fair result. The mean Broberg and Morrey index showed 90.8 points (range: 72–100) corresponding with seven excellent, five good and three fair outcomes. The average Morrey score was 87.3 points (range: 60–100). The result according to the Morrey score was good in 13 patients and fair in two patients. The mean DASH score was 10.84 (range: 0–33.33). The average maximum grip strength of the injured hand was 217.9 Although not significantly different, a tendency towards better elbow scores could be seen in patients without additional injuries. Post-traumatic elbow arthrosis according to the criteria of Broberg and Morrey could be seen in eight of 15 patients. Grade I changes were noted in five cases and grade II changes were seen in three cases. The purpose of this study was to review the clinical results of 15 patients with capitellar fractures treated with FFS. Compared to results in recently published literature, this study obtained similar clinical results in elbow movement and in currently used elbow scores. As fractures of the capitellum rarely occur, larger case series only report up to 26 patients Open reduction and internal fixation have been advocated, especially for Bryan and Morrey type-I and type-IV fractures with larger fragments. Dubberley Treatment of capitellar fractures using a single implant was reviewed by Ruchelsman FFS with an autocompression effect (FFS, Orthofix™, Bussolengo, Italy) were recently developed and described as a one-step fracture fixation system for use in small-fragment fixation. Additional injuries of the elbow joint reach an incidence of up to 50%, In our own cohort, we diagnosed 9–15 patients with additional injuries to the elbow joint. There were three radial head fractures, one ulnar nerve palsy and five injuries to the medial collateral ligament. These side injuries were diagnosed at the beginning of the operation. Further stability testing after internal fixation obtained one persistent elbow instability. According to our treatment protocol for isolated unstable elbow dislocation, Taking the rare incidence of capitellar fractures into account, a comparison of outcome results for different fixation devices in treatment of this fracture is difficult. We are also aware that the difference of grip strength between injured and uninjured arm does not take the normal difference of grip strength between dominant and non-dominant hand into account. This was found to be 10% less on the non-dominant side. In summary, this article presents promising clinical results for the treatment of capitellum fractures of the distal humerus using the FFS system as a one-step fixation technique. The surgeon should be aware of the high coincidence of additional elbow injuries, which can negatively influence the clinical outcome. This study was not supported by any company.