Rougher flotation is a complex process, making it difficult for a single variable to comprehensively and accurately reflects real-time working conditions. This paper proposes a new multivariable recognition method for rougher flotation conditions using pulp flow and froth size as parameters. It utilizes qualitative trend analysis to recognise rougher flotation condition for the first time, where an improved trend extraction method is used to improve extraction accuracy, and fuzzy logic is adopted to calculate the matching degree of trends. Considering the change in knowledge base caused by the increase in variables, this paper presents a scheme of building knowledge base for multivariable rougher flotation conditions. Experimental results of gold–antimony rougher flotation show that the proposed method can accurately recognise rougher flotation conditions.Floating involves mineral separation and beneficiation and uses the difference in physical and chemical properties of minerals to separate useful minerals from gangue minerals ( Various methods, including model-based, knowledge-based and data-driven methods, are used in condition recognition. Liu et al. used statistical modelling of Gabor filtering responses to recognise the operation states of flotation ( The original QTA is only suitable for single-variable data series ( Therefore, a recognition method of rougher flotation working condition based on multivariable trend analysis is proposed using a case study of a specific process in gold-antimony rougher flotation. This method utilises QTA in flotation condition recognition for the first time, uses pulp flow and froth size as recognition parameters to obtain considerable information and to improve recognition accuracy, improves the sliding window method to solve inaccurate segmentation and long processing time, and establishes a multivariable recognition framework for rougher flotation condition. The results will assist in the recognition of rougher flotation condition and flotation performance improvement. This paper proposes a framework of working condition recognition method based on multivariate trend analysis to recognise real-time working conditions, as shown in Firstly, the data of recognition features are obtained from rougher flotation. These data need to be processed before trend extraction. Secondly, this paper uses an improved sliding window method to extract the trends after obtaining multivariable data under the same time axis. Thirdly, multivariable trend sets are matched with their corresponding trend set of each rule in the knowledge base. The minimum matching degree of trend set under the rule is selected as the confidence of the rule. Then, the confidence of all rules is calculated in the same manner. Finally, the condition with maximum confidence is selected as the recognition result. The confidence of the selected condition should be the maximum and greater than 0.5 to intensively reduce recognition errors. Accurate recognition of working conditions on the basis of froth size is difficult because of the presence of water mist and soot in flotation. Therefore, this paper combines pulp flow and froth size to recognise flotation conditions. However, the original data needs to be processed before trend extraction, as shown in Froth size is related to the mineral load of froth and can be used to identify working conditions. A watershed algorithm can extract the contour of froths from froth images, but is prone to be affected by noise, resulting in inaccurate segmentation of images ( In addition to noise, many abnormal values are obtained from sensor and equipment faults in pulp flow data acquisition ( Trend extraction aims accurately extracts of the sequences of time points and primitive sequences from the processed data ( A trend is composed of primitive sequence and time point, and researchers are instructed to calculate the similarities of trends on the basis of the two aspects when matching trends. The primitives under the same working condition are slightly different because of noise and other factors. However, the slightly different primitives in the same condition frequently have similarities, resulting in the same overall trends but different sequences. Unclear boundaries are found between primitives. For example, primitives As shown in Similarity calculation based on sequences Similarity calculation based on time intervals length To accurately evaluate the similarity of two trends, the maximum value of two indicators ( Similarity The knowledge base of rougher flotation working condition should be updated because of the change in the parameters used for working condition recognition. A mapping rule is a production rule where the qualitative information is mapped to the working condition. The use of multiple variables for condition recognition indicates that multivariable trends are mapped to a single working condition, and its matching relationship is many-for-one, whereas that of single variable recognition is one-for-one. Therefore, the mapping rules of rougher flotation knowledge base should be adjusted. An example of mapping rules is shown in The working condition knowledge base should be established to create a mapping between the extracted trend and the working condition. The experiments include trend extraction, trend matching, establishment of knowledge base, and recognition of gold–antimony rougher flotation conditions. After monitor system obtains data, software recognises the working condition and sets a reference dosage of the reagents in accordance with the recognised condition. Finally, operators adjust dosage of the reagents slightly to get a final dosage in actual operation. To describe the working conditions in a standardised manner, rougher flotation working conditions are defined as three levels, namely, good, medium and bad, based on the difference of reference dosage (copper sulphate, etc.) to be added. Because of mechanical properties, froth size and pulp flow have strong correlation with working conditions in the flotation as shown in To evaluate the performance of the improved trend extraction algorithm, this paper uses the data of froth size to extract the trend using the original and improved methods. The extracted result is shown in The experiment aims to determine whether the similarity described in Equation 5 can accurately reflect the matching results. This paper compares the extracted real-time trends with the trends in knowledge base and calculates their similarities. In As shown in Five groups of froth size and pulp flow data under good working condition are selected to establish a mapping rule of good flotation condition. The extraction results under good working condition are shown in Considering the similarity of primitives and time points, this paper gives a simplified procedure for finding out similar sequences. Firstly, remove isolated time points and their corresponding primitives (e.g. 18 and its corresponding F in To obtain the knowledge description of medium and bad conditions, this paper selects five groups of data under medium and bad conditions respectively, using the same processing. These information are used to establish the working condition knowledge base, as shown in To verify the accuracy of multivariable flotation condition recognition method, this paper reselects twenty groups of data under three working conditions for the experiment. The matching degree of each working condition is calculated by matching each group of data with the established knowledge base. The working condition with the highest matching degree (should be greater than 0.5) is selected as the result of recognition. For results Nos.1–3 in  The accuracy of using single variable (froth size) to recognise working conditions are shown in The proposed multivariable condition recognition method has an obvious accuracy improvement compared with the original method. This finding is because the difference in foam size trend is unclear under medium and bad conditions. However, the trend of pulp flow compensates for this problem. Faced with the problem that a single variable cannot accurately recognise flotation condition, this paper proposes a gold–antimony rougher flotation condition recognition method based on multivariate trend analysis. The method applys QTA to flotation condition recognition for the first time and establishes a new recognition framework in accordance to the characteristics of multiple variables. In the trend extraction process, the original sliding window is improved using dynamic initial window size and dynamic threshold to solve the problems of inaccurate segmentation and long time consumption. To improve extraction accuracy, this paper uses a trend matching method based on fuzzy logic to calculate the similarities between real-time trends and trends of knowledge base. Then, working conditions are recognised in accordance with matching degrees. Experimental results of gold–antimony rougher flotation show that the proposed condition recognition method can accurately recognise rougher flotation conditions. It will assist in the recognition of rougher flotation condition and flotation performance improvement.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was funded by the