Forest fuel procurement creates logistical problems, as large stocks are accumulated along the supply chain. The purpose of this study was to examine fuel quality (moisture content, ash content and calorific value) of compacted young trees (mainly downy birch) and both uncompacted and compacted logging residues (LR) (mainly Norway spruce). The materials were examined before and after storage, with and without cover, and effects of handling were considered. Dry matter losses from compacted LR during storage and handling were determined. Fuel quality and mass were determined before and after storage and handling. The moisture content of LR dropped to 28.6% when stored in small piles after fuel adapted logging at the clear felling site for 3 weeks in May. Drying continued after compaction into cylindrical bales (length 3.4m, diameter 0.7m) and during storage in windrows (9 and 12 months), the moisture content falling to 18.2–20.7% for the covered and 18.8–24.9% for the uncovered material. The windrow of loose LR remoistened to 40.8% (by snow contamination) resulted in a 6% lower net calorific value as received, compared to cylindrical bales. Ash contents were in the range 1.6–2.2% for LR and 1.0–1.2% for young trees. Dry matter losses ranged from 8.4% to 18.1% on compacted LR. Remoistening during the winter is higher for loose than for compacted LR. Early summer in northern Sweden provides favourable conditions for drying forest fuels.The Swedish use of bioenergy increased from 50 Extraction of LR is currently limited mainly to Norway spruce ( In the Nordic countries, the fuel wood and timber harvesting systems are becoming more integrated. A new procurement concept, still under development, involves compaction of LR into cylindrical bales, referred to as composite residue logs (CRLs) In addition to LR, young trees (YT) from power-line corridors are a scarcely used forest fuel resource. Corridors wider than 5 LR are produced as a result of logging operations which take place year-round, but demand rises during the winter heating season. This creates a logistical problem, with large stocks present along the supply chain. Fuel quality is affected by the form, placement and duration of storage and particularly by the weather conditions. Homogeneity, low moisture contents, low contents of ash, foliage and small particles usually improve the efficiency and profitability of combustion LR storage sites may be located at 3 different points along the procurement chain: to facilitate drying and defoliation, LR is commonly left in small piles after fuel adapted logging at the logging site during the summer (fuel adapted logging); to minimise remoistening, and to be accessible for winter demand, LR are extracted and stacked in windrows (covered or uncovered) at landings; after comminution, LR chips may be temporally stored close to the end-user. The heterogeneous and dynamic nature of LR makes it difficult, in a study, to control all of the parameters affecting fuel quality during handling and storage. Differences in stored material, stack building, placement and cover, storage duration, time of sampling and especially weather conditions during storage make comparisons between studies difficult. The moisture content (MC), on green weight basis varies seasonally, depending on the weather conditions and rate of transpiration. The MC of fresh Scots pine ( When LR is left in small piles at the logging site, or in larger windrows at the landing, MC can decrease to between 20% and 30% during the summer The most important fuel quality factor is MC, since it affects the calorific value, storage properties and transport costs. It is taken into account in the pricing of the fuel. Three different measures of energy content appear in the literature: gross calorific value (q gross), net calorific value at constant pressure (q net. p) and net calorific value at constant pressure as received (q net. p.m). Gross calorific value is determined using a bomb calorimeter and all other calorific values are derived from it. The gross calorific value includes the heat of water created during combustion. In practise, this water is lost during combustion, resulting in a loss of energy. To calculate this loss and the net calorific value, the hydrogen and oxygen contents of the sample has to be known. The net calorific value as received is calculated from the net calorific value by subtracting the energy required for the evaporation of the water present The ash content varies according to the soil at the site of origin, species, tree size, age and season. Young trees tend to have higher ash content than mature trees, and hardwoods have a higher ash content than softwoods Dry matter losses can be caused either by microbial activity, most commonly fungal attacks (biological), or spillage of material during handling and storage (technical). Apart from the source and the method used to store forest fuels, fuel quality and dry matter losses are also affected by the methods and machinery used for handling, comminution and transport. Dry matter losses in the range 2–12% are reported in all studies presented in The overall aim of the study was to examine the effects of routine storing and handling practices on quality parameters of forest fuels under north Scandinavian climatic conditions. The aim was to compare fuel quality, with respect to moisture content, ash content and calorific value, before and after large-scale storage and handling of compacted young trees and LR (uncompacted and compacted), stored both with and without cover. The study also aimed to determine dry matter losses from compacted LR during storage and handling along the whole supply chain. We hypothesised that storage and handling of compacted LR would result in fuel of equal quality to L LR after storing and handling, and that covering compacted LR would prevent remoistening. L LR and LR compacted into CRLs (CRL LR) originated from 4.1 YT came from a 40 A 5% sample (28 piles) of L LR before storage (L LR B) was collected at random. The piles were chipped into a container, using an Erjo 765 chipper with fresh chipping steels adjusted to a width of 28 L LR were extracted to the landing and stacked on top of 2 rows of logs (diameter 0.25 A total of 290 CRL LR and 27 All CRLs were transported to the landing and temporally stacked there for 2 weeks. The mass of each CRL was determined during forwarder loading, using a type TB 3000 crane-mounted scale Before stacking and final storage, 5 of the 290 CRL LR B (CRLs made of LR before storage) and 5 of the 27 CRL YT B (CRLs made of YT before storage) were randomly selected for analysis. Each CRL was shredded using a slowly revolving Mask Micromat, MS 2000 shredder. Three separate samples from each CRL were collected in 10-litre buckets. Samples were taken at intervals from a stream of material falling directly from the shredder. Buckets were transported to the laboratory on the same day for MC determinations. The 3 dried samples from each CRL were mixed together, homogenised and analysed for ash content and calorific value, as described above. A total of 160 CRL LR B were transported for storage just outside Umeå, 12 In Tjälamark, the windrow of L LR was completely covered to a depth of about 1 In Umeå, the mass of each CRL was determined when moving the CRLs from 1 stack to another. A type TB 3000 crane-mounted scale was used for this, which was first calibrated with a standard weight (mass 465 In Glommersträsk, the same procedure was repeated (CRL LR A12/C and CRL LR A12/U: covered and uncovered CRLs made of LR after 12 months of storage). In addition, 10 CRLs made of YT (2 from each row; 1 from the millboard-covered side and 1 from the uncovered side) were randomly chosen for sampling (CRL YT A12/C and CRL YT A12/U: covered and uncovered CRLs made of YT after 12 months of storage). The snow that had accumulated on top of the windrow had melted by this time. Weather data collected from the closest metrological stations In October, the temperature dropped unusually quickly ( The mean temperature for Umeå in June and July was 2.3 All results ( When LR were stored in small piles for 3 weeks at the logging site, the MC dropped to 28.6% ( The mass of the CRL LR were on average 363 Dry matter losses for CRL LR were 8.7–11.7% after 9 months of storage and 14.4–17.4% after 12 months of storage. The ash content decreased significantly for L LR and increased significantly for CRL YT. The ash content was in the range of 1.62–2.16% for LR and 1.04–1.22% for YT. Net calorific value at constant pressure, before and after storage, ranged from 19.6 to 19.9 for LR and from 19.6 to 19.7 The new CRL system was compared to the current most widely used system for LR procurement. Fuel quality is defined by the end-users’ demands and different boilers require different fuel qualities. Particle size requirements, in particular, are very variable and were not considered in this study. By determining mass, MC, calorific value and ash content as early as possible in the procurement chain before, and as late as possible after storage, it was hoped to examine the differences throughout the entire procurement chain. Since road transport of L LR is expensive, they are often stored in windrows at landings, while CRLs could be more economically transported to windrows at terminals close to the end user. To achieve effective drying during storage, it is important to ensure that windrows are well exposed to wind and sun and that there is an air gap between the material and the ground A major problem with the analysis of biofuel quality (especially forest fuels) is that it is difficult to ensure that samples represent the full range of variation in the material. Needles and twigs are, naturally, unevenly distributed and defoliated matter may be caught in the interior parts of windrows during storage. The superficial parts of the windrows and piles are more exposed to wind, sun and rain, and thus dry faster during the summer and remoisten faster during the autumn and winter. To account for this variation, it is important to take a sufficient number of samples. It is also important to ensure that all material can be accessed, that sampling occurs simultaneously and that handling of MC samples is rapid and careful. All samples were taken from the full range of parts of windrows/piles from a falling stream of material after comminution and were taken to the laboratory in closed buckets for analysis the same day. For these reasons, the CRLs and small piles at the logging site are assumed to be representative. This is confirmed by the low standard deviations for MC and ash content. The large standard deviation for MC (16.1%) for L LR A9/U was unexpected, and the number of samples collected here should have been larger to account for this variation. Since MC is the variable of greatest importance, the number of samples analysed to determine MC was larger than for ash content and calorific value. The original number of samples was the same, but sample numbers were reduced to ensure they were representative of the whole material. For practical reasons, the MC of the LR directly after felling was not determined. However, it dropped from approx. 50% Variations in net calorific value at constant pressure were small (19.6–19.9 The difference between L LR A9/U and CRL LR A9/U in net calorific value at constant pressure as received would result in a 6% difference in price per mass dry matter. The LR were unusually dry. Based on the same difference in MC (16.1%), a variation in MC between 40% and 56.1% would result in an 11% difference in price. Defoliation during storage could explain the drop in ash content from 2.16% to 1.76% for L LR B. After removal of L LR A9/U, a depth of approximately10 The total amount of available logging slash is affected by many factors, including the age and size of trees harvested the silvicultural history and the structure of the stand, species composition and geographical location Because of limited data in this analysis, we assume that the relationship between MC and drying time is linear. We know, however, the rate of drying is normally faster for wet than for dry material, thus motivating a relationship with an inverse or exponential form Blue stain and rot fungus both require MC above the fibre saturation point; moulds can function below this level The study shows how storage and handling of forest fuels affect fuel quality and dry matter losses under the climatic conditions found in northern Scandinavia. The rapid drying of small LR piles shows that spring and early summer provide favourable conditions for drying. Since most of the drying had already occurred before compaction, it was not possible from this study to determine whether L LR dry faster than CRLs. Snow did remoisten CRLs as happened with L LR. Although differences were small, covering did prevent remoistening. The study also shows that rather large dry matter losses occur along the forest fuel procurement chain. As research and tools to further quantify losses are developed, quantification of these losses will become more precise. Knowledge of the actual size and causes of total dry matter losses under different circumstances, and those associated with different procurement systems is poor. It will only be possible to take appropriate measures to prevent them when we better understand the processes involved. How different forest fuel procurement systems are affected by different climatic conditions and how these systems affect the total dry matter losses and fuel quality changes would be interesting subjects for future research. Appropriate timing of the different components in the procurement system, and knowledge of the climatic conditions is essential for producing forest fuels of high quality. This work was supported financially by: Biofuel region; The Swedish energy agency, and; Interreg 3A in the Kvarken–Mittskandia region. Machinery and experimental sites were provided by C.O. Lindbergs, Norra Skogsägarna, Komatsu forest AB, and Skellefteå Kraft AB.