A new approach to calculate the shape factor of the solid particle(s) was introduced using the experimental data and fluid–particle reaction model. In fluid–particle reactions, the solid particle reactants have complex shapes, rather than standard sphere in theory. In order to evaluate the influence of particle shape changes during the reaction process, we established a fluid–particle reaction model incorporating a parameter called the shape factor. Combining the model and experimental data by mathematical method, we can obtain the shape factor and the comprehensive reaction coefficient. The results show that the shape factor is larger than 1 in the early stage, then begins to decline rapidly and gradually comes near to constant 1. It agrees well with the experimental observation, indicating that the shapes of limestone particles are changing from irregular shapes to sphere during the reaction progress. The fluid–particle reaction model with the shape factor can describe the reaction well, which demonstrates the validity of our work. Using this method, the particle shape factor and the comprehensive reaction coefficient of any fluid–particle reaction can be acquired, which has great value on the precise prediction and control of fluid–particle reaction.The systems involving fluid–particle interaction are widely used in industrial processes. As a form of multiphase reaction, fluid–particle reactions take place in a variety of engineering processes. Applications are found in the fields of extractive metallurgy Since in the majority of industrial applications particles are present in a range of sizes and shapes, a better characterization and understanding of particles shapes in fluid–particle reactions are essential for prediction and design of the system. The irregular shapes of solid particles are difficult to measure in experiment. Bouwman et al. In this paper, we proposed a particle shape factor and incorporated it into the fluid–particle reaction model in order to evaluate the influence of solid shape in the fluid–particle reaction. After considering the shape factor, the fluid–particle reaction model is improved and can describe the reaction process more precisely. The quantitative data of the particle shape factor and the reaction parameters can be used on the precise prediction and control of fluid–particle reaction. The experiment of hydrochloride acid dissolving limestone has been done on a static reaction system, as shown in The raw limestone samples from different sources in China, as shown in Fluid–particle reaction is a typical reaction type, with a solid and a fluid reactant, generating solid and fluid products. The reaction of hydrochloride acid dissolving limestone particle is shown in Eq. Fundamental dynamic models are frequently used by engineers to develop new chemical processes and to predict the behavior of existing industrial processes. Among the major models that have been developed for non-catalytic fluid–particle reactions, the shrinking core model (SCM) is most widely used. The SCM On the other hand, the mass balance can be described in terms of the shrinking rate of the particle core as a function of the instantaneous fluid flux In the SCM, the solid reactant is considered to be spherical, non-porous and initially surrounded by a fluid film, through which mass transfer occurs between the solid particle and the bulk of the fluid. Actually, the solid particles have complex shapes, and thus have different surface areas compared to standard spheres as assumed in theory. Traditionally, particle shape is quantified by the use of shape factors, which are dimensionless numbers applies to all geometric shapes and independent of scale and particle's orientation. The most commonly used shape factor is the sphericity  Then the real chemical reaction rate could be improved from Eq. From (3) and (5), we can get Order Integrating Eq. Define Then the conversion fraction of mono-particle is In engineering applications, particle groups always contain continuous sized particles with wide distribution, so the mono-particle model cannot be directly applied. Many researchers incorporated different particle size distribution (PSD) models into the fluid–particle reaction model to gain a better simulation. Macı´as-Garcı´a et al. There are a number of functions that can be applied to describe the multi-particulate PSD, including Gaudin–Schuhmann, Rosin–Rammler, log-normal, Gamma and other modified forms of normal distribution. In our work, we found that the Rosin–Rammler function could well describe the particle size distribution of limestone particle group. It is typically used in mineral processing to describe particle size distributions generated by grinding, milling or crushing operations. By incorporating Rosin–Rammer function into the model, the reacted fraction of particle group is given by In Eq. During the reaction, we took out some solution to study the shape changes of limestone particles at different times. The shapes of the limestone particles were investigated by an optical microscope at 0 As can be viewed, the initial shapes of the limestone particles are not homogenous at all. In other words, both plate-like or elongated particles and blocky or rounded particles are observed in the sample. The limestone particles are different both in size and shapes, and they had almost any shape other than perfect sphere as assumed in the SCM. From the definition by Eq. From the particle shape changing progress during the reaction, we can infer that the particle shape factor of the limestone particles is relatively large at the initial stage of the reaction, and then it decreases closer to 1 after a certain reaction time. In the fluid–solid SCM described in Eq. The conversion fraction of particle group could be written as In Eq.  Using the mathematics expression, the parameter As mentioned above, the shape factor should theoretically be 1 at final reaction, and if the reaction condition is fixed, we can infer that the final constant In the initial stage of the reaction, the particle shape factor is relatively large for the extremely non-regular surface, but it declines rapidly, and then become closer and closer to a constant 1.0, which agrees well with the theory and experimental phenomena we observed. We also find that for a certain limestone sample, the shape factor has been almost the same value in our experimental range. Therefore, the changing rule of the particle shape factor of a certain sample can be considered as the same, and could be represented as: For Liquan limestone with PSD as After obtaining the comprehensive reaction coefficient The simulations of the model incorporating both the comprehensive reaction coefficient The calculation of the particle shape factor not only makes us understand the details about the particle shape change during the reaction, but also helps us describe the fluid–particle reaction better using the SCM, which has great significance on the precise prediction and control of fluid–particle reaction. A fluid–particle reaction model with the particle shape factor was established to consider the particle shape change during the reaction progress, and we also proposed a method to calculate the comprehensive reaction coefficient and particle shape factor using experimental data and the model. For a certain reaction condition, the comprehensive reaction coefficient  Surface area of ideal spherical particle (m Real surface area of the particle (m Consumed solid moles per mole of fluid reacted Fluid reactant concentration (mol m Initial diameter of the solid particle (m) Particle size parameter of the Rosin–Rammler function (m) Mass transfer coefficient of reactant in the fluid (m Chemical reaction coefficient on the surface (m Total reaction coefficient (m Defined reaction coefficient (m Comprehensive reaction coefficient (m Initial radius/diameter of the solid particle (m) Radius of ideal solid particle (m) Reaction time (s) Reacted fraction of mono-particle Reacted fraction of solid particle groups Mole density of solid reactant (mol Particle shape factor This work is supported by the