Heat pumps (HPs) coupled to ground-loop heat exchangers (GLHEs) have become increasingly popular for heating and cooling purposes in the context of growing energy costs. Precise design of GLHEs requires the computation of hourly fluid and ground temperatures, especially when the geothermal system is coupled to another system (e.g. boiler, cooling tower). However, because of the computational burden, hourly computation is often simplified in actual designs by rules of thumb or approximations that can cause over- or under-design of the GLHE system. The hourly temperature computation can be seen as a convolution in the time domain that is most efficiently evaluated by fast Fourier transform (FFT). An additional substantial reduction in computing time is obtained by subsampling the analytical function at a few selected times according to a geometric sequence and then using a good quality interpolant such as the cubic spline. This combined “FFT-S approach” enables one to obtain a 30-year hourly simulation in less than a second on a standard laptop computer, even for the computationally intensive finite line-source model. This reduction of one to two orders of magnitude in computing time compared to time-domain approaches with load aggregation should help promote the use of hourly temperature simulation for GLHE design purposes.synthetic load model parameters (kW)  specific heat of soil, fluid and soil matrix ( complementary error function temperature of fluid entering the heat pump (K or °C) complex numbers Fourier number ( borehole length (m) Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform volumetric thermal conductivity of soil, fluid and soil matrix ( modified Bessel function of the second kind of order 0 temperature of fluid leaving the heat pump (K or °C) fluid mass flow (kg Peclet number ( radial heat transfer rate per unit length of borehole (W heating (or cooling) load (W) aggregated load (W) heating (or cooling) load transferred to ground (W) distance to center of borehole (m) borehole radius (m)  borehole effective thermal resistance (K time (s) temperature (K or °C) mean fluid temperature (K or °C) undisturbed ground temperature (K or °C) temperature at borehole wall (K or °C) underground water velocity (m/s) effective underground water velocity thermal diffusivity (  angle between the flow direction and the direction of the horizontal line joining the borehole axis to the point where ground temperature is computed porosity expressed as a fraction  borehole effective fluid ground soil borehole wall In response to higher energy costs the installation of geothermal heat pumps (HPs) coupled to ground-loop heat exchangers (GLHEs) have increased significantly recently. The underground heat exchanger is composed of one or several vertical boreholes typically 10–15 Exceeding the HP capacity means the underground exchanger is under-designed and one must either increase the total borehole length of the ground exchanger or use auxiliary systems to supply the excess heat load required. On the contrary, when part of HP capacity remains unexploited, the system is over-designed. In such a case important savings can be realized by reducing the total borehole length, therefore improving the economics of the project. The total required borehole length can be found iteratively by computing fluid temperature for the entire design time horizon, and by making successive adjustments to the borehole field (e.g. location of boreholes, length of each borehole) so as to match the HP specifications. With the final hourly fluid temperature simulation the energy savings can be computed by taking due account of the coefficient of performance (COP) of the HP, itself a function of the fluid temperature. The above design process based on fluid temperature requires one to compute iteratively many times the hourly (or for another suitable time step) fluid temperature for long periods (e.g. 10–30 years). This process is recognized in the literature as quite computationally intensive ( Depending on the simplifications made, many different analytical or numerical models can be used. The most common analytical models are derived from the line-source and the cylindrical-source theory ( The analytical model in the FFT approach needs to be evaluated only with a constant unit heat load. We note that the analytical response with a constant (unit) load is a smooth monotonous function that can be well approximated by evaluating it only at a few selected points and then interpolating the solution using an efficient interpolant such as cubic splines. The FFT-spline (or FFT-S in short) combination enables one, for example, to realize a 10–30-year hourly fluid temperature simulation for a well or for pre-computed borehole field in less than a second, even for the computationally intensive finite line-source model. The paper is structured as follows. First, we briefly present the analytical models considered; the solutions are expressed as a convolution product. We describe the particular aggregation scheme used for comparison between the aggregated loads approach and the FFT-S. Then, we present the synthetic heat load signal and compare computation times obtained with four computational approaches: full loads in time domain (TD-F), aggregated loads in time domain (TD-A), FFT, and FFT-S. Each one is compared for three analytical models: infinite line-source, infinite line-source with flow, and finite line-source. Our main finding is that the reduction in computing times with the FFT-S approach is significant enough to clearly render possible routine use of the hourly temperature simulation and its integration in whole-building energy performance simulation. The approach is applicable to any analytical or numerical model as long as it can be represented as a convolution product in presence of variable heat loads. For borefields, it can also be applied to time-domain convolution of heat loads with the so-called G-functions of We briefly review the analytical models considered: infinite line-source, infinite line-source with underground water flow, and finite line-source. We also indicate how applying the superposition principle to variable heat transfer rates leads to time-domain convolution products of the analytical function considered with the variable heat load function.  The infinite line-source model can be coupled to the groundwater flow equation. The resulting Recently several authors ( The mean fluid temperature is obtained by first computing the soil temperature at the borehole wall with one of the previous analytical models and then adjusting for the borehole thermal effective resistance: Assuming a constant heat transfer rate over the entire borehole length, the temperature of the fluid entering the HP ( The principle of superposition applies to the response to multiple heat fluxes, both in space and time ( Suppose the heat transfer rate varies at discrete times Note that for a fixed Eq. We illustrate below the main steps involved in the convolution by FFT approach. Interested readers will find more details in The inverse DFT of Assumed values of the two functions to convolute are given by FFT is a particular implementation of the DFT that allows computation of the DFT with complexity As shown in Eq. As mentioned before, the superposition principle also applies in space ( The calculation can be simplified by pre-computing the entire field response function for a unit heat load and particular geometries (e.g. number, length and location of boreholes). The so-called G-functions of First, we describe briefly a simple function to simulate synthetic loads. The advantages of synthetic loads are better reproducibility and ease of generating various scenarios. Although this function may not represent a realistic heat load, it certainly suffices for illustrating the computational efficiency of various approaches. We use this synthetic load and compute the fluid temperature using four approaches (TD-F, TD-A, FFT, FFT-S) for the three analytical models: infinite line-source, infinite line-source with groundwater flow, and finite line-source. The formula used to generate the synthetic loads is To efficiently compute hourly fluid temperatures, one approach suggested in the literature is to aggregate the heat loads ( This has the advantage of preserving the short-term information and alleviating the computational load. Our results (see Synthetic loads were used to evaluate the accuracy of the results obtained by the various computational approaches.  For the infinite line-source model ( The reported computation times in In relative terms, the advantage of FFT-S over TD-A does not change in the multiple borehole case as the same multiplicative factor applies to each method. Note that when designing GLHE systems many different geometries are usually considered. Moreover, it is not always possible to locate boreholes on a regular grid due to the location of different service installations or the restrictions on the surface land. This could reduce the applicability of the G-function approach. The FFT-S approach allows the computation of the hourly response of one borehole for 20–30 years in less than a second (see It has been shown that the superposition principle in time leads to time-domain convolution of two basic functions: the incremental heat load and the desired analytical/numerical model evaluated with a unit heat load. The convolution decomposition is general and does not depend on the particular analytical model considered. We have illustrated the application with three common models: the infinite line-source, the infinite line-source coupled with groundwater flow and the finite line-source models. It is possible to use the same approach with the constant unit-load output from any numerical model instead of an analytical model response. Similarly, the FFT-S method can be used with the pre-computed response from an entire borehole field (G-functions). The proposed approach to compute hourly fluid or ground temperatures using full FFT is exact in the sense that, contrary to the load aggregation methods previously reported in the literature ( The computing times obtained with the FFT-S approach make it possible to compute the hourly fluid temperature for a single borehole at almost negligible cost. The same conclusion holds for a borehole field represented by a single G-function. In more general situations where published G-functions are not available, the computing times of the various methods will all be multiplied by the number of different distances found between boreholes. Therefore, the relative advantage of FFT-S compared to TD-A remains the same for a borehole field as for a single borehole. The FFT-S approach runs easily on ordinary laptops, even for computer-intensive analytical models such as the finite line-source approach or the infinite line-source with flow. The conclusion holds whatever the simulation time period considered. Efficient computation of the hourly fluid temperature is essential for GLHE system design and performance prediction. It is believed that the FFT-S approach will help simplify and promote its use. Part of this research was financed by NSERC of Canada. We thank Jeremie Gaucher for English editing. Helpful comments from two anonymous reviewers are acknowledged. We also thank S.K. Garg and M.J. Lippmann for kindly providing numerous editorial suggestions.