This paper deals with the processing of thick cold work tool steel coating using high velocity oxy-fuel (HVOF) spraying process. A full factorial experimental design was established to identify the influencing process parameters on the formation of dense coating with low oxidation. Microstructural analysis of the coating was carried out using optical, SEM and XRD techniques. Cold work tool steel coatings with a thickness up to 2mm were developed on bond coated low carbon steel substrates for wear resistance evaluation. A pin on disc test was performed to examine the wear resistance of thick cold work tool steel coatings on different types and sizes of abrasive papers. The wear results were compared with the wear resistance of a standard high speed steel pin. The abrasive wear resistance of cold work tool steel coated pins was found to be superior against soft and fine abrasive papers than the standard high speed steel. Besides, the performance of the coated pins against hard and coarser abrasive papers was found to be similar to standard high speed steel. The study showed the potential of HVOF spraying on the development of thick cold work tool steel coatings for wear resistance applications.Cold work tool steels containing high chromium and high carbon are widely used in mineral processing industries due to their high hardness and high wear resistance Thermal spraying which involves powder as feedstock materials can be a suitable processing method to produce tool steels as an overlay coating if the intended technological applications are pertaining to the surface engineering problems. Especially, high quality coatings with low porosity as well as low oxidation can be produced by HVOF spray process. Besides, low residual stresses during HVOF spraying enables the deposition of thick coatings than in other processes The objective of this study focuses on the development of thick (in millimeters) high chromium containing cold work tool steel coatings using the HVOF spray process. A full factorial design has been established to study the influencing HVOF process parameters. Studies on wear resistance of coated substrates were carried out using a pin on disc test facility. Gas atomized powder of a high chromium contained ledeburitic type cold work tool steel (X190CrVMo20-4) within a sieve fraction of 45 to 63 A full factorial experimental design (DOE) was established for the principal HVOF process parameters such as fuel flow (hydrogen), oxygen flow and spray distance to identify the influencing parameters on the formation of cold work tool steel coatings with reference to coating thickness, porosity and oxidation. In the present investigation, the three most influencing principal parameters of HVOF such as oxygen flow, hydrogen flow and spray distance were considered as variables in two levels (low and high) to establish a 2-level full factorial (2 A pin on disc wear test was carried out to evaluate the abrasive wear resistance of the thick cold work tool steel coating. A pin with the dimensions of Ø6 Optimization of the most influencing parameters of HVOF process by means of an experimental design would help to minimize the number of experimental runs as well as to achieve the reproducible coatings. Besides, while using a 2-level full factorial design, the regression coefficients of each independent variables and their significance may be evaluated elegantly In addition, selective micrographs are presented in One of the principal aims of the present study is to develop thick coatings in a millimeter range using optimized HVOF process parameters identified by the design of experiment. However, development of thick coatings using any thermal spray technique is critical due to the inherent nature of residual stresses associated with the processing. A high amount of residual stresses that arise during coating deposition may lead to poor interfacial adhesion and may even cause delamination at the interface. Though HVOF has the tendency to form a coating with relatively low flame temperature, a large build up of residual stresses could not be eliminated during the deposition of thick coatings. However, few studies successfully demonstrated the processing of the thick coating using thermal spraying with the help of special experimental conditions The main microstructural constituent of cold work tool steel powder used in the present study is retained austenite. Therefore, the thermal expansion coefficient of powder feedstock (austenitic phase) is expected to be higher compared to low carbon steel (ferritic phase) substrates Phase transformations in high carbon and high alloyed (chromium and vanadium-rich ledubritic cold work tool steels) tool steels are inevitable especially during high temperature processing. Importantly, cold work tool steel (X190CrMoV20-4) used in the present study is a martensitically hardenable steel and therefore, it is significant to investigate the phase transformation of the HVOF sprayed coatings.  The cold work tool steels are known for their high hardness and therefore they are used in many wear resistance applications. The HVOF sprayed cold work tool steel is composed of a fine grained microstructure with a considerable amount of oxides and therefore exhibited high hardness of about 712 Analysis of pin on disc abrasive wear test results of the thick cold work tool steel coating is illustrated in The present study shows the potential of the HVOF process on the development of thick coatings for wear resistance application and the following conclusions were drawn based on the present study: The approach of the design of experiment (DOE) with the help of microstructural investigations showed that HVOF spraying of cold work tool steel coating can be achieved with low porosity and low oxidation by balancing the principal HVOF spray parameters particularly oxygen flow and spray distance. However, the oxygen flow was found to be the most influencing principal HVOF process parameter within the design of investigation. Thick (in millimeters) cold work tool steel coatings can be processed using HVOF with appropriate process parameters and substrate conditions. The cold work tool steel coating exhibited a superior abrasive wear resistance against soft and fine abrasive while their abrasive wear resistances against hard and coarse abrasive are comparable to high speed tool steels. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the