Minimizing fluid transport properties of concrete is very important for providing prolonged durability of concrete structures. Sorptivity testing is an easy and effective method for evaluation of near-surface transport properties of concrete. In the sorptivity test, the moisture content of the tested sample has a dominating effect on the rate of absorption. Thus, the drying procedure during sample preparation is an important part of sorptivity testing. In the literature, many different procedures for sample preparation can be found, ranging from long room temperature drying to oven drying at 105 °C for 24 h. In this research, the effect of two drying procedures was compared: a milder one (ASTM C1585), and a more rigorous drying (DIN 52617). The comparison was performed on mortars with water to cement ratios of 0.35, 0.40, 0.45, and 0.50, as well as mortars at the water to binder ratio of 0.40 with different levels of cement replacement by fly ash and slag. The initial sorptivity obtained after these drying procedures was compared to chloride migration coefficient and conductivity test results, while the secondary sorptivity was compared with the total porosity. The latter procedure was found to give better correlations with other transport properties of mortars.Since, most deterioration processes in concrete start from the penetration of ionic species and fluids, minimizing transport properties of concrete are of paramount importance for the durability of concrete structures The theoretical grounds of sorptivity test lay in the solution of the equation of the unsaturated capillary flow. Many investigators suggested that unsaturated flow can be described by Darcy’s law if the permeability, This equation can be rewritten using capillary diffusivity Assuming that water in unsaturated capillary flow can be considered incompressible, the mass conservation equation can be written in terms of moisture content in the following way: The boundary conditions in case of the sorptivity test are: Using Boltzmann’s transformation (ϕ The weight gain of the sample at any given time in the sorptivity test is equal to the cumulative infiltration: By these means, the sorptivity is defined as: It can be clearly seen that sorptivity strongly depends on the initial water content of the sample. It also should be noted that Eq. From a practical point of view, in the scale of the square root of time, the rate of water absorption of cementitious materials usually has two linear portions with the slope change around 6–24 h. The initial sorptivity is determined as a slope of a fitted line between the square root of time, up to 6 h of testing, and depth of penetration, which is calculated as weight gain of the sample during the test divided by the density of water and area of the specimen’s contact with water. This fitted line often has a positive intercept that can be explained by the filling of the open porosity on the surface of the sample upon the contact with water As it has been demonstrated above, the principle of sorptivity testing considers that the tested sample initially is uniformly dry Historically, drying in an oven at 50–60 °C until constant mass appeared in standard sorptivity tests Although very gentle conditioning procedures may potentially produce an initial uniform distribution of moisture in samples, the residual moisture content of the sample after such procedure depends on the pore structure of the sample and is generally unknown. It was experimentally shown that uncertainty over initial moisture content may lead to misinterpretation of sorptivity testing results, improper evaluation of transport properties and, as a consequence, errors in life cycle analysis To answer this question, a comparison was performed between two drying procedures: (i) drying at 60 °C until constant mass (DIN 52617), and (ii) 3 day drying at 50 °C followed by 15 days in a sealed container (ASTM The effect of sample conditioning on sorptivity of mortars with w/b ratio of 0.35, 0.40, 0.45, and 0.50 was investigated. The high sulfate-resistant cement (HS type in accordance with Canadian standard CSA A3001 The fresh mix properties for mortars are also given in Mortars were mixed using a pan mixer and cast into cylinders of 100 mm diameter and 200 mm height. The cylinders were demolded 24 h after casting and cured in the saturated lime solution until the age of 72 h. After water curing, the cylinders were wiped and sealed in plastic bags until the age of 28 days. At 28 days, three specimens of 50 mm height were cut from the middle part of cylinders, while upper 20 mm and the bottom parts were disposed. After cutting, the specimens were conditioned in accordance with two different procedures: “Conditioning A” and “Conditioning B”. “Conditioning A” included drying in an oven at the temperature of 60 °C until constant mass, which was defined as a daily mass change of less than 0.2%. “Conditioning B” included 3 days at the temperature of 50 °C and 80% relative humidity followed by 15 days of equilibration in a sealed plastic container at room temperature (23 °C) similar to that used in ASTM Additional specimens cut from these cylinders were tested for rapid chloride penetrability (RCPT) according to modified ASTM The comparison of water absorption kinetics of mortars with w/b ratio of 0.35, 0.40, 0.45, and 0.50 are presented in It can be seen in Although samples with FA exhibited a similar trend as the samples without SCM in The initial sorptivity calculated for mortars with SCM, with FA, and with GGBFS is presented in The effect of conditioning on the initial sorptivity of mortars with different content of FA can be seen in The relationship between the initial sorptivity and transport properties of the saturated mortars is demonstrated in A similar situation can be observed in The relationship between the bulk conductivity and initial sorptivity is given in By this means it can be seen that there was a better correlation between the initial sorptivity and all other measured transport properties for “Conditioning A” than for “Conditioning B”. Pore structure parameters can also be correlated with the rate of water absorption. In such a manner, threshold pore diameter can be related to initial sorptivity, and total capillary porosity can be related to the secondary sorptivity. The relationship between threshold pore diameter and initial sorptivity is plotted in The relationship between total capillary porosity and secondary sorptivity is given in It can be summarized that experimental data clearly demonstrate the necessity of a rigorous standard drying regime for conditioning of the samples prior to sorptivity testing. The results show for “Conditioning A” an excellent correlation between the sorptivity measurements and other transport properties of mortars, as well as with pore structure parameters. On the other hand, the mild drying mode of “Conditioning B” results in inconsistent measurements of sorptivity and inferior correlation with both pore structure parameters and other transport properties. These results may be explained by the fact that after mild drying the initial moisture content is different for each mortar mixture. As indicated by Hall The purpose of a sorptivity test is to obtain a durability indicator using a very simple, inexpensive, and straightforward test. In view of this, it can be concluded that drying at 60 °C until constant mass is a more appropriate procedure for conditioning of samples for sorptivity testing than drying for 3 days at 50 °C and 80% followed by 15 days sealed drying as prescribed by ASTM It should be noted that the tests were performed on mortars and the sorptivity data for mortars cannot be directly translated to those of concrete. Most probably the use of mortars magnified the effect of the conditioning procedure due to the higher volume of cement paste. However, since the comparison was performed over a wide range of w/b ratios and different SCMs, it is reasonable to assume that the above findings would be generally valid for a variety of cementitious products. A comparison between two drying procedures for conditioning samples for the sorptivity test was made: rigorous drying at 60 °C until constant mass and a mild 3 day drying at 50 °C followed by 15 days in a sealed container (ASTM The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.