This paper presents the coupled effect of solid content and superplasticizer type and dosage on the fluidity and strength properties of cemented tailings backfills (CTB). A total of three different superplasticizers (namely, naphthalene, ether-based and ester-based polycarboxylate) were used at a ratio varying from 0% to 0.5% by mass of CTB. The CTB mixes were proportioned with a solid content of 65%, 66%, 68% and 70%. The unconfined compressive strength tests were performed on CTB samples after 3, 7 and 28 days of curing period. The obtained results show that the effect of superplasticizer on CTB performance depends on type and dosage of the superplasticizer used as well as solid content. The naphthalene-based polycarboxylate admixtures demonstrate the best improvement on fluidity behavior of fresh CTB mixture. For a given superplasticizer type, increases in the dosage of superplasticizer and decreases in the solid content lead to better workability of CTB samples. When increasing solid content, fresh CTB with high superplasticizer dosage performs a relatively low rate of decrease in the workability. A relatively high solid content and superplasticizer dosage have greatly contributed to improved mechanical strengths, especially at 28-day curing age, mainly due to a major reduction in water-to-cement ratio and porosity.Underground mining is widely used to remove and excavate valuable mineral resources from earth’s crust, but it inevitably results in the production of large quantities of problematic tailings In general, the backfill is expected to have a higher solid content (more than 70 wt%), which can improve its strength and stability, and then make it more endurable when extracting adjacent stopes The originality of this paper consists in the comprehensive evaluation of the effect of superplasticizer and solid content on fluidity and strength behavior of CTB samples. Therefore, the main objective of this paper is to evaluate how these factors influence the quality and performance of CTB made of ordinary Portland cement (OPC). To achieve this goal, coarse size gold tailings were adopted to prepare various CTB mixtures with different solid contents, superplasticizer types and dosages. The fluidity values of fresh CTB mixes were tested by using a Mini-cone setup. Unconfined compressive tests at a predetermined curing times were conducted to evaluate the influence of solid content and superplasticizer on CTB’s strength performance. The Canzhuang gold mine, located 30 km east of Zhaoyuan City, Shangdong Province, China, was commissioned in 1970s. The mine field is 1.70 km The tailings used in the study were sampled from the discharge point of the mineral processing plant at the Canzhuang gold mine. The tailings slurry was filled in plastic drums for natural sedimentation of five days, and then the top layer clear water was removed. The left sedimentation was dried in a drying box oven and then cooled naturally for preparing CTB samples. The drying tailings were homogenized to prepare a representative sample for determining their physical, chemical and mineralogical properties. The sampled tailings had an initial water content of around 25%, a bulk density of 1.214 g/cm The particle size distribution of tailings was characterized by using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 laser particle size analyzer and the obtained results are shown in The function of the binding agent used within the backfill is to produce hydrated phases resulting in cohesion and strength. In addition, the binder enhances the lubrication of fresh backfill during the transportation process. OPC was chosen as the main binding agent in this study. OPC is a silica cement following the Chinese standard for “Common Portland Cement” (GB 175–2007). As listed in Three types of superplasticizers, namely, S1(Naph), S2(Ethe), and S3(Este) were used as water-reducing admixtures in this study. S1(Naph) is naphthalene sulfonic acid-formaldehyde condensate with sodium sulfide in the content of 18%. S2(Ethe) and S3(Este) are ether-based and ester-based polycarboxylate superplasticizers respectively. All the superplasticizers used during the experiments are according to the Chinese standard specifications GB 8076-2008 To study the effect of solid content, superplasticizer type and dosage, three series of CTB were mixed by blending OPC, tailings, water, and superplasticizer in different proportions. Previous studies have reported that superplasticizers are more effective when their addition to the mix is delayed by 30–60 s after OPC meets water To better investigate the influence of superplasticizer dosage and solid content on compressive strength of CTB samples, partially mixture of Group A was poured into bottom perforated plastic cylinder molds with 50 mm in diameter and 100 mm in height to prepare CTB specimens for conducting the unconfined compressive test. A total number of 216 open-top cylinders were placed in a standard condition maintained at 20 ± 2 °C in temperature and 95% in relative humidity (similar to underground placement and curing conditions). The de-mold process of CTB samples was conducted after 24 h curing. After the predetermined curing times (3, 7 and 28 days), CTB samples were removed from their plastic molds and subjected to the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) testing for determining the samples’ mechanical strengths. The workability of fresh CTB samples was measured by the backfill’s fluidity. The high fluidity value of fresh backfill indicates that the formed mixture has a good workability and pumpability. The fluidity test is widely used in cement-based materials Determining the mechanical properties of CTB samples, various UCS tests were performed by using a computer-controlled mechanical press with a loading capacity of 50 kN and a displacement loading speed of 1 mm per minute. The UCS tests were undertaken according to the ASTM The Group A, B and C of fresh CTB samples were prepared to investigate the influence of superplasticizer type on fluidity behavior of mixtures. The effect of superplasticizer type and dosage for CTB mixtures with different solid contents ranging from 65% to70% is illustrated in To achieve a desirable fluidity higher than 200 mm, the water content of CTB samples could be reduced by 5% by the addition of 0.2% S1(Naph) and 0.5% S2(Ethe). However, the fluidity of fresh CTB with S3(Este) and 70% solid content failed to meet a value higher than 200 mm in this study, as illustrated in The Group A was used to investigate the influence of superplasticizer dosage for CTB samples with different solid contents (65%–70%). The superplasticizer type was S1(Naph) which had a better performance in improving workability of fresh CTB samples as discussed earlier. Variable S1(Naph) dosages in CTB were set for 0%, 0.1%, 0.2%, 0.3%, 0.4% and 0.5%. For each superplasticizer dosage, CTB at four solid contents, i.e., 65%, 66%, 68% and 70%, were prepared. The effect of S1(Naph) dosage on the workability and UCS of CTB samples are shown in As shown in The effect of S1(Naph) dosage on UCS of CTB samples with different curing times (i.e., 3 days, 7 days and 28 days) and solid contents varying from 65% to 70% is illustrated in The Group A of CTB samples was used to investigate the influence of solid content on fluidity and mechanical properties. Inadequate value of solid content varies from 65% to 70%. For a given solid content, CTB samples at six superplasticizer dosages, i.e., 0%, 0.1%, 0.2%, 0.3% 0.4% and 0.5% were prepared as shown in The fluidity test results of different solid contents, as shown in The change in the unconfined compressive strength of CTB samples as a function of different solid contents is shown in In this study, the influences of type and dosage of superplasticizer on fluidity and strength properties of CTB samples as a function of curing time and solid content were investigated experimentally. The CTB samples with different solid contents (i.e., 65%, 66%, 68% and 70%), superplasticizer types (i.e., S1(Naph), S2(Ethe), and S3(Este)) and dosages (0.1%, 0.2%, 0.3%, 0.4%, and 0.5%) were prepared to obtain the fluidity and UCS at different curing ages (i.e., 3, 7 and 28 days). Based on the experimental results presented, the following conclusions can be drawn. Effect of superplasticizer on fluidity of fresh CTB samples based on solid content, superplasticizer type and dosage. S1(Naph) has more pronounced effect on fluidity compared to S2(Ethe) and S3(Este). The positive effect of superplasticizer dosage on fluidity behavior of CTB samples is more sensitive to CTB samples with a solid content of 66% and 68% compared to that with a solid content of 65% and 70%. Increasing superplasticizer dosage leaded to higher UCS of CTB samples, especially CTB with longer curing times. As the solids content increases, the CTB samples with higher dosage of superplasticizer have a lower rate of decrease in fluidity. Higher solid content contributes to higher UCS of CTB samples, especially at 28 days curing time. This study highlights the beneficial effect of superplasticizers used within CTB samples to sustain/enhance the workability and strength performance by reducing water content without decreasing fluidity or increasing cement consumption. These results can contribute to better optimization of CTB mixtures for mines, saving time and money. This work was financially funded by the Research Fund of The State Key Laboratory of Coal Resources and Safe Mining, CUMT (grant number SKLCRSM18KF007). The authors would like to thank Yingliang Zhao of Northeastern University, China for his kind assistance with XRD analysis. The authors are also grateful to the managers and staffs of the Canzhuang gold mine for providing the tailings material used during the experiments.