The effects of silver ions, galena, and pyrite on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching have been studied. In addition, the effects of galena and pyrite pretreated with silver ions have been investigated. It has been found that the addition of silver ions, pyrite, and pyrite pretreated with silver ions accelerates the rate of chalcopyrite leaching significantly. The addition of galena has minimal effect on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching. Considering the high cost of silver, the possibility of recycling these catalysts was also examined. The results indicate that direct recycling of silver ions as a catalyst is not feasible; however, silver-enhanced pyrite can be efficiently recycled to subsequent leaching tests. Secondary Electron Microscopy and Electron Diffraction X-ray techniques were applied to study the morphology and elemental composition of residues after completion of leaching experiments. In this study, formation of a porous sulfur layer around chalcopyrite was observed in both the presence and absence of catalysts indicating that acceleration of the rate of chalcopyrite leaching in the presence of catalysts is not due to the alteration of morphology of sulfur around chalcopyrite.Hydrometallurgical processing of primary copper concentrates in ferric sulfate media has become an increasingly important process in the treatment of these concentrates due to its lower capital cost, ease of operation, simplicity of leaching reactions, and environmental friendliness. However, the rate and extent of chalcopyrite leaching in ferric sulfate leaching processes can be very low ( The catalytic properties of silver on chalcopyrite leaching in both chemical and biological systems have been demonstrated before. It has been proposed that in the presence of silver ions, a porous sulfur layer forms on mineral particles instead of the deposition of a tenacious and protective sulfur layer ( In addition, it has been found that the addition of pyrite to the leach slurry in ferric sulfate media increases the rate of chalcopyrite leaching ( In this study, the morphology and elemental compositions of pyrite samples were analyzed after pretreatment with silver ions. It has been noted that silver could only be detected in association with galena. In addition, it has been reported that the dissolution of chalcopyrite is favored in the presence of galena ( In another study ( Batch leaching experiments were conducted in a sealed 2-L jacketed glass reactor. The temperature was maintained at 80 Each reactor was connected to a multi-channel digital controller (ADI 1030 Bio-controller). A pH probe, a redox potential probe and a thermocouple were connected to the controller and inserted into the reactor. The outputs of these probes were recorded to a computer from the controller. In each experiment, the solution potential was set to a specific value. The controller was also equipped with two analog outputs. When the solution potential fell below the set point, an analog signal was sent to a digital gas mass flow meter (Aalborg GFCS), upon which oxygen from a cylinder flowed into the reactor through a sparger until the potential set point was reestablished. The rate of oxygen flow decreased as the potential approached the set point. Each reactor was also equipped with a condenser, which allowed excess oxygen to exit while condensing the associated water vapor and returning it to the reactor. Pyrite was pretreated with silver according to the following procedure: 500 The leach reactor was filled with 1.5 The reactor was then sealed and the condenser, stirring motor and oxygen tube were installed. Before adding the concentrate, the solution was heated to the desired temperature using a recirculating water bath. Ferrous and ferric salts (21 The feasibility of recycling pyrite for treating subsequent charges of concentrate was also examined. In each of the tests, upon completion of the first test, the supernatant solution was decanted from the reactor while retaining the residue. Then, new solution containing the desired amount of sulfuric acid was added. This new solution was heated to 80 At the end of each test, the contents of the reactor were emptied to a flask and filtered. The solid residue was collected for analysis by multiacid digestion and induction coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy. The dried residue was weighed, then coned and quartered to obtain a representative sample for analysis. Solid assays were conducted by a local commercial laboratory (Inspectorate, Richmond, BC). XRD analysis was carried out on a Rigaku Rotaflex 200 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation at 40 In this study, a copper concentrate containing 27% copper, two pyrite samples containing 97.6% and 99.99% pyrite from two different sources, and pure galena (99.5%) were used. Mineralogical and elemental compositions of the copper concentrate and pyrite samples are summarized in A number of experiments were conducted in order to evaluate the effects of addition of silver-enhanced pyrite with and without galena on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching. The first test was conducted in order to observe the rate of copper extraction in ferric/ferrous sulfate solution at 450 Two tests were conducted to examine the effect of adding two pyrite samples on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching. Upon completion of the first tests, recycle tests were conducted to examine the effectiveness of recycled pyrite. As shown in In order to enhance the catalytic properties of pyrite, samples were pretreated with silver ions. The finely divided pyrite adsorbed all of the silver from solution in just a few minutes. Leaching experiments were conducted at a pyrite-to-chalcopyrite ratio of 2, a silver-to-pyrite ratio of 100 Obviously, a dramatic improvement in the leaching kinetics of chalcopyrite was observed as a result of pretreating pyrite with minor amounts of silver ions. The morphology and elemental composition of pyrite after pretreatment with silver ions were studied using a Hitachi S-3000N Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Energy Dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used to determine the chemical composition of samples. The main purpose of this analysis was to detect silver on pyrite samples. According to the EDX analysis, shown in It might be hypothesized that when a pyrite sample includes some amount of lead mineral, silver is mostly adsorbed to the lead mineral rather than pyrite. Hence, it was important to examine the effects of galena with and without added silver on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching. Two experiments were conducted to study the effects of galena at two different concentrations. The amount of galena associated with pyrite #1 was obtained and corresponded to 0.283 As mentioned above, when galena is present in pyrite samples, it has been observed that silver is preferentially adsorbed on galena instead of pyrite. In one experiment, the same amount of galena that was present in pyrite #1 with the same amount of added silver was introduced into the reactor (without pyrite) (T12). After pretreating galena with silver for 30 In order to understand the effect of added silver and galena on the rate of leaching, the rate and extent of the interaction of silver with galena were examined. 2  [Ag] In the experiment shown in Another experiment was conducted and 14.5 Considering this analysis and the results of adding silver in the absence of galena in test T14, clearly, the increased rate of chalcopyrite leaching in the presence of galena and silver in test T12 is due to the direct catalytic effect of silver ions on the rate of chalcopyrite leaching. Therefore, unlike pyrite, galena samples pretreated with silver ions have no beneficial effect on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching. The rapid interaction of silver with galena observed in this study is in agreement with previous studies by The morphology and elemental compositions of the leach residues were analyzed. Samples mounted in epoxy were polished with 1200 In addition, X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on the solid residue of reacted chalcopyrite in the presence of galena (T11). The diffraction pattern was compared with the XRD of the galena samples used in these experiments. The results are shown in The XRD pattern shown in This reaction for the dissolution of galena in acidic iron sulfate solutions in the range of 80–110 In addition, the pH of the solution in experiment T11 was followed and a dramatic increase was noted. Since oxidation of chalcopyrite was slow, this increase in pH is attributed to the oxidation of galena to anglesite. This observation is in agreement with the XRD analysis. An experiment was conducted to examine the effect of galena in the presence of pyrite and silver. In this experiment, pyrite was added at a pyrite-to-chalcopyrite ratio of 2 and a silver-to-pyrite ratio of 100 In order to examine our hypothesis regarding adsorption of a lower amount of silver onto pyrite in the presence of galena, a new set of experiments was designed. In the previous experiment shown in This analysis also confirms that in the presence of pyrite, the silver concentration of the solution reached zero after 1 The morphology of chalcopyrite samples after leaching under different conditions was studied using SEM. In previous studies ( In order to compare the morphology of partially leached chalcopyrite particles in the absence and presence of catalysts, 105 Samples were taken after 140   SEM micrographs of chalcopyrite residues leached in the presence of galena are also presented in SEM micrographs of samples of partially leached chalcopyrite particles in the absence of catalysts and the presence of galena are shown in  It has been observed that, under leaching conditions described earlier, both porous and non-porous sulfur layers form on the surfaces of chalcopyrite regardless of the absence or presence of silver catalyst. The observation of only a non-porous sulfur layer in the absence of catalysts, reported in previous studies, can be attributed to low copper extraction under this condition which leads to the formation of only a thin sulfur layer on the surface of chalcopyrite. However, continued leaching leads to the formation of a porous sulfur layer. Conversely, in the presence of catalysts, the extents of chalcopyrite dissolution are considerably higher which leads to the formation of a thicker sulfur layer. Hence, the porous structure can be clearly observed. In this study, the influences of galena and pyrite on the rate of chalcopyrite leaching have been investigated. Pyrite and galena samples were pretreated with silver ions. It has been noted that in the presence of both pyrite and galena, silver reacts with galena preferentially. However, galena pretreated with silver does not enhance the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching, whereas silver ions, pyrite, and pyrite pretreated with silver ions all accelerate the rate of chalcopyrite leaching significantly. The process of using silver to accelerate copper extraction is costly unless silver can be efficiently recovered from the residue and recycled. In this study, it has been shown that direct recycle of the silver catalyst is not feasible; however, silver-enhanced pyrite can be efficiently recycled to subsequent tests. SEM and EDX techniques were applied to study the morphology and elemental composition of residues after completion of experiments. The results indicate that both porous and non-porous layers form on the surface of chalcopyrite regardless of the presence or absence of catalysts. Hence, acceleration of the rate of chalcopyrite leaching in the presence of catalysts is not due to the alteration of morphology of sulfur layers around chalcopyrite particles. This study was financially supported by the