Nakajima et al. [Trans. Inst. Mining Metall. 87 (1978) C194] developed a method to measure the shape distribution of particles in terms of their size and thickness. This method was later extended to include models for square, rectangular, and circular aperture screens. In this project, the empirical equation for the probability of particles passing through the rectangular aperture screen in the Nakajima et al. model is replaced with a “basic probability” model and the results are compared. Next, regression equations relating the efficiency parameter of the model to selected screening operating variables are developed. Finally a “modified” Hatch and Mular model is introduced in the Nakajima et al. model and the results are compared with the experimental data. It is shown that both the new models fit the experimental results obtained from rectangular-aperture screens better than the original Nakajima et al. model.A method for measuring the shape distribution of particles compatible with the common technique of size measurement with square-aperture sieves was developed by The circular arcs are the loci of data obtained with square-aperture sieves and the horizontal lines are obtained with rectangular-aperture sieves (  In a subsequent paper, The equation for the screen efficiency, According to the model of  It was found that the The work described in the present paper was carried out to test and extend the theory of shape discrimination by screening outlined above. This work had three objectives: to develop a simpler theoretical equation for the recovery of non-spherical particles in the oversize on a rectangular-aperture screen to replace the empirical expression used by Nakajima et al. (Eq. to examine the effect of practical screen operating variables on the shape distribution of screen products. This was done by developing a regression equation that described the variation of the parameter to extend the screening model to elongated particles. A sample, 205 kg, of crushed limestone aggregate of less than 20 mm in size, produced by a cone crusher, was provided. The sample was subjected to size analysis using square-aperture sieves of 19, 14, 9.5, 6.7, 4.75 and 3 mm. The cumulative oversize distribution of the sample was approximated by a Rosin–Rammler distribution of: The size density distribution of the sample ( A sample of this material was sieved on the slotted-sieves of 8, 7.2, 6, 4.9, 4, 3.55 and 3 mm width. The best fit values of A small-scale industrial-type “Mogensen” vibrating screen was used for the screening experiments. The screen was 0.45 m wide, 0.90 m long and vibrated with an in-flow circular motion. The screen feed rate could be controlled by means of a hopper and a vibrating feeder. The frequency of vibration of the screen could be varied between 0 and 1440 rpm by a controller, and the amplitude of vibration between 0 and 4 mm by changing the position of two balance weights. The screen surface inclination could be varied manually between 0° and 30°. The screens used were perforated steel plates with rectangular apertures of 6×20, 7×22 and 8×25 mm. The rectangular apertures were oriented perpendicular to the flow of material. Appropriate combinations of five independent operational variables, each at three different levels were studied ( The screen oversize from each experiment was sieved through slotted apertures of 7.2, 4.9 and 3.55 mm aperture width. The experimental design, the oversize recovery and the slotted-sieve data of screen oversize for each experiment are shown in The experimental data were fitted to Eq. In an attempt to improve the modelling results and to develop a slotted screen model compatible with the A full second-order polynomial model (Eq. The dimensions of some 750 aggregate particles in the size range of 6.7–9.5 mm were measured with callipers. It was assumed that the mass of each particle was proportional to the product of its dimensions. The size of each particle, The formulation of the Assuming that the shape factor of the particles is constant and that the particle volume is proportional to the cube of the geometric mean particle size, Eq. The parameters The assumption made by Hatch and Mular that the shape factors of the particles is constant and that the particle volume is proportional to the cube of the geometric mean particle size, which allows the use of Eq. Two second-order polynomial models, in the light of the equations proposed by  To investigate the effect of particle length, a revised