Mineral liberation has a strong effect on flotation performance. However, mainly due to stereological bias, the typical 2D scanning microscope mineralogical analysis is subject to limited representativeness and to high error propagation. In addition, grades calculated from the mineralogical distributions must be compatible with reconciled grades, estimated with mass balance calculations.
                  Despite the existence of several stereological correction methods, only few approaches have been developed to solve this integration issue. Beta reconciliation method is able to minimise errors in liberation data while reconciling balanced grades with the grades calculated via the distribution of liberation classes.
                  This is the first of a series of papers that aims at investigating and modelling flotation per size liberation classes. In this work, the beta adjustment method is detailed and optimized. Results from tests performed on a continuous chalcopyrite flotation circuit shows that the method provides the basis for a consistent balance, allowing to evaluate the flotation performance considering the size liberation classes.In terms of ore characteristics, mineral liberation is the parameter that establishes the maximum possible efficiency in any mineral concentration process involving only physical separation. Therefore, it is an essential criterion for designing new circuits, developing new processes and optimizing existing ones. This feature places mineral liberation as the central focus of modelling and simulation techniques. In recent years, the advance of automated mineralogy techniques has allowed detailed studies in several areas, such as: prediction of liberation spectra produced in mining and grinding ( design and optimization of flowsheets ( geometallurgical studies ( development of specific mathematical models ( Hence, representativeness of liberation data is fundamental. However, liberation data are distorted by error propagation. Two interrelated factors contributed to this: the representativeness of the analysed sample and the stereological bias. When drawn from a continuous circuit, samples are subject to errors associated to process instabilities, sampling procedures, and physical and chemical analyses. These errors, which are commonly below 25%, can be minimized by appropriate process control, good sampling schemes and rigorous analysis methods, which can ensure that the samples represent the flows in the circuit. In addition, liberation analysis requires specific sample preparation procedures. This analysis is performed per particle size fraction. To expose internal sections of the particles, for each size fraction, an aliquot is embedded in an epoxy block that is cut and polished to achieve scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis requirements. The automated mineralogy equipment analyses the mineralogical composition of a given number of particles which must be sufficient to provide a total composite grade compatible with the measured chemical grade of the sample ( In addition to that, the stereological bias - the difference between mineral distribution on a sectioned area basis (i.e 2D imaging) and the real volumetric distribution in the ore – may be a significant source of errors in 2D liberation analysis. This figure clearly shows that the areal grade determined by a 2D image can be completely different from the real particle grade, with biases higher than 100% in some liberation classes. Stereological bias was first published by Several other correction approaches emerged since then. Some methods involves the superimposition of more realistic texture patterns on the ore ( Also in most of these studies, there had been a concept that the analysis of a large number of particles would be able to reduce the stereological bias. If this was true, in the limit, it would mean that the 2D analysis could be used without correction provided a sufficient number of particles were measured; the issue would be to define this number. However, the work of Furthermore, Therefore, in any quantitative study, it is essential to make a correction and estimate 3D data from 2D image analysis; 2D data sets that have not been corrected can result in misleading conclusions. Then, the issue is the choice of a correction method. Every stereological or correction method must generate a 3D liberation distribution consistent with the sample chemical grade. This is a criterion to be fulfilled- or an objective function - in all approaches. This criterion has been considered sufficient when the liberation is analysed to provide information on a specific sample. However, when evaluating the behaviour of a process per liberation classes, data from all flows must be consistent among themselves according to the circuit configuration. Nevertheless, this process consistency is only achieved after the mass balance reconciliation, which adjusts and modifies all measured sample grades to reach values that represent the steady state process. Therefore, stereological corrections that adjust the liberation data to the measured sample grades, most probably, will not be fully compatible to the reconciled sample grades of the mass balance. An integrated approach is necessary due to this interdependence of: measured grades – which represents the mineral proportion in the sample and in its size fractions; liberation – which represents the distribution of this mineral per classes in a sample size fraction, but is measured through 2 D image analysis, subjected to stereological biases; mass balance – which must represent the behaviour of this mineral in a steady state process, interconnecting different flows represented by samples and their fractions, whose grades must be mathematically adjusted to reflect the stable regime. The beta reconciliation method developed by Another approach including liberation adjustment as part of a hierarchical mass balance procedure was developed in the study of These methods have the advantage of reducing the error propagation of the liberation data as well as performing the reconciliation of balanced grades with the grades calculated using the distribution of liberation classes. In this study, the Savassi method was applied to balance a chalcopyrite flotation process. In a first trial, adjustment of all composite particles was very good but proportions of gangue had been overestimated in several cases. To solve this issue, the method was revised and optimized. This work revises the method, details its intermediate steps and adjusts the balance reconciliation of liberation classes to promote a more representative mass balance. The beta function - a distribution function developed in the 18th century –aims to estimate the real probability of an event from the observed frequency of the occurrence of this event in a given number of observations. The fact that the value of the real probability of an event would be achieved only in an infinite number of observations provides an idea of the amplitude of this inference. This ability makes the beta function very useful for several applications. In mineralogical calculations, the beta function has been used for decades. The beta function is defined within the interval 0 <  In this approach, sampling campaign must be rigorously planned and conducted to ensure maximum sample representativeness and to minimise errors in the global balance. Preferably, both mass flowrates and grades should be measured, aiming at a balance with maximum redundancy and low biases. When a chemical element is part of the composition of a single mineral, the calculation is stoichiometric. In this case, and if mass flow rates are also measured, this conversion can be made before or after the global balance, if only this valuable mineral is of interest. For ores in which the valuable metal is part of the structure of more than one mineral or when there is an interest in obtaining the full mineralogical balance (including gangue), or when some flow rates need to be determined using grades, it is essential to perform the conversion into mineral grades before any level of balance reconciliation. The work of Global (or total or unsized) ore mass and water balances are obtained with a mass balance reconciliation software. In the case of this study, this step was performed using both the ore flow rates and mineral grades as inputs and the estimate of errors of each of these measurements. If: M g W and the estimated errors of each of these measurements, ΔM then, global balances will generate balanced mass flow rates of ore and water as well as chemical grades. All global mass balance flows are identified by the subscript (    Residuals of the reconciliation of these parameters In the mass balance per size fraction, the balanced values obtained in the global reconciliation must be kept constant or include minimum alterations. Within a reconciliation software, maintaining the values of global balance corresponds to assigning minimum deviations to these values. For the measured mass distribution in particle sizes and their respective grades, the deviations are established according to the estimated error in each fraction. Then:   the estimates of deviations of each data, Δms In addition to residuals, this stage will generate the following main results:   and, the reconciliation process of these values must be subject to the condition that the sum of reconciled grades of the size fractions is equal or the closest possible to the balanced global grade for each stream ( If the balance is dealing with   Automated mineralogy usually determines the distribution of liberation classes per size fraction. Each size fraction Eleven liberation classes were used for each size fraction. The first class, Each class The volumetric grade of the The grade calculated by this equation must be compared to the one obtained by the balance for the size fraction i. Once the grade from the balance is obtained from a chemical analysis and is equivalent to a mass grade, it is necessary to convert this volumetric grade into a mass grade, what can be made using the mineral and sample densities. The average grade in mass of each mineral class The grade of each size fraction will be calculated from the liberation data using Eq. This average grade obtained by the weighted sum of the liberation classes will be distinct from the average grade obtained from the balance per size fraction. The objective of the interpolation is to reconcile the liberation distribution with this grade obtained in the balance, such that the adjusted grade This adjusted grade will be the sum of the adjusted grades in each mineral class, weighted by its proportion: Therefore, the problem consists of determining the adjusted values of fractions The calculation starts with an estimate of a beta curve, using initial values for the parameters this estimated beta curve and the data measured by QEMScan the grade determined with this estimated distribution and that obtained by the mass balance per size fraction. gangue determined by the estimated curve and the analysed gangue Therefore, the adjusted parameters obtained with this method, mathematically, are the ones that best represent the sample, allowing that the calculated grade by the beta curve be the closest possible to the balanced data and, at the same time, to the sampled data. However, before initiating this calculation, it is necessary to solve a mathematical issue. The beta function is not applicable to extremes. It is not defined for zero or one (g The use of this original approach worked in most cases. However, in several cases, the removal of both extremes of the liberation distribution transferred the stereological biases of composites to gangue or fully liberated classes. This effect could lead to a much higher proportion of gangue or liberated particles than would be reasonable, which would be incompatible with sampled data. Aiming at optimizing the calculation, QEMScan was adjusted to indicate the data of fully liberated particles together with particle almost liberated, generating a class 0,9 < g The use of this highly liberated class improved the accuracy of the original method, once the liberated class is also reconciled by the beta function and only the gangue must be removed from this adjustment. To remove the proportion of gangue in class j = 1, Then, it is possible to adjust a beta curve to this normalized distribution of composites. The incomplete beta curve is used to perform this adjustment, where a and b are the parameters to be adjusted, Since the beta function is defined as a standard formula in Excel and similar softwares, it is possible to use a regular spreadsheet to perform this calculus. To obtain a first beta distribution, it is necessary to estimate initial values for From this initial cumulative function, a simple initial distribution This initial curve must be compared to the sampled data. Since the proportion of gangue, j = 1, had been removed from the sampled distribution, it is necessary to estimate the proportion of gangue to be added to the curve to obtain a complete initial distribution. This requires an initial estimate for the value of gangue, The estimated value of this parameter allows re-calculating the complete distribution curve, from j = 1 up to 11. The value for j = 1 is given by this equation, Eq With these values, it is possible to obtain the initial complete cumulative curve To determine the values of a, b and γ the method of least squares is used. In the original method ( The difference between the distribution of composite particles calculated by the beta curve The difference between the cumulative distribution of composite particles calculated by the beta curve, The difference between the balanced grade for the size fraction In this work, a fourth function was added, to guarantee that the proportion of gangue also had minimum deviation in comparison to the measured values, favouring lower deviation in terms of grades. This function is the difference between the proportion of gangue, Furthermore, as in this process of minimization, the most important aspect is to guarantee that the liberation grade is compatible with the size fraction grade, it was necessary to add a higher weight to the functions S The values of weights ζ and η will depend on the numerical values used in the distribution, if the values are from 0 to 100, as percentages, or from 0 to 1, as fractions. The use of these weights is important because they adjust the four factors to be in the same order of magnitude. The minimization process is done via Solver in Excel and determines the adjusted values for a, b and γ. With these parameters, the adjusted values of the simple and cumulative liberation distributions are determined. Once the liberation has been adjusted for all size fractions and for all flows, it is possible to perform the balance per size fraction. As most reconciliation softwares do not include this level of mass balance with redundancy, the calculation of this balance is distinct of the previous ones. The last level balanced via a reconciliation software was the size fraction. The beta curve adjusted the liberation data to reach the closest possible grades to the ones of the sized balance. However, to reconcile the balance, it is necessary that these grades are Considering these restrictions, there are two possibilites: Calculate the balance using Excel spreadsheets, adjusting the data obtained in the beta curve in order to reach the reconciliation or Use a reconciliation software to perform a complete balance for each size fraction, as if the mass of a single fraction, already balanced, would correspond to the total mass of a beneficiation plant. In this sense, it would be like if the size fraction, instead of being a second level of reconciliation, was the initial total mass, corresponding to the first level of balancing. Using this technique, the software can deal with liberation classes as a sublevel. The basis of this work is the same as described in The MPP is a continuous flotation setup, capable of reproducing industrial circuits. It comprises 12 cells of 1.7 L, similar to Denver laboratory cells, whose flows are interconnected by peristaltic pumps. By its compact form, the MPP enables good control of process variables, including air flow rate, pH, rotation speed and reagent dosage. Sampling can be performed by collecting the whole flow over long periods of time. A simple circuit that included rougher, scavenger and cleaner stages with a feed of 110 g/min (7 kg/h), at 30% solids and with a particle size approximately 85 percent <210 μm was used. As this circuit aimed to evaluate the characteristics of flotation size-liberation class, there was no regrinding of intermediate concentrates, which would require a complete change in the particle size distribution and, therefore, a complete resetting of the model in the middle of the circuit. Tests were conducted in an open circuit to obtain a high accuracy in the parameters. It is important to clarify that it would not be difficult to achieve circuit stabilization with recirculation loads. However, flow rates are small in the MPP, only some grams per minute in intermediate flows. If circuit was closed, sampling of recirculating flows should be performed in small aliquots of 20 s taken every 10–15 min. Then, to obtain the appropriate amount of material to perform all the analyses, at least 150 g and ideally 400 g, the duration of each test and ore feed consumption would be multiplied several times, what would not be feasible due to the limited amount of ore available for these tests. With an open circuit, it was possible to collect the intermediate concentrates over the required time, around two hours, what reduced sampling bias and promotes accuracy.  As collectors, sodium amyl xanthate and sodium isopropyl methylene thionophosphate were used. Ethyleneglycol-propylene oxide ether and MIBC, methyl isobutyl carbinol were used as frothers. Each reagent was added at a dosage of 10 g/t. Due to the small flowrates, the whole flow of products were collected. Therefore, the obtained material was not a “sample” as a “portion” of the flow, but was the whole flow accumulated during a certain time. Tailings were taken in aliquots of 1 min. In particular, the whole flows of concentrates were accumulated for two and half hours. Considering that the residence time of total plant was 45 min (~15 min in Rg + Sc and ~30 min in Cl), concentrate flows were taken during 3 residence times without interruption. More than representative samples, these concentrates were consolidated products from the circuit. Flows of solids and water were determined with this whole amount. From the products, samples were split for chemical and physical analysis. Each test had a sampling campaign that lasted 5:30 h, divided in four blocks, as shown in These products were screened at 210 μm, 150 μm, 74 μm and 44 μm and the fraction below 44 μm was analysed in a cyclosizer. Chemical analysis was performed for Cu, Fe, Si and S elements for the overall sample and for the size fractions. The mineralogical analysis was conducted in QEMScan for size fractions of −210 μm +150 μm, −150 μm +74 μm, −74 μm +44 μm and −44 μm +20 μm, for the feed and the rougher 1 concentrate, rougher 2 tailings, scavenger concentrate, cleaner concentrate and cleaner tailings. The liberation distribution in other streams was obtained through the QEMScan estimate and mass balance. Global mass balance was calculated with the a reconciliation software, using all measured data as inputs: mass flow rates, pulp flow rates, solids percentages and copper grades. This redundancy increased the balance accuracy ( Balanced values and sampled data are shown in Reconciled values were very close to sampled data for all parameters, solids flow rates, pulp flow rates and copper grades. Almost all solid flow rates and copper grades presented low residuals, below 4%. The only residual higher than 6% refers to a tailings grade, with value of 0.13% copper, for which the absolute difference was of only 0.1 percentage point. These results show that the plant was in steady state and was well represented by the samples, which allowed a good reconciliation with low residuals in all parameters. This global balance was appropriate for an evaluation per size-liberation classes. For each size fraction, the Cu, Fe, S and Si contents were transformed into concentrations of chalcopyrite (cpy), pyrite (py) minerals and gangue. A new mass balance was obtained with these minerals per size fractions, setting the calculation parameters to make the balance per size compatible with the flows and concentrations obtained in the previous overall balance. All flows presented correlation factors above 0.85 and the vast majority, factors above 0.9 between measured and reconciled values. Trendlines passing through the origin presented slopes very close to 1.0, being, in all cases, above 0,89.  The high correlation between measured and balanced data demonstrate that the size fraction reconciliation represents the process with good accuracy and is appropriate to be used as a basis for size-liberation balances For each size fraction of each product, a beta curve was adjusted to fit the liberation distribution. Once data of all products had been adjusted by the beta curve, the whole set of liberation data from all test products could be reconciled. At this point, it was necessary that the chalcopyrite grade calculated by the balanced data was equal to the grade obtained in the mass balance per size fraction. In a reconciliation software, this would mean assigning an error equal to zero to the size fraction grade, but this option of zero error precludes reconciliation. The use of Excel is a good option to perform this calculation.   Mathematically, the original Savassi method was very well grounded. The removal of both gangue and liberated particles, as the original method recommended, seemed a very good artifice to the use of incomplete beta curve to represent liberation. This approach worked well, but occasionally, gangue or liberated particles were over or underestimated in some fractions. This occurred because the parameter γ was used for removing and reinserting gangue and liberated particles, but the minimizing function was focused on the total grade and on the differences between the measured and adjusted composite particles. Then, γ was adjusted to reach the final grade, without considering the difference between the measured and adjusted proportions of liberated or gangue classes. As mentioned, main changes were: In dealing with data having the distribution expressed in 11 classes, incorporating liberated class to the precedent class. Then, liberated particles could be represented by the beta curve In the method minimizing the sum of squares of gangue proportion as part of the minimization function adding the weights in the minimization function Mathematically, First plot (a) shows a beta curve that would be obtained using the original minimization formula, adjusting a distribution with 12 classes, for this particular fraction. In this specific case, liberated particles would be underestimated. In a similar way, second plot (b) shows a beta curve that would be obtained using the original minimization formula without minimizing the difference of gangue proportion neither adding the factors, but adjusting a distribution with 11 classes, where fully liberated and almost liberated particles are a single class. In this case, gangue is overestimated. The third plot (c) shows the beta curve adjusted with this optimized method, including the distribution with only 11 classes and the new minimizing function, including the difference of gangue proportion and the weight factors. Adjusted beta function obtained with this optimized method represented all composite classes, gangue and high grade particles. In a typical analysis of propagation error, there is a variable obtained by a mathematical function of measured parameters. The deviation in the unmeasured variable is calculated based on the errors in the measured parameters. In the case of a mass balance, it would mean that the size fraction mass flowrates would be obtained by the sum of liberation classes flow rates, and that global masses would be obtained by the sum of size fractions. In other words, in the regular approach, the “whole” is obtained by its parts. Since parts may vary significantly, the whole will vary much more. Savassi method applies the reversal logic: it hierarchically determines the domain of possible results, the “whole”, that will condition the subdomains or, its “parts”. Once the process testing and sampling are According to that, the conventional error propagation analysis does not apply to this mass balance reconciliation methodology. Although the reconciliation per liberation class is an ill-posed problem with more than one solution, the data domain that attends all these restrictions is limited. In this sense, reconciled values per liberation classes are a set of data that is simultaneously compatible with: the measured data; all mass conservation restrictions among products within each level; values of previous and more reliable balances that better represent the process. Thus, this mass balance has high probability of being representative of mineral liberation reality in the process. In other words, once this The adjustments made in this work contributed to increase this representativeness. This reliability allows detailed process analyses which are the subject of other studies, where the behaviour of liberation classes in a continuous process was evaluated. ( As a suggestion for future developments, this method could be further improved to include multimineral particles. We thank Vale Mineral Development Center, which provided invaluable support. The contribution of all personnel involved in this study is greatly acknowledged. Special thanks to Orivaldo Savassi for his huge contribution in sharing all his knowledge about his models and approaches. Thanks also to Professors Arthur Pinto Chaves and Antonio Eduarto Clark Peres for incentivizing this publication. The support of Proex Capes, CNPq and Fapemig to UFMG is also recognized. Further, the support of