Supercritical CO2 (s-CO2) Brayton power cycles are proposed as the next generation of thermal energy conversion due to their high efficiency and compactness. They are also scalable allowing construction of power plants at different sizes without efficiency costs. The radial inflow turbine is the critical component of small scale s-CO2 cycles. This paper presents a comparative analysis of three design methodologies that are commonly used in preliminary design of air turbines and discusses their applicability to s-CO2 turbines while proposing a process in which the turbine design can be incorporated into the higher-level thermodynamic cycle design and optimization by using these methods. The codes developed based on the three different design approaches are validated against experimental data. The twelve radial turbine designs (3 models × 4 turbine outputs) are generated and compared to furnish significant observations on implications of selecting the relevant meanline design methodology in designing s-CO2 radial turbines. Results show that methodologies suggested by Aungier and Moustapha et al. (Moustapha) produce similar blade geometries and flow features while Whitfield and Baines (W&B)’s model results in larger rotor blade heights and different flow characteristics. The rotor inlet radius is determined primarily by the operating condition, while the blade heights are determined by the design parameters. Turbine losses and performance predictions of different meanline models are also examined.area [m absolute fluid velocity [m/s] diameter [m] empirical factor loss [m Mach number [–] rotational speed [rpm] specific speed [–] pressure [bar] gas constant [J/(kg·K)] power ratio [–] temperature [K] rotor tip speed [m/s] relative fluid velocity [m/s], power [W] relative velocity ratio [–] axial length [m] number of rotor blades [–] blade height [m] chord [m] enthalpy [J/kg] mass flow rate [kg/s] mean throat width [m] radius [m] one/three- dimensional computational fluid dynamics concentrated solar-thermal technology Kofskey and Holeski supercritical carbon dioxide Whitfield and Baines total stations shown in blade Rotor axial backplate exit hub hydraulic incidence ideal meridional passage radial relative isentropic tip, tangential tip clearance trailing edge total-to-static total-to-total windage absolute flow angle [°] relative flow angle [°] specific heat ratio [–] clearance [m] efficiency [–] hub-to-shroud ratio [–] spouting velocity ratio [–] meridional velocity ratio [–] density [kg/m flow coefficient [–] loading coefficient [–] angular speed [rad/s] There is a significant focus on renewable energy as a solution to climate change and sustainable global energy supply. Among renewables, solar energy is regarded as one of the most feasible because of its abundance – larger than the total energy consumption of the earth – and accessibility A large number of thermodynamic studies have been performed in search of the optimized s-CO The turbine design process starts with defining the operating condition and constraints which are normally done from cycle analysis. Once the turbine design specification is determined, thermodynamic and preliminary aerodynamic designs (one-dimensional) are conducted, followed by the three-dimensional Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) There are well-established preliminary (1D) design approaches for radial inflow turbines, and the design principles have been studied for several decades The aim of this paper is to help identifying reliable 1D radial turbine design codes applicable to a small size (≤20 MW) s-CO The principal components of a radial inflow turbine are illustrated in The nozzle consists of a series of annular vanes directed at an angle to impart swirl to the fluid and introduce it to the rotor at a particular angle in a circumferentially uniform fashion. Losses in volute and nozzle are relatively minor. Measured in terms of total pressure reduction, Hiett and Johnston Meanline design and analysis assume the fluid thermodynamic state and velocity to be uniform on a plane normal to a streamline running through the machine. The properties are assumed to vary only in the direction of the flow motion. The purpose of meanline analysis is to provide an optimal combination of overall geometry and flow features and to estimate performance parameters in a relatively quick manner. The outcome of the meanline design then can be refined using CFD and other analytical tools. In this paper, we consider the three most popular meanline design approaches. They all express their outcome in the same set of non-dimensional features but use different processes to get there. Aungier  These equations apply to both ideal and real gases. The turbine isentropic efficiency is the most important performance index and, as shown in Eq. This paper uses CoolProp The design output of the design codes includes the rotor and stator dimensions, the velocity triangles, loss analysis, non-dimensional performance parameters, and a feasibility check. As shown in Existing loss models are based on a combination of empirical and numerical considerations Incidence losses occur when the rotor inlet flow velocity vectors are not matched with the leading edge direction of the rotor blades. There are several models for estimating the magnitude of incidence loss using relative flow features, however, in this study, Balje’s correlation Passage loss is a general term referring to all the losses occurring internally in the blade passage and includes the losses due to friction, blockage and secondary flows. Eq. (4) used in this study includes frictional loss and secondary flow losses as suggested by NASA Tip clearance loss is due to the leakage that occurs through the gap between the rotor and the shroud. Taking into account leakage from both axial and radial directions, Dambach et al. In this study, the tip clearances, ε Technically, the passage loss applies between the inlet and throat of the blade passage. Therefore, it is necessary to include a loss occurring from the throat to downstream of the trailing edge due to a sudden expansion Exit loss is commonly calculated as the kinetic energy at the rotor exit as seen in the Eq. (7) Windage loss is one of the frictional losses, which occurs on the rear surface of the rotor disk as fluid leaks between the rotor and the turbine housing. Ghosh et al. The most well-known three meanline design approaches are used in this study, and they are identified either by the principal design parameters that the models use or by the authors of the literature which comprehensively outlined the preliminary design methodology. Aungier The initially estimated efficiency is refined through the iterations as described in The spouting velocity, In this model, the rotor inlet absolute flow angle is considered as a function of specific speed as originally recommended by Rohlik And the rotor exit flow feature is closely connected to the rotor inlet state by the Eq. With the sequence of calculations, the initial outcomes of turbine design and its performance are obtained. The optimized turbine design and thermodynamic state at each stage are eventually achieved through an iterative process. This methodology was presented by Moustapha et al. The exit swirl is normally assumed to be fairly small in the optimized design, thus the second term in the equation is omitted when it is used in the calculation. The flow coefficient is defined in terms of the exit meridional velocity normalized by the inlet blade speed, U Chen and Baines The rotor inlet/exit flow velocity, rotational speed, flow angles are directly and indirectly determined by the selected flow and loading coefficients in a straightforward fashion using the equations described in the literature Whitfield and Baines The power ratio, S The S Initial guess for the total to static efficiency is required for the calculation of the pressure ratio, but this value is updated through the iterations. It is noteworthy that in this model all design parameters are non-dimensionalized. Rotor dimensions are normalized by the rotor inlet radius and velocities by the speed of sound of the stage inlet state. Once calculations are finished, the results can be easily dimensionalized for the current design objective. The rotor inlet/exit relative flow angles, β Unlike the previous two meanline design approaches, the determination of some important flow feature parameters is left to the designer’s discretion in W&B’s model, with the suggested optimal ranges as seen in However, it is imperative to note that the database used for the suggested ranges is primarily derived from air turbine experience. For this reason, a set of parametric study is necessarily performed in order to determine the optimal design parameters conforming to the maximum efficiency and feasibility criteria. The results of the parametric study are shown and discussed in Section 3.1.2. Depending on the initial choices, it is possible for the meanline analysis to end up with a design that is not feasible. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the quality of the output of meanline analysis against empirical constraints derived from past experience. Through a review of the guidelines available in the open literature The rotor inlet relative flow incidence angle, α Rotor inlet and outlet Mach numbers to be much smaller than unity to avoid chocking and supersonic losses The ratio of meridional velocities to be limited to 1 ≤ C The axial length of the rotor to be larger than 1.5∙b The ratio of the exit shroud radius and the rotor inlet radius to remain below 0.7 Stage reaction, R, which refers to the ratio of the static enthalpy change in the rotor to that in the stage, to stay in a range of between 0.45 and 0.65. All three design codes considered in this paper are set to examine the feasibility of the optimized design against the above criteria. The design outcome is acceptable only if it meets these constraints simultaneously. To compare the three selected meanline design methodologies, four different power outputs levels (300 kW, 1 MW, 10 MW, and 20 MW) are selected. The conservative s-CO  Before starting the design calculations, we validated our code by comparing its results against past experimental data as well as through parametric studies that also helped us determine the optimal design parameters resulting in maximum efficiency. In order to check the applicability of the meanline design codes, Kofskey and Holeski’s radial inflow turbine (K&H turbine) Overall, the three methods generate very similar blade profile with K&H turbine with an accuracy of 3% except for inlet rotor blade height as the K&H turbine adopted no blade height at the rotor inlet. With regard to the estimated flow features, it is observed that the rotor exit velocities are underestimated by around 20% and this becomes the reason for having relatively lower relative flow velocity ratio with the Aungier’s method. However, the Aungier’s and Moustapha’s approaches both successfully estimate the inlet velocity triangle (magnitude of velocities and angle) and outlet flow angles with an acceptable deviation. The W&B’s model is shown to overestimate the relative flow angles while underestimating the flow velocities. The efficiency estimated by the design models tends to be lower by 8% than that of the real turbine. This is a common trend across all three methods and is because the methods are set to estimate the turbine performance conservatively with the selected loss mechanisms. Therefore, it can be concluded that all meanline design codes implemented and tested in this study are conservative in estimating the turbine performance. The deviations also may be caused by the trade-off between air and s-CO Parametric studies are performed, firstly, to check the applicability of codes and, secondly, to investigate the optimal ranges of design parameters for each code. With the predefined ranges of rotational speed and the spouting velocity ratio in This section compares the meanline design model outcomes and discusses the reasons behind it. The comparative analysis is conducted at four different rotor shaft power output levels. The results are summarised in figures for turbine blade profile and velocity triangles. The numerical values for key parameters are tabulated in the Appendix.    Thus, the specific energy, Δh is an important factor for determining r The rotor velocity triangles remain the same independently of turbine sizes. The results imply that Moustapha’s model is also capable of presenting the scalability. It is also worthwhile to note that the variation of flow features in the Moustapha’s model is primarily influenced by the specific energy as seen in the Eqs.  The power ratio does not vary with the power output for fixed operating conditions (e.g. specific energy). The flow angles also remain unchanged. Thus, the rotational speed changing with increasing power level is the determinant for the significant increment in rotor inlet radius. The blade height computation process is much more complicated involving more than 21 correlations in W&B’s model, however, it is possibly said that the degree of variation is an order of the offset of the mass flow rate and rotational speed change as it was for the other two models. With regard to the velocity triangles as seen in   With regard to the velocity triangles, it is observed that the velocity triangles of Aungier’s and Moustapha’s models are in good agreement as seen in Special attention should be made to the rotor exit hub to shroud radius ratio, ν  The Aungier’s and Moustapha’s turbine designs produce almost the same amount of total loss although each loss shows different contribution subject to a design model. Moustapha’s turbine design incurs larger incidence loss (12%–17%) and lower tip clearance (−8% to −20%) compared to Aungier’s turbine design. On the other hand, W&B’s turbine design tends to create more total loss (10%–15%) than the other two designs, and the difference becomes greater in the larger turbines. This is because the W&B model results in higher velocities, which becomes the root-cause for the higher incidence (>600 to 800%) and exit (>133%) losses. It is noteworthy that the incidence model applied to the three codes does not contain the optimum incidence angle value, β  In spite of the numbers in Finally, the optimal rotor speed attaining the maximum turbine efficiency is investigated using the three meanline design approaches. This is to investigate the capability of each meanline design in determining the optimal rotor speed. To sum up, key features and results of three different meanline design models are tabulated in, but not limited to Three meanline design codes for s-CO This paper is aimed to help turbine designers select the appropriate meanline design methodology in designing s-CO The rotational speed, N, and the specific energy, Δh (=W/ Aungier’s and the Moustapha’s methodologies produced similar blade geometry and flow features. W&B’s model resulted in larger rotor blade heights and larger flow velocities. The rotor inlet radius is determined primarily by the operating condition, not by the design parameters, and it was almost identical in all three methods. It is noteworthy that W&B’s model offers the largest degree of freedom in design, while the Aungier’s model provides a limited chance of design flexibility. Turbine losses and performance predictions of different meanline models were examined. Fairly acceptable level of turbine efficiencies was achieved with all meanline design codes. Turbine scalability by the constant specific speed is proved as the identical turbine performance is achieved regardless of power output. The analysis shows that the Aungier’s and Moustapha’s turbine designs produce almost the same amount of total loss while W&B’s turbine predicts larger loss because of higher flow velocities. The results also provide an implication that the fixed clearance gap determined by the manufacturing considerations may be suitable for small size turbine meanline analysis, unlike large size turbines. The design outcomes and their performance estimation should be validated eventually against experimental data. Unfortunately, well-defined radial inflow turbine test data is not available, especially for s-CO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was performed as part of the 