This study employed high-sensitivity and high-resolution secondary ionizing mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS) to determine the distribution of Au, As, Cu, Se, and S isotopes of pyrite from the Shuiyindong Au deposit, southwestern China. NanoSIMS maps show that Au occurs as solid solution, and heterogeneously distributes at micron scale in the ore pyrite, which is the overgrowth of the preexisting synsedimentary or hydrothermal pyrite core, commonly rimmed again by the As- and Au-poor outermost zone. There is no detectable Au in the synsedimentary pyrite. Invisible Au was observed to fill in the submicron-scale cracks of the ore pyrite. Meanwhile, element line profile analysis shows that Au occurs in three discrete climaxes in the ore pyrite. In-situ S isotopic analyses identified two types of S sources. The synsedimentary pyrites have large negative δ34S values ranging from −38.3‰ to −18.8‰, which is a typical biogenetic S generated by bacterial reduction of sea water sulfate. The hydrothermal pyrites with zoned texture have a narrow δ34S range of −3.5‰～−7.4‰ with a median of 2.3‰, similar to the recently published sulfur isotope data of the Southwest China’s Carlin-type gold deposits except for the Lannigou Mine. Combining the distribution of Au and S isotopes in pyrite indicates that the Au-carrying zones have lower δ34S values than that of the ore-unrelated zones. These NanoSIMS observations indicate that the Au mineralization was closely associated with strong deformation of the host rock. The Au forming the deposit was exotic, instead of the reactivated Au in the preexisting pyrite formed in the synsedimentary basin. The mineralization progress was multistage. The distribution of Au and S isotopes is hard to interpret by the viewpoint of metamorphic fluid or fluid pressure fluctuation. Instead, it is more consistent with magmatic fluid, likely contaminated by sedimentary sulfur during its ascending to the surface. In addition, the multistage ore formation pattern discovered in this study poses new challenges to determine the mineralization age of the Au deposits in southwestern China.We can clearly describe the geological and geochemical characteristics of most orogenic or Carlin-type gold deposits at a deposit scale, however, some significant issues including sources of ore fluids and metals (e.g., Au, As, etc.) and mineralization processes of these gold deposits have been under debate for decades ( Southwestern Guizhou, known as the “Golden Triangle” of southwestern China, is a major area of Carlin-type Au deposits in China. The area hosts dozens of Carlin-type Au deposits, such as Lannigou (i.e., Jinfeng), Jinya, Shuiyindong, etc. ( In this study, we used NanoSIMS to characterize the states and distribution of Au and other trace elements in pyrite. Coupled with in-situ analyses of S isotopes, we aimed to provide new constraints on the Au and ore fluid sources as well as the Au mineralization processes of the Shuiyindong Au deposit. Dian-Qian-Gui, the “Golden Triangle” at the junction of the three provinces of Yunnan, Guangxi, and Guizhou, occurs along the southwestern margin of the Yangtze craton ( Shuiyindong is the largest Au mine (greater than 100 tons of Au reserves) in the Huijiabao ore field, located in a nearly E-W-trending anticline area of approximately 20 km in length and 5 km in width. The ore field hosts seven Au deposits of Zimudang, Taipingdong, Shuiyindong, Zhaojiaping, Xionghuangyan, Puzilong, and Zaofanshan from west to east ( The sulfides were observed to occur along the bedding planes in the underground mine exposure forming a harbor-shaped distribution ( Ore-related alternations including decarbonation, silicification, and sulfidation in Shuiyindong are comparable to those of the Carlin-type Au deposits in Nevada, USA ( Based on petrographic observations and Backscattered electron (BSE) analysis, pyrites in the Shuiyindong deposit are classified into two types: synsedimentary pyrite, for example framboidal pyrite ( Arsenopyrite displays a needle-like or diamond shape and is paragenetic with hydrothermal pyrite ( These are post-ore sulfides unrelated to the Au mineralization. Of these, stibnite is not common in the Shuiyindong Au deposit. Realgar and orpiment are often observed on the normal fault planes developed during the post-ore stage ( Most Au hosted in the arsenian pyrite in Shuiyindong is invisible. Some micron-sized native Au particles in pyrite have been occasionally discovered ( Jasperoid and quartz: the quartz veins along or intersecting with bedding planes are products of the Indosinian orogeny or post-ore structural activities, and are unrelated to the Au mineralization ( Calcite: hydrothermal calcite (vein) is common in Shuiyindong. Some calcite veins have formed accompanying sulfidation and Au deposition. Some calcite veins are the product of late structural activities and are unrelated to the Au mineralization ( Ferroan carbonate minerals include ferroan calcite and dolomite, which formed during the syngenetic stage, and have been proposed to be the Fe source forming the Au-carrying pyrite ( Eight representative ore samples were collected from the second and third units of the Longtan Formation in the underground tunnel of the Shuiyindong Mine ( BSE imaging and chemical composition analyses of pyrite were performed using a JXA-8800R electron microprobe equipped with X-ray wavelength dispersive spectrometers (WDSs) in the State Key Laboratory of Isotope Geochemistry, CAS (Guangzhou). Iron, As, S, Co, Ag, and Au etc. were detected under the working conditions of a 25.0-kV acceleration voltage, 40-nA beam current, and 1–10-μm electron beam diameter depending on the width of the pyrite overgrowth zones. The counting time was 100 s for Au, and 20 s for the other elements. The Au detection limit in arsenian pyrite under the operating conditions above mentioned was 200–300 ppm. For BSE imaging of the pyrite, the beam current was reduced to 5 nA to improve the resolution and contrast. The following sulfides and native metals were used as standards: FeS Trace element mapping and in situ S isotope determination in pyrite was conducted using a CAMECA NanoSIMS 50L mass spectrometer at the Institute of Geology and Geophysics, CAS. First, mapping images of S ( We obtained clear elemental distribution patterns for As, Au, Cu, Se, and S in the pyrite. They showed the fine texture of the zoned pyrite and characterized the states and distributions of these elements ( The in-situ S isotopic compositions of pyrite from the Shuiyindong Au deposit are listed in For the typical Carlin-type Au deposits in Northern Nevada, USA, ore fluids have been suggested to have been derived from deeply emplaced large intrusions ( Our NanSIMS observations did not identify significant Au in the synsedimentary pyrite. This observation was consistent with previous trace element analysis of pyrite of the Shuiyindong Au deposit ( In-situ S isotopic analysis provides further evidence of exotic Au forming the deposit. The results show that most ore-related pyrites have a relatively narrow range of S isotope from −3.5‰ to 5.7‰ except for one sample up to 7.4‰ ( The zoned texture of the hydrothermal pyrite is a record of its growth history, water–rock interaction, fluid chemistry, and evolution ( The high-resolution NanoSIMS maps of pyrite from the Shuiyindong Au deposit provide new findings such as the lack of detectable Au in the synsedimentary pyrite, microcrack-filling of invisible Au, and three Au climaxes in the ore pyrite. In-situ analysis indicated the ore pyrites have a narrow S isotopic range similar to magmatic S. These observations combined with the geological characteristics of the deposits and previous geophysical investigations show that the Au is exotic rather than from the interior of the preexisting pyrite. The metallogenic process consists of multistage Au enrichment. The structural deformation resulted in host rock rupturing and facilitated fluid migration. Combined with the S isotopic feature, we suggest that Au and S of the Shuiyindong Au deposits most likely derived from a concealed deep magmatic chamber. The thick sedimentary cover of the Youjiang Basin may be the reason for the lack of felsic intrusive rocks or dikes exposed at the surface. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We would like to thank Dr. Lin Hou of the Chengdu Center, China Geological Survey, and manager Faen Chen of the Zijin Mining Group Company Limited for their help in accessing the ore field and sampling. We are especially grateful to Dr. Jianchao Zhang and Jialong Hao of the Institute of Geology and Geophysics, CAS, for their help analyzing the element mapping and S isotopic compositions of the pyrite. This work was jointly funded by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: