This special issue contains a selection of papers presented at Bio and Hydrometallurgy ’10, one of a series of conferences on this topic running since the 1990s. The conference was held at the Vineyard Hotel in Cape Town, South Africa in November 2010 and kindly sponsored by Goldfields Ltd. It was attended by delegates from Australia, Brazil, China, Germany, France, Belgium, Finland, UK, Kazakstan, India, Iran, Turkey, Japan, Korea, Canada, Egypt, DRC and South Africa, drawn from academia, the science councils and industry. The meeting focussed on developments in leaching, solvent extraction and ion exchange, biohydrometallurgy using micro-organisms in metal extraction and associated remediation processes, hydrometallurgy, and other applications of biotechnology in minerals engineering. The papers were biased towards biohydrometallurgy for metal recovery (approximately two-thirds), addressing equally the microbiology and engineering aspects of the process. Hydrometallurgy and remediation systems made of the topics of some one third of the presentations. In the bioleaching space, the growing understanding of the microbial communities was evident through the papers on identification of the components of microbial communities, microbial surfaces and polysaccharides, microbial community dynamics in evolving systems and microbial attachment and colonisation. Surface properties, mineral–microbe interactions and mineralogy were focal areas. Utilisation of these, and other, biological systems in bioremediation systems was evident. The concept paper, presented by Goldfields, validating the ASTER process for the remediation of thiocyanate and cyanate containing waste streams for commercial application demonstrated the importance of industrial participation. In addition, the bioprocessing of electronic wastes was illustrative of the focus on maximising research productivity and a new addition to the conference theme, illustrating the importance of considering waste streams as new resources. Following the conference, the authors were invited to submit final papers incorporating the discussions taking place during the meeting for consideration for this Special Issue of Minerals Engineering. All papers accepted have been peer-reviewed, according to the Elsevier standards and compiled into this special issue. The next conference in this series Bio and Hydrometallurgy ’12 will be held in Falmouth, UK in June 2012.