Magnetic Fe3O4/CeO2 composites with highly ordered mesoporous structure and large surface area were synthesized by impregnation-calcination method, and the mesoporous CeO2 as support was synthesized via the hard template approach. The composition, morphology and physicochemical properties of the materials were characterized by XRD, SEM, TEM, XPS, Raman spectra and N2 adsorption/desorption analysis. The mesoporous Fe3O4/CeO2 composite played a dual-function role as both adsorbent and Fenton-like catalyst for removal of organic dye. The methylene blue (MB) removal efficiency of mesoporous Fe3O4/CeO2 was much higher than that of irregular porous Fe3O4/CeO2. The superior adsorption ability of mesoporous materials was attributed to the abundant oxygen vacancies on the surface of CeO2, high surface area and ordered mesoporous channels. The good oxidative degradation resulted from high Ce3+ content and the synergistic effect between Fe and Ce. The mesoporous Fe3O4/CeO2 composite presented low metal leaching (iron 0.22mgL−1 and cerium 0.63mgL−1), which could be ascribed to the strong metal-support interactions for dispersion and stabilization of Fe species. In addition, the composite can be easily separated from reaction solution with an external magnetic field due to its magnetic property, which is important to its practical applications.Dyes, pharmaceuticals, pesticides and other organic contaminants in waste water are toxic, bio-refractory and high concentrated, which greatly damage aquatic life and human health CeO One effective way to improve the catalytic activity of CeO Recent studies have shown that ordered mesoporous materials with uniform and adjustable mesopores, high surface areas, and large pore volumes are promising candidates for the dispersion of metal oxides In this work, we first synthesized ordered mesoporous CeO All reagents were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification. The magnetic mesoporous Fe For the synthesis of magnetic mesoporous Fe For comparison, irregular porous CeO Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab(9) diffractometer at a scanning rate of 8° min The Fenton-like catalytic activities of the as-prepared samples were evaluated by the removal of MB as a model reaction. Batch removal experiments were performed in a conical flask (250  The morphologies of CeO  We used MB as a model organic contaminant to investigate the removal efficiency of the as-prepared materials. To investigate the influence of different CeO As traditional Fenton reaction suffers from narrow pH range, the effect of initial pH value on the removal of MB with Fe To better understand the roles of cerium and iron in Fenton-like catalytic reaction, XPS spectra of mesoporous Fe Raman spectroscopy was applied to provide detailed crystal structure information including the lattice vibrational states and defects of the materials. The effective method for the identification of reactive species in the Fenton system is free radical quenching experiment, and t-butanol was applied as scavenger of Based on above analysis, a possible mechanism of MB removal by magnetic mesoporous Fe Mesoporous CeO This work was supported by the