Objectives
                  Following chewing a solid food, the median particle size, X50
                     , is determined after N chewing cycles, by curve-fitting of the particle size distribution. Reduction of X50
                      with N is traditionally followed from N ≥ 15–20 cycles when using the artificial test food Optosil®, because of initially unreliable values of X50
                     . The aims of the study were (i) to enable testing at small N-values by using initial particles of appropriate size, shape and amount, and (ii) to compare measures of chewing ability, i.e. chewing efficiency (N needed to halve the initial particle size, N(1/2-Xo)) and chewing performance (X50
                      at a particular N-value, X50,N
                     ).
               
                  Design
                  8 subjects with a natural dentition chewed 4 types of samples of Optosil particles: (1) 8 cubes of 8 mm, border size relative to bin size (traditional test), (2) 9 half-cubes of 9.6 mm, mid-size; similar sample volume, (3) 4 half-cubes of 9.6 mm, and 2 half-cubes of 9.6 mm; reduced particle number and sample volume. All samples were tested with 4 N-values. Curve-fitting with a 2nd order polynomial function yielded log(X50)-log(N) relationships, after which N(1/2-Xo) and X50,N
                      were obtained.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Reliable X50
                     -values are obtained for all N-values when using half-cubes with a mid-size relative to bin sizes. By using 2 or 4 half-cubes, determination of N(1/2-Xo) or X50,N
                      needs less chewing cycles than traditionally. Chewing efficiency is preferable over chewing performance because of a comparison of inter-subject chewing ability at the same stage of food comminution and constant intra-subject and inter-subject ratios between and within samples respectively.A major function of mastication is to prepare food for swallowing ( When chewing starts on a sample of single-sized particles, the comminution process is reflected in the reduction of the median particle size ( Regardless of the measure of chewing ability, a test on food comminution which includes solely short chewing sequences will be most feasible because it requires the least endurance of a subject. Furthermore, the initial phase of chewing is important to be considered rather than being ignored (see below), because (1) most reduction in particle size occurs here, and (2) this phase includes a transition from a slower rate of reduction to a faster rate which reflects the influence of selection in particular (cf. Discussion). To date chewing sequences in tests have been longer than necessary for some reasons. First, the present study will show that it is important to choose an initial size of the single-sized particles on which chewing is started which is a mid-size of the upper class of sizes. However, in several studies using sieving to separate size classes of an artificial test food (Optosil Second, the first larger sieve aperture through which the total weight of all particles and fragments will pass, should be included as a data point with the value 1.0 in the cumulative underweight distribution. Hence, the relevance will be shown of considering the first empty sieve as the top sieve of the series used, rather than the sieve below (the sub-top sieve) on which most if not all initial particles are retained in an initial phase of chewing. Third, a fairly large amount of initial particles has been used in the abovementioned studies using Optosil, i.e. 8 cubes of 8 mm or 17 cubes of 5.6 mm. Because of a limited number of posterior teeth and predominantly one-sided chewing, such numbers of large particles (which are easily transported by the tongue) will initially saturate the breakage sites on the teeth ( Another advantage for limiting the amount of initial particles is reducing the bite force which is required to fracture particles. This bite force is approximately proportional to the number of selected particles, which decreases with smaller numbers of offered particles ( Limiting the required bite force can further be attained by using half-cubes rather than cubes as initial particles. With the same percentage of deformation needed to initiate fracture, the work (force x displacement) needed to initiate fracture will be half for half-cubes than for cubes of the same size. Another advantage of using half-cubes is that the volume of a half-cube corresponds more than that of a cube with the mean volume of irregularly shaped flakes, which are formed during chewing on Optosil ( The first aim of the present study is to enhance feasibility of carrying out a test on chewing ability using a solid test food without ignoring the initial phase of chewing. To that end, the effect of using initial particles of appropriate shape, size and amount will be examined on the quality and validity of curve-fitting with the Rosin-Rammler equation and on relationships between The study was carried out in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration, and approved by the University Ethics Committee (Ref no. 2017060201). Eight students from the School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University (4 males and 4 females), gave informed consent, and participated in the chewing experiments. The mean age was 23.6 years (SD 1.3, Using brass moulds, cubes with an edge size of 8.0 mm and half-cubes with a larger edge size of 9.6 mm were made of Optosil  Each particle sample was weighted with an accuracy of 1 mg, and placed in a separate labelled cup. Furthermore a series of labelled containers was prepared for collecting the outcome particles after chewing. These containers were each provided with a household sieve by which a labelled coffee-filter (with a round bottom) was supported. The subjects were blinded for the labelling on the cups, containers and coffee-filters. The observer was seated at a distance of 2 m from the subject, for observing the movement of a marker on the subject’s chin during chewing. The subject was sitting upright in a comfortable chair. An assistant who was seated alongside the subject handled the cups with the particle samples, while the observer provided the subject with the right combination of container, household sieve and coffee-filter. The chewing outcome belonging to a particular condition of particle type and number was pooled across the various trials in the same coffee-filter. When the same container was needed by chance, the observer carried out a fake change of containers to keep the subject blinded for the conditions of the next chewing trial. Observer and assistant had an identical list to communicate about the progress of a session by subsequently mentioning a stage number. The assistant transferred the samples one-by-one to a soup spoon, sprayed some water on the particles, and handed the filled spoon to the subject. The subject was instructed by the observer to transfer the particles from the spoon to the tongue, and was then instructed to start chewing. Before the chewing experiments were started, subjects were instructed to chew in a habitual way and not to swallow during chewing sequences. The observer followed the cycle numbers using a custom-made spreadsheet in Excel The particles in the coffee-filters were cleaned using a diluted solution of a dish-washing detergent in hot water (80 °C) and by rinsing with hot clean water. The coffee-filters were then folded as bags with the particles inside, which were dried overnight in an oven at 60 °C. Each dried bags was weighted and emptied in a stack of 10 wire sieves (diameter 100 mm), with sieve apertures of 8.00, 5.60, 4.00, 2.80, 2.00, 1.40, 1.00, 0.71, 0.50, and 0.25 mm (in general, a factor √2 between successive apertures). While the stack was placed on a sheet of smooth baking paper to recover fragments which might fall outside the stack, a bag was emptied in the stack by tapping the bottom while carefully opening the bag hold up-side-down. Furthermore, following initial emptying, the interior of the bag was gently brushed to release all small fragments. The emptied coffee-filter was weighted and the weight of the chewing outcome equalled the difference between the weight of the bag including content and the weight of the emptied coffee-filter. Following the procedure of For each subject (n=8), 16 relationships between underweight and sieve aperture were obtained corresponding with 4 numbers of chews from each of 4 types of particle samples. Curve-fitting using the Rosin-Rammler equation yielded estimates of Following some chews, The range of non-initial Chewing performance ( Undamaged hence non-selected particles were still present in the chewing outcome of the smallest number of chews, The selection chance across  The value of Using Graphpad software (Graphpad Prism 7.03; Graphpad Software Inc., San Diego, CA), one-way ANOVAs for paired observations were applied for statistical testing of differences between three or four groups of data in which one factor was involved. Bonferroni’s multiple comparison tests were subsequently used to determine significance of differences between pairs of data. A two-way ANOVA was applied when two factors were involved, with paired observations for both factors. The level of significance was 5%. In order to enable comparisons of ratio values between chewing efficiency and chewing performance, all values of measures of chewing ability were logarithmically transformed (cf. Section Overall the weight loss (percentage of the baseline weight), was 0.66% before sieving (SD 0.63, n     The examples in In order to examine whether the quality of curve-fitting is influenced by a pronounced presence of initial particles, values of Non-selected particles from chewing stage 1 (    Relationships between   In order to enable comparisons between chewing efficiency and chewing performance, all values of measures of chewing ability (cf. Regarding ratios in intra-subject values of chewing ability between particle samples, An SD-value related to the log-values of chewing ability from the various subjects within a type of particle sample, is a measure of the variation in inter-log values (hence inter-subject ratios) within that sample. These SD-values ( Apart from comparing the mean values of the measure of variation between log-measures of chewing ability, it is also of interest to consider the coefficient of variation (CV = SD/mean) of the measure of variation. This because a small CV for a particular log-measure of chewing ability indicates more similar inter-subject log-values hence more similar ratios in the values of chewing ability for the various types of particle samples than a large CV. Less than 4 types of particle samples were tested at A similar degree of scatter around the regression functions of relationships between log-values of chewing ability from pairs of particle samples, but a larger inter-subject range of these values yielded a degree of correlation of intra-subject log-values between particle samples which was larger for chewing efficiency than for chewing performance. Pearson’s correlation coefficients ( The present study shows that the initial particle size should be a mid-size with respect to borders of the size-classes which are chosen. Furthermore, it is essential to include a lower border of an empty top class, yielding a value of 1.0 in the cumulative size distribution as a logic extension of a series of cumulative values including an inevitable end-value of 1.0. When both conditions are met, unbiased values In accordance with theoretical and simulation studies of chewing ( In samples with only two half-cubes of 9.6 mm, the sample volume (0.88 cm While the selection chance is increased from 0.33 to 0.90 by reducing the number of half-cubes from 9 to 2, the number of initially selected particles decreases from on average 3.0 to 1.8. This reduction in selected numbers by 40% yields a reduction of about 40% in bite force (1.8/3.0*100%) needed to fracture 1.8 selected particles. Maximal bite force is considerably reduced in various categories of subjects whose chewing ability is greatly impaired (35–63%; for an overview cf. The initial chewing phase is important to consider because much food comminution occurs initially with respect to an Cumulative particle size distributions by weight, hence volume, are directly obtained using sieving. Such a distribution is of interest in sight of digestion and flavour release as the reversed value of The Apart from one-chew experiments, further evidence that the later phase of natural chewing is related to a two-way interaction in selection is given by the following findings. When the number of half-cubes is reduced from 9 to 4, hence reducing the degree of initial saturation of the breakage sites and shortening the phase with an one-way interaction in selection, the initial shape of The criterion for chewing efficiency is the number of chews needed to attain a value of Regarding the similar gradient − Hence, the initial curvature of Because of constant inter-particle-sample ratios for any particular subject, a sample-specific value of Inter-subject differences in chewing efficiency can be compared straightforwardly by choosing a range with larger numbers of chews for determining The second consequence of Regarding consequences of the characteristics of A comparison between subjects with different chewing ability is less straightforward for chewing performance than for chewing efficiency. In contrast to chewing efficiency, chewing performance does not directly reflect the amount of inter-subject shifts in Because preparing food for swallowing is a primary aim of mastication, the masticatory normative indicator (MNI) has been introduced with a cut-off point to distinguish between normal and abnormal masticatory function ( Two conditions should be met to obtain valid results of The authors report no conflict of interest. This study was financially supported by the This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China (ref no. 2017060201). The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China, The National Key Research and Development Plan (2017YFD0400101). The authors are grateful to Ms. Huan Liu, Yawen Pan, and Yujia Xi for their assistance, to Mr. Xiangjun Wang for manufacturing moulds used to prepare the Optosil particles, and to the subjects for their kind cooperation in this study. The observer followed the cycle numbers during chewing of the subject, using a custom-made spreadsheet in Excel Individual The conditions of a solid test food (intrinsic strength, particle shape and number) for an optimal differentiation within populations should be such that chewing on a sample of particles becomes gradually more difficult but remains still feasible, the more impaired a subject's chewing ability is. Using samples of 4 half-cubes, testing 2, 6 and 12 cycles enables the determination of a Using samples of 2 half-cubes, determining The total number of trials determines the time-load of testing. This total number is 9 trials for subjects with a non-impaired chewing ability when tested with samples of 4 half-cubes, and 8 trials for subjects with impairment factor 3–4 who are tested with samples of 2 half-cubes. The duration of testing will then be 8–9 min with a duration of 1 min per trial. When subjects with none impairment of chewing ability are tested with samples of 2 half-cubes, 16 trials are needed, including 10 trials with a single chew. Because testing duration per trial is shorter than 1 min when a single chew is involved, the total duration of testing will not exceed 10 min. A comparison of values of Testing 3