Titania nanotubes (TNTs) were prepared by anodization on different substrates (titanium, Ti6Al4V and Ti6Al7Nb alloys) in ethylene glycol and glycerol. The influence of the applied potential and processing time on the nanotube diameter and length is analyzed. The as-formed nanotube layers are amorphous but they become crystalline when subjected to subsequent thermal treatment in air at 550°C; TNT layers grown on titanium and Ti6Al4V alloy substrates consist of anatase and rutile, while those grown on Ti6Al7Nb alloy consist only of anatase. The nanotube layers grown on Ti6Al7Nb alloy are less homogeneous, with supplementary islands of smaller diameter nanotubes, spread across the surface. Better adhesion and proliferation of osteoblasts was found for the nanotubes grown on all three substrates by comparison to an unprocessed titanium plate. The sensitivity towards bovine alkaline phosphatase was investigated mainly by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in relation to the crystallinity, the diameter and the nature of the anodization electrolyte of the TNT/Ti samples. The measuring capacity of the annealed nanotubes of 50nm diameter grown in glycerol was demonstrated and the corresponding calibration curve was built for the concentration range of 0.005–0.1mg/mL.Although electrochemical growth of titanium oxide nanotubes (TNTs) on titanium and titanium alloys has a history of 14 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an enzyme present mainly in the liver, osteoblasts and placenta, and its activity and expression are clinical references in the diagnosis of hepatic or bone diseases. The bone ALP represents a biochemical marker of bone formation and general osteoblast activity. This enzyme is also involved in bone mineralization process The paper defines controlled electrochemical growth conditions in order to obtain predetermined sizes of the nanotubes films, in organic electrolytes, both glycerol and ethylene glycol, for which growth equations are proposed, for exposure times of practical interest (short exposure). The ALP adhesion at the oxide layer interface is favoured by the specific nature, diameter and length of TNT TNT films grown on three of the most common titanium base materials, titanium and TiAl6V4 and Ti6Al7Nb alloys are interdisciplinary and comparatively investigated, as their mechanical strength, biocompatibility, non-toxicity, corrosion resistance and easy processing The purpose of this analysis is to select the best support and preparation conditions in order to maximize the nanotube film biosensitivity towards ALP. Therefore, specific morphology, crystallinity and biocompatibility of these films were pursued. Also, among the selection criteria of TNT films, the degree of electrochemical homogeneity and their wetting ability were also considered. All these features are important in the surface response to the presence of protein markers such as ALP enzyme, for direct electrochemical evaluation. Under polarization, specific oxidation and/or reduction processes can occur at the interface or the electrochemical double layer characteristics may be altered and these changes, related to the marker, can be measured by cyclic voltammetry or by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The samples, Glycerol and ethylene glycol-based electrolytes (90% glycerol, 9.3% H Anodization was performed in a standard two-electrode bath with circular platinum mesh cathode and MLW DC power source, of 150 The nanotube films were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, QUANTA INSPECT F) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analyzer (EDAX), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, TECNAI F30 G The contact angle was measured using a PG-3 goniometer (Klimatest), using double distilled water. Due to the high porosity of the tested samples, the evaluation of the contact angles was carried out in the dynamic sessile drop mode. Biocompatibility tests were carried out using G292 osteoblastic cells (ATCC CRL-1423) cultured in McCoy's 5a medium (Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (Gibco, USA), 100 Electrochemical measurements were performed using a VoltaLab PGZ 301 Radiometer potentiostat connected to a classical three-electrode cell. TNT samples were used as working electrodes (electrode surface at 0.2826 Solutions of bovine intestinal alkaline phosphatase (ALP, Sigma-Aldrich, pro analysis reagent) were prepared with double distilled water just before use, in the range of 0.005–0.1 In order to improve the anodization, the influence of the processing time and anodizing voltage in two conventional electrolytes, ethylene glycol Several series of samples produced both on titanium and on Ti6Al4V and Ti6Al7Nb alloys were investigated. A comparative analysis of the nanotubes produced in similar conditions by anodization and subsequent annealing on the three different substrates was carried out (samples 18–20 in   Time evolution of the OCP of the nanotubes grown on the three types of substrates, both in ethylene glycol (samples 18, 19 and 20 in The measurement of the contact angle on samples 18 and 19 revealed that both types of annealed TNT films, obtained on titanium and Ti6Al4V substrates, have a pronounced hydrophilic character. The contact angle reached 31° in both cases, but this occurred 10 times faster in the case of the TNT film on titanium substrate than in the case of the TNT film with Ti6Al4V substrate, In vitro biocompatibility was tested for polished titanium sample 25 and for three TNT samples (22, 23 and 24) using G-292 osteosarcoma cells which were found to be a valid experimental model for primary human osteoblasts expressing alkaline phosphatase Based on the results presented so far, titanium was chosen as optimal substrate for the TNT films. Hence, electrochemical sensitivity towards different concentrations of bovine ALP (0.005, 0.5 and 0.1 The influence of the nanotube diameter on the electrochemical sensitivity towards the bovine ALP content is stronger in case of the TNTs grown in glycerol than for those in ethylene glycol, These results support the use of the nanotubes prepared in glycerol and subsequently annealed as an electrochemical sensor for bovine ALP. Calibration tests were performed for the EIS results obtained for bovine ALP in distilled water, by using sample 22 as electrode. Calibration curve of the impedimetric response measured in aqueous solutions of bovine ALP of different concentrations (corresponding to enzyme activities of 1, 2, 3.5, 15, 18.5 and 25 TNT with controllable dimensional features can be prepared by anodic exposure in organic electrolytes at lab temperature, under a DC voltage driven on a specific route. Structural and morphological analyses revealed that nanotube growth occurs by the overlap of hexagonal rings, with a cross section of about 7 Fluorescence microscopy studies showed that TNT films support osteoblast attachment and proliferation, being able to induce ALP biosynthesis. On contrary, polished titanium sample did not provide the right surface for cell adhesion that was reflected by the lower ALP content. On annealed TNT/Ti samples, both cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance data show clear quantitative dependence on the bovine ALP concentration. This aspect proves that the TNT interface is able to capture the enzyme, affecting the double layer. Both when prepared in glycerol and ethylene glycol, the TNT films present electrochemical sensitivity to the variation of ALP content in distilled water. Sensitivity increases with increasing nanotubes diameter, in both cases. However, the influence of the diameter on the TNT/Ti electrochemical sensitivity towards ALP is stronger for the nanotubes grown in glycerol than in ethylene glycol. Therefore, the nanotubes of 50 We would like to express our gratitude to Prof. Radu Silaghi-Dumitrescu from “Babes-Bolyai” University of Cluj Napoca for supplying the synthetic human plasma and synthetic human blood. The financial support from