Preprocessing of pharmaceutical powders is a common procedure to condition the materials for a better manufacturing performance. However, such operations may induce undesired material properties modifications when conditioning particle size through milling, for example. Modification of both surface and bulk material structure will change the material properties, thus affecting the processability of the powder. Hence it is essential to control the material transformations that occur during milling. Topographical and mechanical changes in surface properties can be a preliminary indication of further material transformations. Therefore a surface evaluation of the α-lactose monohydrate after short and prolonged milling times has been performed. Unprocessed α-lactose monohydrate and spray dried lactose were evaluated in parallel to the milled samples as reference examples of the crystalline and amorphous lactose structure. Morphological differences between unprocessed α-lactose, 1 h and 20 h milled lactose and spray dried lactose were detected from SEM and AFM images. Additionally, AFM was used to simultaneously characterize particle surface amorphicity by measuring energy dissipation. Extensive surface amorphicity was detected after 1 h of milling while prolonged milling times showed only a moderate particle surface amorphisation. Bulk material characterization performed with DSC indicated a partial amorphicity for the 1 h milled lactose and a fully amorphous thermal profile for the 20 h milled lactose. The temperature profiles however, were shifted somewhat in the comparison to the amorphous reference, particularly after extended milling, suggesting a different amorphous state compared to the spray-dried material. Water loss during milling was measured with TGA, showing lower water content for the lactose amorphized through milling compared to spray dried amorphous lactose. The combined results suggest a surface-bulk propagation of the amorphicity during milling in combination with a different amorphous structural conformation to that of the amorphous spray dried lactose. The hardened surface may be due to either surface crystallization of lactose or to formation of a low-water glass transition.Tableting performance is influenced by the chemical and mechanical properties of the formulation ingredients. In order to assure a good tableting performance, the powders are preprocessed using different unit operations such as granulation, drying, milling and blending, to achieve an optimal particle size, particle size distribution, stability, good flowability and a homogeneous mixture between the formulation components. However, the excipients or active ingredients might suffer from undesired structural changes which alter their surface properties during the different pre-conditioning steps ( Milling induced amorphisation of particulate solids has been reported by several researchers. It has been suggested that the solid state amorphisation upon milling occurs during prolonged processing times ( The potential impact of even partial amorphisation of the material on processing and product performance calls for careful characterization of the powders ( The objective of this study was to elucidate whether amorphisation of α-lactose monohydrate during milling is a surface induced phenomenon, and how the amorphicity evolves over time in the particulate structure. To this end, AFM is used to characterize the sample’s surface mechanical properties, and hence amoprhicity, by means of a recently developed methodology ( The material used in this study is α-lactose monohydrate. The lactose used to prepare the milled samples was obtained from DFE Pharma (Pharmatose® 200M, Veghel, Netherlands) and the lactose used for spray drying was purchased from Merk KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany). Ball milling of received crystalline lactose was performed in a planetary ball mill (PM 100 CM, Retsch, Germany). Crystalline lactose was stored in desiccator over P A solution of a 10% solid content of lactose was spray dried in a laboratory spray dryer built at RISE (Research Institutes of Sweden). The feed solution was pumped with a 5 ml/min flow rate through a 2 mm diameter orifice nozzle, and dried with an air flow of 0.8 m The morphology of the powder materials (lactose, milled lactose and spray dried lactose) was examined by scanning electron microscopy (FEI-XL, 30 series) with an accelerated voltage of 5 kV in high vacuum. The particulate samples were sprinkled over a double-sided carbon tape mounted on an aluminium holder and blown out with nitrogen gas to remove the excess of powder. Afterwards the samples were coated with gold (120 s, 40 mA) using a Balzers SCD050 coater to allow evaluation at high magnifications without damaging the sample with the beam. The surface area of the crystalline and milled lactose powders were measured by the BET gas absorption isotherm method using a surface area analyzer (Micromeritics TriStar 3000). An amount of 0.83 ± 0.08 g of sample was used to perform the adsorption of N Surface nanomechanical properties of the particulate samples were measured using a Multimode 8 atomic force microscope equipped with a Nanoscope V controller (Bruker, Santa Barbara, CA) operated in PeakForce QNM (Quantitative Nanomechanical Property Mapping) mode. Silicon nitride tip cantilevers (HQ-NSC 14/AlBS, Mikromasch (Estonia)) with radius of approx. 8 nm were used to perform the measurements. The cantilever spring constant was calibrated using the technique of Sader ( A set of force profiles (normal force vs. apparent separation) is collected at each pixel. These profiles represent the approach and retraction paths between the tip and the sample which corresponds to the loading and unloading to a maximum force (i.e. PeakForce) of 24nN. The area between the two curves corresponds to the dissipation energy (eV) and includes the work of adhesion as well as viscoelastic losses. The scan rate used to perform the measurements was 0.5 Hz with a PeakForce tapping frequency of 2 kHz. The size of the scanned area was 2 × 2 μm from which an average dissipation value was calculated from all the force cycles collected at each pixel (512 × 512 pixels per scan). 17 scans were collected on average over at least three different areas of several particles from each one of the samples. The dissipation data corresponds to the average dissipation at each scan. Ambient conditions were controlled and kept constant under a certain temperature (25 ± 1 °C) and relative humidity (20 ± 2%) in order to avoid recrystallization of the lactose during data collection. The degree of apparent amorphous content of milled lactose was determined using Raman spectroscopy (Enwave Optronics Inc., SLSR-ProTT analyser, Irvine, CA, USA) equipped with TE cooled CCD detector and a laser source with an excitation wavelength at 785 nm. The experimental methodologies developed to quantify apparent amorphous content have been described in detail elsewhere ( The differential scanning calorimeter used in this study is a Mettler Toledo DSC 1 STARe System. For calibration purposes a burn-in cycle (20 min at 600 °C) followed by Indium and Zinc checks were performed before the measurements. The checks (T Thermogravimetric analyses were carried out in a Mettler Toledo thermogravimetric analyzer, TGA2. The instrument was calibrated by using isatherm, nickel and trafoperm with a magnet placed on the sample to detect the temperature at which their magnetic properties change upon heating. Approximately 4 mg of the powder sample were weighted in a sample pan. The temperature was increased from 25 °C to 240 °C with a rate of 20 °C/min. The sample was held during 1 min at the initial temperature and during 5 min at the final temperature. The N The morphologies of the particles used for evaluation are displayed in the SEM images ( Particle size reduction usually has implications for the powder’s surface area. The extent of the surface area for the unmilled lactose and the 1 h and 20 h milled lactose is measured with BET analysis ( The changes in particle size and surface features during the milling process could easily induce surface-bulk propagation of material phase transformations (from crystalline to amorphous), which would have implications for the material’s mechanical properties ( The topographical features at the nanoscale observed in the 3D plot ( We have shown previously that by measuring surface energy dissipation it is possible to estimate the physical state of the material ( The complete set of all the average dissipation values measured at different areas for each sample is represented in a cumulative plot in The crystallinity can also be evaluated by measuring the thermal response of the material upon heating using DSC, though this addresses primarily the bulk properties. The thermal profiles of the lactose samples are presented in The 1 h milled lactose sample ( The differences in thermal profiles indicate that An intriguing observation is that the recrystallization and melting peaks occur at different temperatures for the milled samples compared to the reference samples. This may indicate that two different amorphous structures occur with different degrees of order that evolve towards different crystal forms upon heating, which melt at different temperatures ( The narrow and well-defined endothermic peak at 227 °C suggests that this is a melting transition for a crystalline material, although it does not coincide with the reported melting points for α-lactose monohydrate, anhydrous α-lactose or β-lactose. Thus, this peak may represent a different crystal form. The possibility of simultaneous occurrence of α and β lactose in mechanically amorphised lactose has been presented earlier ( The exact nature of this crystalline material remains unclear. Mutarotation of α-lactose to form β-lactose occurs in the temperature range of 60–120 °C ( DSC analysis thus corroborates the differences in the samples that are implied by the surface mechanical properties detected above with AFM, which strongly suggests a recrystallization at the surface after prolonged milling. Furthermore, it also contributes to elucidation of the surface-bulk propagation mechanism of the amorphisation during milling. Extensive surface amorphisation measured with AFM combined with the partial bulk amorphicity for the 1 h milled sample detected with DSC suggests that amorphisation is a phenomenon that begins at the surface and propagates to the bulk, disrupting the crystalline structure. Bulk amorphicity increases with milling time (e.g. DSC for the 20 h milled sample and earlier Raman studies ( While the AFM data is most suggestive of surface crystallization, all possibilities should be considered, for example it may also be possible that the increased hardness is a result of a different amorphous state. The water content of the sample and its binding to the structure influences the mobility of the lactose molecules, and thus the glass transition temperature ( While milling of lactose does indeed reduce the particle size for short times (of the order of one hour) continued milling can in fact be counter-productive in this regard. While the available surface area increases slightly, the particle size actually increases again at longer milling times suggesting that there is significant agglomeration - but that the smaller particles retain their shape during the agglomeration. This leads to a significantly different morphology of the particles after milling with a protuberant structure of nanoscale proportions. Dissipation measurements using AFM clearly indicate extensive amorphisation at shorter times, but at longer times the surface displays a much “harder” response, which is more characteristic of a crystalline material. This unexpected behaviour is reflected in the calorimetric response of the samples – the less milled samples display significant amorphous behaviour followed by crystal melting mainly typical of α-lactose and thus follow “normal behaviour”. The longer milled samples however show very different behaviour to the amorphous reference, and the well-defined crystalline melting peak is characteristic of neither pure α- nor β-lactose. It is speculated that the structural conformation of the mechanically induced “amorphicity” thus differs significantly from that formed during spray drying. This different structure appears to be intimately connected to the water content since a much lower water content was found for the almost fully amorphized lactose in comparison to the spray dried lactose. This reduction of water, probably lost during the almost complete disruption of the crystalline structure while milling, might explain the hardening of the particle surface. Thus, the mechanical behaviour at the surface of highly milled lactose is more similar to unprocessed lactose even though the particulate structure is extensively amorphous. An alternative hypothesis for particle surface hardening after long term milling is the possibility of surface recrystallization, which might reasonably be due to the increase of relative humidity in the sealed milling chamber associated with the expulsion of water from the crystalline lactose. In either case it is clear that upon heating, this anomalous surface structure leads to a different crystallization pathway for the amorphous material. Milling times are thus crucial not only for particle size, but also for the final bulk and surface properties of the milled material. The milling time will also strongly affect the subsequent behaviour of the material in terms of adhesion, water uptake and recrystallization.