The Gole Larghe Fault is an exhumed paleoseismic fault crosscutting the Adamello tonalites (Italian Southern Alps). Ambient conditions of faulting were 9–11 km in depth and 250–300 °C. In the study area the fault accommodates ∼1100 m of dextral strike-slip over a fault thickness of 550 m. Displacement is partitioned into three hierarchically different sets of discrete subparallel cataclastic horizons (faults
                     
                        1–2–3
                     ). Fault displacement is in the range of few centimeters (faults
                     
                        3
                     ) to a maximum of a few tens of meters in major faults
                     
                        1
                     . Faults
                     
                        1–2
                      nucleated on pre-existing joints, whereas faults
                     
                        3
                      are newly generated fractures produced during slip along faults
                     
                        1–2
                     . Each fault within the Gole Larghe Fault records the same evolution with development of indurated cataclasites precursory to pseudotachylyte production. Pseudotachylytes are usually generated at the host rock/cataclasite boundary and within cataclasites the mean clast size decreases getting closer to pseudotachylyte fault veins. Pseudotachylytes and cataclasites have a similar chemical composition which is enriched in Loss On Ignition, K, Rb, Ba, U and Fe3+ compared to host rock.
                  We envision two models for the evolution of the Gole Larghe Fault. In both models synkinematic fluid–rock interaction along a fault causes fault hardening by precipitation of abundant K-feldspar+epidote (and minor chlorite) in the cataclasite matrix conducive to final production of pseudotachylyte. In the first model, induration occurs progressively by differential precipitation related to fabric evolution in cataclasites. In the second model, induration occurs abruptly dependent on the development of full connectivity within the fault network and to fluid reservoir. Whatever the model, the Gole Larghe Fault represents a strong fault, where hardening processes resulted in a low displacement/fault thickness ratio and contrast with many mature weak faults where localized repeated seismic slip along the same weak horizons yields high displacement/fault thickness ratios.Exhumed strands of the San Andreas fault (e.g. Punchbowl and San Gabriel faults) are characterized by high values of displacement/fault thickness ratios resulting from repeated seismic ruptures along the same weak horizon ( The field association of cataclasites and pseudotachylytes has been often described in the literature ( In this paper, we will describe a fault zone, the Gole Larghe Fault, within tonalites of the northwestern Adamello batholith (Southern Alps). Inside the fault zone slip is partitioned into discrete subparallel cataclastic horizons which are developed along pre-existing joints and which are characterized by pseudotachylyte overprinting cataclasite. The exposure of fault segments several hundreds meters long on perfectly unweathered, glacier-polished outcrops and the presence of numerous markers crosscut by faults allow the details of fault geometry and kinematics to be resolved in the field on a range of scales of 10 The Adamello batholith consists of four main intrusive units ( In the northwestern Adamello (Avio and Central Peaks bodies), intrusive rocks record a succession of post-magmatic ductile-to-brittle deformations, referable to the cooling history of the pluton and including: (i) development of two main sets of joints striking NNE–SSW and ESE–WNW ( The study section of the Gole Larghe Fault is located in the upper Genova Valley (2300–2700 m a.s.l., N 46°10′–E 10°34′) within tonalites of the Avio intrusive body (star in Outside the fault, a pervasive network of joints is present in the tonalites ( Within the fault, deformation is localized into roughly spaced, narrow (millimetric to decimetric thick) cataclastic horizons, consisting of cataclasite and pseudotachylyte. Fault horizons are oriented on average 51°→195°, i.e. subparallel to J Given the presence of numerous markers within the tonalites (basic xenoliths, aplitic and pegmatitic dykes and mylonites, The geometry of the cataclastic network within the fault zone was studied in detail in an outcrop located at the front of the Lobbia Glacier, ∼     Rare epidote veins crosscut the cataclastic horizons at high angle ( In the fault zone, cataclasites–ultracataclasites are strongly indurated rocks with a dominantly green color due to the presence of epidote and chlorite. Cataclastic rocks have gradual or abrupt variations in thickness and fabric along the fault strike ( The intersection between Pseudotachylytes occur as fault veins, injection veins or more rarely as the matrix of breccia ( Pseudotachylyte fault veins have a thickness on the order of millimeters to few centimeters and, in well exposed major faults, they can be followed up to several meters (and exceptionally for several tens of meters) along fault strike. Exceptionally thick veins (> The Avio tonalites consists of 48% plagioclase, 29% quartz, 17% biotite and 6% K-feldspar ( Biotite is extensively deformed by irregular kinking. In some samples biotite appears either unaltered or weakly altered to titanite Igneous quartz (quartz Plagioclase is fractured, with tension cracks filled by chlorite and epidote, and micro-faulted, usually along cleavage planes. Deformation twins in feldspar are common. Cataclastic rocks record different stages and intensities of deformation, but most are different types of ultracataclasite. Protocataclasites consist of rotated polycrystalline fragments separated by a wavy foliation of epidote, titanite and chlorite. Protocataclasites usually mark the boundary with the host rock, but elongated domains are also found within the cataclastic rock assemblage, bounded by cataclasite and ultracataclasites ( Dark green layers are matrix-supported cataclasites consisting of K-feldspar In cataclastic rocks, clasts include: (i) igneous quartz, feldspar and biotite (replaced by chlorite), (ii) veins of epidote and K-feldspar, (iii) reworked protocataclasites and ultracataclasites and (iv) mylonites. Lithic fragments exhibit a variety of shapes. Quartz clasts with cuspate–lobate outlines are common, with concavity decorated by chlorite ( In thin section, the green-yellow lenses of strongly altered cataclastic rock are cut by epidote veins and show pervasive precipitation of epidote. Lenses include altered remnants of spherulites. Pseudotachylyte veins can be zoned or unzoned ( Very few samples from Veins consist of epidote, K-feldspar and an association of the two minerals. Rare epidote and K-feldspar veins cut cataclasite/pseudotachylyte ( The 2-dimension clast size distribution of quartz was determined on 100× magnification and 1.0 The area of each quartz clast was determined using the NIH-Image software ( The quartz clast size was expressed as the diameter The The mineral compositions of dark green layers, yellow-white layers and pseudotachylyte were estimated in the SEM-BSE images. On these images was generally impossible to distinguish chlorite from epidote given the very similar gray color of the two minerals. In general, dark green layers and yellow-white layers contain more K-feldspar and less plagioclase and quartz than the host rock; biotite is almost completely altered to chlorite ( Wavelength Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence analysis (WD-XRF) was conducted with a Philips PW2400. For analysis, powder samples were mixed and diluted at 1:10 with Li The average XRF compositions of cataclasite (8 samples), host rock (4 samples) and pseudotachylyte (7 samples) are presented in X-Ray Powder Diffraction analysis (XRPD) was conducted with a Philips PW3710 (working conditions 40 kV acceleration voltage and 50 mA beam current). The same cataclasites were first investigated by SEM-BSE and later analyzed with XRPD. This procedure allows a cross-check of data on mineral composition obtained with the two methods and an estimate (XRPD) of the mass fractions of chlorite and epidote (undistinguishable under the SEM-BSE). A semi-quantitative analysis of XRPD data was performed using the software X'Pert HighScore (Philips copyright 2002) based on the Chung method ( In the analyzed cataclasites samples, epidote is more abundant than chlorite (chlorite is < The orientation of Partitioning of joint reactivation into hierarchically different faults, with fault spacing increasing with cumulative displacement, can be explained by a drop in shear stress (shear stress shadow) in the rock volume surrounding the active faults ( Field and microstructural observations suggest that cataclasites were indurated before the development of pseudotachylytes. In fact pseudotachylyte fault veins, along the margins of cataclastic horizons, display injection veins intruding both cataclasites and host rock ( Induration is probably related to fluid circulation and solute precipitation during cataclasis. Fluid-present conditions during faulting are supported by several lines of evidence: (i) the intense fracture-related low-T greenschist facies alteration and veining of tonalites associated with faults ( Determination of the mineral composition in SEM images of cataclastic rocks indicates that K-feldspar and epidote are the main mineral constituents of the matrix of the dark green and the yellow-white layers (  Fault thickening is often related to the formation of sidewall ripouts adjacent to the leading slip plane due to local gradients in joint shear strength resulting, for example, from different degrees of joint sealing by early veining or by indentation at small deviations from planar geometry. Formation of sidewall ripouts could explain the large variations in fault thickness commonly observed over a short distance along the fault length ( Variations of fault thickness along fault strike could also be explained by the initial arrangement of joints reactivated as faults. Domains of strong damage during faulting are located at contractional/extensional bridges between en-echelon joint terminations as for example the E′–E″ contractional duplex structure with ramping horses in Most Localization of deformation is frequently observed in frictional sliding experiments along the so-called “boundary” or “basal” shears at the fault gouge–forcing block interface ( By comparison with the above experimental data, it can be suggested that, in the fault zone, the process of fault thickening by growth of the damage zone in tonalite flanking a reactivated joint is probably accompanied by strain localization within the cataclasite layer towards the boundary with the host tonalite. This conclusion is confirmed by microstructural observations. In sample 23-00 ( Many The geometry of pseudotachylyte veins indicates the same kinematics for both the friction-induced melting and the preceding cataclastic phase. Most pseudotachylytes are perfectly fresh, preserving unaltered primary microlitic phases ( We envision two end-member possibilities (model A and B) for the evolution of the Gole Larghe Fault. Model A involves progressive induration of each fault of the Gole Larghe Fault before production of pseudotachylytes, whereas model B involves instantaneous bulk induration of the whole fault zone followed by a random seismic reactivation of each fault of the Gole Larghe Fault. According to model A ( The clast size distribution data, which indicate high According to model B ( The homogeneous composition of analyzed cataclasites ( The Gole Larghe Fault is a fault zone with a low bulk displacement/thickness ratio (∼ In both models, the Gole Larghe Fault is inefficient in slip accumulation under the conditions of faulting (250–300 °C, 0.25–0.30 GPa and hydrothermal conditions). The San Andreas Fault and its anomalous weakness (e.g. Weak faults are characterized by high values of displacement/fault thickness resulting from repeated slip along the same weak localized horizon; examples are the Punchbowl and San Gabriel Faults, exhumed strands of the San Andreas Fault, which accommodate displacements > Strong faults cannot be just considered as an embryonic stage of development of a weak fault, but as a completely different type of fault. The Gole Larghe Fault example emphasizes how fault mechanics (and seismicity) and evolution are determined by a complex interaction of different factors including host lithology, presence of precursor mechanical anisotropy, local conditions of deformation, presence and composition of fluids. A similar geological setting as in the Adamello batholith is found in the central Sierra Nevada granitoid plutons (California) where strike-slip faults developed by reactivation of pervasive pre-existing joints along which fluids have deposited vein-filling assemblages similar to those in the Adamello batholith ( Preliminary versions of the manuscript were reviewed by several people which are kindly acknowledged: Caleb III Holyoke, Zoe Shipton, Darrel Cowan. A particular acknowledge goes to Jan Tullis for her in-depth friendly review. Terry Tullis, Neil Mancktelow and Anne-Marie Boullier are thanked for insightful discussions. Olivier Fabbri, Lori Kennedy Aiming Lin and Mark Swanson are thanked for their reviews and kind suggestions and improvements. Of course we remain responsible for the views expressed in this paper. Many thanks to Antonio Novello and Leonardo Tauro for thin sections, Daria Pasqual for XRF analyses, Federico Zorzi and Gabriella Salviulo for XRPD analyses, Stefano Castelli and Lorenzo Raccagni for polished sample. Funding by MURST Italian grant: Progetto Giovani Ricercatori (2000) MURST N248. The Geological Service of the Provincia Autonoma di Trento (Italy) provided invaluable helicopter facilities and is greatly acknowledged.