Growing awareness of the link between diet and health is fast changing consumer habits, so that there has been increasing demand for foods with health enhancing properties, such as low-fat meat products. This paper seeks to give a general idea of the various aspects of interest relating to product design and fat reducing strategy. These aspects concern sensory, nutritional, safety, technological, appreciation, legal and cost factors and are essential to a clear product concept, without which no product is likely to succeed. It also describes some elements that determine the feasibility of manufacturing low-fat meat products according to their structural characteristics and processing conditions, and the different quality assessments used in the study of such reformulated meat derivatives. This is particularly important for purposes of quality control and verification of product design specifications. This article does not enter into aspects relating to the influence of fat on product characteristics, fat reduction technology and use of fat replacement, which are discussed in the literature.Meat is an important component of the diet in developed countries. In the USA and most European countries it is a major component of total expenditure on food. It accounts for about 35% of expenditure in Denmark, France and Belgium; 30% in Italy, Spain and Ireland; and 25% in the UK, The Netherlands and Greece The need to reduce fat and cholesterol consumption is not simply a more or less well-grounded popular feeling. Leaving aside the controversial aspects of the subject, a number of health organisations, including the World Health Organisation (WHO) The fundamental goals pursued in reformulation of meat products must therefore address the lipid fraction in these products both quantitatively— Fat content has a basic effect on various product characteristics (flavour, mouthfeel, juiciness, texture, bite, handling, heat transfer, etc.) and therefore it cannot be reduced and/or modified simply by using less fat or replacing animal fat with another type of fat. Various reviews The same quality factors must apply to low-fat products as to any other meat product; however, in view of their particular characteristics, there are a number of specific considerations to be taken into account in determining what specifications they are to meet. This may mean imposing conditions of various kinds, and these will clearly count in determining strategies for fat reduction ( Consumption of processed meat is closely allied to public taste, and therefore low-fat meat products that are not acceptable in terms of palatability or appearance will not sell regardless of the health characteristics attributed to them. In other words, it is crucial for the success of fat reduction that reformulated meat products have acceptable flavour, texture and other sensory characteristics. Besides being perceived as healthier, the new product must offer good quality attributes, which should in principle be the same as those of the regular (full fat) product to which consumers are accustomed. In any event it is essential to identify a benchmark product whose characteristics the new product seeks to emulate. In most cases the benchmark for the low-fat product is the full-fat product; however, in some cases there have been studies aimed at establishing maximum consumer acceptance in relation to fat level. Fat has been shown to improve palatability by increasing tenderness and juiciness The concept of low fat meat product's demands that a minimum desired fat level is established in each case. This level seems to be associated with the way that the composition and the nature of the product are modified and with the way that this affects sensory and other properties. Byers Nutrition is a very important factor in food selection It is also important to remember the role of fat in satiety. Because of their high-energy value, lipids produce a sated feeling. This is not immediate, but as lipid digestion is slow, it delays the perception of a need to consume more food. If reformulated products do not produce a feeling of satiety comparable to homologous products with more fat, this may modify the amount of food intake. After taste, product safety is the main factor in food selection Differences between full-fat and low-fat product characteristics derived from the degree of fat replacement by water raise a number of technological problems in connection with processing and storage properties. A clear example of this is water-binding properties, which can be more important than fat binding properties in reformulated meat products. The added water must not be lost during heat processing and chilling Fat reduction can be accompanied by changes in the fatty acid composition of processed meats. Although there are considerable nutritional advantages, the presence of less saturated fats or oils with high levels of monounsaturated fatty acids (oleic acid) is associated with changes in the physicochemical properties of the fat (melting point, colour, flavour), and this produces additional technological problems regarding both the processing conditions and the properties imparted to meat products (e.g., texture or flavour). Interconnected with the above quality factors there are other aspects relating to “appreciation”, including such factors as usefulness, profit, preference, social values, etc., all of them very important for evaluating this kind of product. Emotional factors of this kind are often unrelated to intrinsic product quality characteristics, which explains why consumer acceptance of fat-reduced meat products is frequently based on perceived rather than on real product differences. This fact seems to be associated with the “degree of information and awareness” shown by some consumers who are especially interested in benefiting from the improved quality of life to be gained from foods which more effectively meet individual dietary needs and help reduce the risk of certain diseases. For other reasons, some of which are discussed later on, the same notion regarding the relationship between diet and health can also cause consumers to positively accept familiar ingredients, while the use of unfamiliar ingredients can arouse suspicion or even cause rejection of meat products. Nevertheless, Neuwirth Some of the current or emerging strategies to modify fat content, fatty acid composition or cholesterol level in livestock, e.g., growth regulators or transgenic technology Another aspect to be considered in connection with types of ingredients is the question of the legal regulations that in most cases govern their use. In the case of promising unconventional ingredients, however, there are not always any particular regulations. At all events it is necessary to take into account the legal limitations on the addition of such compounds and also the regulations governing the processing and labelling of low-fat meat products. In the USA, in order to make low-fat meat products in line with consumer demands, the regulations have had to be modified to give processors greater flexibility in formulating reduced-fat hot dog and other cooked sausages. The modified regulations permit processors to exchange fat for added water (AW=% moisture −4×% protein), provided that in total they do not exceed 40% in the finished products and that the total fat does not exceed 30% There are a number of nutritional claims that can be made regarding fat. The claims, low, reduced, less, lean, light/lite, healthy, etc., are not always backed up by a clear definition of the changes in composition that such denominations entail. This has generated considerable confusion at all levels, particularly among consumers, and it points to a need for standardisation of the various product “categories” and of the changes in composition that the nomenclature implies in each case. Cost is an essential factor in anyone's choice of a given product and should therefore be borne in mind when considering any fat reduction strategy. Higher lean-to-fat ratios and some non-meat ingredients generally raise the cost of manufacturing low-fat meat products. Despite the high cost of lean meat, there are cases where its cost is relatively low when compared to some highly processed, highly functional ingredients A number of factors determine the feasibility of manufacturing this kind of product using the procedures described above. The processor must have a clear concept of the product, which means drawing up specifications of various kinds ( In products made with identifiable pieces of meat—that is products retaining the natural muscle structure, not ground and requiring no added fat (e.g., steak, roast, ham, loin, etc.)—the possibility of reducing fat depends on several factors associated with the type of cut, grade, cooking method, etc. The consumer may even opt to remove the fat on the plate. In such cases processors normally eliminate fat simply by removing as much of the subcutaneous and inter-muscular fat as possible. The minimum percentage of fat in products of this kind is basically determined by the effectiveness of trimming and the degree of marbling, which in turn depend on such factors as species, breed, type of cut, etc. The lipid content in edible products is in the range 4–5% The most suitable processed meats for reducing fat level are those in which there is some structural loss and high fat content; these can be reformulated by altering their traditional composition. For practical purposes processed products can be classified into two main categories In products like ground meat or restructured steak, adjustment of the fat level does not present a technological problem In finely comminuted mixtures like frankfurters and liver sausage, the limit for achieving palatable products with the available technology has been estimated at around 10% (replacing fat with protein and water) in the first case and 15% in the second In dry sausages, fat reduction is more complicated. More finely granulated products are more suitable for fat reduction than more coarsely granulated products. The large particles of fat revealed in the shear surface suggest a higher fat content and the shear surface has a very uneven appearance In more finely-granulated sausages like salami and saveloy, fat reduction presents problems owing to loss of product moisture as a result of drying. For example, newly-made conventional salami contains roughly 32% fat, rising to 40% after one week and 45-50% after four weeks of maturation Fat reduction in spreading sausage is limited by the maintenance of spreadability, as the sausage becomes too firm once the added fat is no longer sufficient to prevent it from binding too quickly and thus becoming firm. Spreading sausage with about 15% added fat represents the limit to which the fat content can be reduced, giving about 20% fat in the finished product On the other hand, having the right technology for reformulation of meat products opens up an interesting range of possibilities. Firstly there are products designed for consumption by a given type of population who are allergic to or intolerant of certain compounds that occur in some of the non-meat ingredients that could be used to produce desired characteristics. Cases in point are lactose (lactose intolerance), gluten (gluten enteropathy) and egg proteins (allergic reactions). Given the large variety of available non-meat ingredients, it should not in principle be difficult to find formulations that dispense with them. There are considerable advantages to be gained by reformulating meat products in such a way as to retain the characteristic features of a traditionally popular product while for example eliminating pork meat and fat, which some communities refuse for cultural or religious reasons. Scientific knowledge of the beneficial role of various food ingredients for the prevention and treatment of specific diseases suggests that healthier meat products could be developed by not only altering the amount and kind of fat but also by incorporating very broad classes of health enhancing ingredients (e.g., antioxidants, dietary fibre, peptides, lactic acid bacteria and others) to produce a so-called functional food. Meat products of this kind are now available on the market. It is essential to assess the extent to which formulated products meet their design specifications and to have a suitable methodology for quality measurement and assessment so as to gain a clear picture of their properties and acceptability, and hence of the suitability of the fat reduction procedure. This provides useful information about any modifications, which would be helpful in development of a low-fat meat product. The consequences of changes in composition, both for the nature of the multi-component systems that make up these products and for their various quality factors, have been analysed from several different standpoints using various types of procedure. In any event, as noted earlier, they must meet basically the same criteria as are applied to regular products Different quality factors in low-fat meat products associated with fat reduction technologies have been widely investigated with reference to those of the product with standard fat content. It is generally in these factors, classified as processing and product characteristics ( Meat batter properties strongly influence a number of quality factors of processed meat. These have been characterised on the basis of rheological behaviour, pH, temperature changes caused by processing conditions (reduction of meat particle size, mechanical action, etc.), fat distribution in the protein matrix, and generally all properties that are influenced by the nature of the meat system and the manufacturing procedures required to produce a wide array of low-fat meat products. The most suitable type of characterisation will generally depend on product type, e.g., batter, patty, whole muscle or chunked or former. An understanding of the rheological behaviour of comminuted meat systems is necessary not only for the design of machinery, processes and operations but also for the end-point characteristics and consumer acceptability of products Temperature increases occurring in meat batters during the structural disintegration involved in some kinds of meat processing, which are dependent on composition (water/fat/protein/other ingredient), have been evaluated Rheological transitions during heating can be followed by recording the stress required to apply small non-destructive strains to the material Cooking properties of some meat products have been widely analysed to determine the effect of fat reduction or substitution of oils for animal fat. Product yield is important not only for its effect on manufacturing cost, but also because it provides information which can be a useful management tool for purposes of production targets and product specifications. In gel/emulsion meat systems like frankfurters or bolognas, the processing characteristics evaluated are basically cooking loss and emulsion stability There have been a number of different approaches to the effects of fat reduction on the characteristics of processed products. One of the first aspects to be evaluated is actual composition as compared to target composition: i.e., fat, protein and moisture, and in some cases added water as well. Other components may also be analysed; examples of these are changes in cholesterol levels associated with fat reduction, the presence of non-meat ingredients or the effect of cooking treatments In products like pork and beef patties, valuable information on the effect of the target treatment can be gained from the changes undergone by the product during cooking—changes in weight, shape and size, or the appearance of air pockets A large number of parameters have been used in sensory analysis of low-fat meat products, depending on factors like the nature of the product or alterations made to composition. These parameters include firmness, elasticity, chewiness, cohesiveness, coarseness, greasiness, juiciness, saltiness, smokiness, spiciness, colour, overall acceptability, etc., and also consumer evaluation. Less frequently used are time intensity techniques for analysis of sensory attributes (e.g., intensity of overall flavour as a function of time) depending on the fat level Instrumental colour measurement has been performed on raw patties Instrumental texture analysis has generally been done by testing machine, largely by compression test (Texture profile analysis, TPA) using varying percentages, penetration test, and Kramer shear press cell and Warner-Bratzler shear tests. Which method of instrumental texture analysis is applicable to each case depends on the type of product; TPA is the most widely used in meat emulsion products because geometrically homogeneous samples can be taken, whereas other methods may be more suitable for patties, which are more irregularly shaped because of their characteristics and the cooking process. In frankfurters, skin strength has been analysed as a function of fat levels and substitution of olive oil for pork back fat On the subject of hygiene, studies have tended to focus on the effects of changes in composition (e.g., fat content and added water) and processing conditions (e.g., grinding treatment or cooking treatment, presence of certain non-meat ingredients) on microbial populations Parallel to analysis of the characteristics noted above, it is useful to carry out other studies that tend rather to explain the nature of the system. Given a clearer understanding of the mechanisms whereby composition, ingredients and conditions of preparation can influence water binding, rheological and other properties, it is possible to improve the characteristics of processed low-fat meat products. Through various different protein interactions, muscle proteins influence many basic functional properties of meat products, such as water and fat binding capacity, gel-forming capacity or emulsifying processes; it is an interesting challenge to link the molecular forces involved in denaturation and association events with the properties of processed meats. To this end, there have been studies analysing protein molecular interactions (hydrogen, hydrophobic, disulphide) involved in the formation of the gel network matrix of low and high fat frankfurters Low-fat processed meats are perishable—in some cases more so than the regular products—so that it is essential to understand their behaviour in normal conditions of retail distribution. Besides providing advantages in connection with a variety of quality factors, this will help ensure that they are handled safely. A number of different storage characteristics have been studied according to the kind of low-fat meat product. These relate to binding properties (basically vacuum purge loss), sensory properties, (generally the same as were evaluated to identify the initial product characteristics), instrumental colour measurement, instrumental texture analysis, microbiological growth (product shelf-life can be shortened as the higher moisture content may favour microbial growth), and lipid oxidation (TBARS), all in relation to different variables such as fat and added water, packing conditions (plastic film and vacuum level), presence of certain ingredients (e.g. carrageenan, potassium lactate) or storage conditions (chilled or frozen) In developing low-fat meat products it is not sufficient simply to use any one of the fat reduction procedures described individually. For any reformulated processed meat to possess all its desirable characteristics, it would generally seem that several of the available technological options ( When simultaneously applying options that can influence product properties, the possibility of interactions between factors must be considered. The effect produced by a given technological process or the addition of an ingredient may not only be influenced by the application of other processes or the addition of other ingredients, but it may also depend on the medium in which this takes place—fat, water or protein content, ionic strength, etc. Interaction can affect such major characteristics of low-fat products as composition, organoleptic attributes, cooking properties, storage characteristics, cost, etc. There are various references in the literature to such interactive effects between non-meat ingredients or between a non-meat ingredient and the processing conditions, although not all are equally significant Complete factorial design and central composite rotatable design are widely used experimentally in the development of low-fat meat products. In single-factor designs the focus of interest is the comparison of treatment means for different levels of a single factor. Complete factorial designs have been used to screen different potential factors such as fat content, non-meat ingredients (e.g., modified connective tissue or salt), processing conditions (e.g., grinding or cooking temperature) and storage conditions (e.g., freezer storage temperature or packaging type). Similarly, the influence of fat levels, non-meat ingredients (e.g., tapioca starch, oat fibre, soy protein or salt) and processing conditions (e.g., cooking temperature) has been analysed by central composite rotatable design. Despite the possibilities that these experimental designs offer, the optimisation of low-fat meat systems has only rarely been addressed. One such case is Beggs In low-fat and similar products, where acceptability is closely tied not only to sensory characteristics but also to information on the product (in this case nutritional benefits, extremely important to health-conscious consumers), experimental designs that combine both factors can be very helpful. The combination of communication and product may lead to a different design decision than would have been reached on the basis of product evaluation alone. Arteaga Public demand for low fat foods has intensified the interest of researchers and industry in developing lower fat meat products. Fat content has a basic effect on various product characteristics and therefore it cannot be reduced and/or modified simply by using less fat or replacing animal fat with another type of fat. The new products must not only possess acceptable sensory characteristics but must also guarantee at least comparable performance to equivalent high-fat products in the various forms in which they are commercialised. This is not always simple, however, since modifications to the composition and nature of reformulated products can cause changes that become apparent to varying degrees in the course of storage. Strategy for the development of low-fat meat products presupposes a clear concept, which entails identifying all specifications which have any bearing on customer needs and hence could compromise acceptability. The nature of such product specifications varies widely; they do not refer only to sensory, nutritional or hygienic aspects; convenience, cost, regulation, marketing and even ethics also play an important role. The established product concept, the nature of the product (which determines the type of processing required) and at a later stage the mode of preparation and consumption, all go to determine what fat reduction technologies are to be used in manufacture. This does not only entail acquiring empirical knowledge of the role of the meat raw material, choice of the most suitable non-meat ingredient or how given processing conditions affect low-fat meat product attributes, through “cook-and-look research”. More basic knowledge is required as to the effects and the action mechanisms of the various constituents used, the changes in the nature of low-fat products, and the influence of processing conditions and their impact on quality factors of the final meat product as compared to the high-fat equivalent. There has been some research of this kind on model systems and full-fat products, but without high levels of added water. Further studies are needed on new ingredients such as flavouring agents or synthetic fat substitutes. Scientific knowledge of the beneficial role of various food ingredients for prevention and treatment of specific diseases suggests the possibility of developing healthier meat products by altering the amount and kind of fat and incorporating very broad classes of health enhancing ingredients. However, additional research is necessary to substantiate the efficacy of those components in the specific meat processing conditions. Different factors (consumer acceptability, technological suitability, etc.) relating to raw material in emerging strategies for the modification of meat composition (fat level and fatty acid profile), or for the production of non-meat ingredients, must be explored when developing low-fat meat products. Given the availability of various technological options for development of low-fat meat products