Wire + Arc Additive Manufacturing (WAAM) is a promising manufacturing process for producing large aerospace components. Based on welding technology, the process is highly affordable, has a very high deposition rate and is not limited by chamber size. Ti-6Al-4V is a promising candidate material for this technology given that it is extensively used in aerospace applications and some large, high buy-fly ratio components can be more efficiently produced by WAAM than via the conventional machining from billet approach. There is currently limited knowledge about whether additional post processes including heat treatments and hot isostatic pressing are necessary to unlock the optimal mechanical properties of Ti-6Al-4V components produced by WAAM. This work explores a range of different post process treatments and the effects on the microstructure and tensile properties of Ti-6Al-4V components produced by WAAM. The relatively slow cooling rate (10-20Ks−1) during the β-α transformation produced Widmanstätten-α and offered an optimal balance between strength and ductility. Hot Isostatic Pressing (HIPing) removed gas porosity but was not effective in improving strength or ductility. Residual tensile stresses in as-built components severely impair ductility and should be removed through stress relief treatments.Additive Manufacturing (AM) has emerged as a promising manufacturing process for producing bespoke components, particularly from high cost materials. Powder bed AM technologies such as Selective Laser Melting (SLM) are relatively mature and have received significant attention in the production of Ti-6Al-4V components. AM technologies incorporating wire feedstock are beginning to emerge and offer advantages including high deposition rates and the potential for large part sizes. The wire based AM processes share a number of similarities in terms of the size, shape and quality of potential parts but differ in terms of the heat source (electron beam, laser beam, plasma arc, electric arc etc.) and the chamber requirements (vacuum, inert gas or atmosphere exposed) [ A notable difference between wire based AM processes and established powder-bed AM processes is the size of the molten pool, slower torch travel speed and higher material deposition rates which subsequently determine important solidification parameters such as the temperature gradient It is now widely accepted that the rapid cooling during SLM of Ti-6Al-4V under most processing conditions results in an as-built microstructure containing very fine acicular α or α′ with corresponding high strength and moderate to low ductility on account of the small slip length [ While a detailed understanding of the effect of processing parameters and post process treatments of Ti-6Al-4V produced by popular powder bed AM technologies is beginning to emerge, there is still uncertainty surrounding how these same factors influence the microstructure and mechanical properties of Ti-6Al-4V produced by WAAM. Initial research has shown that WAAM can produce high quality Ti-6Al-4V components with mechanical properties equalling or exceeding other AM processes in the as-built state. For example, the slower cooling rates during WAAM prevents the formation of α′ martensite [ In light of the coarser microstructure produced and differences in the process it remains unclear whether Ti-6Al-4V produced by WAAM necessitates additional post process heat treatment or expensive HIPing processes. Very limited work exists on the effects of heat treatment on the mechanical properties of Ti-6Al-4V produced by WAAM. Brandl and co-workers [ The aim of this work is to compare the microstructures and mechanical properties of Ti-6Al-4V components produced by Wire + Arc Additive Manufacturing that are subjected to different post-build treatments. Details about the equipment and base experimental set up for the WAAM process used here are available elsewhere [ Components were compared in the as-built condition, stress relieved condition, heat-treated condition and HIPed condition. The HIPing process is a heat treatment which simultaneously coarsens the microstructure through annealing while closing porosity. In order to separate the effects of microstructure and porosity on the resulting mechanical properties it was necessary to perform an additional test that replicated this heat treatment without closing the porosity. This was achieved with a vacuum heat treatment under identical heating and cooling cycles as that used during the HIP process. The slow cooling rate and long exposure time at high temperature during the HIP and vacuum heat treatments is expected to coarsen the microstructure which may reduce strength while increasing ductility. As such it was desired to explore a different heat treatment that could preference strength over ductility. Solution treatment and ageing (STA) is one such heat treatment used for Ti-6Al-4V components and involves firstly solution treating to develop a larger β-phase fraction followed by quenching and subsequent ageing to decompose the unstable β and promote higher strength. The STA heat treatment was selected as the final condition to evaluate the microstructure and mechanical properties of Ti-6Al-4V produced by WAAM. A summary of the heat treated conditions is shown in Tensile bars were wire cut from the components using modified geometries of ASTM The effectiveness of Hot Isostatic Pressing on removing porosity was investigated by examining HIPed and non-HIPed components with an Inveon multimodality PET-CT imaging scanner (Siemens) (Micro-CT). The system can deliver high resolution CT images (<10 μm for a field-of-view <20 mm) with a maximum field-of-view of 80 mm × 50 mm (with a resolution of approximately 50 μm). The voltage and current used in this study were 300 kV and 80 μA, respectively. The cross sections of the sample were recorded in three directions with step sizes of 0.001 mm. As expected the post process heat treatments had a large influence over the microstructure produced and corresponding tensile properties. The deposition parameters used in this study produced wide components (approximately 12 mm) that contained coarse prior-β grains often exceeding several millimetres in size (see The tensile properties for each test condition are presented in The benefits of HIPing titanium components produced during powder bed additive manufacturing processes such as SLM has been previously discussed by others. Namely, the process is greatly beneficial in removing the defects associated with unmelted powder particles and/or unconsolidated layers that can limit ductility to under ε This result could indicate that either porosity does not form during WAAM (and therefore HIPing makes no difference), or alternatively, all components contain porosity and the HIPing process was not effective in removing this porosity. To investigate further, high resolution X-ray Micro-CT was performed on small sections The localised nature of the large pores in non-HIPed (Vacuum annealed) samples may also account for the observed variations in tensile ductility. Although the vacuum annealed and HIPed specimens had similar mean tensile ductility (ε Perhaps a more important consideration for removing porosity through HIPing is improved fatigue properties. It is understood that internal defects such as porosity considerably reduce fatigue life given that it is the crack initiation process that consumes most of the fatigue life. Therefore, the size and distribution of porosity will be a critically important factor influencing the fatigue life of Ti-6Al-4V WAAM components. Oh et al. [ The tensile strength of the components subjected to vacuum annealing and HIPing was less than the minimum strength specified in ASTM Another key microstructural parameter is the prior-β grain size because this in turn limits the size of colony-α structures that can form. When Ti-6Al-4V is cooled through the β-transus, clusters of lamellar α belonging to the same crystallographic variant can form colonies that grow in size until they are impeded by other α variants growing within the parent β-grain or until impeded by the β grain boundary itself. Thus large β-grains have the potential to foster large α-colonies and since the colony size determines slip length, it is desirable to avoid the formation of large β grains during solidification. It is important to note that the processing parameters in the present study resulted in very large melt pools (greater than 10 mm diameter) as a consequence of high heat input (approximately 1.48 kJ/mm determined from experimental parameters) and this may not be representative of the cooling rates experienced in other WAAM processes using different parameters. For example, Wu et al. [ Images of the fracture surfaces are shown in Analogous with tensile strength, the ductility of the components was most sensitive to the scale of the α-grain size. The size of the dimples on the fracture surfaces were found to correlate with the grain size (≈10 μm in vacuum heat treated vs ≈ 3 μm in solution treated and aged, This work investigated the effect of post build heat treatments and Hot Isostatic Pressing on the strength and ductility of Ti-6Al-4V produced by Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing (WAAM). The different thermal processes were found to directly influence the mechanical properties through a Hall-Petch relationship with the α-grain size. The conclusions from the study are listed below: WAAM is prone to the entrapment of spherical gas porosity which ranges in size but can exceed 350 μm in diameter (dimensions measured by X-ray MicroCT). Hot Isostatic Pressing is very effective in removing this porosity, however, this gave no measureable improvement in strength or ductility. The processing parameters during WAAM (current, deposition speed etc.) are particularly influential on the grain size and mechanical properties. Unlike other higher cooling rate AM processes that generally require post-build annealing to remove martensite and achieve acceptable ductility, the relatively slow cooling rate of 10–20Ks Residual stresses substantially impair the tensile properties of as-built components. A short post-build stress relief at 653 K for 2 h improved the ductility by over 30% while not coarsening the grain size. This condition fulfilled the strength and ductility requirements specified in ASTM The authors would like to acknowledge to support of the School of Mechanical and Mining Engineering and the Queensland Centre for Advanced Materials Processing and Manufacturing (AMPAM). MJB acknowledges the support of the