Single particle impact breakage characteristics of clinkers from different plants were determined by the drop-weight technique. Impact breakage distribution parameter (t
                     10) defined by Narayanan [Narayanan, S.S., Whiten, W.J., 1983. Breakage characteristics for ores for ball mill modelling. In: Proceeding of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, vol. 286, pp. 31–39.] was used to characterise the breakage distributions of different clinkers based on the specific comminution energy. The single particle impact breakage resistance parameter as represented by 
                        
                           A
                           ·
                           b
                        
                      [Man, Y.T., 2000. A model based scale-up procedure for wet, overflow ball mills. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Mining, Minerals and Materials Engineering, The University of Queensland] based on the model parameters of the well known E
                     cs−t
                     10 relationship given by Leung [Leung, K., 1987. An energy-based ore specific model for autogeneous and semi-autogeneous grinding. Ph.D. Thesis, The University of Queensland, JKMRC] was correlated with the standard bond index number, belite and alite mineral amounts.Grinding of raw material and clinker represents approximately 65% of the total electrical energy consumption in a cement plant and 40% of the total is used in clinker grinding stage. This high power consumption is both due to the fine size required for the product and to the mill feed breakage characteristics. The mill feed breakage characteristics are measured by a grindability index that measures the ability of clinker to resist grinding. Different definitions and corresponding measuring methods have been reported for grindability ( Impact tests such as drop weight or twin pendulum have found wide application in direct measurement of breakage characteristics of various minerals ( In this equation the impact breakage distribution parameter or breakage index is denoted by The study aimed to investigate the breakage distributions of different clinkers on the basis of energy level and establish the relationships between single particle impact breakage resistance parameter Drop-weight apparatus used in this study is shown in Product size distributions resulting from the breakage of −9.5 Size normalized distributions of each test fraction at different specific comminution energy levels were found not to coincide on a single distribution indicating that, energy level has an effect on breakage patterns of each size. Non-self similar breakage size distributions resulted at an energy level of 1 Drop-weight data analysis was done based on the well known approach given by The chemical and mineralogical compositions of the test clinkers determined by X-ray diffraction analysis are listed in Differences in the chemical compositions of the test clinkers are found to be not significant whereas the differences in mineralogical compositions do very significantly. Breakage test results indicated that, As given in Regression results to predict Correlations between Standard Bond work index and strength giving mineral amounts are investigated for clinker-5, clinker-6, clinker-7, clinker-8 and clinker-9. Standard Bond tests were carried out using a 90 Experimental data demonstrated that, the technique described is a potential means to efficiently estimate the resistance of clinker mill feeds to impact breakage on the basis of alite and belite mineral contents. Test results have proven that, alite and belite amounts could be correlated both with impact breakage parameter The clinkers tested all had similar elemental compositions however varied in mineral composition and grindability. Potential savings in grinding costs by varying the mineral composition through variation in processing conditions and the correlations needs to be further investigated. The financial support to this work from Turkish Scientific and Technical Research Council (Project No: MISAG 190), Prof. A.J. Lynch and Prof. W.J. Whiten for their valuable discussions, A. Seyfi Erdem who conducted the Bond tests, Aysun Günlü, İlkay Bengü Çelik, Namık A. Aydoğan, Can E. Özer, Serkan Dikmen for their effort in sampling and experimental studies are gratefully acknowledged.