A two-step process for boron recovery from borax sludge is proposed in the present work. The borax sludge was leached with sulphuric acid solution. Then, for the removal of alkaline species from the leachate, calcium and magnesium were precipitated by adjusting the pH of leachate using 1.5M NaOH and 1.5M HCl solutions. The effects of pH, temperature, concentration and time on the precipitation process were investigated. It was determined that the calcium and magnesium concentrations in the leachate were reduced from 121mg/L to 2.6mg/L and from 145mg/L to 4.0mg/L, respectively, at a pH value of 12, a temperature of 70°C, an initial boron concentration of 500mg/L and a precipitation time of 3h. Under these optimum conditions, it was observed that the boron concentration in the solution decreased very slightly. In this process, the alkaline species were successfully separated from the boron.
                  Finally, borax pentahydrate (Na2B4O7·5H2O) was produced by the evaporation of the final solution obtained after precipitation process.Boron is found in the form of boric acid or borate salts in nature. Boric acid, borax, borax hydrates and sodium perborates are commercially important boron compounds. Boron compounds are used in over 100 industries for the production of borosilicate glass, enamels, leather, detergents, cosmetics, insulation- and textile-grade fibers, fire retardants, artificial fertilizers, insecticides, disinfectants and drugs ( There is a small range between boron deficiency and boron toxicity in plants. Some plants can tolerate irrigation waters with 4 Some studies have been carried out to recover boron from boron wastes by leaching using various solutions ( The most significant problem in borax production is to separate tincal from clay minerals. Tincal dissolved in hot water is separated from clays in colloidal form by gravity settling using some anionic and nonionic polyelectrolytes. These coagulants increase the costs. Precipitation lowers total costs due to the lower chemical costs and the smaller sludge volumes ( The borax sludge used was obtained from the Etibank Kırka Borax Plant in Turkey. The major part of the suspended solid particles from this sludge was separated in gravity settling. The remaining part in liquid phase was separated by filtration using a coarse filter paper on a porcelain funnel. Then, the solid part was dried at room temperature and subsequently sieved by using ASTM standard sieves. Since most of the solids were passed under 150 To recover boron from solid waste, leaching was firstly applied according to the method described by Precipitation studies were performed in a 250 After precipitation studies, the final solution obtained in the precipitation process was placed in a 250 Leaching was initially studied to recover boron from solid waste. Then, for the removal of alkaline species from the leachate, precipitation was utilized by adjusting the pH of leachate using 1.5 The effect of pH on the precipitation yields of the species was studied in the pH range of 7–12. As seen in The final boron concentration in the solution decreased slightly at higher pH values and boron precipitation yield was only 6.86% at pH 12 ( To observe the effect of temperature on the precipitation yields of the species, the experiments were carried out in the range of 20–70 The effect of initial concentration on the precipitation yields of the species was studied using the diluted leachate in the range of 250–2000 The effect of precipitation time on the precipitation yields of the species was investigated using different time intervals at a pH value of 12, a temperature of 70 The XRD pattern of the precipitate formed after precipitation showed mainly the formation of calcite, very little mica and very little amphibole ( When the concentrations of Borax pentahydrate was crystallized by evaporation from the final solution obtained after the precipitation performed under the optimum conditions (pH XRD of the produced crystal showed mainly the formation of tincalconite (Na The recovery of boron from borax sludge using leaching followed by precipitation was investigated. The major conclusions derived from the present work are as follows: The final concentrations of alkaline species in the solution decreased with increasing pH, temperature and precipitation time, and they increased with the increasing initial boron concentration. The final boron concentration decreased with increasing pH and increased with increasing temperature, initial boron concentration and precipitation time. It was determined that the calcium and magnesium concentrations in the leachate were reduced from 121 The cost of this process is not high because the borax sludge is leached with a dilute acid solution, the leachate with a high pH value (pH The current price of sodium hydroxide is 15 This research has been supported by Eskişehir Osmangazi University Research Foundation (Project No: 200315039).