This study is aimed at explaining the effect of copper activation in flotation systems which contain free gold and gold locked in pyrrhotite and pyrite. Unlike other studies, the effect of the sequence and amount of copper added to the slurry in relation to the xanthate conditioning period is investigated and the results are discussed in terms of how the two gold bearing types respond to true particle–bubble attachment and entrainment during flotation. The results indicate that increasing the dosage of copper sulphate increases the entrainment of refractory gold when the copper is added before the potassium amyl xanthate (PAX), because there is a greater flux of water upwards to the froth, which results in a decrease in the amount of sulphide material that is attached to the air bubbles. When the true flotation of refractory gold decreases, there is also a higher degree of entrainment. True flotation of free gold increases since there is a larger proportion of non-mineralised surface sites on the bubbles where attachment can take place. When copper sulphate is added after the collector the recovery of free gold increases dramatically so that there is an overall increase in total gold recovery of up to 6% compared with the usual sequence of adding the copper first.It is well known that activation of iron sulphide flotation systems with Cu(II) will provide an increase in sulphide grades and recoveries ( The majority of research into copper activation during flotation has concentrated on individual sulphide minerals like those in the iron sulphide group ( Also, no work has been done to examine how different dosages of copper may affect the relative amounts of free gold and refractory gold being recovered by entrainment compared with true flotation. True flotation relates to hydrophobic particle–bubble attachment and the subsequent rise of the mineralised bubble through the pulp to the froth, while entrainment is generally used to describe fine hydrophilic or very hydrophobic material that becomes caught in the liquid films existing between the bubbles. If one could calculate or estimate how much of these gold bearing constituents were recovered in these ways, this would greatly enhance our knowledge of the role of copper activation in the flotation of refractory gold ores. This work provides new information towards these areas, and attempts to elucidate the effect of copper activation on the way free gold and refractory gold are transported from the pulp phase to the froth phase during flotation. Different amounts of copper sulphate and various air flow rates were used during batch flotation tests of the Central mill feed material from Stawell in Victoria. The sequence of addition of the copper in relation to the xanthate conditioning period was investigated and PAX adsorption experiments were also carried out. Batch flotation tests were conducted on the Stawell Central ore in a 3-l Agitair cell. The ore contained by weight 6.0% pyrrhotite, 3.5% pyrite, 0.5% arsenopyrite and 0.5% chalcopyrite. The mill feed contained 2.2. gAu/t, while the pyrrhotite contained on average 13.5 gAu/t and the pyrite contained on average 14 gAu/t. Carefully prepared ore samples of 1900 g each were dry-milled individually to 80 wt.% passing 106 μm and 49.5 wt.% passing 38 μm. These samples were transferred directly to the flotation cell where the slurry was made up to 45% solids by mass using deionised water. Potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) was used as the collector at a dosage of 25 g/t, copper sulphate (CuSO In each test, the pulp was agitated at a rate of 1400 r.p.m. for a period of 10 min so that any differences in pH and redox potential between each test would be negligible. The natural pH varied between 7.5 and 8.1 during the tests. After 10 min but before any addition of reagents the pulp potential stabilised to approximately 0±10 mV. CuSO The bulk concentrates from each test were sampled and prepared for cyanide leaching to determine the relative amounts of free gold and refractory gold that were recovered. Samples of 50 g each were leached for 24 h in 600-ml beakers with 3000 ppm NaCN. After addition of the concentrate to each leaching vessel the slurry was made up to 400 ml using deionised water and lime was added so that a stable pH of 11.0 was maintained during the leaching period. The high level of NaCN was needed because of the high gold content and the refractory nature of the concentrates generated during flotation. After leaching, the residues were filtered, dried and prepared for gold analysis by AAS. The gold remaining in the cyanide leach residues was determined to be the percentage of refractory gold in the flotation concentrates and the amount of gold extracted was assumed to be free gold. The recoveries of free gold and refractory gold for each test could then be calculated since the amounts in the original feed sample were already known. The PAX adsorption work was carried out on the Cary 1C UV–Visible Spectrophotometer. Clear solutions were taken during the PAX conditioning stage at 1, 3 and 5 min. Three peaks were identified at 301.34, 226.56 and 204.96 nm. The 301.34 nm peak represents the xanthate molecule which has been verified by The ore used in this study had undergone very careful bulk sampling preparations prior to this work so that any errors due to variations in mineralogical composition and free gold distribution were minimised. As a result of this, the reproducibility of gold recovery during flotation was within an error of 4%, while deviations in mass and water balances were less than 0.2%. Because of the consistency maintained during the flotation tests with reference to conditioning sequences, test duration, scraping interval and depth of froth removal, it was expected that any significant change in bubble size between each test was due to the addition level of copper sulphate and/or the air flow rate. In this section, results are given for some initial flotation tests where the sequence of copper addition was investigated for Central mill feed and Central cyclone overflow material from Stawell. These initial flotation tests were completed before it was decided to investigate the effect of the sequence of copper sulphate addition on the transport characteristics of free and refractory gold. The standard flotation procedure as described in From these data, it can be seen that during the flotation of both materials the overall gold recovery is much greater when copper sulphate is added after the PAX compared with adding it before the PAX For the Central mill feed the difference is close to 7% and for the Central cyclone overflow it is about 6%. Although free gold determination was not carried out for these initial experiments, the water recovery for each test gives an indication as to the trends the free gold recovery may have shown, if we assume that there is a proportional relationship between water recovery and free gold recovery like that suggested by The increased recovery of gold by adding the copper after the PAX was too high to be dismissed as an experimental error, and it was confirmed for two different materials. Therefore, a more detailed set of experiments was planned to investigate in detail the transport of free and refractory gold during flotation. These tests are discussed in the following sections. The figures given in the following sections were graphed according to the model developed by   Free gold is naturally hydrophilic but becomes hydrophobic during the conditioning steps in flotation where it readily adsorbs any amount of organic material (    During these tests, froth images were taken using a video camera to provide further evidence that the dosage of copper added to the slurry affects the entrainment of material in the froth and the bubble loading, as shown in   By comparing An image of the froth taken during flotation under conditions of 25 g/t PAX and 100 g/t CuSO  The results in these experiments done at various air flow rates give an overall picture as to why the gold recovery in the initial flotation tests was greater for copper added after the PAX compared with when it was added before the PAX The extra 6–7% gold recovery was a result of up to 10% more free gold floating into the concentrates due to the greater entrainment. An important aspect of the work outlined in this paper is that it proves that under certain conditions of copper dosage, addition sequence and air flow rate, between 10% and 30% of the free gold available in the pulp could enter the concentrate by entrainment. This can be calculated by taking the difference between the total free gold recovery (at a particular water recovery) and the free gold recovery at zero water recovery. Nearly all the data gathered during this test work confirmed that the free gold recovery increased when the water recovery increased, and because it is known that higher water recovery gives a greater amount of entrained material, this observation means that significant entrainment of the free gold must be taking place. These results agree with the work done by The significance of the copper addition with respect to the above discussion is that copper is known to be an oxidant for xanthate ( Even though this work has proved that a significant proportion of the free gold floats by entrainment, it must be realised that under normal flotation conditions, the free gold is hydrophobic and tries to attach to the air bubbles but is usually only successful when the bubble load is low. Hence there may be a critical bubble load at which free gold cannot attach successfully to air bubbles. Tests were conducted to investigate the PAX adsorption during conditioning prior to copper sulphate activation. These tests were done to complement the flotation work that was outlined in the previous sections and the results are shown in In The investigations carried out in this chapter have established a number of important findings with regard to the effect of copper activation on the recovery of gold bearing minerals and the transport characteristics of free gold, refractory gold, water and gangue. It is expected that these results may elucidate the role of copper activation during the flotation of refractory gold ores, which up to this stage have proven difficult to concentrate. The major findings are summarised below. ⋅ Increasing the dosage of copper sulphate increases the entrainment of refractory gold when the copper is added before the PAX because there is a greater flux of water upwards to the froth which provides a decrease in the amount of sulphide material that is attached to the air bubbles. ⋅ When the true flotation of refractory gold decreases, it has a higher degree of entrainment and the true flotation of free gold increases since there is a larger proportion of non-mineralised surface sites on the bubbles where attachment can take place. ⋅ Adding 300 g/t copper sulphate after conditioning with PAX provides an even greater level of entrainment for the free gold than when the copper is added before the PAX This is because not as much copper has the opportunity to adsorb onto the sulphide mineral surfaces prior to PAX adsorption so that there is more copper available to stabilise the froth. ⋅ When the copper is added after the PAX the refractory gold displays a negative slope vs. the recovery of water. This shows that because the copper does not have a chance to exchange ions with the iron-sulphide surfaces, the strongly hydrophobic Cu–X compounds do not form. The sulphide minerals can then be removed easily from the bubbles with increasing amounts of water so that the recovery of refractory gold decreases instead of increasing. ⋅ At air flow rates of 2.0 l/min and above, the total gold recovery becomes 6–7% greater when copper is added after the PAX compared with the standard sequence of adding the copper first. This occurs because there is a 10% increase in the free gold recovery which is a result of the increased levels of entrainment. ⋅ The adsorption of PAX prior to copper activation indicates that a significant proportion of the xanthate still adsorbs onto the sulphide minerals without prior activation which shows that it is not the amount of xanthate which determines particle hydrophobicity, but the strength and insolubility of the collecting species. ⋅ It is proposed that greater additions of copper sulphate may have a stabilising effect on the froth due to the formation of dixanthogen which has been known to change the frothing characteristics of high sulphide ores whether it is dissolved or suspended in the pulp. The assistance of Stawell Gold Mines for funding this research, providing ore samples and gold analysis is gratefully acknowledged. Also, Stafford McKnight at the University of Ballarat is thanked for the Siroquant XRD analysis.