Alkali basaltic diatremes such as Elie Ness (Fife, Scotland) expose a range of volcanic lithofacies that points to a complex, multi-stage emplacement history. Here, basanites contain phenocrysts including pyrope garnet and sub-calcic augites from depths of ~60km. Volcanic rocks from all units, pyroclastic and hypabyssal, are characterised by rare earth element (REE) patterns that show continuous enrichment from heavy REE (HREE) to light REE (LREE), and high Zr/Y that are consistent with retention of garnet in the mantle source during melting of peridotite in a garnet lherzolite facies. Erupted garnets are euhedral and unresorbed, signifying rapid ascent through the lithosphere. The magmas also transported abundant pyroxenitic clasts, cognate with the basanite host, from shallower depths (~35–40km). These clasts exhibit wide variation in texture, mode and mineralogy, consistent with growth from a range of compositionally diverse melts. Further, clinopyroxene phenocrysts from both the hypabyssal and pyroclastic units exhibit a very wide compositional range, indicative of polybaric fractionation and magma mixing. This is attributed to stalling of earlier magmas in the lower crust — principally from ~22 to 28km — as indicated by pyroxene thermobarometry. Many clinopyroxenes display chemical zoning profiles, occasionally with mantles and rims of higher magnesium number (Mg#) suggesting the magmas were mobilised by juvenile basanite magma. The tuffs also contain alkali feldspar megacrysts together with Fe-clinopyroxene, zircon and related salic xenoliths, of the ‘anorthoclasite suite’ — inferred to have crystallised at upper mantle to lower crustal depths from salic magma in advance of the mafic host magmas. Despite evidence for entrainment of heterogeneous crystal mushes, the rapidly ascending melts experienced negligible crustal contamination. The complex association of phenocrysts, megacrysts and autoliths at Elie Ness indicates thorough mixing in a dynamic system immediately prior to explosive diatreme-forming eruptions.Basaltic volcanism takes place in all tectonic settings and accounts for an estimated 80% of all igneous activity at the Earth's surface ( Maar-diatreme volcanoes — an important class of basaltic landform — are formed as a consequence of rapid magma ascent and explosive eruptions (see Most maar-diatremes contain lithic fragments (‘xenoliths’) entrained from the feeder dyke or conduit walls at a range of crustal levels, and occasionally from the upper mantle. Such xenoliths commonly disaggregate during ascent or eruption, liberating crystal fragments or ‘xenocrysts’ into the host magma. The study of xenoliths, xenocrysts and other crystal fragments from deeply eroded maar-diatremes can yield crucial evidence on the origin, interactions and ascent mechanisms of their parent melts (e.g. Geochemical and mineralogical constraints are even more powerful when combined with a physical volcanological understanding of diatreme emplacement, thus yielding insights into the spatio-temporal evolution of the magmas. Here we present data from crystal and lithic inclusions in dykes and pyroclastic deposits of the well-exposed Elie Ness diatreme, SE Scotland ( The Elie Ness diatreme, erupted at ~ The Elie Ness diatreme exposes a stratigraphic thickness of > LFA2 dominates most of the pipe-fill at current levels ( LFA3 comprises a series of minor discordant intrusions, including a 500 The Elie Ness diatreme was mapped at a scale of 1:2270 ( Whole-rock major elements were analysed using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) (Panalytical Magix-Pro WD-XRF fitted with a 4 Major element analysis of zoned and unzoned pyroxene crystals from selected samples (5, 10, 14 & 17) was carried out using a Cameca SX-100 electron probe micro-analyser (EPMA) in the School of Earth Sciences at the University of Bristol. Analyses were performed using operating conditions of 15 The rocks investigated in this study are classified as basalts, trachybasalts and basanites ( All LFA samples have Zr/Nb The strongly negative Ba anomaly observed in one sample (S4, The basalts, trachybasalts and basanites — pyroclastics and intrusives — contain abundant xenoliths and crystals (xenocrysts and phenocrysts), akin to many Permo-Carboniferous volcanics in Scotland (e.g. In this section, we summarise the pertinent characteristics of xenolith and crystal assemblages recorded at Elie Ness, combining empirical observations of these fragments in thin section, and drawing extensively on published accounts, including exhaustive studies by The pyrope garnet crystals are typically < Lustrous black ultramafic xenoliths, with diameters up to ~ Olivine and clinopyroxene are inferred to represent cumulus phases, whilst kaersutitic amphibole, biotite and sodic feldspar were intercumulus. The kaersutite oikocrysts ( With loss of olivine and then pyroxene, this suite of xenoliths is inferred to grade into less frequent biotite-rich ultramafic xenoliths ( Feldspars (anorthoclase, K-albite and sanidine) occur as discrete crystals, and as xenoliths dominated by Na-rich feldspar. Anorthoclase megacrysts, up to several cm across, occur in the tuffs and minor intrusives. Scarce zircon megacrysts (> Alkali feldspar cleavage fragments are presumed to be derivative from coarse anorthoclasite rocks comparable to those found as xenoliths ( Clinopyroxenes and some alkali feldspars from the tuffs, breccias and dykes ( Zoned clinopyroxenes are abundant in LFA3, and of comparatively low abundance in both pyroclastic lithofacies associations (LFAs 1–2), where they are more fragmented. In many cases, the clinopyroxenes are strongly zoned (see Zoned clinopyroxenes are abundant in LFA3, and of comparatively low abundance in both pyroclastic lithofacies associations (LFAs 1–2), where they are more fragmented. In many cases, the clinopyroxenes are strongly zoned (see The wide range of clinopyroxene compositions is shown in plots of CaO vs. Al The clinopyroxenes are subdivided further using Mg# vs. Cr In general, the rims to zoned clinopyroxene have comparably low Cr In general, the rims to zoned clinopyroxene have comparably low Cr Finally, the feldspar cleavage fragments have compositions ranging from albite and anorthoclases to sanidines (Na The temperature and pressure, and hence crystallisation depth of volcanic rocks can be estimated using clinopyroxene compositions ( Quantitative pressure and temperature estimates for the Elie Ness pyroxenes were obtained using the clinopyroxene-only and clinopyroxene-liquid barometric and thermometric equations of The Elie Ness parental magmas are assumed to have an asthenospheric origin [> Negative Sr in the trace element patterns ( The pyrope garnets and low-Ca augites are inferred to represent high-pressure phenocrysts that crystallised from basaltic melts deep in the lithospheric mantle (~ The very broad compositional range exhibited by clinopyroxenes ( Crystals derived from fragmentation of pyroxenitic cumulate. From the petrographic indications that some pyroxenites were above their solidus temperatures at the time of entrainment, they are assumed to be cognate to the host magma (cf. Discrete Na-rich pyroxene crystals ( Phenocrysts crystallised under a variety of conditions ranging from deep lithospheric to near surface. Pyroxene thermobarometry suggests that crystallisation of a subset of these pyroxenes (i.e. late effusive eruptive phase of LFA3) commenced in lower-crustal magma reservoirs at ~ The clinopyroxene crystal fragments exhibit a very wide compositional range in both the intrusive and extrusive rocks ( Elsewhere, high Mg and Cr clinopyroxenes have been interpreted as xenocrysts that formed in the mantle or deep crust (e.g. Elsewhere, high Mg and Cr clinopyroxenes have been interpreted as xenocrysts that formed in the mantle or deep crust (e.g. It is noteworthy that the nearby basanitic Elie Harbour diatreme (see Significant mineralogical differences within the East Fife cluster may suggest that eruptions sampled the deep lithosphere on length-scales of individual diatremes, as documented in monogenetic volcanoes in modern rift systems, where the distribution of melt is similarly controlled by large-scale lithospheric structures ( Our data and petrological constraints provide a ‘cradle-to-grave’ insight into the deep and shallow magma plumbing systems fuelling alkali basaltic maar-diatreme eruptions. Accordingly, the three lithofacies associations ( In contrast, LFA2 (overlying LFA1) shows very little variation in REE and trace element patterns ( The late-stage coherent trachybasaltic and basanitic dykes of LFA3 ( Elie Ness is remarkable for the complex assemblage of lithic inclusions, crystals — and inferentially former melts — signifying a wide range of pressures, temperatures and melt compositions. For all of these components to have been evacuated in the explosive tuff-forming eruptions requires a culminating flux of basanite magma through the subvolcanic plumbing system, that evacuated magmas in differing stages of evolution. We propose that energetic magma flows transport the deep crystals, disaggregate and entrain earlier-formed ‘anorthoclasite suite’ xenoliths approximately at Moho levels (produced from several previous replenishments of ‘underplated’ chambers, The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Gernon was supported by the