A number of previous researchers have noticed that the degree of mineral liberation in a given size fraction is the same regardless of where in a comminution circuit a sample is collected. This behaviour has been observed for a range of ore types, and was found to be independent of the mode of breakage. This provides a useful heuristic for modelling the particle characteristics in mineral comminution and separation circuits. However, the published research does not explicitly consider the effect on the liberation behaviour of minerals of the amount of energy applied to break the ore. In this study, a gold-bearing pyrite ore and a copper sulphide ore were comminuted over a wide range of energy levels, using impact breakage. The liberation properties of the product particles were characterised using a Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA). It was found that that the amount of impact energy applied did not significantly affect the degree of liberation of the minerals in a given size fraction, measured using particle sections. This provides sound experimental evidence to support the heuristic model.In an integrated mineral processing simulator, a mineral liberation model serves as a link between comminution and separation models by generating particle composition data for the comminution products, which is passed into the subsequent separation models. Various mineral liberation models for comminution have been developed over the years, starting with the early work of On the other hand, observations have been made on liberation in comminution which can be helpful for modelling the particle characteristics in mineral comminution and separation circuits. Specifically, a number of researchers (  Similar results were obtained by  The most recent investigation in this area of research was conducted by These investigations suggest that the degree of mineral liberation, or more specifically the particle composition distribution, in a given particle size fraction is the same anywhere in a comminution circuit, irrespective of the ore type and mode of breakage. The heuristic model appears to be robust and applicable to a wide range of cases, providing a useful link between comminution and separation models in mineral processing simulation. However, none of the previously published research considered separately and explicitly the effect of using different amounts of breakage energies on the liberation behaviour of minerals. The research described here investigates the effect of different energy levels on the liberation behaviour of minerals in two ore samples, and tests the heuristic model described above. Impact breakage was used as it is one of the major modes of breakage in comminution devices. The two ore samples used in this study were a gold-bearing pyrite ore and a copper sulphide ore. Both samples were obtained during full plant surveys from the conveyor belts feeding the respective SAG mills. The gold-bearing pyrite ore was stage crushed to 100% passing 6.7 mm, and the −6.7 + 4.75 mm size fraction was taken to represent the unbroken feed ore size. The copper sulphide ore was crushed to 100% passing 4.0 mm, and the −4.0 + 3.35 mm size fraction was taken to represent the unbroken feed ore size. Impact breakage of the ore samples was undertaken at the JKMRC using the JK Rotary Breakage Tester (JK-RBT) ( The energy levels chosen were 0.1 kWh/t, 1.0 kWh/t and 2.5 kWh/t. The low energy levels encompass the range of energies typically encountered in industrial mills, while the 2.5 kWh/t breakage energy level was included to test the outcome of the experiment at higher energy. Following breakage, the product samples were wet screened at 38 μm, dried, and the +38 μm material was dry sieved. The particle size distributions of the broken particles are shown in Representative sub-samples were split from each product size fraction using a rotary sample divider and were submitted for assay, and for mineralogical characterisation using the FEI Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) at the JKMRC. Each sub-sample for mineralogical characterisation was mounted in a polished section for analysis in the MLA. The XBSE measurement mode was used to measure the particle sections in the MLA. This mode utilizes backscatter electron images to define particles and mineral grains, followed by acquisition of characteristic X-rays to identify the mineral present in each grain ( As in all measurements of mineral liberation made on particle sections, the effect of stereological bias means that the values obtained from measurements in two dimensions are estimates of the true volumetric liberation. This stereological bias results in the overestimation of the proportion of mineral present as liberated (i.e. grade 100%) particles. The quantitative data from the analysis of each block was generated using the MLA Dataview software. A summary of the modal mineralogy data for the gold-bearing pyrite ore and the copper sulphide ore, as determined by the MLA analysis, is shown in The gold-bearing pyrite ore has relatively simple mineralogy, consisting of pyrite in a silicate/carbonate matrix, as shown in the MLA image in The copper sulphide ore has chalcopyrite as the main copper mineral. An example of typical chalcopyrite-bearing particles in the MLA image is shown in The grain size distributions of the pyrite in the gold ore and the chalcopyrite in the copper ore are shown in Note that the grain size distribution data are based on 2D measurements in polished section and are an estimate of the true volumetric (3D) grain size distribution which is slightly coarser due to stereological bias in the 2D data ( In this work, pyrite is the mineral of interest in the gold-bearing pyrite ore, and chalcopyrite in the copper sulphide ore. The amount of pyrite or chalcopyrite in each particle composition class (i.e. ranging from 0 to 100% at 10% interval) was calculated for the following particle size fractions: −2.8 + 1.18 mm, −1.18 mm + 850 µm, −850 + 600 µm, −600 + 425 µm, −425 + 300 µm, −300 + 212 µm, −212 + 150 µm, −150 + 106 µm, −106 + 75 µm, −75 + 53 µm, −53 + 38 µm and −38 µm. For the two ores comminuted at different energy levels, errors in the particle composition distributions were analysed using a statistical approach based on bootstrap resampling ( For the gold-bearing pyrite ore, comparisons between the three energy levels may be made for each pyrite composition class (i.e. at 10% intervals ranging from 0 to 100%) as a function of particle size, as presented in Similarity in the liberation distributions of the product particles comminuted using different energy levels is indicated when the confidence intervals in the graph overlap. It can be observed that there is considerable overlap of the liberation data points, compared by composition class and size fraction of the product particles of the two ores comminuted using different energy levels. This outcome indicates that the amount of applied impact breakage energy does not significantly change the distribution of pyrite and chalcopyrite in a given size/composition class. However, for both pyrite in the gold-bearing pyrite ore and chalcopyrite in the copper sulphide ore differences between the particle composition distributions at the three breakage energy levels can be observed in the extreme most composition classes of 0–10% and 90–100%. These differences are most noticeable at the coarsest size fractions (i.e. coarser than 850 μm). This is attributed to the wide spread of values due to the lower number of coarse particles measured in the MLA analyses (as shown in To overcome the limitations and uncertainty of visual comparison of the results, a more detailed statistical analysis of the breakage test results was conducted to determine whether or not the amount of applied impact breakage energy significantly affected the distribution of the mineral of interest in a given size/composition class. The method used calculates the differences between 1000 resampled sets of particle compositions distribution for the mineral of interest for each product size fraction, using pairs of breakage energy levels. The 1000 resampled sets were generated using the bootstrap resampling method ( For each composition class (i.e. ranging from 0 to 100% at 10% intervals), comparisons were made between two breakage energy levels at a time per for each distribution of liberated pyrite in the gold-bearing pyrite ore and liberated chalcopyrite in the copper sulphide ore, as a function of particle size. Hypothesis tests were conducted to test the null hypothesis that there is no difference (i.e. the difference is not statistically different from zero) in the amount of liberation of each mineral in each size fraction as a result of using different breakage energy levels, at the specified confidence level. Specifically, in each case a two-sided test was applied to determine whether the null hypothesis can be accepted at the 95% confidence level. Given the large amount of data, the results of the comparisons are most usefully displayed as contour plots (   The contour plots show the number of measured particles which were compared in each particle composition class and size fraction. To minimize the number of values displayed on each plot, especially in the fine size fractions, only the mean values for the number of particles measured are shown. The regions in  Another common observation which has been made in practice by many researchers is that, the degree of breakage in a comminution product can make substantial difference to the distribution of particle and mineral mass across the product size classes. This is another area that needs to be investigated. Liberation analysis, measured using particle sections was carried out on the crushed products of a gold-bearing pyrite ore and a copper sulphide ore after impact breakage at various specific breakage energies in the JK-RBT. Three specific energy levels were investigated: 2.5 kWh/t, 1.0 kWh/t and 0.1 kWh/t. The investigation considered the whole particle composition distribution, the composition classes from 0 to 100%, at intervals of 10%. The results confirm previous observation that the amount of applied impact energy does not significantly affect the distribution of minerals in a given size and composition class, and provides additional experimental evidence to support the heuristic model that the degree of liberation of a mineral in a given size fraction remains almost constant in a comminution circuit. This observed behaviour can be a useful tool for modelling the particle characteristics in mineral comminution and separation circuits. It is recommended that other modes of breakage (i.e. other than the impact breakage used in this study) be investigated to test whether the breakage energy input in these other modes affects the liberation behaviour of the ore. The work was conducted with funding from Australian Minerals Industry Research Association (AMIRA) P9P Project. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the industry sponsors of P9P in granting permission to present this work. The valuable assistance of Emeritus Professor Tim Napier-Munn in the statistical analysis of the results is also appreciated.