Pyrite oxidation is the main cause of acid mine drainage (AMD) formation, a very serious environmental problem in numerous mining areas worldwide. To manage AMD, a promising approach called carrier-microencapsulation has been proposed to suppress pyrite oxidation via the formation of a protective coating on the mineral using redox sensitive catecholate complexes of Fe3+, Al3+, Si4+ and Ti4+. In this study, the mechanisms involved in the suppression of pyrite oxidation by Fe-based CME were investigated by conducting a series of electrochemical studies (i.e., linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), electrochemical impedance spectrometry (EIS), and chronoamperometry). The results of LSV showed that the sequential decomposition of Fe3+-catecholate complexes on pyrite (tris-catecholate → bis-catecholate → mono-catecholate → Fe3+) occurred at different electrode potentials that corresponded to HOMO energy levels of the three Fe3+-catecholate complexes. Moreover, the oxidative decomposition of Fe3+-catecholate complexes formed a passivating coating as illustrated by chronoamperometry and EIS results using a rotating disk platinum (Pt) electrode. With longer decomposition time and at higher anodic potentials, defects in the coat decreased, resulting in the formation of a more resistant and evenly distributed coating. A comparison between chronoamperometry results of coated and uncoated pyrite electrodes suggests that the coating formed by Fe3+-catecholate complexes suppressed both anodic and cathodic half-cell reactions of pyrite oxidation by limiting the diffusion of reactants and products between pyrite and bulk solution phase.Pyrite (FeS The formation of AMD rapidly commences upon the exposure of pyrite to oxygen and water according to the following reaction ( Ferric ion (Fe Pyrite oxidation in aqueous systems occurs via an electrochemical mechanism, whereby oxidants like DO and Fe Strategies for AMD management are classified into two broad categories ( Decomposition of the redox-sensitive complexes releases their metal(loid) ions, which precipitate on the surface of pyrite to form a protective coating against further exposure to oxidants. Previous studies have shown that CME using Ti Fe In this study, the mechanisms involved in the sequential decomposition of Fe All chemicals used in this study were reagent grade (Wako Pure Chemical Industries. Ltd., Japan) and utilized without further purification. Ferric nitrate nonahydrate (Fe(NO A mineral specimen from Cerro de Pasco Mine, Peru was used to prepare the pyrite electrode. The pyrite specimen is mainly composed of Fe (45.8%) and S (51.2%) and only pyrite peaks were observed in its XRD pattern ( The static-type electrode experiments were done using a conventional three electrode cell setup connected to a computer-controlled electrochemical measurement unit (SI 1280B, Solartron Instruments, UK) ( The LSV measurements were conducted using the static-type electrode setup, a Pt working electrode, and 120 ml of 0.1 M NaNO To investigate the formation and growth of the protective coating via anodic decomposition of Fe The first series of chronoamperometry-EIS experiments was designed to investigate the formation and growth of the protective coating with time. To decompose Fe Another set of chronoamperometry-EIS experiments were carried out to investigate the effects of electrode potential on coating formation. Firstly, EIS was carried out at the OCP, and then a 10 mV DC bias against the OCP was applied to the working electrode while the anodic current was measured as a function of time until fluctuations in the current stabilized (i.e., the measured current was less than 5% of the total current for 1 min). After finishing the steady state current measurement mentioned above, another EIS measurement was conducted (DC bias, 0 mV vs previous potential; AC amplitude, 5 mV; AC frequency, 20,000 Hz to 0.1 Hz). After this, chronoamperometry-EIS experiments were repeated alternately with a 10 mV incremental step increase of the DC bias until the applied potential reached +0.8 V. To form the coating, the pyrite electrode was pretreated for 24 h in a magnetically stirred (200 rpm) acetate buffer solution (40 ml; pH 5) containing 5 mM Fe Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations with hybrid functionals were performed to determine geometries, energies, and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy levels ( The first step of coating formation in CME is the oxidative decomposition of metal-catecholate complexes on pyrite. Redox properties of Fe Meanwhile, peaks at A However, Pt is an ideal surface, so whether these reactions would still occur on the pyrite surface under similar applied potentials remains unclear. To verify the oxidative decomposition of Fe To better understand why Fe When the sequential decomposition of Fe Electrochemical measurements using a rotating disk-type electrode require the use of electrodes with a surface that is perfectly circular in shape, a requirement that is very difficult to achieve using a natural mineral sample. Fortunately, the oxidative decomposition of Fe A constant potential of 0.8 V was applied on the Pt electrode and 10 cycles of 1-min chronoamperometry and EIS were conducted. This applied potential (i.e., 0.8 V) was much higher than the observed potential whereby Fe The results of SEM-EDX analysis of the Pt electrode after chronoamperometry-EIS measurements ( As discussed previously, the decrease in current observed during the rotating disk-type electrode experiment was likely because of coating growth on the Pt electrode. Kinetic model (A) also assumes that contact between Fe By combining Eqs. In kinetic model (B), it is assumed that the Pt electrode surface is completely covered by a thin porous coating during the initial periods of the experiment and the reactant (Fe The current, I, is proportional to the diffusion rate of Fe With these, a differential equation, d(1/I)/dt ∝ I, is derived, and the following relation is obtained by solving the equation:  The smaller initial current in  Model (C) in With increasing polarization times, f The effects of electrode potential on coating formation are illustrated in At higher electrode potentials (over 0.6 V), the data could be fitted with two semi-circles 1 and 2. With increasing potential, the diameter of semi-circle 1 decreased but that of semi-circle 2 increased. Semi-circle 1 corresponds to the coating while semi-circle 2 could be attributed to the combination of polarization resistance R EIS results obtained at 0.2–0.58 V were analyzed with Model (D) as an equivalent circuit. In this section, anodic and cathodic chronoamperometry of coated and uncoated pyrite electrodes were carried out, and the effects of coating formed by Fe   The quantity of electric charge after 2 h of anodic chronoamperometry calculated from the measured current with and without coating were 0.44 and 0.72C/cm In this study, the mechanisms of CME using Fe The authors wish to thank the