Rare earth elements (RE) are incorporated into a large variety of complex oxide phases to provide tailored mechanical, electrical, optical, and magnetic properties. Thermodynamics control phase stability, materials compatibility in use, corrosion, and transformation. This review presents, in one compilation, the thermodynamic properties of a large number of such materials and discusses systematic trends in energetics and the factors controlling stability.The rare earth (RE) elements (often defined as the lanthanides plus yttrium) are technologically important in applications ranging from phosphors to fuel cells, magnets to medicine, superconductors to cell phones, turbines to thermoelectrics. They are considered “rare”, not because of very low geochemical abundance, but because there are few natural occurrences where RE are present in high concentrations. Their mining, beneficiation, separation, and processing involve many steps and can have a negative environmental impact, which is one of the factors driving such industry overseas, especially to China, where rare earth ores are abundant and environmental regulation has been much more lenient than in the USA. Technological uses of RE range from applications requiring major RE constituents in magnets to trace amounts in light emitting diodes (LED), with specific processing tailored to particular elements and devices. Rare earths are also major fission products in the nuclear fuel cycle. Finally, recovering rare earths after use can be difficult, labor intensive, and a source of pollution. Thus the “cradle to grave” rare earth cycle is fraught with challenges. Rare earths are considered “strategic” or “critical” because their supply is limited and often geopolitically controlled yet a shortage would impact many industries and potentially disrupt our technology-dependent society. Indeed rare earths are a major focus of the recently established U.S. Department of Energy Hub, the Critical Materials Institute dedicated to the more efficient use of critical materials. The processing of rare earths and their incorporation into devices are governed by what is thermodynamically possible, and sustainable technology needs thermodynamically and kinetically efficient pathways using minimum energy and causing the least environmental harm. Thus the thermodynamic properties of rare earth oxide materials must be known and used to develop industrial best practices. Rare earths, as all elements, come from the Earth. Specific RE minerals are usually minor constituents of rocks and RE are often incorporated in such minerals in minor concentrations, with several RE occurring together. The major commercially exploited ore is bastnasite, a complex RE carbonate hydroxide fluoride, followed by monazite and xenotime (phosphates), and several others (see The purpose of this paper is to provide, in a single source, an overview of thermodynamic properties of crystalline rare earth oxide systems, with emphasis on families of multicomponent compounds with specific structures ( A detailed review of structures and properties is given by Cerium forms two major oxides, CeO Thermodynamic data for the formation of binary RE oxides are summarized in The perovskite structure of stoichiometry ABO The tolerance factor, accounting for bond length or size mismatch, is the major factor controlling the enthalpy of formation of 3–3 perovskites from their binary oxides (see The distortions from cubic symmetry driven by size mismatch depend on composition and temperature, with first order or higher order transitions among them. In general the enthalpies associated with such transformations is small (<5 Substitution of large divalent ions (Sr, The balance between these mechanisms depends on the nature of M, temperature, and oxygen fugacity. The resulting perovskites can be ionic, electronic, or mixed conductors and have been studied extensively for these properties. Studies of thermodynamic properties of such solid solutions are summarized in Perovskites of the 2–4 charge type, A In minerals the substitution of RE into perovskites is often charge balanced by the incorporation of niobium or tantalum. Some of these substitutions and the mineral names associated with them are listed in The perovskite structure is a starting point for the creation of more complex structures by intercalating non-perovskite layers between perovskite-like ones. This generally changes the stoichiometry: an important example is the K Superconductors with The fluorite structure of stoichiometry AO In addition to the partially disordered defect structures discussed above. A number of fully ordered structures can be derived from fluorite. The C-type rare earth oxide structure is a ordered fluorite variant, with oxygen vacancies fully ordered in the 1 The pyrochlore structure ( Natural pyrochlore minerals are complex in composition and stoichiometry. Some of their charge balanced substitutions are given in Rare earth elements are major fission products in nuclear reactors, and UO The garnet structure, well known from mineralogy, with the general formula A Rare earth phosphates, REPO Thermodynamic data for RE silicate and germanate systems are included in As materials in which ionic bonding dominates, RE ternary oxides usually show a uniform trend in enthalpies of formation depending on the RE–O bond length, lattice parameter, ionic radius, or ionic potential (all of which are interrelated. These properties enable accurate interpolation and estimation of enthalpies of formation for missing RE compounds and probably for the trivalent actinides as well. However a given crystal structure can tolerate only a limited range of bond lengths. Indeed the existence of a given structure is limited by competition with other structures which become more thermodynamically favorable at smaller or larger ionic radii. This is shown schematically in Though not the major focus of this paper, the behavior of RE in molten, glassy, and amorphous oxide materials has attracted considerable attention. In general RE ions are considered “network modifiers” for silicate, borate, and phosphate melts since they do not enter tetrahedral coordination. They appear to require 7–10-fold coordination and sometimes are associated with “free” or non-bridging oxygen ions, with tendencies toward clustering and phase separation It has been shown that nanoparticles can have quite different thermodynamic properties from those of bulk phases as a consequence of their high surface areas, resulting in significant contributions of surface energy and hydration effects Many new RE oxide multicomponent oxide phases have been synthesized over the past two decades in the search for optimized functional materials. Thermochemical studies are beginning to define systematic trends in stability and link energetics and properties. Paradoxically, the thermodynamic data base for natural RE materials (minerals) is less complete than that for some of the more “popular” technological ones. This work is supported by the