Thin-walled cold-formed circular hollow sections (CHSs) are widely used as the primary and secondary structural members in the construction of roof structures often used for high rise buildings in the Middle East. The British steel design code BS 5950 is the main code used in the Middle East for the design of such structural elements. Existing experimental static axial tests performed by the second author on CHSs were used to assess BS 5950. This code was shown to over-estimate the axial capacity of compression members under static axial load in the middle member slenderness range of 0.35–0.75. This is because most of the braces in such range failed by the interaction of local buckling and overall flexural buckling. Newly derived design curve termed “Curve e” is proposed for design purposes. The newly derived curve is compared against other design codes such as the North American Steel Design code ANSI AISC 360-10, the European Steel Design Specification Eurocode 3, and the Australian Steel Design Code AS 4100. One case study for a newly constructed roof structure in the Middle East is presented. It was found that the existing curve “c” over-predicts the capacities of the most stressed secondary and primary braces by 37% and 15% respectively. Finite element models were constructed and found to provide good agreement against the experimental load-defection curves. Once validation is completed, additional FE models were created to expand the available database for strength of different CHS braces up to a member slenderness of 2.0. Newly derived design curve ‘‘e” within BS5950 platform was found to be a suitable lower bound for the experimental and numerical results. Additionally, a modified version for the AISC design model is suggested in this paper by reducing the strengths by 15%; applying a form factor of 0.85.Brace slenderness Yield load Yield stress Yield load Nominal section capacity of a steel member subjected to axial compression Form factor of the cross-section Gross cross-sectional area Yield stress Effective length of the member Member slenderness reduction factor Function of the combined slenderness and imperfection parameter Combined slenderness Effective outside diameter Yield slenderness limit Nominal strength for flexural buckling according to AISC Critical stress Reduction factor Effective cross-sectional area Effective length factor Radius of gyration of the cross-section Elastic buckling stress Reduction factor for the relevant buckling mode according to EC3 Critical buckling load Slenderness parameter Elastic modulus Poisson's ratio Tensile strength of the material Finite element ultimate compression load Experimental ultimate compression load Cross-sectional slenderness ratio The use of thin-walled sections as components in load bearing structures is common in several areas of engineering design. This relatively new design philosophy is coherent with the 3rd millennium life, as recent construction has to rely on the use of thin-walled structures for transportation vehicles, bridges, buildings and even households tools and appliances. The widespread acceptance of thin-walled structures is due to a lot of work achieved by research engineers who extend the boundaries of leading-edge technology in a search for a more efficient load bearing system Thin-walled structures are capable of carrying substantial loads, deflecting far beyond their elastic or buckling limits. The collapse of such structures under load involves the development of plastic hinges for both open and closed profiles. These plastic hinges are best described as local plastic spatial mechanisms, because they involve large localised plastic deformation with geometric folding In recent years thin-walled cold-formed steel hollow sections have become more popular as a construction member and consequently attracted a lot of research efforts to determine their structural properties. Cold-formed tubular sections are manufactured worldwide to high degree of straightness and squareness. Cold-formed steel framed houses become cost effective compared to those constructed from timber particularly in North America. Cold-formed tubular members are currently used more often in modern steel construction worldwide mainly as space trusses and frames. The Colonial Stadium in Melbourne used 6000 The British steel design Code BS 5950 This section provides the problem statement of the current paper, from which the commercial structural analysis software called “SPACE GASS” It is worth noting that the dome was designed with secondary and main braces as pin-ended struts. The only member assumed with fix-ends was the SHS 300 × 300 × 8 box girder supporting the dome shown in It is a common fact that the classification of the CHSs differs between different international specifications, as can be seen in An experimental study into the behaviour and strength of the fix-ended CHS braces subjected to monocycle and cyclic concentric axial loading was investigated by Elchalakani et al. The nominal member capacity of a compression member with constant cross section is calculated in AS4100-1998 In which The member slenderness reduction factor ( The nominal strength ( In which, The unfactored buckling resistance ( The newly derived curve titled ‘curve e′ can be given by the equations below where it is proposed to use  The fast developed finite element technique, fortunately, has provided great tool to analyse the hollow steel section braces All generated columns were axially loaded to simulate the axial compression performance of the CHS braces; see Similar to that used in previous investigations In the ABAQUS model, a primary elastic buckling analysis was carried out on perfect CHSs to generate the first positive buckling mode (see The steel used experimentally by Elchalakani et al. In this section, the accuracy of the FE model is checked by analysing eight different CHS tests conducted by Elchalakani et al. Thirty FE models are generated in this section (see In this section, the results and the discussion of the current parametric study are presented. The ultimate loads of the current program are presented in The axial load-axial deformation relationships were obtained from the FE analysis and presented herein in For the braces with the same thickness, the ductility indices (DIs) were found to increase with the increase in the member slenderness until a certain limit, from which the ductility indices tend to decrease. This may look illogical unless the values of the deflections used in the DI calculation are thoroughly examined. Herein, the deflection values used in the DI calculation for a sample group (with The British steel design Code BS 5950 The FE results confirmed that the BS 5950 Beyond The capacity-slenderness relationships from the FE results were found to be similar to that of the AISC Newly derived design curve ‘‘e” within BS5950 platform At the end, a modified design model