The management of Osteoporotic ankle fractures is still considered to be a challenge by many surgeons. One of the issues seems to be a lack of data focused on this special subgroup, with very little evidence of good quality. We did a narrative review of the literature in an attempt to identify the magnitude of the problem and to evaluate the evidence in support of management options.
                  The current review of the literature has brought to light some interesting facts. Despite limited data there seems to be an in increase in the incidence of these fractures. Although we could not demonstrate any clear distinction between geriatric and osteoporotic ankle fractures from the available literature; it is clear that all geriatric fractures are not necessarily osteoporotic and neither is the reverse true. The evidence to associate osteoporotic ankle fractures with poor outcomes is weak, and factors other than osteoporosis may have a stronger influence. From this analysis, we could not establish a higher incidence of implant failure for this specific fracture group, although many modifications in technique have been proposed due to the fear of fixation failure. Hook plating and Tibia-pro fibula fixation have weak evidence in support, but posterior fibular plating is preferred due to soft tissue protection. There is weak evidence in support of Locking plates for these fractures, as publications focused on this are limited; nevertheless some advantages have been documented. Augmentation by calcium based bone graft substitutes has been reported to improve pull out strengths of screws, but again the evidence of its role in Osteoportic fractures is limited. Fibular nailing has been proposed with specific advantages in osteoporotic fibular fractures, but the concept is new and it is indicated only in a select a subgroup of cases. Some evidence exists for the use of trans-articular nails in geriatric subgroups with limited pre-injury mobility, but the technique has to be used with caution to prevent other complications.
               
                  Inference
                  More data needs to be accumulated before clear guidelines for management of osteoporotic ankle factures are defined; however the current literature supports the need for modifications in standard ankle facture fixation methods to improve outcomes.Ankle fractures among the elderly population are a growing concern, with medical co-morbidities, fragile local soft tissues and osteoporosis posing challenges to the treating surgeon. Historically, many unstable ankle fractures in elderly patients were treated non-operatively because of high anticipated complications. The most common misconception is that osteoporotic and geriatric fractures are the same; undoubtedly almost all geriatric fractures have some degree of osteoporosis, but all osteoporotic fractures do not necessarily occur in the elderly. The distinction between these two is often unclear and the management options in both of them may be similar or may overlap. There is also a percieved higher risk of failure of standard fixation methods in osteoporotic ankle fractures, To clarify these issues, there was felt to be a need for a narrative analysis of the literature to evaluate the incidence and definitions of osteoporotic fractures, and to define modalities of treatment for this special group of ankle fractures. Three researchers (MSD, RKR, SP) independently searched PubMed for publications on osteoporotic ankle fracture using specific keywords (“Osteoporotic AND Ankle AND Fracture, Osteoporotic AND Ankle AND Fracture AND Fixation) on 17/02/2019 and 265 hits were obtained ( After thorough review of the articles we identified 17 articles of our interest. The short-listed articles were read in detail to arrive at this narrative review. Study selection discrepancies between three researchers were resolved by discussion. Ankle fractures constitute around 10.2% of all bony injuries.  Geriatric ankle fractures have been referred to as age related fractures, fragility fractures Greenfield et al. In contrast, Biver et al. Although bone mineral density has been used conventionally to define osteoporosis, it may not be a sensitive tool to access and predict fracture risk for ankle fractures. Many authors now think that the conventional guidelines based on BMD maybe understating the problem of osteoporosis. One of the issues which can be taken in to account is the degree of trauma and the extent of comminution that occurs; if the fracture occurs with low energy trauma it can be presumed to be osteoporotic, especially if the displacement is significant and the comminution significant. Therefore, if one sees an elderly patient who has significant displacement, significant bone impaction it could be classified as an osteoporotic ankle fracture despite BMD being normal. Nevertheless, all geriatric fractures are not associated with low energy trauma nor do they have significant displacement or significant comminution/compression; thus it often becomes difficult to define which geriatric fractures are osteoporotic. However, if you take the secondary criteria which include BMD plus degree of trauma etc. then all of those which fit in to BMD plus secondary criteria can be labelled as osteoporotic and should be managed accordingly.  Four studies included in this review evaluated factors that influenced outcomes of geriatric ankle fractures. Zaghloul et al. In contrast Gauthe et al., Aigner et al.  Therefore, the evidence to associate osteoporosis with poor outcomes is weak, and the current published literature gives only indirect correlation. In the 1980s Beauchamp et al. noted high complication rates and limited benefits after internal fixation of ankle fracture over 50 years of age, and hence preferred non-operative treatment. A fact of note is the perceived higher incidence of failure of standard fixation methods in osteoporotic ankle fractures. The risk of screw loosening is of concern to most surgeons with use of conventional compression plates. Recent articles are focusing on better implants to improve the purchase and decrease failures.  Based on the available literature the following 6 methods of improving fixation were specifically evaluated. There is limited literature evaluating the role of hook plate and the use of tibia pro fibula screws in the osteoporotic ankle fractures; we found only one article for this review. Panchbhavi et al. This study implies that the hook plate may serve as a blade plate, providing additional rotational stability in a different plane, and tibia pro-fibular screws redistribute forces from the distal fibula to an intact tibia. This construct may be load-sharing and could allow earlier weight bearing. Nevertheless, it did not influence union times, but reduced associated complications. Said et al. DeOrio et al.  From the current literature search, we could not find any clinical study mentioning posterior implant placement specifically for osteoporotic ankle fractures. Most of the available studies are biomechanical studies done on either cadaver or artificial bone. We included three cadaveric studies suitable for this review [ Minihane et al.  We found one published clinical study In a comparative retrospective clinical study Herrera-Perez et al. Zahn et al. Kim et al., Lyle SA et al. Tsukada et al. Moriarity et al.  Some authors have increased the holding power of screw fixation in osteoporotic bone by use of Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). Another option proposed is the commercially available Calcium phosphate cement which is a bio-resorbable and has limited heat generation. A vitro study comparing augmentation with tricalcium phosphate cement vs PMMA vs no augmentation showed comparable pull out strengths between tricalcium phosphate cement and PMMA, From the current published literature we found two studies suitable for this review [  There are only two publications [ Lee et al. Appleton et al.  Recent reports have shown calcaneo-talo-tibial nail (commonly used for hind foot fusion) to be a good option in treating frail elderly patient with an unstable ankle fracture; we found four studies from the current published literature [ Al Namari et al. Jonas et al. Lemon et al. Persigant et al. One patient had deep infection, and required debridement, while another patient had distal screw migration which required no intervention at final follow up. The authors noted that TIMN allowed immediate weight bearing and early rehabilitation. Baker et al.  For the 6 objectives outlined for this study, we were able to reach the following conclusions. Since, no prospective randomised controlled studies exist, we could only do a narrative review. There is lack of data to identify the exact incidence of osteoporotic ankle fractures for any population type, but there is a trend of increasing incidence of ankle fractures (?osteoporotic) in geriatric populations. Even today, there is little distinction between geriatric and osteoporotic ankle fractures, but they remain a part of the same injury spectrum. The evidence to associate osteoporosis with poor outcomes is weak, but the published literature gives indirect correlations based on age, swelling and type of fracture. From our review, we could not establish a higher incidence of implant failure in osteoporotic ankle fractures. Modifications in fixation seem to help, but the publications are few and the evidence is weak. Hook plate, tibia pro fibula screws and posterior fibular plate placement seem to be of benefit, but again evidence is weak. Locking plates have some advantages, but specific data focused on osteoporotic factures is lacking The evidence to support the use of calcium based bone graft substitutes as augmentation methods to improve screw pullout strength in osteoporotic ankle fractures is based on cadaver studies alone. In specific subgroups, Fibula Nailing seems to have some advantage, as does Trans-articular fixation in low-demand elderly patients with multiple co-morbidities. Nevertheless no specific recommendations can be made for both the above methods, as the evidence, is not strong for any single modality to be recommended in isolation, as there are no comparative studies. We conclude that although thee are some studies looking at this subgroup of fractures, focussed multicentic studies with randomised patient groups ae needed to give specific recommendations. None. None.