An axial inlet cyclone was developed and tested for wet size classification of particulate materials with the purpose of providing an alternative to the tangential inlet cyclone used traditionally in the mineral processing industry. The proposed device shared many of the fundamental features of a conventional cyclone, but had a circular opening on the roof of the cylindrical section and surrounding the vortex finder for feed entry, instead of a tangential inlet. The feed material spiraled down through that opening and generated the necessary spin for separation inside the cyclone. Experimental work was carried out on a sample of copper–nickel mill tailings having a particle size of 91% passing 300 μm, and the performance of the cyclone was evaluated at different inlet pressures, feed pulp densities and vortex finder lengths.
                  In comparison to the tangential inlet cyclone, the axial inlet cyclone provided higher throughputs, coarser cut-sizes in relatively dilute pulps, and greater flexibility and control over the cyclone separation process.Many industries enjoy the benefits of hydrocyclone in a diverse range of applications involving solid–solid, solid–liquid, and even liquid–liquid separations ( The mineral processing industry makes extensive use of the hydrocyclone particularly in closed grinding circuits, where size classification of the mill discharge is required to remove the sufficiently ground material as finished product, and return the remaining material back to the mill for further size reduction. Choice of a tangential inlet type hydrocyclone has been the standard practice in these applications, but recently certain concerns have been expressed over the throughput of these cyclones and their poor performance in handling concentrates (containing frother) in regrinding circuits. It was to address the throughput issue in particular that the present work on axial inlet cyclone was undertaken, since this type of cyclone is known to deliver high throughputs in other applications, particularly those involving the treatment of gaseous effluents. The axial inlet cyclone has been in use for a long time in industry for the collection of particulates from waste gas streams ( For the experimental work, a hydrocyclone setup was designed and constructed as illustrated in Essentially, the hydrocyclone consisted of a conical section, a cylindrical section, and a vortex finder/overflow assembly. The conical section was fabricated from moulded fiberglass, and had a 15° included angle, which falls mid-way within the typical range of 10–20° angles employed in classifying cyclones ( The tangential inlet was made from a piece of thick plastic tubing, and fused onto a tangentially carved opening on the side of the cylindrical section, approximately 12.7 mm (0.5 in.) from the top of the section. This inlet provided an immediate tangential path of entry for the feed as it flowed into the cyclone. The inlet had an equivalent diameter of 24.7 mm by area, thus providing an inlet diameter-to-cylinder diameter ratio of 0.28, in conformity with the The axial inlet consisted of a 50.8 mm (2 in.) dia. acrylic tubing fitted around the 25.4 mm (1 in.) dia. vortex finder. Feed was introduced through a tangential slot near the top of the axial inlet tubing and spiraled down into the cylindrical section ( The overflow system consisted of a 25.4 mm (1 in.) dia. vortex finder tubing connected to an inverted u-shaped piping of similar diameter. The vortex finder length, defined as the length of vortex finder tubing that extends into the cylindrical section of the cyclone, could readily be varied by raising or lowering that tubing. The underflow and overflow products were discharged into a sump and then pumped back to the cyclone, thus forming a closed-circuit operation. Cyclone inlet pressure was measured by means of a glycerin-filled mechanical pressure gauge mounted close to the inlet, and was regulated by varying the feed rate via adjustment of valves on the cyclone feed and bypass streams. Since the overflow discharge point was very close to the cyclone and was at near atmospheric pressure, the inlet pressure readings were considered to approximately represent the pressure drop across the cyclone. In order to ensure that the samples taken from the underflow and overflow streams were simultaneous and representative, a duplex rail system was constructed and mounted on top of the sump. The bottom rail was clamped to the sump and remained stationary, while the top rail could be easily slid along the bottom rail in a brisk, smooth motion. Containers were placed upon the top rail and aligned to the flow streams. To facilitate the collection of samples from the discharge streams, suitable lengths of acrylic piping were fitted around the discharge openings, in such a manner as not to disturb the patterns of flow. The total volume of pulp circulating in the system amounted to 15 L. Volumetric throughputs of 106 L/min in axial inlet mode and 78 L/min in tangential inlet mode were achieved when operating at an inlet pressure of 86.2 kPa gauge (12.5 psig) and a feed pulp density (weight percentage of solids in the solid–liquid mixture fed into the cyclone) of 20%. These throughputs corresponded to solids handling capacities of 1.46 and 1.08 t/h, respectively. The cyclone feed material used in this study consisted of mill tailings obtained from Falconbridge Limited’s Strathcona Mill, which is located in Onaping, approximately 450 km north of Toronto, in the province of Ontario, Canada. With a capacity of approximately 3 million tonnes of ore per year, the Strathcona Mill processes ore from four of Falconbridge’s Sudbury mines, producing two concentrate products; a copper–nickel concentrate and a copper concentrate, which are subsequently smelted at Falconbridge’s smelters. The Strathcona Mill produces approximately 2.3 million tonnes of tailings per year, 60% of which is used for mine backfill, with the remainder sent to the tailings impoundment area. Hydrocyclones are used for backfill preparation from the tailings. For laboratory tests, representative samples were taken from these tailings. Size analysis of the samples showed a particle size of 91% passing 300 μm sieve size, with the full size distribution, obtained by a combination of sieving and laser analysis, given in Timed representative samples were taken simultaneously from the underflow and overflow streams in order to collect the necessary data for performance evaluations. The basic recorded data included solids and water flow rates, and particle size distributions. Size analyses were obtained by wet-and-dry sieving and laser particle size analysis. Data for the cyclone feed was derived by mathematically combining the underflow and overflow products. Solids flow rate and particle size distribution data provided the necessary information for the construction of cyclone classification curves (also known as efficiency curves, partition curves, Tromp curves, performance curves or selectivity curves), which are plots of solids recovery to underflow, expressed as either fraction or percentage, versus particle size. Tests were conducted first with water only in order to make a rapid assessment of the two cyclones and find out whether a sufficient contrast existed between their performances to justify a further and detailed investigation. Experiments with pulps ensued, using the material described above. Various performance criteria were evaluated, including throughput, cut-size, sharpness of separation, solids and water splits, underflow and overflow pulp densities, etc., but only the first three have been reported here, since these were considered to provide a sufficient basis for comparison between the two cyclone designs. These parameters were assessed as a function of cyclone inlet pressure, feed pulp density and vortex finder length. Inlet pressure was varied between 24.1 kPa gauge (3.5 psig) and 103.4 kPa gauge (15 psig), feed pulp density between 15% and 25%, and vortex finder length between 0 and 127 mm (5 in.). While studying one variable, others were kept constant at their standard values, which were an inlet pressure of 69 kPa gauge (10 psig), a feed pulp density of 20%, and a vortex finder length of 50.8 mm (2 in.). Not all tests were duplicated, but those that were, indicated good reproducibility. The throughput (capacity) of a cyclone, usually expressed as the volumetric flow rate of cyclone feed, is governed primarily by its size, but a given cyclone can yield a range of throughputs depending on the actual operating conditions employed. Tests conducted with water only revealed a strong influence of inlet pressure (  While the throughput increased with increasing inlet pressure, the recovery to underflow decreased, as seen in Similar relationships were observed between throughput and inlet pressure when the cyclone was operated with pulp. As shown in A frequently used parameter to characterize the separation process in a cyclone is the so-called “cut-size” (also known as “ A similar trend was observed with feed pulp density, as illustrated in  A number of mathematical models are available for the prediction of None of the above-mentioned models was found applicable to the axial inlet cyclone. Ideally, separation in a cyclone should be such that all particles larger than the It has been recognized that a part of the material entering the cyclone escapes the classification action and reports to the products unclassified. In order to assess the true classification efficiency, it is necessary to eliminate the effect of such material and obtain a corrected efficiency curve. As suggested by Especially when making efficiency comparisons between different cyclones or conditions of operation, it is often useful to plot the efficiency curve using the On the basis of above considerations, efficiency comparisons were made between the axial and tangential inlet cyclones tested in this study. This study has demonstrated that the axial inlet cyclone may offer a viable and beneficial alternative to the tangential inlet cyclone for wet size classification in the mineral processing industry. One of the advantages that can be derived from this type of cyclone is increased throughput, which could result in reduced size or number of cyclones needed for a given application. Within the experimental conditions employed, throughput increases of up to 40% have been realized in comparison to the tangential inlet cyclone. The axial inlet cyclone also makes it possible to achieve separations at coarse cut-sizes even in relatively dilute pulps, while a similar separation in a tangential inlet cyclone would normally require feeds with high solids concentration. Furthermore, the inlet pressure was found to be a critical parameter in the operation of the axial inlet cyclone, having a significant influence on both the throughput and the This project was made possible through the financial supports of MMO (Manufacturing and Materials Ontario) and Falconbridge Limited. The assistance of Norman Lotter (Falconbridge) and Mike Grace (MMO) in obtaining these supports is greatly appreciated. The authors also thank Peter Wells of INCO Ltd for his role and encouragements in the initiation of this study.