Cylindrical Ni thin films were developed on Cu cylindrical substrates, usable for torque sensor applications. Experimental results indicate that optimum torque sensor response is obtained after heat and field annealing. The development was based on a new electro-deposition device with uniform cylindrical deposition ability.Recently a wide variety of experimental techniques has been developed for the production of magnetic materials for applications in magnetic torque sensors and devices Magnetic torque sensors can be divided into two categories. The first one, measures small angles of displacement due to torsion, using a magnetic circuit, requiring considerably large space and complicated mechanical arrangement Having the motivation to develop new magnetoelastic tubes with circumferential magnetoelastic anisotropy for torque sensor applications, we have developed cylindrical Ni thin films on Cu cylindrical substrates in order to study the effects of torsionally induced stresses. An electro-deposition device with uniform cylindrical deposition ability was conceived, designed and calibrated for that purpose. Modeling the thermodynamic response of the electrolysis solution, we have determined the parameters of current amplitude, temperature, solution and steering conditions. The samples were undergone structural characterization by means of scanning electron microscopy. Moreover, magnetic induction measurements were performed, with respect to torque on the samples. In fact, the magnetic and structural characteristics of the sample were dependent on the deposition conditions A cylindrical electro-deposition device was designed for the production of circumferentially oriented Ni cylindrical thin films. The nickel-plating process on a copper substrate was initially selected to allow easy production and characterization of samples, since nickel is easily deposited on copper and has high resistance to corrosion The electro-deposition device is illustrated in Prior to the electro-deposition procedure, the cathode surface was mechanically polished with successively finer grades of emery paper and then it was ultrasonically rinsed for 2 Experiments for several Ni thin film depositions on Cu were obtained with different conditions, such as current densities, concisions and deposition time. Hence, the optimum deposition of Ni on Cu, was found to be a 10 The morphology of the Ni thin film cylinder was examined using SEM techniques. As cast, heat annealed and oxidized samples have been tested, demonstrating the classical polycrystalline structure of Ni film, thus ensuring sufficiently acceptable deposition, without any sign of Ni film delamination from the Cu surface. The sample’s thickness was less than 8 The device used for the determination of the torsion response of the sample is illustrated in The repeatability of the sample was examined after the heat and field annealing, as illustrated in The observed torsional magnetomechanical effect can be explained in terms of domain processes in magnetostrictive materials Torsion affects the magnetic domain rotation as well as the domain wall motion With respect to these measurements we drew the conclusion that monotonic torsion response is obtained for Ni cylindrical thin film less than 8