New application fields of particle technology, e.g. coatings, pharmaceuticals or electronic components require more and more highly defined particles in the lower micrometer range. In this case the particle size distribution (PSD) is no longer sufficient to define the specifications alone. The particle system has to be described by further distributed properties, which are for instance particle shape or particle composition. Tomographic particle characterization is one key methodology to provide the data, required to quantify these specifications. The tomogram of a representative particle sample contains information on the size and shape of each individual particle. The data of X-ray absorption furthermore gives hints about the material properties and structure of intergrown or composite structures. One central challenge in the tomography of a particle sample is the segmentation of the image data. When the particles in the sample are too close to each other, the algorithm is not able to separate individuals. On the other hand, oversegmentation can occur, when a particle is separated into two or more individuals during the image processing. Therefore, the physical sample preparation, which keeps the particles at a defined distance, strongly facilitates any automated segmentation.
                  The established techniques known from SEM, TEM or automated mineralogy (MLA) cannot be transferred to X-ray microtomography (XMT), because they only have to provide a representative 2D-measuring plane. The 3D-sample preparation introduced here is able to provide a homogeneous particle sample immobilized within a matrix material with low X-ray absorption. In the sample, all particles have a minimum distance which amounts to more than a defined minimum multitude of the voxel size. The carrier matrix is a wax structure, that is shock frozen within a small polymeric tube with inner diameter from 0.5 mm to 2 mm. This corresponds to the requested sample size for the tomographic measurements (X-ray microscopy system Zeiss VERSA 510), which is 1024 times voxel size (≈0.5 μm to 2 μm), allowing multi-dimensional characterization of particles from 5 μm to 50 μm in size and shape.Distributed particle properties are of great interest when describing processes from the micro- to the macro-scale. The easiest way is to spread particles on an object carrier and performing a two-dimensional (2D) analysis with optical or, if higher resolutions are needed, electron microscopy [ Gy [ Hutschenreiter [ A more practical approach, especially for micron-sized particle systems, is given by Koglin et al. [ The preparation method for particulate samples in XMT-analysis depends on the particle size and the parameters of interest. The easiest case is a packed particle bed where, however, particles are not prevented from moving while scanning. Also direct particle-particle contact can cause problems in particle software segmentation. To fix the particles, an embedding matrix is used - in most cases epoxy resin, because it is well machinable and transparent for optical analysis. A good summary of miniaturized alternatives to conventional sample preparation techniques for solid samples can be found in [ If the setting velocity of the particles is not negligible, segregation leads to different compositions of vertical sections. While sedimenting, particles get in direct contact as is the case in a packed bed. Both effects can be problematic in software segmentation due to non-separated particles and different grey-scale histograms ( To prevent sedimentation, the hardening time of the epoxy resin needs to be significantly reduced. This can be achieved by replacing it with wax. Waxes are used for tissue preparation in optical microscopy because of its histological compatibility. A good summary of existing methods for biological sample preparation and their applications in X-ray microtomography is given by Strotton et al. [ Particle-dependent distributions (e.g. size, shape) give insight in how mechanical processes work and how they are connected to related micro-processes. Only in three dimensions, a reliable description of distributed volumetric particle properties is made possible [ In conventional radiological 2D imaging, all attenuation coefficients along one line through the sample volume form one sum signal. This equals one specific grey value of overlapping structures, which are located in succession in the beam path. So they cannot be analysed separately. By scanning a specific field of view (FOV) of the sample under different angles, a 3D-volume can be created by applying a mathematical reconstruction algorithm. Extracted sections from this volume are no longer a sum signal but a real volume-slice with grey values proportional to the attenuation coefficients of the material. State-of-the-art scanners for micro-scale analysis are designed with cone-beam geometry and flat-panel detectors in combination with a magnifying optic (sometimes called an X-ray microscope). A detailed description of the evolutionary steps can be found in [ Comminution: liberation analysis [ Agglomeration: sintering of raw material in iron ore processing [ Separation: analysis of exposed grain surface area in flotation processes [ Mixing: physical separation processes in silo storages [ In-situ measurements become more and more interesting in all application fields due to decreasing scan-times and increasing computational power. Analyses that were formally only possible in synchrotron experiments become now available for lab-based X-ray systems. A very good summary of quantitative X-ray tomography applications is given by Maire and Withers [ As idealized sample, a spherical soda-lime glass-particle system (SiLibeads, type S from Sigmund Lindner) with particle sizes below 50 μm was chosen (72.3% In The model approach of Gy and Hutschenreiter has to be supplemented, because In case of tomographic imaging it is sometimes not possible to get all sampled particles into the FOV and thus in the measured volume. A second sampling step has to be taken into account, which leads to the question how many particles are needed to get a representative sample — presumed that there are is no segregation. Vigneau et al. [ Koglin et al. [ The initial sample is divided into sub-samples of 640 mg using rotating sample splitters. Two sub-samples were selected for concentrations of 10% and three for 15% (combined as analysis sample). The sample was extracted with a self-designed computer-controlled syringe. A detailed description can be found in A histological wax (PHC9061, PothHille) with a melting point between 59°C and 61°C was used as embedding matrix. The suspension of dispersed particles and wax was then sampled using a pre-heated plastic tube of 2 mm inner diameter. Pre-heating is required to prevent uncontrolled solidification of the wax before sampling is finished. This will be discussed in the results section. With the estimations from Koglin et al. and Vigneau et al. regarding the minimum particle number for a representative sample, one can calculate the minimum particle concentration To estimate the maximum particle concentration under ideal conditions (no agglomeration/sedimentation), one can define a cube with side length The number of separating voxels Rearranging Eq. To prevent segregation effects, aspiration speed has to be much higher than the stationary setting velocity of the particles. The required dynamic viscosity was measured with Discovery Hybrid Rheometer DHR 1 by TA Instruments at 70°C, 80°C and 90°C. The overall average is 24 mPas. With the Stokes-equation one can calculate the setting velocity of the largest particle (will sink the fastest) with diameter 50 μm–0.4 mm Errors for sample splitting are (1) losses by emitting dust and loosing fine fraction of the particulate sample that will influence the PSD, (2) the entry of impurities caused by abrasion or dust which can influence the XMT-measurement due to high absorption coefficients (see subsecction 1.4) and (3) forming of agglomerates that will alter the system from the initial state. To prevent agglomeration, the sub-samples where put in the stirred pre-melted wax very slowly. The rotation speed was increased after adding new sub-samples starting from 400 min The analysis was carried out with an XMT (Zeiss, type VERSA 510) with a polychromatic X-ray source, a rotating tungsten target, a maximum acceleration voltage of 160 keV and a maximum power of 10 W. Compared to a conventional X-ray micro-computed tomography set-up, the optical system increases magnification by factor of 10. pixel-resolution of the CCD-sensor (2048 × 2048) Px, optical magnification (0.4×, 4×, 20×, 40×), mechanical stability of the system and thermal stability of the system and the sample. Secondary effects due to system resolution are for example the X-ray tube itself [ The reconstruction was done with the Scout&Scan Reconstructor Version 11.1.8043 from Zeiss with the standard filtered back projection (FBP) algorithm. Reconstruction settings are summarized in Image processing was done with FIJI (ImageJ 1.51w). All related parameters are listed in As shown in Qualitatively, reconstructed sections themselves have a lot of valuable information. Quantitative analysis needs much more precise work in acquisition (e.g. voxel-resolution → object surface), image pre-processing (e.g. beam-hardening correction → artefacts), image processing (e.g. oversegmentation) and in post-processing, especially when developing macros for slice-per-slice operations (processing one slice after another with the same sequence of image processing steps). Due to the spherical shape of the particles, the equivalent spherical diameter was chosen as representative measure for particle size. After particle identification, ImageJ 3D Objects Counter [ To verify the influence of the tube extraction height (TEH) on the PSD (selective aspiration), samples on top, middle and bottom position - vertically centred - where extracted and combined to a sample stack (see To verify the influence of the extraction point (EP) in the sample vessel, two different positions (close to the top/bottom) where investigated. Equally to TEH, the tube was placed outside of the rotation centre of the fluid to guarantee optimal mixing conditions. The minimum number of particles per scanned volume are 18,400 for the Vigneau-approach (Eq. In preliminary studies of the wax preparation method, two side-effects where observed. First, the reconstructed volume shows an inner cylinder of the tube (silicone, temperature range from 60 °C to 200 °C). This can be explained by the temperature gradient between the tube-hull (room temperature) and the hot wax ( The second effect was induced by unintentional tilting of the tube. Vertical sedimentation effects due to gravitational force are suppressed by the flow-induced force in the opposite direction. Horizontally placed, For the experiments, two concentrations where chosen that lay within the theoretically calculated The target concentrations are in good agreement with the calculated values with tendency to higher concentrations, except 10–4-Top from the lower and 10–5-Bottom from the upper extraction point. At 15% target concentration 15–3-Bottom shows a much higher concentration of about 25%. One can see that for TEH the variation of the particle number is comparable for target concentrations 10% and 15%, contrary the variation of the calculated particle concentration is 4 times higher when going from 10% to 15%. Peaks in the approximation (LOESS) curve ( When plotting the particle number against the concentration ( In X-ray microtomography is a powerful tool to determine particle size distributions. The paper discusses (1) what points have to be considered when preparing small-scale particle samples for XMT-measurement. The sample has to be representative and has to fit to the desired voxel size, which determines the FOV. (2) Wax embedding was successfully validated as preparation method for spherical particle systems for XMT-measurement. (3) Target particle concentration should be in proximity of the minimum concentration (Eq. (3)) to get statistically verified number of particles but to minimize the risk of agglomeration ( Future work will focus on dispersion grade in each volume over the sample (for a better measure for preparation quality) and particle systems with various particle shapes. This will set new requirements to statistics (higher dimensional K-S) and maximum particle concentrations. The presented segmentation algorithms are expected to be not sufficient for this systems (particle detection - oversegmentation) and will have to be replaced by supervised learning algorithms (e.g. neural networks [ Raw-data files (Zeiss-format) and reconstructed slices can be requested from the corresponding author. We would like to thank the