Three wax/oil-based binders were formulated for metal injection molding of stainless steel 316L. The differences in formulation were the molecular weights of the backbone polyethylenes and the partial substitution of wax by palm oil. Solvent debinding was carried out in petroleum ether at 30/40°C and followed by a short resoaking in clean petroleum ether to remove the residual wax. The rest of binder could be thermally extracted at 370°C with a high heating rate of 300°C, with no defects. Sintering was done in H2 atmosphere at 1300–1400°C. Approximately, 96% theoretical density, hardness of 65 HRB, tensile strength of 500MPa and Young modulus of 9GPa were achieved with all three binders. The palm-oil-substituted binder produced much higher of ductility of 47% compared to 37% for the wax-only binders.Metal injection molding (MIM) uses an injection molding machine to inject a mixture of binder and metal powder to obtain the near net shape parts. Binder formulation and debinding are two most important keys for successful MIM. The use of inappropriate binders and/or debinding systems would produce defects or result in excessive processing time—notably debinding time. Binders can be classified into three categories: wax/oil-based, water-based and solid polymer solutions ( Many aspects of the wax/oil-based binder have been studied, such as the effect of wax composition ( Binders were prepared by compounding low density polyethylene or LDPE (LD1630J and LD1450J from The Siam Cement Petrochemicals Group) with paraffin wax (commercial grade imported from China), stearic acid (Asia Pacific Specialty Chemicals Limited) and palm oil (commercial food grade). LD1630J has a melt flow index of 30 The binders and their binder components were thermally characterized with NETZSCH 409. A simple test for volume change from solid-to-liquid was performed by melting the cylindrical piece with known size in a measuring cylinder. Wetability testing of binder components on a polished stainless steel 316L plate was done in a tube furnace (Lenton). Photographs were taken for comparison of the wetting angles.  The injection molding machine (Model BOY 15/5 No. 4568) was employed with injection pressure of 700–1100 Commercial grade Petroleum Ether was used for solvent debinding. At each interval of 1 Specimens were ground and polished for various characterizations. Density was determined by Archemedes’ method. Hardness and strength were determined using the Hardness tester (Instron UHM 250) and the Tensile tester (Instron UTM 4502), respectively. Microstructure was studied with the Light microscope (Olympus BM). The thermal characteristics of binders and constituents are summarized in Compatibility of powder and binder was investigated by studying the wetting ability of each binder component on stainless steel 316L plate. Photographs of molten LD1630J (A), LD1450J (B) and paraffin wax on 316L plate at 125 An important requirement of MIM mixture is low volume change from fluid-to-solid phase change, to avoid defects from stress and shape distortion from large volume change ( The viscosity was observed by stirring the molten at 120 As discussed earlier, as all three binder had similar thermal characteristics, the optimum injection parameters were similar. These were the injection pressure of 6.2 The variation in powder distribution in the specimen was also studied by measuring density of sections of the injected (green) specimens along the flow direction. It was found that the density gradually increased from the ingate to the far end ( The green specimens were immersed in petroleum ether under different conditions to identify the optimum solvent debinding parameters for dissolving paraffin wax. The conditions and the corresponding observations are shown in From the first condition, dissolution of paraffin wax at 40 As well as residual stress from injection, the backbone polyethylene would swell in the solvent (  The partly-debinded specimens were subjected to the next stage of thermal debinding. It was expected that the channels of porosity, generated by the removal of paraffin wax, would provide the pathways for the vaporization of the rest of binder and that a high heating rate could consequently be used. However, that is not the case, all specimens were damaged or broken if the heating rate was more than 50  To reopen the pores, the specimen was, again, immersed in clean petroleum ether at 40 After reopening the pores at the surface, thermal debinding was successfully carried out in the next step at 370 Prior to sintering, deoxidization in highly reducing atmosphere was required to remove oxides. Preheating at 700 To improve the density further while avoiding excessive grain growth at high sintering temperature, the sintering was done at 1350 The debinding of injection-molded specimens with in-house wax/oil-based binder using a combined solvent-thermal technique required an acceptable time of only 19 The effects of substituting oil for 10% paraffin wax were the reduction in the variation in density along the specimen and more uniform packing of powder demonstrated by the better elongation during tensile testing. The physical and mechanical properties of our specimens were comparable to those obtained commercially. This work was funded by the National Metal and Materials Technology Center (MTEC), Thailand, and supported by Chulalongkorn University. The authors also would like to express gratitude to The Siam Cement Petrochemicals Group and Pacific Sowa Corp., for kindly supplying raw materials. For manuscript preparation, Dr. John T.H. Pearce's suggestions and English proof reading are greatly appreciated.