Optical sorters are important devices in the processing and handling of the globally growing material streams. The precise optical sorting of many bulk solids is still difficult due to the great technical effort necessary for transport and flow control. In this study, particle separation with an automated optical belt sorter is modeled numerically. The Discrete Element Method (DEM) is used to model the sorter and calculate the particle movement as well as particle – particle and particle – wall interactions. The particle ejection stage with air valves is described with the help of a MATLAB script utilizing particle movement information obtained with the DEM. Two models for predicting the particle movement between the detection and separation phase are implemented and compared. In the first model, it is assumed that the particles are moving with belt velocity and without any cross movements and a conventional line scan camera is used for particle detection. In the second model, a more sophisticated approach is employed where the particle motion is predicted with an area scan camera combined with a tracking algorithm. In addition, the influence of different operating parameters like particle shape or conveyor belt length on the separation quality of the system is investigated. Results show that numerical simulations can offer detailed insight into the operation performance of optical sorters and help to optimize operating parameters. The area scan camera approach was found to be superior to the standard line scan camera model in almost all investigated categories.The amount of bulk material processed on a global scale continues to grow. In 2012, more than 8687 MT of coal With continuously growing material streams, the handling and sorting of bulk solids is of great importance. In addition to conventional separating processes like screens Scientific studies conducted in the field of optical sorting can be separated into different core areas. Investigations regarding the sorting of nanoparticles discuss the necessary experimental structures for particle separation and are presented in Due to the high technical effort necessary for the material transport and flow control, the optical sorting of many bulk solids is still difficult. The gap between particle detection and separation makes it crucial to reduce the proper motion of the bulk solids during transport to be able to reliably predict the particles' position for the material separation. De Jong and Harbeck Due to the heterogeneous nature of bulk solids, the design and calibration of optical sorters is mostly product-specific and highly empirical. The number of air valves required for the material separation and their distance to the optical sensor are currently determined experimentally. Furthermore, the calibration of the valve activation time and the air blast duration is based on simple assumptions (linear particle movement and constant velocity). Hence, adjustments of the system, especially regarding components involved in particle transport and flow control, are based on numerous experiments. In order to reduce the duration and number of extensive experiments required for the initial calibration of optical sorters, improve sorter accuracy, decrease error probability and enable the optical detection of new particle properties, a new multi-disciplinary approach is employed in this study. It combines digital imaging, algorithmic image processing and numerical simulations. An area scan camera is mounted on an optical belt sorter and enables the real time tracking of the recorded particle stream, giving detailed information of the particles' positions and velocities at the end of the belt. A detailed description of the process can be found in In order to improve the tracking modeling and to get a more detailed understanding of the bulk solid's behavior as well as to improve the design of optical sorters, particle-based simulation approaches like the Discrete Element Method (DEM) can be employed. The DEM has already been successfully applied to describe other material separators like screens The particle ejection by air valves is modeled and analyzed with a MATLAB script in a processing step after the simulation. Here, the effects of the number of air valves, air blast duration time and distance between the detection point and the valve bar on the sorting quality are examined. It is planned to model the particle ejection by coupling the DEM with Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) in future research, similar to the recently published paper by Fitzpatrick et al. In this section, the employed DEM approach, the numerical setup and operating parameters as well as the operational procedure are presented. The bulk solids and the walls of the optical belt sorter investigated in this study are described with the Discrete Element Method (DEM), first introduced by Cundall and Strack in 1979 The contact forces originating from particle-particle or particle-wall collisions are separated into a normal and tangential component. A linear spring damper model is used to obtain the normal component of the contact force In addition to the tangential contact force, the moments resulting from the rolling friction between particles and particles as well as particles and walls are considered and included in the external moment resulting out of contact forces Here, The non-spherical particles employed in this study are modeled with polyhedrons. With the help of a triangular surface mesh, different particle shapes can be realized. The contact detection between the polyhedrons is based on a fast common plane algorithm The numerical model considered in this study is based on an actual table-sized, modular optical belt sorter. It combines all major components of a regular full size optical belt sorter with the advantage of being easy to adjust, handle and operate. The system also enables the use of either an area scan camera or a conventional line scan camera for particle detection and localization. A sketch of the optical belt sorter is shown in Components of the sorting process that are not modeled with the DEM are indicated with a dashed box in In the case of the line scan camera model, the particle velocity is assumed to be equivalent to that of the conveyor belt and the particle velocity in y-direction is neglected. The valve responsible for the ejection of the detected particle is therefore simply determined by the y-location of the particle. The activation time of the valve is set by calculating the time a particle requires to move from the belt end to the center of the valve bar with the assumption that the particle has constant belt velocity in x-direction. In the case of the area scan camera model, the assumption is made that both the x- and y-velocity of every particle are known at the end of the conveyor belt, due to the applied particle tracking. Consequently, the valve responsible for particle ejection is determined based on the location of the particle at the belt end and the additional movement in y-direction depending on the y-velocity of the particle. The activation time of the valve is also set by calculating the time a particle needs to move from the belt end to the center of the valve bar, but the actual particle velocity in x-direction is considered. The duration in which the valves release the jets of compressed air can also be adjusted in the MATLAB script. Here the assumption is made that only particles whose center of gravity lies within the valve air influence zone during the activation timeframe are considered as ejected. This simplification is made under the consideration that the particle sizes of the different particle shapes are very similar. Three different particle shapes are employed in this study, namely spheres, cylinders and plates. Their material parameters, which are also required for the DEM simulations, are based on beech wood particles In order to compare the sorting quality results of the line scan camera with those obtained using the area scan camera model, a base case is defined and six operating parameters are altered one at a time in different simulation series. These are presented in Three of the parameters are adjusted in the MATLAB script. These include the overall quantity of the valves used for sorting, their activation duration and the distance of the valve bar from the detection point, namely the conveyor belt end. The parameters examined on the DEM side include the applied particle mass, conveyor belt length and particle shape. As the variation of the operating parameters on the MATLAB side requires significantly less calculation time compared to the DEM simulations, more values were tested. The introduced particle stream always consists of equal portions of red and blue particles, meaning that 50% of the bulk solids have to be separated. The target particles are always the blue bulk solids. The initial particle packing within the particle container (see In this section, the obtained results are presented and discussed. First, an initial validation of the particle behavior on the conveyor belt is provided, followed by a discussion of the conducted numerical investigation. A sensitivity analysis of important DEM parameters concludes this section. In order to confirm the qualitative accuracy of the conducted simulations, the average particle velocity on the conveyor belt is compared between the simulations and corresponding experiments carried out on the modular optical belt sorter. As the main focus of this study is based on the particle movement on the belt, this component of the sorter was considered the most crucial. The base case of the study as well as the cylinder and plate case are investigated. The conveyor belt is separated into four equal parts, each 0.1 During the experiments, the particle movement on the conveyor belt is recorded with a high speed camera in each investigated section. A tracking algorithm The results obtained by the sphere analysis can be seen in The results of the plate case is presented in The average particle velocities of cylinders for both experiments and simulations are shown in Two main indicators for separation quality are analyzed for each conducted simulation series. The first is the percentage of particles that are not ejected by the air valves even though they should have been separated from the material stream. The second indicator shows the percentage of particles falsely co-ejected by the air valves as so called “by-catch”. To ensure a clear visual separation of the two categories, the not ejected particle indicator is plotted in dashed lines and the falsely co-ejected indicator in filled ones. In both categories, the separation results of the line scan camera and the area scan camera model in combination with the particle tracking are compared. In addition, the results achieved under perfect separation conditions (using the exact particle positions modeled within the DEM for valve activation) are presented. The separation quality of the base case can be seen in The results show that the number of particles not ejected when employing the line scan camera model is significantly higher compared with the area scan camera model, which demonstrates how important detailed knowledge of the particles' motion is to obtain a good separation quality. Under ideal conditions (dashed red line) all particles are obviously ejected. The differences between the falsely ejected particle results are not as distinct. About 8% to 9% of the particles are ejected as by-catch. Nevertheless, when applying the line scan camera model, the number of falsely ejected particles is slightly lower compared to the results of the area scan camera model and under perfect separation, due to the formation of particle clusters on the conveyor belt, marked with green circles in The standard deviations of the different investigated categories are all below 4%. Only for the area scan camera model a slightly higher value is obtained. This is not surprising, however, due to the fact that at these low particle ejection percentages, a difference of a few deflected particles already has a high impact. As the results and the derived conclusions in this study are of a qualitative nature and the deviations between the different simulation series are very small, only one simulation is conducted for every altered parameter. This greatly reduces the required calculation time with negligible effects on the obtained results. The first operating parameter investigated in this study is the influence of the number of air valves employed. Starting with only 12 valves, the number is increased gradually at four valve increments up to 40 valves, resulting in an influence zone ranging from a radius of 0.75 The graph shows that the percentage of not ejected particles continuously increases with a rising number of air valves, both for the line and area scan camera model. The number of falsely co-ejected particles decreases with rising valve numbers in all three evaluation models. As the air influence radius is significantly reduced with growing valve quantity, a precise prediction of the particle position at the ejection stage becomes increasingly important. As to be expected, the likelihood of not ejecting a particle that should be separated from the material stream is higher when the valve influence area is smaller. The importance of exact particle motion prediction is underlined when comparing the line and area scan camera results. While the number of not ejected particles increases by a margin of about 2% for 40 valves with the area scan camera model, the percentage of not ejected particles increases by a margin of around 8% when employing the line scan camera approach. The falsely co-ejected particle number decreases from about 20% for 12 valves to 2% for 40 valves and is very similar for all investigated models. As the influence radius of the valves is greatly reduced, less particles are falsely co-ejected. At the lower valve quantity numbers the percentage of falsely ejected particles of the line scan camera model is slightly lower compared to the other two models. This can be explained by the particle cluster formation discussed in the previous section. At higher valve numbers, this difference disappears due to the very small air influence radius. Even if particles are clustered, they are no longer always deflected as an entity. The second examined operating parameter is the valve activation duration. Results for durations ranging from 0.0025 When applying the line scan camera model the percentage of not ejected particles starts at a value of 24.5% at a duration of 0.0025 The third operating parameter investigated is the distance between the belt end, which is also the particle detection point, and the valve bar. The findings are presented in The ratio of not ejected particles rises steadily with increasing distance between belt end and valve bar when employing the line scan camera model. In contrast, the number of not ejected particles remains fairly constant at a much lower value when using the area scan camera model. With a larger gap between detection and separation point, the need for a precise motion prediction increases. If the particle velocity is not predicted accurately enough, the spatial offset from the expected location, once the particle reaches the valve bar prevents a good separation result. The number of falsely co-ejected particles remains relatively equal at a value between 8% and 9%. Again, the values of the line scan camera model are slightly lower compared to the other two approaches and the offset increases with higher differences between the not ejected particles of the line and area scan camera model. Small fluctuations are most likely the result of situational occurrences in the particle stream. The fourth operating parameter investigated and altered for the DEM simulation is the applied mass of the entire particle packing, where 0.1 The graph shows that both the percentage of not ejected and falsely co-ejected particles rises with increasing applied particle mass. A higher throughput causes increased particle interaction and therefore a higher likelihood of orthogonal or irregular particle movement. The results match the experimental findings of Udoudo The influence of the conveyor belt length is also modeled within the DEM. A length of 0.2 The results show that the line scan camera model has a very high percentage of about 40% of not ejected particles at a short belt length of 0.2 At a length of 0.4 The effect of different particle shapes on the separation quality is investigated in the final simulation series. Cylinders, spheres and plates (described in detail in The percentages of particles not ejected by the air valves of cylinders and spheres are very similar with values of about 5.6% for the line scan camera model. The number of not ejected particles when employing plates is considerably lower. In contrast to the cylinders and spheres the plates show no rolling motion once they are on the conveyor belt, which greatly reduces particle movement orthogonal to the belt direction. In comparison to the line scan camera model, the percentages of not ejected particles based on the area scan camera model are significantly lower for all investigated particle shapes. The number of falsely co-ejected particles is slightly different for each of the particle shapes. Cylinders have the highest percentage followed by plates and lastly spheres. These differences are probably related to different particle feed rates between the investigated particle shapes. Both aspects affect the particle proximity which directly influences the rate of falsely co-ejected particles as discussed in A comparison between the applied prediction models shows that spheres and cylinders have very similar results. In both cases, the percentage of co-ejected particles of the line scan camera model is lower compared to the other two approaches due to the much higher number of not ejected particles. This is different for plates. Here the line scan camera model has the highest percentage of co-ejected particles. This is probably explained by the fact that the difference between the number of not ejected particles between the line and area scan camera is not as high. It is important to consider that the particle shape only influences the particle behavior on the conveyor belt and the particle-particle and particle-wall interactions. As only the center of gravity is currently considered for particle ejection, the shape has no influence on the separation phase itself. This aspect will be thoroughly investigated when using CFD for particle ejection and thereby accurately modeling the entire valve. In order to understand the impact of choosing the correct material parameters for the conducted DEM simulations, the influence of the coefficient of rolling friction and Coulomb friction on sorting quality is assessed in a sensitivity analysis. On the basis of the experimentally obtained values, a higher and lower coefficient is additionally employed. The base case of the study is used for the alterations. The results of utilizing different rolling friction coefficients between the particles and the conveyor belt are presented in The impact on sorting quality when different Coulomb friction coefficients are employed can be seen in The sensitivity analysis shows that employing different friction coefficients can have a significant impact on sorting quality, especially regarding the line scan camera model. However, the qualitative result, namely that the model combining an area scan camera with particle tracking is superior to the convectional line scan camera model, remains true for all investigated friction coefficients. A numerical model of an automated optical belt sorter based on the Discrete Element Method in combination with a MATLAB script for particle ejection was described and analyzed in this study. Two models for particle detection and movement prediction, namely a line scan camera (assuming that the particle has reached belt velocity at the detection point and neglecting possible particle movement in y-direction) and an area scan camera model with subsequent particle tracking (considering the actual particle velocity in x- and y-direction at the detection point), were presented and compared. Different operating parameters of the optical sorter were altered one at a time and the resulting influence on sorting quality was assessed. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: The employed model of the area scan camera with combined particle tracking is superior to the conventional line scan camera model in all investigated operation modes. Merely the number of falsely co-ejected particles is often slightly higher, which can be attributed to the formation of particle clusters. The qualitative results are in agreement with the findings of Pfaff et al. Employing a higher number of air valves for the separation stage can help reduce the percentage of falsely co-ejected particles. However, the accurate prediction of particle motion is crucial to prevent a significant rise in the number of not ejected particles. High valve activation durations ensure that the number of not ejected particles is very low, at the cost of higher by-catch rates. Larger distances between the detection and separation phase directly lead to a linear increase in the percentage of not ejected particles when employing the line scan camera model. Falsely co-ejected particle numbers remain relatively unaffected. In all investigated cases regarding the separation stage of the sorter, optimized detection and prediction methods like the area scan camera approach can offer the required precision to achieve accurate particle separation with low particle by-catch. As expected, increasing the applied particle mass leads to a reduction in overall sorting quality of the optical sorter. This is in line with the results of Pascoe et al. The investigation showed that numerical simulations of optical sorters can help to optimize operating parameters according to the desired application. Depending on the sorter adjustments, the emphasis can be laid on reducing the number of not ejected particles or the percentage of falsely co-ejected bulk solids. The study provides a first step towards modeling an entire automated optical belt sorter. For future improvement, the separation step needs to be analyzed and described in greater detail. Here the coupling of DEM with CFD can provide the necessary insight. Although an initial comparison between simulation and experiment has been conducted, the presented numerical results and observations are of qualitative nature and still require additional verification by corresponding experiments. It is also planned to model and investigate industrial bulk solids like coffee beans, glass shards or peppercorns with the DEM. The IGF project 18798 N of the research association Forschungs-Gesellschaft Verfahrens-Technik e.V. (GVT) was supported via the AiF in a program to promote the Industrial Community Research and Development (IGF) by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy on the basis of a resolution of the German Bundestag.