The accurate prediction of grade/recovery is instrumental to automation control in a flotation process. It is also challenging due to the complex interactions and codependences of manipulating variables. The deep learning network FlotationNet, which was developed in this study, considers different mapping relationships between input variables and output purities by using customized architecture. To create a database for model training, 3498 raw data from a real-world froth flotation plant were collected, wrangled, and restructured. A designed loss function was embedded in FlotationNet to guarantee an accurate prediction for the main product as well as to avoid overfitting. Compared with baseline machine learning models, FlotationNet delivers the best prediction for iron but the worst prediction for silica. Finally, some advice is given to further enhance the performance of our proposed model. FlotationNet is a successful example of the advantages of customizing deep learning architecture to address real-world situations in industry.Since its introduction in the mineral processing industry more than 100 years ago, froth flotation has been considered one of the most widely used and important separation methods [ A universal process for predicting grade and recovery in a flotation process using machine leaning can be simplified as follows: select manipulating variables as data features and collect corresponding grade and recovery values as labels; identify the model architecture with a configuration of model inputs and outputs; update the model's parameters to achieve expected prediction performance by training; test the model with unseen data inputs. The early research using machine learning in the flotation process can be traced to the 1990s. Aldrich [ This study aims to leverage recent advances in deep learning to model a froth flotation process, predicting the grade and recovery for output materials. In particular, we developed a hierarchical deep learning network, FlotationNet, based mainly on Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) module and fully-connected architecture to ingest various easily measured manipulating variables from a manufacturing reverse cationic flotation plant with the goal of predicting separated iron purity and the most significant unwanted particle silica purities. Along with the temporal relations among input and output purities, this model considers high non-linearity between manipulating variables and output purities. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In deep learning, a recurrent neural network (RNN) is usually used to exhibit the temporal dynamic behavior of data [ From the The database used in this study (shown in the supportive material) was collected from a real-world manipulating froth flotation plant over nearly half a year (From 12 PM on March 29th, 2017 to 23 PM on September 9th) with a continuous hourly base. A flowsheet of this flotation plant is shown in We collected 3948 tabular data samples with an hourly basis. Each sample encompasses 23 flotation process parameters along with a timestamp, grouping into two categories. The first two parameters are the original qualities of iron ore pulp (the purities of iron and silica) before it is fed into the plant. Parameters 3 to 21 are process operating parameters. The last two parameters are final product qualities. We cast the froth flotation control as a supervised regression problem for the purpose of predicting product qualities using all manipulating variables (parameters 1 to 21). Thus, the investigation of data modalities for manipulating variables and the control effects to product purities can enhance understandings of mapping rules for model inputs and outputs. The stabilization also reveals the time-correlation among processed purities, which means the processed purities are not only dependent on 21 manipulating variables but also on their previous values. Apart from two fed material purities, there are over 100 variables (only 19 process operating parameters are measured and provided in this study) affecting the froth flotation process to varying degrees [ Based on the analysis of the data modality, we tailored a hierarchical deep learning network, FlotationNet, modelling this froth flotation process, predicting the final product purities using measured fed material purities and process operating parameters. Showing in The loss function of FlotationNet is composed of two parts: the prediction loss of the iron purity The original tabular data should be restructured to meet the requirements of FlotationNet. Following the data requirement of LSTM in the first branch, the main inputs composed of two fed purities and two processed purities should be reshaped as sequence. FlotationNet sets up the sequence length as six hours, because as the time lag increases, the time correlations among processed purities weaken ( The mini-batch gradient descent strategy was used to update trainable parameters for FlotationNet, wherein the batch size was set at 16. The pairwise comparisons between the predicted purities from FlotationNet and the ground truth values provide us with an intuitive impression of FlotationNet's performance, as shown in  If we define prediction error as predicted value minus ground truth value, the average prediction error for iron is 0.0771% whereas the number for silica is 0.369%. Considering that the average ground truth purities for iron and silica are 64.7392% and 2.3492%, respectively, the prediction errors have a nonsignificant proportion of the ground truth values. In order to demonstrate the advantage of FlotationNet's customized architecture for modelling forth flotation process, we build two baseline machine learning models for the same flotation process. One is a vanilla stacked LSTM model and the other is a general feedforward neural network (FNN), as comparisons. The vanilla LSTM is also capable of grabbing temporality among data by setting the lookback time lag as six hours. However, unlike FlotationNet, only one data entry is allowed in this vanilla LSTM, implying that input purities and process operating parameters are equally treated. The vanilla LSTM produces an average prediction error of 0.249% for iron and − 0.187% for silica, which is a much higher iron prediction error than that produced by FlotationNet but a lower silica error. This trend can be verified by cosine similarities which are 0.902 for iron and 0.963 for silica. For FlotationNet, the similarities are 0.953 and 0.938, respectively. Although both the vanilla LSTM and FlotationNet use two LSTM layers (both have 32 LSTM units in each layer), capturing temporality among data, FlotationNet performs much more powerfully than vanilla LSTM in iron prediction since FlotationNet differentiates between two types of parameters, the fed purities and the process operating parameters. Nevertheless, the average silica prediction error from the vanilla LSTM is unexpectedly lower than that from FlotationNet even when the same loss functions are used in both models. The FNN treated all inputs as cross-sectional without any temporality consideration in the model. We build a fully-connected FNN with three hidden layers (32 neuros in each layer) to repeat the same task as FlotationNet and the vanilla LSTM. The FNN delivered the average prediction error for iron as 0.289%, which is the worst performance among the three proposed models. Surprisingly, the FNN obtained the minimum silica prediction error, −0.171%, among the three models. Not surprisingly, for each proposed model, the prediction performance for iron was much more accurate than that for silica, which is guaranteed by the weight configuration of iron component λ Although FlotationNet shows great prediction accuracy for iron purity using the manufacturing data, the model still has room for improvement. For instance, in the present study, data scarcity is still the key issue restricting FlotationNet's performance. Three thousand data samples engaged in model training is considered insufficient to run a fully effective update for 23,834 trainable parameters in FlotationNet. Also, the number of training samples should positively link to the number of training features, empirically [ Accurate purity prediction for processed materials based on measurable manipulating variables is not only instrumental for automation control in a manufacturing flotation plant, it is also challenging. In this study, we developed a novel deep learning network, FlotationNet, modelling the dynamic control process in a froth flotation plant. Specifically, a hierarchical deep learning architecture capable of ingesting the mixed data was used to predict processed iron and silica purities. To take into account the time correlations between fed purities and output purities, we used a sub-architecture composed of two LSTM layers to capture temporality among fed purities from an independent data entry. Other manipulating variables that are process operating parameters were considered by FlotationNet as cross-sectional and fed from the other data entry. Considering the trade-off between iron prediction accuracy and silica prediction accuracy, a custom loss function was built to give a priority to iron prediction results since silica is a by-product in most cases. Also, L2 regularization was implemented in the loss function to alleviate overfitting in the training process. FlotationNet demonstrated considerable prediction accuracy for iron purities, significantly higher than those obtained using the vanilla LSTM and the FNN. However, the silica prediction accuracy shown by FlotationNet was the worst of the three proposed models in this study. A possible reason for this was analyzed in this study along with some measures that can further enhance FlotationNet's performance. To conclude, the results of this study show great potential for realizing automation control of the flotation process by deploying deep learning models in flotation plants and encouraging the usage of machine learning in the mineral processing industry. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Dr. Yuanyuan Pu is the main author of this paper whose speciality is the machine learning whereas the second author of this manuscript is a PhD candidate at University of Alberta Miss Alicja Szmigiel who is the flotation specialist. Professor Jie Chen has supervised the project through the College of Resources and Safety Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Coal Mine Disaster Dynamics and Control, Chongqing University where Dr. Pu is currently employed whereas Professor Derek Apel was supervising Dr. Pu during his PhD studies at the University of Alberta and he is the current supervisor of Alicja Szmigiel. Professor Apel has also provided the research funding for this project. None. This study was supported by the