As an important pulverizing equipment, the vertical spindle pulverizer (VSP) is widely used in power plants to produce fines for combustion. But high temperature and pressure in VSP limit the study of grinding process. Herein, a laboratory roller mill, with the addition of a power recorder, has been designed for the simulated study. Parameters of loading force, table revolution rate and fractional filling in this device can be adjusted. Grinding tests for different combinations of these three parameters are conducted. Confidence analyses of the experimental data illustrate the reliability of results, with a 90% confidence limit being 5% of the mean measured value. Breakage characteristics of the top size show the first-order law and the initial samples of narrow size fraction are all broken and disappear with less than 20s. Both the loading force and table revolution rate have a positive effect on t
                     10 and the tests for condition of lower fractional fillings also generate the high value of t
                     10. For the analyses of energy-size reduction, t
                     10 and specific energy are conducted as the response results. The mathematical relationship between t
                     10 and specific energy of the grinding test with fixed parameters can be described well by the classical energy-size reduction breakage model, 
                        
                           
                              
                                 t
                              
                              
                                 10
                              
                           
                           =
                           A
                           (
                           1
                           -
                           
                              
                                 e
                              
                              
                                 -
                                 b
                                 ·
                                 
                                    
                                       E
                                    
                                    
                                       cs
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           )
                           ,
                        
                     with the R
                     2
                     >0.97. Due to the difference of values of t
                     10 generated at the unit specific energy for the conditions of different parameter combinations, this model only can simulate the grinding process with changes of loading forces or fractional fillings. 10 Sets of additional experimental data demonstrate this conclusion. Reasons of this phenomenon are discussed.Nowadays, the vertical spindle pulverizers (VSP) are widely utilized in the power plant to produce pulverized fines. In China, thermal power generation accounts for nearly half of the total generating capacity. Energy consumed to generate pulverized fines by VSP is considerably huge. High-density minerals that only account for 1% of the total feed are discharged to the bin in order to avoid being reground. Then these coal fines, entrained by the hot primary air, are classified by the classifier to obtain the qualified pulverized fines. The relatively coarse rejects of classifier fall to the grinding table to be ground. This cycle continues until the powder size meets the demand of combustion. Pressure of the floating roller loaded by hydraulic system mainly determines the breakage behavior of VSP. Many mathematical models were established to describe the grinding process of comminution device, such as crusher, ball mill, stirred mill and high-pressure grinding rolls In this case, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations of coal classifier are conducted to study the effects of coal property and operational parameters on the performance of coal classifier In this study, a laboratory scale comminution device, equipped with a power recorder, was used to simulate the internal grinding process in the VSP. Firstly, associated conditions of minerals in the experimental samples were investigated by the Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Effects of loading force, table revolution rate and fractional filling on the breakage characteristics of coals of different narrow size fractions were studied in this paper. Simultaneously, applicability of the classical breakage model of Associated conditions of minerals were analyzed by the FEI Quanta These prepared samples were investigated at the high vacuum back scattering model, with accelerating voltage of 25 This laboratory scale device, which simulates the grinding process of VSP, is shown The grinding table is shaped like a groove. The tire-shaped roller is just fit on the table. The loading force of the roller can be adjusted by a spring scale. This grinding circuit is instrumented with a frequency converter and a power measuring meter to control the revolution rate of grinding table and record the energy input, respectively. Resolution of power meter is 0.01 The experimental materials consist of three size fractions: 11.2–8, 8–5.6 and 5.6–4 The experimental data of Specific rate of breakage of the top size is generally used to characterize the breakage behavior of particles. The first-order grinding phenomenon, which is calculated by Eq. Relationship between the percentage of the top size and grinding time is shown in Usually, VSPs are used to produce pulverized fines in power plant. Here, another parameter, Simulation of size distribution of progenies is conducted by MATLAB. This function does adequately describe the size distribution of ground products, with the  For the grinding tests with different table revolution rates, results are described in The final variable is the fractional filling, that is, the mass of particles. Considering the mill capacity and energy efficiency, Austin found that the good mill filling levels ranged from 0.075 to 0.3 It is well known that the comminution is an energy extensive process. But, if the studies only concern on the energy consumption or size distribution of ground products, the results are not enough to have a good knowledge of grinding process. In this case, the power consumptions of non-load conditions for parameter combinations of each loading force and table revolution rate are firstly studied. Just as shown in Energy-size reduction model was considered in the previous studies that conducted by Austin, Sato and Shi. A breakage model has been developed for a long time to describe the relationship between the energy and size composition in multiple grinding devices. This model is based on the experimental data of energy and size distribution of progenies on the Drop Weight Tester (DWT) and can be described as follows Usually, the fitted result of But this breakage model can still be used with the same structure. Firstly, this model is applied to simulate the data of energy and size distributions of experiments with fixed operational parameters. Some results are shown in As to the second difference, a question is raised regarding whether or not the similar size distribution of the ground products is generated for the same input energy with different combinations of loading force, table revolution rate and fraction filling. Or, can the classical energy-size breakage model describe the relationships between the energy input and size distributions of tests with changes of multiple operational parameters? For the breakage tests in DWT or JK Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT), weight and drop height of hammer or rotor speed can be changed to generate the different grinding energy Previous industrial experiments on VSP in power plant of China indicated that the proportion of circulating load to raw coal, namely circulating ratio, could be 8–12 A new laboratory scale vertical roller mill, modified with a power recorder, has been designed to simulate the internal grinding process in the VSP. Associated conditions of minerals to coal are investigated by SEM. Grinding experiments with different combinations of operational parameters are designed. Distributions of specific energy and size of ground products are analyzed. The following results are obtained. Strength of the associated surface investigated by SEM is too small to resist the loading force and particles of the top size disappear before grinding time expands to 20 Value of the fineness parameter The classical energy-size breakage model Energy efficiency parameter From the industrial experiments conducted on VSP by our research group, we find that ash contents of the feed to VSP in power plants of China are relatively high. Contents of minerals are also high. It is a heterogeneous system on the grinding table. The reduction of particle size, liberation of associated minerals and supplement of raw coals and circulating loads enhance the heterogeneous characteristics of grinding phenomenon. Studies of grinding kinetics and energy split of different minerals is essential. This work is supported by the   