The extraction and separation properties of Au(III) using two monoamide compounds, N,N-di-n-octylacetamide (DOAA) and N,N-di-n-octyllauramide (DOLA), which have different side chain lengths attached to the carbonyl carbon (CH3 for DOAA and n-C11H23 for DOLA), were investigated. The solvent extraction of some precious and base metals (Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), Fe(III), Cu(II), Ni(II) and Zn(II)) in HCl solutions was carried out using DOAA and DOLA diluted with n-dodecane and 2-ethylhexanol. A good selectivity for Au(III) extraction with 0.5M extractant is obtained at lower HCl concentrations (<3.0M) in both systems. The extractability of Au(III) with DOAA is greater than that with DOLA. In the 0.5M DOAA–3.0M HCl system, a third phase is formed when the Au(III) concentration in the initial aqueous phase is over 39g/L. In contrast, third phase formation is not found in the 0.5M DOLA–3.0M HCl system, and its loading capacity of Au(III) is about 79g/L. The Au(III) extracted in the organic phase is effectively back-extracted by 1.0M thiourea in 1.0M HCl solution in both systems, while some thiourea is precipitated using the organic phase containing 20g/L of Au(III). The back extraction of Au(III) using water is poor in the DOAA system, but possible in the DOLA system.The use of gold in industrial applications has recently become extensive, e.g., electrical systems and devices, fuel cells, catalysts, biomedical area, etc. ( Many extractants for gold have been reported, such as oxygenated extractants, thio extractants, ammonium extractants and phosphorus extractants ( The application of di-substituted aliphatic amide (monoamide) compounds as extractants has been widely studied in the field of nuclear reprocessing ( DOAA and DOLA were synthesized using the procedure described in the next section. The stock solutions of metals were prepared by dissolving the metal chlorides (HAuCl The extractants were synthesized based on the procedure described in the reference ( The mixed solution of 80 vol.% The Au(III) loading properties were investigated using 0.5 During the back extraction, the mixture of the organic phase loaded with the metal ions and the same volume of water or 1.0 All the experiments were carried out at 23  The dependence of the extraction percentage of the precious and base metal ions on the HCl concentration with 0.5 The extraction percentage of Au(III) with DOLA gradually increases with an increase in the HCl concentration, and exceeds 95% when above 1.0  The increased amounts of the Au(III) extraction in both systems are almost the same: ca. 40% increase from 0.01 to 0.1 The Au(III) loading properties of the 0.5 The back extraction from the organic phase (0.5 The back extraction properties in the DOLA system are different from those in the DOAA system. A considerable amount of the Au(III) in the organic solution is back-extracted by water. This corresponds to the dependence of the extraction on the HCl concentration (  Two monoamide compounds, DOAA and DOLA, were used in order to investigate their extraction capability and selectivity for Au(III) from other precious and base metals (Pd(II), Pt(IV) Rh(III), Fe(III), Ni(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II)) in HCl solutions. In both the DOAA and DOLA systems, Au(III) immediately reaches the extraction equilibrium and a high selectivity for Au(III) is obtained at the lower concentrations of the extractants and/or HCl solution. The extractability of Au(III) with DOAA is higher than that of DOLA. The extraction percentage of Au(III) with 0.5 The authors wish to thank Dr. Tsuyoshi Yaita, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute, for fruitful discussions. This work was financially supported in part by Industrial Technology Research Grant Program in '04 from New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) of Japan.