The combined influence of κ-carrageenan (0.5%) and egg albumin or collagen isolate non-muscle proteins (NMP, 2%) on quality characteristics of beef gels processed without or with 0.5% microbial transglutaminase (MTG) was investigated. Beef gel properties were determined by measuring textural, hydration and colour characteristics. Substitution with NMP resulted in gels (8% total protein) which were less hard, chewy and elastic, and had poorer binding properties. Although MTG improved WHC and textural parameters, it could not restore texture of NMP substituted gels to that of non-substituted meat gels. κ-carrageenan favourably affected hydration properties and thermal stability, yielding lower cooking loss and purge and higher WHC for NMP substituted than non-substituted meat gels. It also restored hardness and fracturability of NMP substituted batters, but was unable to improve springiness or cohesiveness. Addition of NMP and κ-carrageenan significantly altered colour, while no significant influence of MTG on gel colour parameters was observed.The functionality of comminuted meat products depends on numerous factors such as water holding capacity of the meat, non-meat ingredients, ionic strength, pH and temperature and rate of heating treatment ( For many years, different isolated proteins have been used as functional ingredients in a number of ground and emulsified meat products, to support and ensure binding properties of meat. This has resulted in the production of more stable meat products with better textural properties. Gelling ability of proteins and physical properties of protein gels are important for use as texture modifiers in foods ( Non-muscle proteins and polysaccharides are often used to enhance the texture and binding properties of comminuted meat products ( The combination of carrageenan with non-muscle proteins appears to provide a useful means of improving the textural and binding properties. Whether egg albumin or collagen protein would have a synergistic effect with carrageenan to improve bind and textural properties in cooked beef homogenates is not known. Furthermore, the influence of transglutaminase on such systems is also unknown. A better understanding of the gelation properties of proteins (muscle and non-muscle) and κ-carrageenan and their interactions in meat systems in the presence or absence of transglutaminase, would contribute to improved utilization and processing qualities of these ingredients in meat products. Thus the objective of this study was to examine the combined effect of microbial transglutaminase, κ-carrageenan and egg albumin or collagen isolate on colour, binding and textural properties of beef gels. Post-rigor beef semimembranosus (top round) was purchased from a local market. The beef was trimmed of visible fat and connective tissue, then ground in a laboratory grinder through a plate with 3-mm diameter orifices. The ground meat was portioned, vacuum-packed and frozen in an air-freezer, and kept frozen at −22 °C until product formulation. The protein concentration of the ground beef was determined by a nitrogen analyzer (Leco Corporation, St Joseph, MI). Nitrogen values were converted to protein by multiplying by 6.25. The protein content of the meat was 22.82%. The ingredients used in the homogenate formulations included κ-carrageenan (CGN), (Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis, USA), salt (sodium chloride—BDH Inc., Toronto, Canada), sodium tripolyphosphate (Fisher Scientific Company, New Jersey, USA), sodium nitrite and sodium ascorbate (BDH Inc., Toronto, Canada). Microbial transglutaminase MTG preparate (ACTIVA series)—was supplied by Ajinomoto (Barentz, Poland.) as a mixture containing 99% maltodextrin and 1% microbial transglutaminase, with transglutaminase activity of approximately 100 units/g. The enzyme concentration is reported in the present study as the commercial concentration. Collagen protein isolate (CP), (Prowico II) was purchased as a commercial product from Prowico Prot. Gew. GmbH Co. KG, Germany. Egg albumin isolate (EA) was arranged as a gift from “OVOPOL”, Nowa Sol, Poland. Protein isolates were hydrated with distilled water (1:4 ratio) for 30 min prior to adding to meat ingredients. Before processing, the meat was tempered at 4 °C for 24 h. Meat homogenates (300 g treatments, triplicate batches) were prepared by mixing the ground beef with non-muscle proteins (NMP) and the other ingredients for 60 s on speed 8 using a Galaxie VIII homogenizer (Osterizer, Canada) to produce homogenates containing 8% (w/w) total protein. Levels of components tested are shown in Following overnight storage, each chilled gel was removed from the plastic tube, blotted dry with a paper towel and weighed for a cook yield. Overall cook loss was calculated as a percentage based on the raw stuffed weight. Gels (25 × 15 mm) of known weight were placed in tubes and centrifuged (Sorvall Five 25 × 15 mm gel cores were vacuum-packed and placed in a single layer in an air-cooler at 4 °C. Purge was determined by reweighing blotted slices following 1 week storage. Purge as percentage of water content was also calculated. The colour of the meat gels was measured using a Hunter Lab Labscan II spectrocolorimeter (Hunter Associates Laboratory Inc., Reston) and expressed as Hunter The textural characteristics of gels were analyzed according to texture profile analysis (TPA; The center core of gels samples were cut (25 mm in diameter, 15 mm height) and compressed twice to 30% of their original height at a constant cross-head speed of 60 mm/min. The TPA parameters, namely hardness [peak force on first compression (N)], fracturability [first bite, the force required to produce the first fracture (N)], cohesiveness [ratio of the active work done under the second force-displacement curve to that done under the first compression curve (dimensionless)], springiness [distance the sample recovered after the first compression (mm)], and chewiness (hardness × cohesiveness × springiness (N*mm)] were computed. The experiment was replicated three times. Statistical analysis of results was performed using a Minitab Statistical package (Minitab 12.5 for Windows, Minitab Inc., State College, PA). Data were analyzed by two-way analysis of variance as a 2×5 factorial design with two MTG levels (0 and 0.5%) and five ingredient treatments (MP, EA, CP, EA+CGN, CP+CGN) as main factors. Fisher's Least Significant Difference test at  Cooking loss results are the most important test for the meat industry to predict the behavior of the products during cooking due to non-meat ingredients or other factors. In the present study cooking and purge losses were not appreciably affected by MTG addition ( Statistical analysis revealed that 2% substitution of the 8% meat proteins with egg albumin or collagen isolate and 0.5% κ-carrageenan addition had a significant ( Binding properties were markedly improved by the addition of κ-carrageenan. Regardless of the kind of non-muscle protein used, treatments with κ-carrageenan had lower cooking and storage losses than the samples containing only 8% muscle proteins and without the hydrocolloid. The addition of κ-carrageenan also decreased the percentage of water loss from gel samples after centrifugation, indicating that the hydrocolloid improved water retention of meat gels. The greatest WHC was observed in treatments containing CP and κ-carrageenan, which suggests protein-hydrocolloid interactions among MP/CP/CGN. Results indicated that the matrix formed in those gels had a greater ability to entrap water than that of other gels. Although some authors have found that carrageenan had no influence on hydration properties ( The effects of MTG and tested ingredients on colour parameters are shown in The highest lightness and the lowest redness were recorded for gels processed with egg albumin addition. κ-carrageenan generally caused the appearance of darker colourings (higher redness and lower lightness values) than in treatments without its addition. However, when collagen isolate and MTG had been added during comminution, The colour attributes of cooked meat products arise mainly from the pigmentation of the meat and from the variations of pigment conversion rates occurring on cooking. However, when the myoglobin content is kept constant the colour of comminuted products is mostly influenced by fat content, non-meat ingredients and added water. It was expected that the gels containing only meat proteins would have a redder colour than those containing non-meat proteins, due to the higher concentration of the lean meat. In fact, in the present experiment the redness MTG addition had no significant influence on the  Although the addition of MTG improved the textural parameters considerably, it was not successful in restoring the values of gels containing NMP to those of the non-substituted gels containing meat proteins only. Effects of transglutaminase on the texture are well documented for raw (not cooked), restructured meats ( None of the tested ingredients was able to yield gel textural properties equivalent to the control containing 8% muscle proteins. Addition of NMP to meat batters decreased gel strength compared to that of pure MP gels. Only addition of either CP or EA together with carrageenan caused no significant changes in hardness as compared to MP gels. Combination of κ-carrageenan with either egg or collagen proteins resulted also in an increase in the force needed to fracture the mixed gels. It was observed that the force required to fracture the gels containing CP and κ-carrageenan was even higher than that for pure MP gels. However overall results indicate that both tested proteins (egg albumin or collagen) resulted in poorer gelling properties or interfered with the properties of myofibrillar proteins, and could not replace muscle proteins in beef batters even when supported by MTG and carrageenan. Nevertheless, it was also indicated that egg albumin either alone or in combination with carrageenan presented superior textural characteristics in comparison to collagen protein. In general, EA treatments with or without carrageenan formed stronger gels then the samples with CP addition. Non-muscle proteins are often used to enhance the texture of meat products ( Collagen proteins have been found to disrupt the meat gel more than stabilize it ( Addition of carrageenan to the 6% MP/ 2% NMP batters increased all TPA parameters. However, with the exception of hardness and fracturability, carrageenan was not successful to bring the texture of gels containing non-muscle proteins to that of the 8% MP gels. Carrageenans have been used in meat products for their ability to form gels and retain water and to provide a desirable texture ( Non-muscle proteins generally have been found to be inferior to myofibrillar proteins for functionality in comminuted meat systems. The results reported here indicate that neither egg nor collagen proteins could replace the meat proteins in beef homogenates. Substituting of the meat proteins resulted in meat gels which were less hard, chewy and elastic, and had poorer binding properties. Significant effects on colour were also observed. The loss in functionality by substitution with non-muscle protein was not overcome by the addition of MTG preparate. Although MTG was not successful in restoring the values of gels containing NMP to those of the non-substituted gels containing meat proteins only, it nevertheless resulted in considerable improvements in WHC and textural parameters. Therefore, the use of MTG proved to increase the effectiveness of both ingredients in comminuted meat system. No significant influence of MTG on gel colour parameters was observed. κ-carrageenan added as a component of the batters favourably affected hydration properties and thermal stability, yielding lower cooking loss and purge and higher WHC for NMP substituted than non-substituted meat gels. It also restored hardness and fracturability of NMP substituted batters, but was unable to improve springiness or cohesiveness. Interactions between κ-carrageenan, non-muscle protein and MTG were observed. For example, improvement of textural properties by the addition of MTG was observed for treatments containing egg albumin but not collagen protein isolate. The combination of collagen protein isolate and κ-carrageenan addition resulted in the highest WHC, and the addition of κ-carrageenan and MTG restored the lightness and redness of gels formed with collagen protein isolate to the characteristics of non-substituted meat gels.