Slake durability index ( In order to measure this parameter, the slake durability test is used. A problem with the slake durability test is that completing this test may take two or more days. Twice drying specimens by oven (each time 8–12 The slake durability test was developed by Franklin and Chandra There are only a few publications concerning the statistical correlation between Koncagul and Santi They concluded that the main reason behind the weakness of the correlation between Sharma and Singh Santi and Higgins In the present study, two-cycle slake durability, density, porosity, Preparation of appropriate specimens for carrying out rock mechanics tests based on scientific standards is a hard and time consuming task. Particularly with regard to loose rocks like soft sandstone, maximum attention must be paid to prepare the specimens according to the standard. Block samples of soft sandstone with dimensions of 30×30×30 In order to remove anisotropic effects from the results, rock samples with major discontinuities were eliminated from specimens. Samples were divided into two groups: irregular samples (for density, porosity and slake durability tests) and core samples. The core specimens have been drilled from the blocks with A total of nine groups of soft sandstones have been used in the present research. In this section, regression modeling technique is used to evaluate the relationship between The method of least-squares can be used to estimate the regression coefficient vector If the fitted regression model provides a good representative of the observed The coefficient of determination denoted by Since Adding more independent variables to the model can only increase To test whether there is a relation between the dependent variable The value of Once it is determined that at least one of the regressors is important, a logical question becomes which one(s). The hypotheses for testing the significane of any individual regression coefficient, such as The null hypothesis The independent variables in a multiple regression model are interrelated or are dependent on each other, so a multi-collinearity problem exists and hinders the ability to assess the importance of an independent variable. The problem is diagnosed by the calculation of the variance inflation factor (  The According to Multiple variable regression analysis was done on data set in order to improve the accuracy of the equations proposed by single variable regression in At the first step, all of the variables are entered into the model. The proposed equation for predicting  Furthermore, In order to know about multicollinearity of the variables, the According to the As was concluded in Step 0, the density must be removed from the model. The proposed equation for predicting A comparison between the measured values of A variance analysis table is given in  The Another parameter which must be removed is ln( By removing ln( A comparison between the measured values of  Based on the results of single variable regression analysis, density, porosity, The backward elimination method was used in order to eliminate the parameters with multicollinearity. The results showed that porosity and ln( In this study the parameters showed a high amount of relationship with each other. Using parameters with no or less amount of relationship improves the accuracy of the equations.