This paper established the mechanics model of flip–flow screen. Based on theory analysis, the authors obtained the elastic dynamic differential equation of screen surface, the distribution formula of acceleration along screen surface, the acceleration formula and the numerical solution. All the formulas were tested by experiments. Based on the above, the authors designed the model flip–flow screen and did the pilot experiments. All the results obtained will instruct us in designing flip–flow screen and applying it in industry.In recent years, the surface moisture of raw coal delivered to the preparation plants is usually over 7%, because of water permanence from overhead aquifers, the increasing use of water sprays to meet stringent underground dust control requirements, and other handling problems. Because of the rapid blinding of screen apertures, conventional dry screening of such moist material at mesh sizes of 6 mm is very difficult. There are now various types of equipment for dry screening of raw coal in China. The successive appearances of probability sizing screen, rotating probability screen, banana screen, spiral screen, piano-wire screen and so on in early 1980s have been widely spread in coal screening. Satisfactory results can usually be obtained when over 13 mm raw coal is sized. But the problems for 6 mm coal sizing, especially the dry screening of fine particles from sticky and moist material, have not been solved. The flip–flow screen ( For the sake of studying the acceleration of flip–flow screen surface, we designed a model flip–flow screen shown as (a) Under the no-load condition, the screen surface moves at elastic moving displacement; (b) The length of the neutral plane of screen surface is constant during the elastic motion. The dynamic model of pressed screen surface is shown as The horizontal displacement In order to analyze the deflection curve equation, we found the solution by perturbation method. Taking the displacement We could get the first-order equilibrium differential equation from the The vertical displacement of screen surface is The parameters of model machine designed by us were as follows: length of screen surface The test result of acceleration in the middle point of the screen surface was as The maximum acceleration of the test result is 53 g. However, the maximum acceleration of the calculated result is infinite. In reality, when the screen surface extended near horizontal state, the tensile played a main role and made the real acceleration decrease greatly. Using the above calculating formula and testing system shown as We have done parameter optimization research on the flip–flow screen, changed the technical parameters according to the different characteristics of screened raw coal, changed the kinetic parameters (inclined angle of screen surface, tension of screen surface and the driving frequency) of the flip–flow screen and carried out a test of 6 mm raw coal and found out favorable operating status. The test system consists of three parts: raw coal screening, water content examination and size analysis. The test flow-sheet shows in The test procedure is: blending the water raw coal (50–0 mm) evenly, conveying it to the bucket elevator to go through the raw coal bin and electric vibrating feeder, which feeds it into the model flip–flow screen for screening and gets over-products and the under-product (0–6 mm). And then we perform the size analysis and surface moisture examination on the samples of the screened products.   The elastic dynamic model of flip–flow screen surface was obtained and the displacement, velocity, acceleration of any point in screen surface were given. The acceleration distribution of flip–flow screen surface corresponds sinusoidal distribution. The screening efficiency of flip–flow screen is over 84% at 6 mm cut point.  The authors would like to thank the NSFC (59774009) and YSF (BQ96001) for their support.