The hydrometallurgical processing of EAF dust and steel-making sludge with sulphuric acid was investigated at atmospheric pressure. The influence of acid concentration, temperature, time, and liquid/solid ratio was studied. Zinc extraction reaches almost 100% and iron extraction exceeds 90% in 3 M H2SO4 at 80 °C and L/S ratio of 5 after 6 h. A good selectivity with regard to zinc altogether with the relatively high zinc extraction was achieved in 0.1–0.3 M H2SO4 at 80 °C. In that range the zinc extraction was about 30% and the Zn/Fe ratio was about 9. The leach liquor was treated using goethite precipitation. The process was modified in order to minimize the consumption of the alkali and to reduce the sulphur and zinc content in the precipitate.Steel-making wastes are classified as hazardous because of toxic elements such as lead and cadmium. However, they contain high concentrations of Zn, Fe and other metals which can potentially be recovered from these materials. Both pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes are expensive and require various additional raw materials. The most commonly used pyrometallurgical treatment is the Waelz process ( Various media can be used in hydrometallurgy for zinc extraction e.g. HCl ( The jarosite process where NaFe The goethite process ( The aim of this study was to determine the conditions both for selective leaching of zinc and for complete zinc and iron extraction in sulphuric acid for two various types of steel-making wastes, EAF dust and a sludge from Mittal Steel Ostrava whose leaching in HCl was studied in ( Two samples of similar composition were investigated. Sample 1 was EAF dust and sample 2 was dried sludge from the steel-making tandem furnace (TF) (a type of oxygen open hearth furnace). The particle size was less than 0.18 mm. The content of the monitored elements was determined using XRF and is shown in Mineralogical analysis was carried out using X-ray diffraction and laser confocal microscopy. Both samples contained magnetite, hematite, wuestite and zinc ferrite (franklinite). The results of the semi-quantitative diffraction analysis can be seen in  The leaching experiments were performed in a thermostatted shaker using 2.5 g solid/25 mL acid. In case of studying the influence of the liquid/solid ratio, the amount of solid was variable. After filtration and washing, residues were dried and weighed. The liquors were analysed by AAS and the Fe The leach liquors from the EAF leaching experiments were combined and concentrated by evaporation to give a solution containing 10.535 g/L of Zn, 0.0156 g/L of Pb, 0.0459 g/L of Cd, and 27 g/L of Fe (0.866 g/L Fe At first the influence of the sulphuric acid was studied. A leaching time of 6 h was chosen on the basis of preliminary experiments. It can be seen from  The influence of the temperature on metal extraction is shown in  In Because the best selectivity together with the sufficient zinc extraction was found in 0.1–0.3 M H The precipitate behaviour in settling and filtration was satisfactory. Only α-FeOOH was found to be present. The chemical composition of the precipitate is shown in Two types of metallurgical wastes were leached in sulphuric acid at atmospheric pressure. The metal extraction was investigated depending on acid concentration, temperature, time, and liquid/solid ratio. Similar results were obtained both for the EAF dust and for the dried sludge from the tandem furnace. The zinc extraction reaches almost 100% and iron extraction exceeds 90% in 3 M H Almost complete zinc and iron dissolution was achieved, leaving a small volume of residue concentrated in lead which could be treated subsequently to recover the lead. The leach liquor was treated by precipitating goethite. The process can be carried out with a small amount of alkali provided that the dilution is sufficient; consequently the costs of hydrometallurgical treatment of steel-making dust and sludge could be reduced. The precipitate contamination with zinc (0.044%) and sulphur (2.7%) was low compared to results obtained by commonly used quantity of ZnO or the other alkalis. The sulphur content can be even reduced by virtue of stricter pH auditing. The main disadvantage of this method of precipitation is the high consumption of water, but in case the solution is neutralized by fresh dust, the amount of water necessary to dilute the leach liquor is much smaller. The dependence of the solution and precipitate composition on time, temperature, and pH will be the subject of future investigation. The present study was supported by the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic (GA 104/06/1606). The authors acknowledge Dr. Filuš, Dr. Matýsek and professor Fiala for the mineralogical analysis.