In this study, Turkish fermented sucuk samples were produced by incorporating of 0.5, 1 and 2 g/100 g black carrot concentrate (BCC) in the presence/absence of sodium nitrite and effects of BCC on some physicochemical, microbiological, bioactive, aroma, textural and sensory properties of sucuk were investigated after fermentation for 12 days. The highest total phenolic content value was determined in sucuk sample added with 2 g/100 g BCC and no nitrite and antiradical activities of the sucuk samples were significantly affected from addition of BCC. Incorporation of BCC did not show significant effect on the hardness values, while it improved the adhesiveness characteristics of the final product. Additionally, resilience values decreased with the increase of BCC concentration in the sample formulation. Volatile composition of the samples was influenced from nitrite and BCC levels in the sucuk samples and majority of the volatile compounds were terpenes. Increase of BCC concentration affected the exterior and interior a* values of the samples. All the sucuk samples had considerably acceptable sensory properties.Sucuk, a traditional Turkish dry-fermented sausage is one of the most popular meat products in Turkey and similar meat products are also known in Europe and Middle Eastern Countries ( Carmine is a red natural colorant of cochineal extract, obtained from dried female bodies, of the insect Carrot ( Fresh beef and tail fat used in the sucuk production were purchased from a local butcher in Kayseri, Turkey. Other sucuk ingredients such as salt, garlic, red pepper, black pepper, cumin and pimento were provided from a local supplier in Kayseri, Turkey. Black carrot concentrate (BCC) was kindly donated by a company (Erkon Konsantre Co.) in Ereğli, Turkey. BCC is obtained from black carrots by physical concentration methods. Manufacturing methods are similar with other vegetable processing ( Sucuk (∼1 kg) dough was prepared with composing following ingredients: 800 g beef meat (size:3 mm) 200 g tail fat, 25 g salt, 10 g minced fresh garlic, 4 g sugar, 7 g red pepper, 5 g black pepper, 9 g cumin and 2.5 g pimento. Sugar was added after dissolving in sterile warm water and afterward the dough was mixed homogeneously by kneading the batter. Following the preparation of the sucuk dough, it was divided into 9 batches. Based on the base formulation BCC at different concentrations, 0.5, 1 and 2 g/100 g and/or 150 mg/kg sodium nitrite (NaNO After weighing the essential ingredients, each batch was thoroughly mixed by kneading with hands for 30 min, and stuffed into the artificial collagen casings by using a filling machine (Tefal Le Hachoir 1500, Ecully Cedex, France). The filled sucuk samples were ripened consecutively for 3 days at 90% relative humidity (RH) and 24 °C for 4 days at 85% RH and 22 °C for 5 days at 80% RH and 18 °C in a controlled fermentation cabinet (Nüve, TK 252, Ankara, Turkey). At the end of the fermentation for 12 days, samples were taken in triplicate in two repetitions for the physicochemical, bioactive, textural and sensory evaluation. For this aim, the casing of the sucuk is removed and the sucuk is homogenized using an Ultra turrax homogenizer before analysis except textural and sensory evaluation. For textural and sensory analysis, they were cut using a knife in certain size as a circle. For the microbiological analysis, the samples were analysed in sterile conditions. All the analyses were conducted within 60 min of sampling. The moisture content of the sucuk samples was determined according to the standard procedures of Surface and cut surface color values of the sucuk samples were measured using an automatic colorimeter (Konica Minolta, model CM-5, Mississauga, ON, Canada). The color values were recorded as Residual nitrite level was determined according to the method described by Sucuk samples (25 g) were weighed into sterile Stomacher bag by using sterile equipments and homogenized with the addition of 225 mL sterile distilled Maximum Recovery Diluent solution for 90 s in a masticator (Stomacher, IUL, Barcelona, Spain). Decimal dilutions of the samples were prepared until 10 The extraction procedure was performed according to the method described by Total phenolic content of the sucuk samples was determined by the method described by DPPH free-radical scavenging activity was determined according to the method described by All analyses were carried out in triplicate with two repetitions. TPA test was conducted using a texture analyzer (TA.XT Plus Texture Analyzer, Texture Technologies Corp. NY/Stable Micro System, Godalming, UK). Fermented sucuk samples were cut into small pieces having a 20 mm diameter and 20 ± 0.5 mm thickness. Before the test, the parameters of measurement were set to be following: pre test speed 2 mm/s, test speed 1 mm/s, post test speed 1 mm/s and strain level 25%. For the determination of TPA parameters, a spherical probe (SMS/1S) and 30 kg load cell were used. After the measurement, hardness (g), adhesiveness (g s), springiness, cohesiveness, gumminess, chewiness and resilience values were recorded by calculation using TPA curves. All analyses were carried out five times with two repetitions. Determination of aroma profile of the sucuk samples was conducted using a Gas Chromatography-Mass Sepectrometry (GC–MS, Agilent 7890A GC system, Agilent, Avondale, USA) equipped with a mass selective detector (Agilent Technologies, Agilent, Avondale, USA) and DB-WAX column (60 m × 0.250 mm i.d.; film thickness 0.25 μm). Five gram of samples that shredded and separated from casings weighed into GC–MS vial (40 mL). Then, the vial was kept in a thermoblock (RCT basic, IKA, Germany) for 1 h at 40 °C. After that, SPME fiber (75 μm, 23 ga, carboxen/polydimethylsiloxane (CAR/PDMS)) (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) was subjected to the headspace for 1 h at 40 °C. At the end of the duration, the fiber was injected to GC–MS in the splitless mode. GC–MS conditions were adjusted as following: The oven temperature was held at 40 °C for 10 min, heated to 110 °C at 3 °C/min, from 110 °C to 150 °C at 4 °C/min, and from 150 °C to 210 °C at 10 °C/min, finally increased to 210 °C/min and held for 12 min. The carrier gas was helium with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The voltage of electron ionization detector was 70 eV. The compounds were identified by comparison with spectra from the libraries of Flavor 2, Nist05 and Wiley7n. All analyses were carried out in duplicate with two repetitions. Sensory evaluation of the sucuk samples was performed in a room with appropriate temperature (25 °C) in open sitting. Sensory analyses of the sucuk samples were carried out by eight selected panelists consisting of staff and graduate students of Food Engineering, Department at Erciyes University. The age range of the panel members was 20–30 and half of the members were male. Before the analysis, sensory panel members were trained about the sensory evaluation techniques. Fermented sucuk samples were cut into small pieces (20 mm diameter and 20 ± 0.5 mm thickness) and grilled with a grill (Tefal 1805 Serie 1, China) for 1 min for each side of the sample. After that, they were immediately served to the panelists. The panelists used warm tap water to cleanse their palates before testing each sample. The sensory attributes evaluated were color, flavor and aroma, texture and overall acceptability. Samples were rated on a nine-point hedonic scale where 1 reflected dislike extremely and 9 reflected the highest acceptability. All analyses were carried out with two repetitions. All the data obtained were given as means of triplicate data with their standard deviations. Analysis of data was carried out using one-way ANOVA. Duncan's Multiple Range Test was also used to separate significant differences between means at the  pH values of the samples were significantly different ( Weight loss of the samples varied from 26.3 g/100 g to 33.9 g/100 g and they were determined to be similar except S1 ( Microbial profile of the fermented sucuk samples is shown in Aroma and textural properties of sucuk are strongly related to the microbiota including lactic acid bacteria (  Bioactive properties of BCC and sucuk samples are showed in Texture profile analysis (TPA) results of the fermented sucuks are tabulated in Volatile compounds of the sucuk samples incorporated with different concentrations of BCC and nitrite as well as carmine are listed in  Essentially, fermented meat products have characteristic taste and flavor, resulting from mainly fermentation, other chemical events and product formulation. However, there have been a number of researches which report changes in sensorial properties caused by use of nonspecific ingredients in the preparation of sucuk. As is also evident from the sensory results of the current study, this change is generally in a negative way. For instance, The results of the study showed that the addition of black carrot concentrate provided significant changes in some physicochemical and bioactive properties of sucuk samples. pH values were determined to be low in the BCC incorporated samples compared to the control ones. Also, BCC incorporation contributed to the reduction of the numbers of yeasts and molds, thereby improved the microbiological quality since growth of yeasts and molds is not desired in sucuk fermentation. Total phenolic content and antiradical activities of sucuk samples increased with the addition of BCC. BCC addition also resulted significant changes in the some textural characteristics of the samples. Significant changes were observed in the aroma profile of samples. Sucuk samples incorporated with BCC got acceptable sensory scores. As a conclusion, BCC could be essentially incorporated with sucuk formulation to improve its quality characteristics without causing any sensorial defect.