This paper analyzes the effect of uncertainty in the recovery of each concentration stage on the global recovery and concentrate grade. The uncertainties are represented by normal, uniform and triangular probability distribution functions (PDFs). The case studies include the uncertainty in the recovery of each stage separately and simultaneously across all of the stages with different standard deviation levels. A total of 2880 cases were studied, which corresponded with twelve circuits, three distribution functions and 84 different combinations with standard deviations in the stage recoveries. For each case, 2000 simulations were performed, with an overall simulation total of 5.76 million. Among the conclusions obtained in this work are the following: 1) The shape of the distribution function in the output variables is dependent on the input distribution function, the concentration circuit and the uncertainty level; 2) when the recovery of a single stage is represented by a PDF, the other stage recoveries are assigned a deterministic value then the type of the PDF obtained for the global recovery is similar to the input distribution; 3) when considering uncertainty in several stages simultaneously, the resulting PDF type usually is not the same PDF type observed for the input variables; and 4) the circuit structure affects more than the stage recoveries in the analysis of the global recovery and concentrate grade. In the literature, there are few studies analyzing the effect of uncertainty applied to mineral processing. Several tools and methods are available to analyze, design and optimize flotation circuits ( Various methodologies for the design of flotation circuits have been proposed in the literature, with most using optimization techniques. In these methodologies, the alternatives are presented through a superstructure, a mathematical model is developed, and an algorithm is used to find the best option based on an objective function. There are at least three reviews of studies concerning the optimal design of a flotation circuit including that of The methodology used was developed by After selecting the circuit to be tested, one or more of the variables that have uncertainties are selected for analysis. The uncertainty is represented by a PDF, including normal, uniform and triangular PDFs. In this work, the following cases were considered: the recovery of one stage (i.e., rougher, cleaner, scavenger, or re-cleaner) that exhibits uncertainty while the other stage recoveries have deterministic values and the case where the recoveries of all stages exhibit uncertainty. The uncertainty level for each variable is represented by its SD. The SD values considered for the stage recoveries were 0, 1, 3, 5 and 7. A total of 84 combinations of stage SD values were studied. An SD value of 0 indicates that the variable shows no uncertainty. For each case, 2000 random values of the selected variables were generated using the PDF and SD. Simulations were performed for each of these values, the results were stored and the statistical indicators were calculated. Based on the simulation results metric indicators were determined and normalized for each circuit, PDF type and combination of SD values. Metric indicators were used to assess each objective and were classified based on their efficiency, quality and process stability. The indicators were as follows: 1) global recovery of valuable species, which is a measure of the efficiency of the process, 2) concentrate grade, which is a measure of the quality of the product, 3) global recovery SD, which indicates the degree of uncertainty of recovery, and 4) concentrate grade SD, which indicates the degree of uncertainty in the concentrate grade. Each of these indicators was assessed using the mean value, SD, kurtosis and skewness. The procedure described above was repeated for each SD combination for the variables with uncertainties, each circuit to be analyzed and each PDF. Each PDF required 960 simulations; with a total of 2880 cases, there were 5.76 million simulations and 11,520 histograms of output variables. In this study, only the global recovery and concentrate grade were analyzed. Input values of the variables were generated using the PDF; for an example, The simulation results were tabulated for each of the 2880 cases studied, using a specific circuit for a specific combination of SDs and a specific PDF. Statistical descriptors for each case were determined, and a histogram was constructed. An analysis was performed based on the type of distribution, the level of SD and the effect of each circuit. Graphs showing skewness versus kurtosis were constructed because the position on the graph indicate the type of PDF obtained. Positive kurtosis values indicate that the PDF has a mass distribution near the central value (leptokurtic), and negative kurtosis values indicate that the PDF presents a mass that is dispersed from the central value, thus showing a flat PDF (platykurtic). Positive values of the skewness factor indicate that there is a mass distribution (or data density) that is less than the central value, while negative values are observed for a mass distribution greater than the central value. In other words, skewness tells us the amount and direction of the skew, and kurtosis tells us how tall and sharp the central peak is relative to a normal PDF. In When the recovery of a stage is represented by a PDF, the other stages recoveries are assigned a deterministic value then the type of PDF of the global recovery obtained is similar to the input distribution. Thus, area A of The other parts in Only the effect of the uncertainty over all stage recoveries was analyzed because in cases where the uncertainty occurs in a single stage, the PDF type of the global recovery tends to be the same type as the PDF of the stage recovery. The circuits were analyzed using three comparisons: the circuits that sent the cleaner tail to the rougher versus the circuits that sent the cleaner tail to the scavenger, the circuits that sent the scavenger concentrate to the rougher versus ones that sent the scavenger concentrate to the cleaner, and the circuits that sent the re-cleaner tail to the rougher versus ones that sent the re-cleaner trail to the cleaner. When comparing the circuits that sent the re-cleaner tail to the rougher or cleaner, no significant differences in the PDF types were observed. When the scavenger concentrate was sent to the rougher, the PDFs that were obtained were closer to the normal PDFs for the global recovery compared to the PDFs where the scavenger concentrate was sent to the cleaner. This result occurred because the concentrate passed through more processing stages. The most significant effect on the nature of the PDFs for the global recovery was observed when the different destinations of the cleaner tail were compared. In this case, if the tail was sent to the scavenger, the PDF tended to have a behavior closer to normal, as opposed to when the tail was sent to the rougher stage. In The SD value of the stage recoveries has a significant effect on the shape of the global recovery PDF and its SD. When considering only the uncertainty in a single stage, while others stages have a deterministic value, the SD value of the recovery stage affects the value of the global recovery SD, but the type of PDF obtained is usually the same type of PDF observed for the stage recoveries. Standard deviations of 7 show some cases where this behavior is not met. For cases where PDFs are considered for all stage recoveries, it is observed that for cases where the SD for any stage recovery PDF does not exceed 3, the global recovery PDF tends to be normal. This behavior is observed regardless of the type of PDF used. When the SD of any stage recovery PDF has a value equal to or greater than 5, the PDF of the global recovery deviates from the normal distribution.  By studying the circuits, it was observed that the circuits whose cleaner stage tail was sent to the scavenger stage possessed concentrate grade PDFs that were not close to normal PDFs. Moreover, the circuits that sent the cleaner tail to the rougher demonstrated concentrate grade PDFs that were closer to normal PDFs. This behavior is opposite to the observed for global recovery as was indicated in For the analysis of the input SD with respect to the global recovery SD, when one stage recovery varied and the others remained constant, a linear behavior was observed for the three PDF types tested. The values of the slopes with different PDFs were very similar, showing variations less than 4%. This behavior is independent of the PDF, but it is a function of the circuit structure. Therefore, it can be assumed that a test with one type of PDF can be used to estimate the SD of the other PDF types. This behavior is also observed for each concentrate grade. Based on the previous observation, a general predictive model for the SD was developed and yielded the following equations:  where the subscripts GR, CG, R, C, S, RC indicate global recovery, concentrate grade, rougher, cleaner, scavenger and re-cleaner, respectively. Constants A through H and a through h are functions of each circuit, but they are independent of the type and combination of the SD and stage recovery PDF. The correlation coefficients between the simulated values of the SD and the predicted SD are 0.966 and 0.959 for the global recovery and concentrate grade, respectively.  Another interesting element is that the mean and SD of the global recovery depends very little on the type of stage recovery PDF and are more dependent on the type of circuit structure. Moreover, global recovery SD values depend on the SD values of the stage recoveries. An important conclusion is that the RCC, RRC, RRR and RCR circuits have better global recoveries than the SCC, SRC, SCR and SRR circuits, despite variations in the recoveries of the concentration stages. This behavior allows us to conclude that for the cases studied here, with stage recovery SDs values up to 7, the circuit structure affects the outcome more than the stage recovery, when analyzing the global recovery. By analyzing the SD versus the mean value of the concentrate grade, the circuits that sent the scavenger concentrate to the rougher stage yielded the best results, which was expected. An interesting aspect is that these circuits also yielded smaller SD values, i.e., they were less sensitive to the uncertainties of the stage recoveries. For the global recovery, the mean values and SDs of the concentrate grade depended less on the PDF type and more on the circuit structure. An important conclusion is that the RRC, RRR, SRC and SRR circuits possess higher concentrate grades than the SCC, SCR, RCC, and RCR circuits, despite variations in stage recovery. This behavior indicates that for the cases studied here, with a stage recovery SD value up to 7, the circuit structure has a larger impact than the stage recoveries when analyzing both the global recovery and the concentrate grade. From the simulations, the following conclusions can be drawn: 1) The resulting PDF depends on the PDF type of the stage recovery, the stage type, the SD values and the circuit structure; 2) When the recovery of a stage is represented by a PDF, the other stage recoveries are assigned a deterministic value then the global recovery PDF that is obtained is similar in type to the stage recovery PDF; 3) When considering various stages, the uncertainty of the resulting PDF type usually is distinct from that of the stage recovery PDF; 4) Circuit structure affects PDF behavior, namely having more stages in the recirculating streams the global recovery and concentrate grade results in PDFs more closely approaching normal PDFs; 5) The concentrate grade PDFs are usually different from the stage recovery PDFs; 6) RCC, RRC, RRR and RCR circuits have better global recovery, while the RRC, RRR, SRC and SRR circuits have the highest concentrate grade, despite variations in stage recovery. This means sending everything to the beginning of the circuit (i.e. rougher feed) yields the better recovery and concentrate grade; 7) The circuit structure affects more than the stage recoveries when analyzing both the global recovery and the concentrate grade, and 8) these previous conclusions apply to the current design practices, or optimization methodologies, when uncertainties need to be included. For example, because “the circuit structure affects more than the stage recoveries when analyzing both the global recovery and the concentrate grade”, the circuit structure can be selected with simple models or based in laboratory tests. Later, the uncertainties can be included through case studies or simulations. The authors wish to thank