In copper sulphide flotation, copper adsorbs on pyrite through superficial oxidation of the copper minerals (e.g. chalcopyrite) which promotes pyrite flotation in the presence of xanthate. This “inadvertent” activation of pyrite by copper ions is undesirable in copper sulphide flotation. In order to minimise this effect, depressants are used to suppress the effect of the activating ions. The effect of diethylenetriamine (DETA) in different combinations (under aerated and non-aerated conditions) on Cu-activated pyrite hydrophobised by xanthate was examined using flotation, spectroscopic and solution analyses, at pH 10. The results showed that DETA affects the flotation behaviour and surface chemistry of pyrite. However, high dosages are required. The depression action of DETA on Cu-activated pyrite was attributed to both the removal of surface copper to form soluble Cu–DETA complex in solution and competition for Cu sites on the activated pyrite surface. The significant depression of pyrite in the presence of DETA under the aerated condition was due to increased amount of iron oxy–hydroxides (Fe–O/OH), copper oxides and Cu(I)–DETA hydrophilic species.Chalcopyrite and gold are the main valuable mineral phases in most polymetallic sulphide ores, with pyrite being the main sulphide gangue mineral. Chalcopyrite and gold are mostly associated with pyrite in these ores; therefore, their economical extraction requires a selective depression of pyrite. The major problem associated with chalcopyrite and pyrite selectivity is due to accidental activation of pyrite by dissolved Cu DETA is a polyamine and soluble in water and alcohol ( In this study, the effect of DETA in combination with aeration of Cu-activated pyrite in flotation was investigated. Surface (X-ray spectroscopic, XPS and EDTA extraction technique) and solution (Ultraviolet visible spectroscopic, UV–visible and inductively coupled mass spectroscopy, ICP-MS) analytical techniques were used to understand the mechanisms of DETA on Cu-activated pyrite depression. A high grade pyrite sample was obtained from a copper mine in Peru. The chemical/elemental compositions of the pyrite sample analysed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) is shown in All the chemical reagents were of analytical grade. Potassium amyl xanthate (CH The experiment was carried out in a 0.5 The rest potential for the pyrite in the pulp during conditioning and flotation was measured using a TPS 90-FLMV pH/Eh/DO combined meter. The pH and Eh probes were calibrated using pH buffer solutions of 7 and 10 and Light's solution ( The X-ray spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using a Kratos Axis-Ultra X-ray photoelectron spectrometer equipped with a delay-line detector. A monochromatised Al Kα X-ray source was used, operating at ∼300 Ethylene diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used to extract metal oxidation products (e.g. oxide/hydroxide, sulphate, carbonate, etc.) from the pyrite surface ( An Evolution 201 UV–visible spectrophotometer was used to determine the concentration of xanthate remaining in solution before and after treatment with DETA. Identifying the peaks (for xanthate and DETA) in the process water was difficult due to the presence of other mobile ions, hence demineralised water at neutral pH was used for all the experiments. A 0.1 The effect of DETA on pyrite rejection was studied under two different test conditions; (1) non-oxidising (or non-aerated) and (2) oxidising, (or aerated) condition. The experimental results under non-aerated condition are presented in The depression of pyrite in the presence of DETA is also described by the initial rate constants, The open-circuit or rest potential measured during the flotation involving DETA is shown in The results in Under the aerated condition ( To further understand the mechanism of DETA depression of Cu-activated pyrite under aerated and non-aerated conditions, EDTA extraction was performed on the aerated and non-aerated samples before and after DETA addition. The adsorption spectra for potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) in solution, in the absence and in the presence of DETA, have been recorded at pH 7 as shown in In the present study, it has been demonstrated that DETA can depress the flotation of copper-activated pyrite induced by xanthate at a pH 10. The flotation results in This (Cu–S species) then interacts with the collector for improved pyrite flotation. The Cu–S activation product is observed to be highly stable and insoluble in DETA, however oxidation/aeration of the Cu-activated pyrite transforms this product to oxides/hydroxides which are more soluble in the presence of DETA. A similar observation was made by The XPS results ( The results from UV–visible spectroscopy ( Accidental activation of pyrite occurs in most copper flotation plants via superficial oxidation of the copper minerals (e.g. chalcopyrite) or by deliberate activation of pyrite with copper sulphate in porphyry copper–gold flotation. The latter is mostly done to increase gold recovery as a result of enhanced pyrite flotation in the rougher stage. However, in the cleaner stage, where selectivity between chalcopyrite, gold and pyrite is required to improve copper and gold grades, pyrite liberation and depression becomes crucial. The findings from this study suggest that DETA can be an advantageous depressant to reject Cu-activated pyrite hydrophobised by xanthate. Furthermore, not only will DETA be able to depress pyrite but may also clean chalcopyrite surface of oxidation products (e.g. Cu(OH) DETA depressed xanthate-induced Cu-activated pyrite at pH 10 ( Copper removal/deactivation (whether copper sulphide or xanthate) from the pyrite surface. Formation of Cu(I)–DETA complex on pyrite surface and consequently increased the oxidation of surface copper (mainly copper oxide). The fundamental findings (DETA depression effect) can be applied to pyrite depression in pyritic copper–gold ore flotation and, in particular, in the post-regrind depression of pyrite for gold recovery. The financial support from AMIRA International and the industry sponsors of the P260F project is strongly acknowledged. The first author would like to acknowledge the scholarship he received from the University of South Australia, Ghana government, and the University of Mines and Technology, Ghana.