Manganese extraction from a low-grade ore was investigated using cane molasses as a reducing agent in dilute sulfuric acid medium. The effects of concentrations of cane molasses and sulfuric acid, leaching temperature as well as reaction time were discussed. The results showed that high manganese recovery with low Fe and Al extraction yield could be obtained by analyzing the leaching efficiencies of Mn, Fe and Al during the leaching process. The optimal leaching condition was determined as 1.9 mol/L H2SO4 and 60.0 g/L cane molasses for 120 min at 90 °C while using particles smaller than 0.147 mm. The leaching efficiencies were 97.0% for Mn, whereas 21.5% for Al and 32.4% for Fe, respectively.Manganese plays an important role in many fields, such as steel production, preparation of dietary additives, fertilizers, cells and fine chemicals ( Cane molasses, a by-product of sugar manufacture, generally contains 25%–35% cane sugar, 15%–25% invert sugar and 9%–11% colloidal materials. It is a low cost rich resource, containing renewable and non-hazardous reducing agents compared to other available raw materials that can be used for manganese leaching under mild acidic conditions. In this paper, the leaching processes of manganese, iron and aluminium from the ores using cane molasses as reducing agent were demonstrated. And the effect of concentrations of cane molasses and acid, leaching temperature and reaction time were investigated. The sample of manganese ore was obtained from Bayi Manganese Mine, Guangxi, China. Both the bulk and sieved samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku model D/max-2500) to define the mineralogical composition. The obtained diffractogram was identical to standard diffraction mineral patterns. From the XRD pattern ( The ore sample was crushed and ground to the required particle size smaller than 0.147 mm (> The leaching experiments were carried out in a 500 mL three-neck flask immersed in thermostatically controlled water bath with mechanical stirring. In a typical experiment, 10.0 g of sample was first added to 50 mL sulfuric acid solution under stirring (∼ Manganese dioxide ores cannot be leached by the sulfuric acid directly. But its oxidizing ability gets stronger in the acidic medium. In order to obtain high leaching efficiency of manganese, reducing substances must be added in acidic solution. The chemical reactions which take place during the manganese dioxide dissolution by sucrose or glucose can be described by the following reactions ( In order to evaluate the effect of cane molasses, a series of leaching experiments was carried out by varying concentrations of cane molasses from 10.0 to 70.0 g/L while fixing H A mineralogical study of the manganese ore has identified hematite as the main iron minerals in the ore. The dissolution of hematite requires a highly acidic medium and is influenced by the crystallinity of the mineral. It also results in the consumption of the H At a cane molasses concentration of 60.0 g/L, manganese is almost completely dissolved. So an initial cane molasses concentration of 60.0 g/L is sufficient to leach MnO Leaching experiments at different initial H Metal extraction from the manganese ore also tightly depends on reaction temperature (  The mineralogical forms of ore samples before and after leaching treatment were investigated by XRD and shown in A reductive leaching process for a low-grade manganese ore has been successfully demonstrated using a mixture of sulfuric acid and cane molasses as reductants. The results indicate that the leaching efficiencies of Mn, Fe and Al increase as the H This work was financially supported by scientific research project of Education Department of Guangxi, China (No. [2006]26).