Synthetic mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxide precipitates (MHP) were produced containing varying levels of Ni, Co, Mn, Mg, Al, Fe, Cr, Cu, Zn and Si to understand and characterize the ageing processes and subsequent nickel and cobalt leach recovery. Precipitates were monitored over a 12week period using X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and leach tests in ammonia–ammonium carbonate solution. Manganese and cobalt incorporation into MHP was beneficial for subsequent nickel recovery; most likely preventing or slowing nickel–magnesium hydroxide formation. High magnesium MHP generally lowered subsequent nickel recovery due to its stability and slow leaching kinetics.
                  Between 94–100% Ni and 84–100% Co were leached from nearly all high magnesium MHP precipitates after soaking in the leach solution for 72h, except for the precipitate containing about 5% Al which only recovered 87% Ni and 61% Co. An XRD of this precipitate showed that it was much more amorphous than any other MHP whilst the XRD of the leach residues revealed a magnesium–aluminium hydrotalcite structure. Both nickel–magnesium hydroxide and hydrotalcite-like structures appear to inhibit nickel and cobalt recovery because of their slow leaching characteristics.The BHP Billiton Ravensthorpe operation in Western Australia was the first of the third-generation nickel laterite acid leach plants which commenced production in late 2007. The operation utilized pressure and atmospheric acid leaching to recover metals into the solution, followed by the production and shipping of an intermediate mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxide precipitate (MHP) to BHP Billiton's Yabulu Refinery for further processing. The MHP separates the nickel and cobalt from many of the other impurities present in the solution, resulting in a more robust process ( The MHP produced is a complex material that undergoes various solid state transformations and oxidation reactions ( The intermediate was precipitated at 50 Although significant test work was conducted by BHP Billiton, the causes of the ageing processes and the effects of various impurities still required further investigation. In this study, mixed hydroxide precipitates were synthesized with varying levels of Ni, Co, Mn, Mg, Al, Fe, Cr, Cu, Zn, Si, C, S and SO The metal hydroxides were produced by adding a stoichiometric quantity of ‘fresh’ magnesia (MgO) (Emag 45—Queensland Magnesia Pty Ltd.) to 6 The concentrations of the metals in the solution before precipitation are shown in After the initial precipitation and analysis, it was discovered that the pH did not rise above 8 using MgO due to the presence of sulfate in the solution from the metal sulfates. According to XRD (Siemens D500), moisture determination and leach tests were performed on the precipitates in weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 12. XRD was also performed on selected leach residues, and a reductive soak test was conducted in week 12 using the Yabulu refinery procedure. SEM (Phillips XL30) was conducted on a few of the precipitates in weeks 1, 3 and 12; whilst the size distribution was monitored over the 12 Cross sections of the MHP were prepared for SEM by firstly drying the precipitate at 50 The leach tests were conducted in triplicate and were scaled down versions of the Yabulu Refinery predictor leach test. In the modified standard leach test, 0.2 The reductive soak predictor leach test entailed a 45  The precipitation and incorporation of metals in a mixed metal hydroxide is an extremely complicated process ( The temperature seems to have a significant effect on magnesia dissolution and on the kinetics of precipitation. As the precipitates took about 8 In precipitates 1–4 the nickel concentrations are reasonably constant, whilst the manganese increases and magnesium decreases. Although Ravensthorpe MHP typically contains 3% Mn (  When more manganese was present in the solution, more nickel and cobalt were incorporated into the precipitate. There is obviously some interaction between the metals causing a co-precipitation of the nickel and cobalt. However, aluminium and copper have an adverse effect and compete with nickel and cobalt for precipitation. By comparison, only 8% Si, 39% Cr, 57% Fe and 71% Zn were precipitated which did not significantly affect Ni and Co precipitation. In terms of magnesium content, precipitates containing copper have a higher Mg, whilst high iron and chromium precipitates have a lower Mg contents. The reasons for the effects of these metals on nickel, cobalt and magnesium are unknown. However, the size of the hydrated ions and their hydrolysis pH will likely have an effect on their level of inclusion. As expected, the overall particle size of the precipitate increased after their initial production ( XRD (Siemens D500) on the filter cakes showed that the precipitates consisted of predominantly Ni(OH) There were no conclusive signs of oxidized manganese species in any of the precipitates. Manganese is known to oxidize readily, and indeed in many cases the precipitate was observed to become brown over time as the metal oxidized. Obviously no crystalline oxidized manganese hydroxides exist in the precipitate, so the composition cannot be determined. The XRD pattern of precipitate 7 containing aluminium is significantly different, as shown in In the XRD patterns of precipitates 5, 6 and 2 (  SEM images on cross sections of the precipitates were performed over the 12 The particles chosen in  Modified standard and reductive leach tests were performed at periodic intervals over the 12 A comparison of leach recoveries between precipitates 5 and 6 revealed that the presence of cobalt actually improved nickel recovery by 13 and 15% for the standard and reductive tests respectively. Manganese also improved nickel recovery by between 3 and 23% (precipitates 1–4 vs. 5). The presence of manganese and/or cobalt appears to limit the formation of the slow leaching nickel–magnesium hydroxide. Unusually, the recovery of nickel was greater with the standard leach compared to the reductive leach for precipitates 5, 6, 9, 11, and 12. Similarly, for the recovery of cobalt with precipitates 6 and 9. Therefore, the oxidation of cobalt is not an issue and in some cases where metals cannot be reduced (precipitates 5, 6, 9, 11 and 12) the oxidative process was better. However, the reductive leach was beneficial when the precipitates contained manganese. These conclusions suggest that the manganese and cobalt could be interacting with the nickel in different ways. It is suggested that the cobalt forms a mixed hydroxide with the nickel, thus limiting the formation of Ni,Mg(OH) Overall, precipitate 7 containing Ni, Co, Mg and Al exhibited the worst metal recoveries followed by precipitates containing Si, Cr and Fe. The trivalent Al, Cr and Fe ions are known to induce transformation to hydrotalcite-type structures, which are stable and slow leaching. However, in the reductive leach test, divalent iron-rich precipitate exhibited better nickel and cobalt recoveries than the aluminium and chromium rich precipitates. In most cases the standard and reductive leach tests exhibited poor recoveries, whilst the reductive soak test leached > The XRD of the reductive leach residue of precipitate 7 containing Ni, Co, Mg, Al and precipitate 8 containing Ni, Co, Mg, Fe indicates the presence of magnesium–aluminium and magnesium–iron hydrotalcite structures ( The leach residue of precipitate 10, which contained copper, has many unidentified XRD peaks ( It should be noted that the synthetic precipitates produced and tested were aged longer and contained higher levels of metal impurities than the Ravensthorpe MHP, and the laboratory leach tests were not as robust as the Yabulu Refinery MHP leach process. Nevertheless, it is apparent that aluminium at high levels would cause a significant loss of nickel recovery in leaching. To observe the kinetics of nickel leaching and to determine the effect of magnesium on the rate of nickel dissolution, four precipitates with increasing concentrations of magnesium (17 to 30%) were produced, aged for 3  The presence of manganese and cobalt in nickel hydroxide has been found to be beneficial to subsequent recovery of nickel by leaching. The beneficial level of manganese in this study was about 4.4%. Manganese is observed to oxidize to an amorphous phase and no X-ray crystalline phases exist in the precipitates. The oxidation state of cobalt in MHP could not be determined but likely to be Co(III). Over 99% Ni and 91% Co were leached from all precipitates containing over 4.4% Mn. The formation of a mixed manganese or cobalt hydroxide with nickel is believed to prevent or slow Ni,Mg(OH) Fortunately, with all precipitates but one, reductive soaking for 72 It is concluded that it is important to incorporate the 72 The work was conducted as part of an Australian Research Council (ARC) linkage project involving BHP Billiton Yabulu Refinery and Murdoch University. Additional funding was provided by the