The ulnar coronoid process plays a central role in elbow stability due to its unique anatomic characteristics. A fracture of the coronoid, although uncommon, represents a serious injury that can adversely affect functional outcome if not treated appropriately. Several surgical interventions addressing different fracture patterns are being increasingly recognised as effective treatment options even for smaller fragments. A review of the literature was performed in order to evaluate different treatment strategies applied to clearly defined fracture configurations. 14 articles reporting data for the management of 236 coronoid fractures met our inclusion criteria and were subjected to critical analysis. The data suggest that recognition of specific coronoid fracture patterns, use of appropriate classification systems and application of staged surgical protocols can stabilise the elbow effectively and lead to favourable outcomes.The ulnar coronoid process is an anterior extension of the proximal ulnar metaphysis and therefore represents an important stabiliser of the elbow joint providing a static restraint to posteriorly acting forces. The olecranon–coronoid angle between a line joining the tips of both processes and the ulnar diaphysis is 35° with a posterior tilt which corresponds to the anterior tilt of the trochlea with respect to the humeral diaphysis. There are several structures attaching at or near the coronoid process. The anterior band of the medial collateral ligament (MCL) on the sublime tubercle 18.5 The role of the coronoid process in elbow stability has been documented by several biomechanical studies in cadavers. By removing more than 50% of coronoid height, Closkey et al. demonstrated significant posterior elbow instability when applying an axially directed force at various flexion angles and emphasised the role of the coronoid as an anterior osseous buttress. Coronoid fractures are caused by axial compression of the trochlea on the coronoid process. Regan and Morrey O’Driscoll et al. The aim of this study was to systematically review the available literature on coronoid process fracture management and reveal up to date information regarding proposed operative treatment strategies and their outcomes. An electronic search of the Medline database was conducted using the PubMed search engine for papers published until December 2010, entering the following terms: “coronoid fractures” and the appropriate MeSH terms: “ulna fractures”, “fractures, bone”, “elbow joint”, “joint instability” and using Boolean operators. Two reviewers (N.M., G.K.) reviewed each article. It was often possible to exclude a citation immediately on the basis of information in the title and abstract. If the citation could not be excluded immediately, the full article was downloaded and reviewed by both authors. Each article's bibliography was also reviewed in an attempt to identify other potential articles for inclusion. The names of the institution, authors and journal were blocked out on all manuscripts to minimize bias during the review. Articles were considered to be eligible for this study if they met the following inclusion criteria: English language publications Clinical studies on adult patients Report of acute management of coronoid fractures Report of coronoid fractures based on the four different mechanisms of injury and fracture patterns Report of at least 5 coronoid fractures Availability of complete treatment information regarding all reported coronoid fractures Adequate description of outcomes using validated assessment tools Articles incorporating patients with coronoid fractures and other fractures of the proximal forearm were included only if clearly separated data for the patients with coronoid fractures could be extracted. Articles with inconsistencies in the presentation of their data were excluded. The electronic search through PubMed yielded 167 citations. 42 full articles were retrieved, considered for inclusion and subjected to further analysis, however only 14 papers reporting data on the management of 236 coronoid fractures, satisfied the inclusion criteria and received critical analysis. There were no randomised, controlled trials or non-randomised comparative studies and the formal meta-analysis was consequently undertaken as a systematic review of the literature. All eligible articles are presented based on the different fracture pattern characteristics. This pattern of instability is created when a combination of axial and valgus directed forces are applied to the extended elbow with the forearm in supination. It is the commonest mode of instability and results from a simple fall onto the outstretched arm or can be the consequence of a high energy impact. There is a staged disruption of elbow constraints in a lateral to medial direction referred to as the Horii circle of forces. 9 studies reporting on 175 coronoid fractures in the setting of the “terrible triad” met the inclusion criteria Ring et al. The mean follow up of the studies reviewed, ranged between 22 and 84 months. The mean flexion arc reported by each study was calculated by subtracting the mean extension lag from the mean flexion angle. It ranged between 92°and 119°. The mean rotation arc (combined pronation and supination) ranged from 100° to 137°. One or more validated assessment tools were used in each study. The Broberg and Morrey score There were 12 cases with residual instability following treatment. There were 65 cases of degenerative changes graded as grade I in 43 grade II in 14 and grade III in 7 cases according to the system by Broberg and Morrey. This pattern of injury has been recently recognised as a cause of complex elbow instability. A single study reporting on anteromedial facet fractures met the inclusion criteria. The fracture was stabilised using a precontoured anteromedial specific plate and screws in 7 cases a mini T-plate in 1, suture-only fixation in 1 and a combination of a T-plate and sutures in 1 case. The mean follow up of the patients studied was 22 months. Complications included 2 cases of instability in the 2 patients with elbow dislocation and non-operative treatment of the coronoid fracture (1 of them developed HO), 1 case of deep sepsis and chronic osteomyelitis treated with removal of the implants, antibiotic treatment and an attempted elbow arthrodesis that failed, and 2 cases of ulnar neuropathy treated non-operatively. The mean flexion arc was 125° and the mean Broberg and Morrey score Fractures of the ulna with concomitant dislocation of the proximal radioulnar joint (Monteggia fractures) have been classified by Bado Four studies reporting on 39 patients were suitable for review according to our inclusion criteria Konrad et al. Lindenhovius et al. Doornberg et al. A single study dealt with the rare combination of posterior Monteggia and ulnohumeral dislocation in 6 patients. Anterior transolecranon fracrure-dislocations occur as a result of direct impact of the flexed elbow followed by anterior displacement of the forearm. Two studies met the inclusion criteria of this review. Lindenhovius et al. Of the ten patients with anterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation reported by Doornberg et al. The coronoid process of the ulna represents a primary stabiliser of the elbow joint and loss of its integrity following fracture; can lead to instability and subsequent post-traumatic osteoarthritis. A clinical history focusing on age, gender, mechanism of injury and systemic conditions is followed by examination of the injured elbow, paying attention to the presence of palpable fracture, dislocation and instability. Plain radiographs should be followed by CT scanning in all cases so as to identify the exact location of the coronoid fracture and enhance diagnostic accuracy. Three dimensional CT has been shown to improve interobserver variability facilitating fracture classification and anticipating different ligamentous disruptions that result in distinct instability patterns. The Regan and Morrey classification The O’Driscoll classification system It can be clearly seen that all these injuries affect elbow stability; therefore surgical management is indicated in most cases aiming to repair the injured structures and initiate early motion. Early surgery is preferable as it is associated with better and more predictable functional outcomes. The lateral approach can be used in the setting of the “terrible triad” facilitating exposure to the fractured radial head, the injured lateral collateral ligaments as well as the placement of a hinged external fixator if needed. Alternatively a posterior utilitarian approach with subcutaneous lateral (through the intervals described, for radial head and LUCL management) and medial (for the coronoid) extensions can be used. The medial approach either as a separate medial incision centred over the medial epicondyle or through the medial window of the posterior global incision can be used to gain access to the coronoid. This approach is particularly useful in the surgical management of anteromedial facet fractures (O’Driscoll type II). Three different intervals have been described depending on the size of the fragment. Large coronoid fragments (O’Driscoll type III) associated with transolecranon fracture-dislocations can be appoached through the olecranon fracture in a straight-forward fashion utilising the posterior approach. An anterior approach to the coronoid between the brachioradialis and biceps tendon, followed by dissection through the fibres of the brachialis, whilst protecting the radial nerve, has also been described. Fixation of the coronoid fragment again depends on location and size. Smaller fractures associated with the “terrible triad” or varus posteromedial instability can be stabilised by “lasso-type” sutures through proximal ulnar drill holes or suture-anchors both incorporating the fragment's capsular attachment. Larger fragments that can take screws are fixed as necessary with cannulated or non-cannulated screws. It has been reported that postero-anteriorly directed screws are biomechanically superior to their antero-posteriorly directed counterparts. Large anteromedial facet fractures can be secured with precontoured or T-plates in a buttress fashion More recently several authors have reported arthroscopic-assisted techniques as an alternative in the treatment of coronoid fracture fixation with the use of sutures and screws. Stabilisation of the coronoid should be followed by treatment of the other components of each specific injury pattern. The radial head should be fixed if possible and replaced if too comminuted as restoration of radiocapitellar contact is an important secondary restraint to valgus stability of the elbow. The LCL is invariably torn in posterolateral rotatory instability patterns including the “terrible triad” and posterior Monteggia fractures (including the posterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation variant) as well as in cases of varus posteromedial subluxation. Repair of the ligament as well as the disrupted common extensor origin should be performed in all such cases. The lateral ligament complex should be re-attached to the centre of the capitellar circumference in the lateral condyle from which it is usually avulsed. Prior to closure elbow stability should be tested. In the presence of residual instability despite adequate treatment of the coronoid, radial head and LCL, one option is to repair the MCL. Another option to treat instability is the application of an articulated external fixator at the end of the operation. This should be centred over the elbow centre of rotation and stabilised with half-pins to the humeral and ulnar shafts. Humeral pins can be placed laterally or posteriorly following dissection down to bone so as to avoid injury to the radial nerve. An algorithm for the management of coronoid fractures and associated injuries based on the O’Driscoll classification system is suggested ( Post-operatively the elbow is placed in a well-padded splint with the forearm rotated in such a way so that ligamentous repairs are protected. Shoulder abduction should be avoided because of the varus stress it places on the elbow, as both “terrible triads” and anteromedial facet fractures are associated with varus instability. Functional outcomes are related to residual instability and subsequent post-traumatic osteoarthritis. Patients that did not have their coronoid fractures surgically fixed tended to have poorer results. Infection following coronoid fracture fixation is rare and can be treated with debridement and antibiotic therapy as necessary. The ulnar nerve can be injured as the result of trauma, intra-operative handling and post-operative swelling. There is however no consensus regarding performing a prophylactic in situ releases or anterior transposition of the nerve at the time of the initial surgery. Our understanding of the role of the coronoid process in elbow stability, kinematics as well as its association with complex instability patterns has greatly advanced over the past decade. It has become clear that a fracture of the coronoid, no matter how small, can adversely affect elbow stability and should be repaired. When faced with such injuries three dimensional CT scanning should be obtained so that specific fracture pattern characteristics can be recognised. In this regard the O’Driscoll classification system is very useful in guiding treatment based on fracture morphology and reliable prediction of associated soft tissue injuries. Prior to surgery, availability of fluoroscopy as well as appropriate screws, plates, radial head prostheses, suture material and external fixators should be ensured. The surgeon should be familiar with the different approaches and techniques of fracture reduction and fixation so that a staged reconstruction of all injured structures can be performed. The goal should be a stable elbow joint that can move within a functional flexion arc before leaving the operating theatre. Instability should be avoided at all costs in order to achieve an optimal outcome and minimise the risk of post-traumatic osteoarthritis. No randomised-controlled trials reporting on the management of coronoid fractures are available in the literature. Future studies should be conducted to determine optimal management strategies regarding controversial issues such as the treatment of small anteromedial facet fractures, the MCL and the benefit of prophylactic ulnar neurolysis. The authors disclose that there is no conflict of interest.