The dynamic compression responses of dry quartz sand are tested with a modified spilt Hopkinson pressure bar (MSHPB), and the quasi-static compression responses are tested for comparison with a material testing system. In the experiments, the axial stress–strain responses and the confining pressure of the jacket are both measured. Comparison of the dynamic and the quasi-static axial stress–strain curves indicate that dry quartz sand exhibits obvious strain-rate effects. The grain size distributions of the samples after dynamic and quasi-static loading are obtained with the laser diffractometry technique to interpret the rate effects. Quantitative analyses of the grain size distributions show that at the same stress level, the particle breakage extent under quasi-static loading is larger than that under dynamic loading. Moreover, the experimental and the theoretical relationships of the particle breakage extent versus the plastic work show that the energy efficiency in particle breakage is higher under quasi-static loading, which is the intrinsic cause of the strain-rate effects of brittle granular materials. Using the discrete element method (DEM), the energy distributions in the brittle granular material under confined compression are discussed. It is observed that the input work is mainly transformed into the frictional dissipation, and the frictional dissipation under dynamic loading is higher than that under quasi-static loading corresponding to the same breakage extent. The reason is that more fragmentation debris is produced during dynamic breakage of single grains, which promotes particle rearrangement and the corresponding frictional dissipation significantly.Granular materials such as sand, gravels and rock blocks are common materials in engineering applications. Investigations on their dynamic mechanical properties are of great interest to many engineering problems, including the design and assessment of dynamic structural responses ( Compression test results on soils and sand under quasi-static loading have been widely reported (  There are mainly two micro deformation mechanisms in the dry brittle granular material, i.e. particle rearrangement (including the relative contact sliding and particle rolling), and particle breakage at high pressures. The existed constitutive models for granular material are far from perfect due to the limited understanding of the micromechanics of granular materials, especially the particle breakage mechanism. Numbers of quasi-static compression experiments have showed that granular materials suffered distinct particle breakage after material yielding ( The discrete element method (DEM) is a powerful tool in investigating the compression responses and particle breakage process of brittle granular materials. DEM deals with the movement and interactions of large numbers of spherical particles as has been described by In the present study, we intend to figure out whether or not the quartz sand has strain-rate effects, and what leads to the rate effects if any. The MSHPB will firstly be adopted to investigate the dynamic responses of quartz sand. The grain size analysis will then be applied to the samples after loading, and the influence of loading rates on the particle breakage extent of granular materials is to be investigated. The energy efficiency in the particle breakage process will be discussed. With the DEM simulation, the stress distributions across the granular sample during dynamic loading will be discussed to evaluate the micro inertial effects. The intrinsic mechanisms of the breakage-energy efficiency will also be interpreted with the simulation results. Dynamic experiments are carried out with the MSHPB, and the schematic diagram of the setups is shown in The grain-size analyses of the samples are mainly carried out by the laser-diffractometry instrument Mastersizer2000. Mastersizer2000, produced by the Malvern cooperation in England, is functioned mainly based on the Mie’s light-scattering theory ( The uniformly-graded dry quartz sand is chosen as the experimental material. When preparing a sample, an aluminum block of the diameter 37 The initial grain size distribution of the granular samples is shown in Before the SHPB test, the incident and the transmission bars are aligned with the sample and are compressed into the jacket to make full contact of the bar ends with the blocks. The sample is sandwiched between the incident bar and the transmission bar. The dowels are removed before loading. In the experiment, impact of the striker on the incident bar through the pulse shaper generates an elastic incident wave propagating through the incident bar. When the incident wave travels to the interface of the incident bar and the sand sample, part of the incident wave is reflected as a reflected wave into the incident bar for the impedance mismatch of the incident bar and the sample, and the rest is transmitted as a transmitted wave into the transmission bar. The samples are compressed by the transmitted loads. The incident and the reflected waves are recorded by the strain gages on the incident bar, and the transmitted wave is recorded by the strain gages on the transmission bar. These signals are recorded by a high-speed digital oscilloscope, for example, Tektronix TDS5034B in the present study. The incident wave and the transmitted wave are used to interpret the stress–strain curves and the strain rate histories of quartz sand with the two-wave method ( As comparison, the quasi-static (strain rate 10 The stress uniformity across the sample during dynamic loading is significant to evaluate the effectiveness of the dynamic experimental results. The generally-used criterion for examining the stress uniformity in an SHPB test is to compare the stresses at the impact and the support end of the sample, as is presented in The engineering axial stress–strain curves of quartz sand obtained from quasi-static to dynamic loading are shown in The confining pressures are also measured in the experiments, and are used to interpret the stress paths of loading. The mean stress The Measurement results of the grain size distributions of the samples after loading are used to evaluate the particle breakage extent of the granular material. The results are presented in Photos of the sample configurations before and after loading are taken by the scanning electron microscope to gain a visual impression of particle breakage. Comparison of the sample configurations before loading ( To interpret the dynamic compression responses, quantitative analyses of the particle breakage extent of the samples needs to be introduced. The grain size distributions of the samples under high stress levels are presented in In the confined compression process of granular materials, the strain can be split into the elastic and the plastic part. Local gradients, After yielding, the deformation of the granular material mainly comes from particle breakage. Thus, it may be safe to assume a simple coupling relation between the breakage extent and the plastic void ratio. The stress corresponding to the zero relative breakage is the yield stress of the granular material, and can be inferred from the compression curves presented in The breakage extents of the samples under quasi-static and dynamic loading are compared with the Einav relative breakage index, and the results are presented in To unite the two influential factors of particle breakage (stress and strain), the plastic work According to the definition of the void ratio, the increment of the plastic axial strain can be expressed by the increment of the plastic void ratio as Comparison of the experimental and the theoretical breakage-dissipation relationships is shown in  The dynamic multi-scale model of the brittle granular material is created based on DEM, and it contains three scales: the micro, meso and macro scale. At the micro scale, rigid balls are taken as primary particles, deformation of which is only allowed in the contact area. The Hertz–Mindlin contact model is used to deal with the force–displacement relations on the normal and shear directions, as is shown in Eq. The configuration of the simulated sand sample is shown in To create a cluster, 57 balls are firstly packed in a hexagonal-closed-packed way to create an intact cluster ( The model parameters are selected according to the physical and mechanical properties of the quartz sand used in the experiment, and are summarized in During one-dimensional loading, the upper platen moves in a constant velocity (15 Comparison of the numerical and the experimental results is shown in  Comparison between the stress measured from the sample boundary and the stress calculated from Eq. The contact force distributions across the sample corresponding to point A and point B in For breakable granular materials, the input work is mainly transformed into three parts of energy under dynamic compression, i.e. the free energy, the kinetic energy and the plastic dissipation, including the frictional and the breakage dissipation. The energy distributions of the simulated breakable granular material are presented in Compression tests on single particles are carried out to interpret the breakage modes of the grains. The loading geometry is a cluster sandwiched between two rigid platens, as is shown in Therefore, under dynamic compression of granular materials, breakage of each grain produces more fragmentation debris and thus more degrees of freedom in the granular assembly. Contact sliding among the grains is promoted which thus results in higher frictional dissipation. Since the pure breakage dissipation is approximately the same under different loading rates, the plastic work (or input work) is thus bigger under dynamic compression which is consistent with the experimental results presented in The present paper mainly discusses the effects of strain rates on the compression responses and particle breakage process of dry quartz sand. The dynamic and quasi-static confined compression tests of the quartz sand are carried out with the MSHPB and MTS809 setups, respectively. Comparison between the dynamic and the quasi-static compression curves show that the brittle granular material investigated exhibits obvious strain-rate effects. With the laser-diffractometry instrument Mastersizer2000, the grain size distributions of the samples after loading are measured. Quantitative analyses of the grain-size-distribution curves of the samples show that the granular materials are subject to severe grain-crushing during high-pressure compression, and the breakage extent under quasi-static loading is bigger than that under dynamic loading corresponding to the same stress level. The relationship between the breakage extent and the plastic work shows that the energy efficiency in particle breakage of brittle granular materials is higher under quasi-static loading than that under dynamic loading, which is the intrinsic cause of the strain-rate effects of brittle granular materials. The theoretical relationships of the particle breakage extent versus the axial stress, and the particle breakage extent versus the plastic work are derived. The theoretical predictions are well consistent with the experimental results, and further confirm the explanations presented above. The DEM simulation is adopted to check the stress distributions across the granular samples during dynamic loading. The simulation results show that the stress distributions across the sample are macroscopically uniform, and the stress–strain curves measured from the sample boundary indeed reflect the material properties of the granular samples. The energy distributions in the brittle granular material under confined compression are calculated. The results show that the input work is mainly transformed into the frictional dissipation. Moreover, the frictional dissipation is higher under dynamic loading than that under quasi-static loading, corresponding to the same breakage extent. That explains why the breakage efficiency under quasi-static loading is higher. Compression tests on single grains show that the number of the fragmentation debris increases with the loading rates. The reason is that, under rapid loading, the grains do not have enough time to accumulate elastic energy and drive cracks to propagate along the existed micro defects, and grain crushing mostly generates in the direction of wave-propagation. Since more degrees of freedom are generated in the dynamic particle breakage process, the frictional dissipation due to particle rearrangement is thus bigger. We would like to thank Prof. Jian Zhao of Laboratory of Rock Mechanics of EPFL for extensive discussions of this manuscript. We also thank Editor and two anonymous reviewers for providing constructive comments on this manuscript. This work is supported by the In DEM, the particle motion, including translation and rotation, is controlled by the second Newtonian law ( The local damping mechanism implemented at the micro scale is critical for dynamic loading. The damping force/moment The bonding material is modeled by the parallel-bond model which is described by the elastic-brittle constitutive law. Parallel bonds can resist forces as well as the torsion and bending moments exerted by particles. For an intact parallel bond, the generalized force–displacement laws of the parallel-bond are linear-elastic and listed as The bond-breakage criterion is determined by Eq. The free energy is the total elastic energy stored in the contacts and parallel bonds. According to Eqs. The kinetic energy is calculated as The frictional dissipation is calculated as