After designing the final range of open pit mines, one of the first essential decisions to be made in the production planning framework is to determine the cutoff grade. The cutoff grade of mines, due to interconnections with technical and economic parameters, is one of the most important parameters for the design of open pit mines. Considering the fundamental role of plant cutoff grade on the economical operation of a mine, the optimal selection of this grade is of great importance. One of the main problems in mining operations is how to determine the optimal cutoff grades of ore deposits at different periods during the life of a mine, it can be considered based on one of the goals of maximizing annual profit or net present value extraction during the mining period. Despite the existence of a range of different techniques for determining the optimal cutoff grade, Lane's algorithm is usually the most widely used cutoff grade optimization technique, which is calculated taking into account the technical and economic factors of production. Cutoff grade optimization with the goal of maximizing the net present value over the years of the mine's life, as well as the correlation with the distribution of the grade and tonnage of the remaining ore, requires a long calculation process, especially for large mines. In this research, optimal cutoff grade programming based on Lane's theory and aimed at maximizing the net present value in MATLAB software (computer model) has been carried out. Mineral operations consist of three phases: mining, processing, and refining. In single-product and single-process mode, the optimum cut-off grade and the net present value of production are calculated for each year of the mine's life. After validating the outputs of the model, the implementation of the computer model based on the data of Gol Gohar iron mine No.1 in a five-year plan was carried out. The changes in optimal cutoff grade and changes in net present value from 48.65% to 18,582 billion rials in the early years of the mine increased to 40.5% and approximately 3000 billion rials at the end of the mine's life.The cutoff grade is used to clean the minerals of a deposit from waste materials. The waste material can be left in place or sent to a drainage site, but minerals are sent to the processing plant for processing and eventually a sale. Determining which material in the ore is of value and which material should be waste is one of the most important aspects of mining. This decision is made with the aid of the cutoff grade (the lowest grade minerals are extracted). The cutoff grade is considered to be the main technical and economic factor of the operation of open pit mines and processing plants and it plays a major role in decision making concerning the sustainable development of mining, the volume of extraction operations and the profitability of manufacturing operations. Considering the scope of mining activities, the price changes of minerals, and the presence of valuable metals, the cutoff grade should be determined and optimized. Optimization of the cutoff grade determines the strategies for mixing minerals in different situations in order to increase revenue and reduce the gravity of the vector, especially at high depths inevitably. Determining the cutoff grade is one of the most indispensable operations in open-pit mining, which determines whether the mine is profitable economically. Determining the cutoff grade, as one of the first decisions in the framework of the final design of an open pit mine, is one of the most important technical and economic parameters of production during the exploitation period ( There are many theories concerning the determination of optimal cutoff grade, but most of the recent research shows that determining the optimal cutoff grade with the issue of maximizing net present value is a more reliable method than other methods ( The Gol Gohar collection of irjan, which is one of the great reserves of iron ore in Iran, is located approximately in the center of the triangular between Kerman, Shiraz and Bandar Abbas. In the last few decades, optimization has focused on maximizing net present value. This requires minerals to be mined in the early years of the life of the mine and gradually mined materials with the slightly lower grade. In other words, the optimal cutoff grade will be a function of time and its value will be greater in the earlier years of the mine. To apply the 1- 2- These benefits are considered to be The present values of In these equations, Therefore, the present value at time If the expression Combining equations Since the net value of the remaining reserves at time In order to calculate the optimal cutoff grade based on the Lane method, the mineral operation is considered as a process consists of three sections of mining, production of concentrate, smelting, and refining. Each of these sections has costs and limited capacity. Meanwhile, fixed costs are also included. Operating profit ( In the above relationships, T is the length of the production period, To maximize According to According to Lane's theory, the optimal cutoff grade will match on the optimal point of one of the curves To do this, the values  In the previous stages, six cutoff grades were calculated, of which three are based on capacities, cost or price ( As stated above, the problem with determining the optimal cutoff grade of an ore deposit is finding a method that optimizes the three objective functions. Various types of optimization methods can be used for this purpose. These methods are divided into three groups: analytical methods, numerical methods, and intelligent optimization methods. Analytic methods or differential and accounting methods can be used for continuous and derivative functions. In these methods, the derivative of the function is used and the optimal point is obtained. The calculation of the numerical value of the objective function is the last step of the process. The optimal value of the objective function is calculated after determining the optimal value of the decision variables. These methods may be appropriate for certain problems, including simple deposits with low reserves. However, if the optimization problem includes target functions or ranges that are not directly dependent on variables or these complex functions, these problems cannot be solved with the use analytical methods. In numerical methods, contrary to analytical methods, the values of the objective function are calculated for different values of the variables and then the results are determined according to the optimal answer. The basis of most numerical optimization methods is the production of a sequence of approximate values. Numerical methods, in turn, are divided into two types of elimination and interpolation methods, and in intelligent methods, the search is performed for a number of points, and the value of the objective function in these points of evaluation and the more desirable point is created. As described in Section In order to evaluate the computer model, the optimum cutoff grade of an example is with following parameters is considered. In this example, the final range of 1000 tons of mineral matter with a distribution of 0–1 in the range of 0.1, with the tonnage of each group of 100 tons, Mining capacity of 100 tons per year, processing capacity of 50 tons per year, unit refining capacity of 40 lb/year, mining cost of $1 per ton, processing cost $2 per ton, refining cost $5 per lb, fixed cost of $300 per year, final selling price of the product being $25 per lb and 100% recovery, and a discount rate of 15% ( The optimal cutoff grade value was calculated using the Lane method, which means that the optimal cutoff grade at the beginning of the life of the project is 0.5% and at the end of its life it reaches 0.4%. Also, the optimal cutoff grade was obtained using a computer model, which means that the optimal cutoff grade during the life of the project is 0.5% and at the end of its life reaches 0.405%. Cutoff grade optimization in Gol Gohar iron mine No. 1 using the provided computer model is discussed. Input data is the same as mine data, as shown in As can be seen in Every year, after determining the optimum cutoff grade, the grade distribution tonnage table was also corrected. By deducting this adjusted table at the end of each year from its values at the beginning of the same year, the amount of mining from different grade intervals can be calculated. Accordingly, for this period of 5 years, mining is determined by the interval of the grade and the amount of annual waste of the Gol Gohar mine and this is shown in Additionally, by determining the amount of annual waste and the amount of mineral extraction (total extraction amounts from different grade intervals), the amount of the annual trashing ratio is determined. Due to the amount of minerals extracted each year as well as the maximum capacity of the processing plant, some minerals are accumulated annually. The provided computer model has limitations and assumptions that include: the model is based on basic metal ore, such as copper, in which the constraints are divided into three stages: extraction, processing, and refining unit (market), the deposit is assumed to be monolithic, and its linear distribution is considered. The main advantages of this model can be summarized as follows: it considers the various stages of the entire production process, and the optimal combination is selected according to the entire operation, capacity limiting the processes of extraction, treatment, and purification is effective, the tonnage-grade distribution of the deposit is effective in determining the cutoff grade, the time value of money is considered, it leads to maximizing profit or maximizing net present value. The disadvantages of this computer model include the following: its dependence on the head-to-head grade to determine the tonnage-grade distribution of ore, linear assumptions about the distribution of the grade between categories, fixed price assumptions. One of the most important technical and economic parameters for designing and planning for various years of mineral projects is cutoff grades that maximize the net present value, resulting in the optimization of the operation. The main problem in mining operations is how to determine the optimal cutoff grades of ore deposits during different periods of the life of the mine, with the goal of increasing the net present value of extraction. Considering the importance of determining and optimizing the cutoff grade of limitation in mineral activity, this paper presents a new approach to solving the Lane model, a classical method for determining the optimal cutoff grade with the goal of maximizing the present net value. To this end, the data and problem variables and the objective function of the problem were determined, and the coding of the computer model and the target function was selected using MATLAB software. Additionally, on the basis of the calculations, the cutoff grade was calculated. To do this, the problem was formulated according to the Lane model as a three-stage process including mining capacity limitations, processing plant, and market. Then, by analyzing the relationships between the parameters and the decision model variables, a computer model was developed for its solution. Finally, a numerical example was solved once using the Lane method and once using the method presented in this paper. The results of these methods were compared and their validity was evaluated using the analytical method. Comparison of the economic results obtained from the two methods shows that the net present value obtained from the optimal cutoff grade obtained in the net present value computing model is convergent. Then, using the computer model, the cutoff grade optimization amount of Gol Gohar iron mine No. 1 was estimated. Its economic results show that its optimum cutoff grade at the beginning of this five-year plan is 48.65% and in the final years reaches 40.5%. The net present value in the first year of the life of the mine is 18,582 billion rials, and as the life of the mine passes, the net present value decreases. Also, this model can be used to optimize the final range of open pit mines in the form of a production planning cycle as an offer for further research and to complete this research. Author states that there is not any conflict of interest. Author states that the research was conducted according to ethical standards. None. None. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at