Plate motion near the fault gouge layer, and the elastic interplay between the gouge layer and the plate under stick-slip conditions, is key to understanding the dynamics of sheared granular fault systems. Here, a two-dimensional implementation of the combined finite-discrete element method (FDEM), which merges the finite element method (FEM) and the discrete element method (DEM), is used to explicitly simulate a sheared granular gouge fault system. We focus on investigating the influence of normal load, driving shear velocity and plate stiffness on the velocities and displacements in the direction parallel to the shear direction (x-direction) measured at locations on the upper and lower plates just adjacent to the gouge. The simulations show that during slip phases the magnitudes of the measured velocities on the upper and lower plates are proportional to the normal load and may be inversely proportional to the square root of the plate's shear modulus. Whereas, the driving shear velocity does not show distinct influence on the measured velocities. Additionally, large slip velocities are generally associated with large macroscopic friction coefficient drops. For the models subjected to smaller normal loads, larger shear velocities and with stiffer shear plates, the same magnitude of slip velocity could cause a larger drop of macroscopic friction coefficient. During stick phases, the velocities of the upper and lower plates are respectively slightly greater and slightly smaller than half of the driving shear velocity and are both in the same direction of shear. The shear strain rate of the gouge is calculated from this velocity difference between the upper and lower plate during stick phases and thus the gouge effective shear modulus can be calculated. The results show that the gouge effective shear modulus increases proportionally with normal load, while the influence of shear velocity and plate stiffness on gouge effective shear modulus is minor. The simulations address the dynamics of a laboratory-scale fault gouge system and may aid in revealing the complexities of earthquake frictional dynamics.The nucleation and growth of earthquakes are driven by fault friction. A better understanding of friction would therefore advance dynamical modeling of earthquakes. The fault gouge, an ensemble of solid granular particles created by comminution – the fragmentation and wearing of fault blocks – plays a key role in the frictional stability of a fault ( Numerical simulation is widely used to model single fault or fault patches simply because of its ease of implementation and capability of analyzing a granular gouge fault system at a level of spatial and temporal resolution not accessible experimentally ( From a computational mechanics viewpoint, a granular fault system is essentially a combination of continua (each individual plate and particle) and discontinua (particle-particle and particle-plate interactions). Considering this, a numerical tool such as the combined finite-discrete element method (FDEM) ( In this paper, based on the FDEM simulations of a granular fault system, we explore the motion of the gouge and plates during multiple stick-slip cycles. This analysis is conducted for models featuring different plate stiffness and subjected to different normal loads and shear velocities. We first provide a brief introduction to the numerical method including the theory of FDEM and model setup. Then the motion of both the upper and lower plates in stick and slip phases in terms of velocity and displacement in directions parallel to the shear direction ( The FDEM was originally developed by Munjiza in the early 1990s to simulate the material transition from continuum to discontinuum ( The general governing equation of the FDEM is ( It is beyond the scope of the present paper to provide a complete description of the above principles; however, details of these can be found in FDEM monographs (  The granular fault gouge is consolidated by first moving the top and bottom stiff bars towards each other to ensure the particles are well contacted. After consolidation, the gouge thickness and length are approximately 11.7 mm and 500 mm, respectively. Then the top stiff bar begins shearing, i.e., displacing horizontally towards the right-hand side, with a constant horizontal velocity In the following simulations, a shear velocity The simulations use a time step of 1.0E-4 ms, and each model is run for roughly 3.0E+8 time steps with a total shearing time of approximately 30,000 ms. Each model reaches steady state after the first 3,000 ms, approximately. Because of this, in this work, the data for the analysis was collected after 5,000 ms of simulation time. The shear and normal forces between the particles and the upper and lower plates, as well as the The To further interpret plate motion, we examine the average Because the The To better demonstrate the scale of macroscopic friction coefficient drop and to facilitate comparison, we also plot in the bottom row of To examine the plate motion during stick phases, we first plot in The velocity difference between the upper and lower plate sensors, i.e., Additionally, as mentioned earlier and indicated by the green lines in In summary, the two main characteristics derived here, i.e., the Similar to the effect of normal load on plate motion during slip phases, the gouge effective shear modulus also scales with the normal load ( It is worth mentioning that the trend of plate motion (indicated by We have applied the FDEM to explicitly simulate the stick-slip induced near gouge plate motion in a sheared granular gouge fault system. In the FDEM model, the plates and particles are represented by discrete elements to track their motion and interaction with neighboring objects, and each discrete element is further discretized into finite elements to capture its deformation during shear loads. Three groups of models with a total of 12 simulations have been conducted to respectively explore the influence of normal load, shear velocity and plate stiffness on the plate motion in terms of The simulations show that for all the models, during each slip event, the bottom of the upper plate lurches to the right and the top of the lower plate resets towards the left. The During the stick phases, the The scaling analysis shows that the The authors state that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there was no financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. Institutional Support [LDRD] at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (50%) and the Office of Science, Basic Energy Science, Geosciences (50%) supported this work. Technical support and computational resources from the Los Alamos National Laboratory Institutional Computing Program are highly appreciated. Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.