Leaching experiments were carried out to identify optimal conditions for the recovery of Ni, Cu and Co from low-grade Ni–Cu sulfide tailings. Mixed nitric–sulphuric acid solutions were found to be capable of leaching these tailings at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure. Recoveries up to 91.5%, 85.0% and 54.6% for Ni, Cu and Co, respectively, were obtained under laboratory conditions. Effective removal of iron from the leaching mixture was performed by Na-jarosite precipitation and the resulting Ni, Cu and Co were enriched as a mixture of their sulfide precipitates with metal contents of 8%, 7% and 0.24%, respectively. The proposed leaching procedure is operationally simple and economical and may be applicable in the industrial recovery of valuable metals from Ni–Cu sulfide tailings.Lean ores and tailings can account for up to three-quarters of the total reserves of certain metals ( Low-grade Ni–Cu sulfide tailings were obtained from a local mining company with a composition of SiO Ni–Cu sulfide tailings were assayed using atomic absorption techniques, Fe was titrated using K A batch of solid tailing sample (20 g) was soaked with distilled water in an evaporating dish. A certain calculated volume of concentrated nitric and sulphuric acids was added successively with constant stirring. After various time intervals, the resulting slurry was transfered into a beaker, leached with distilled water (30 ml, 1.5 ml/g) three times with vigorous stirring for 30 min at room temperature, and centrifuged to give a clear leaching mixture. The solid residue was washed 3 times with small amounts of distilled water, filtered, and the resulting filtrates were combined with the above leaching mixture. The total leaching solution mixture was then filtered and its volume was measured. The metal contents of Ni, Cu, Co and Fe were analyzed immediately by standard chemical methods. A series of tests were conducted using the three-stage procedure shown in Preliminary leaching experiments (ore sample 20 g, water 0.2 ml/g ore, conc. sulphuric acid 0.4 ml/g ore, leaching for 48 h, at room temperature) indicated very low leaching yields for Ni, Cu, Co and Fe (29.3%, 28.0%, 18.2% and 49.0%, respectively) when only sulphuric acid was used without any oxidants added. To improve leaching of valuable metals from the taillings, nitric acid needed to be added. The reactions involved in this process are shown below: In order to search for optimal conditions for the leaching experiments, it was decided to perform the experiments at a constant temperature (100 °C). A series of experiments were conducted using nitric acid as oxidant under the following conditions: tailings sample 20 g, water 0.07 ml/g ore sample, nitric acid and sulphuric acid additions, leaching for 2 h at 100 °C. The leaching results obtained by varying the volume ratio of nitric acid to sulphuric acid while keeping a constant total acidity in the leaching mixture are shown in It is apparent that leaching of Ni and Co increases as more HNO A series of experiments were conducted with a fixed amount of nitric acid (ore sample 20 g, water 0.07 ml/g ore, HNO As a result of the above experiments, a mixed acid leaching system consisting of nitric acid/conc. sulphuric acid in a volume ratio of 3:1 was found to be optimal for the selective leaching of valuable metals from the Ni–Cu sulfide tailings. Further experiments have shown that reducing nitric acid ratio in the leaching system led to a lower leaching yield for Ni (< A series of experiments were also carried out under conditions simulating heap leaching. The leaching procedure was carried out essentially at room temperature for extended time intervals, under the following conditions: ore sample 20 g, water 0.07 ml/g ore sample, nitric acid 0.3 ml/g ore sample and sulphuric acid 0.1 ml/g ore sample, leaching at ambient temperature (∼ The procedure of leaching Ni–Cu sulfide tailings using mixed nitric–sulphuric acid system is as follows: a batch of 1.0 kg ore sample was soaked with distilled water (0.15 L), and treated successively with nitric acid (0.3 L) and sulphuric acid (0.11 L) for 240 h at room temperature (24 °C). The resulting acidic slurry was leached three times with distilled water and the slurry was washed with distilled water three times. The combined leaching mixture (total volume ca. 2.1 L, pH 1.8) was analyzed. The results are shown in It has been shown that jarosite precipitation is an effective method to remove excess iron from acidic leach mixtures ( The valuable metals from the above leach mixture (pH 1.9) were recovered as their metal sulfides by dropwise addition of a 10 wt.% aqueous Na It was found that the enrichment process based on sodium sulfide as the precipitating reagent was optimal for the recovery of these valuable metals. This process was operationally simple with high precipitation rate and low cost. A simple and effective method for the extraction of valuable metals has been studied experimentally by using a mixed nitric–sulphuric acid leaching system from the low-grade Ni–Cu sulfide tailings. Excellent recovery yields were achieved for Ni, Cu and Co (91.5%, 85.0% and 54.6%, respectively) at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure in 240 h. The optimal condition for this mixed acid leaching of Ni–Cu sulfide tailings is the following: tailings/nitric acid/sulphuric acid in a weight ratio of 1:0.42:0.18. The overall effectiveness of this simple leaching procedure was further demonstrated by a laboratory kilogram-scale experiment, which gave an overall recovery yield of 81.7%, 75.7% and 52.4% for Ni, Cu and Co, respectively, as their enriched sulfides (ca. 7–8% for Ni and Cu). The method described here may be applicable for the recoveries of Ni, Cu from low-grade Ni–Cu sulfide tailings on an industrial scale.