This study was set out to investigate the impacts of Combined Sewer Overflows (CSOs) on the microbiological water quality of a river used as a source of drinking water treatment plants. Escherichia coli concentrations were monitored at various stations of a river segment located in the Greater Montreal Area including two Drinking Water Intakes (DWIs) in different weather conditions (dry weather and wet weather (precipitation and snowmelt period)). Long-term monitoring data (2002–2011) at DWIs revealed good microbiological water quality with E. coli median concentrations of 20 and 30 CFU/100 mL for DWI-1 and DWI-2 respectively. However, E. coli concentration peaks reached up to 510 and 1000 CFU/100 mL for both DWIs respectively. Statistical Process Control (SPC) analysis allowed the identification of E. coli concentration peaks in almost a decade of routine monitoring data at DWIs. Almost 80% of these concentrations were linked to CSO discharges caused by precipitation exceeding 10 mm or spring snowmelt.
                  Dry weather monitoring confirmed good microbiological water quality. Wet weather monitoring showed an increase of approximately 1.5 log of E. coli concentrations at DWIs. Cumulative impacts of CSO discharges were quantified at the river center with an increase of approximately 0.5 log of E. coli concentrations. Caffeine (CAF) was tested as a potential chemical indicator of CSO discharges in the river and CAF concentrations fell within the range of previous measurements performed for surface waters in the same area (∼20 ng/L). However, no significant differences were observed between CAF concentrations in dry and wet weather, as the dilution potential of the river was too high. CSO event based monitoring demonstrated that current bi-monthly or weekly compliance monitoring at DWIs underestimate E. coli concentrations entering DWIs and thus, should not be used to quantify the risk at DWIs. High frequency event-based monitoring is a desirable approach to establish the importance and duration of E. coli peak concentrations entering DWIs.Meteorological conditions are known to affect the microbiological contamination of rivers and precipitation has previously been linked to waterborne disease outbreaks ( When river water is used as the source for drinking water production, degraded microbiological water quality can increase the likelihood of treatment breakthroughs and waterborne disease outbreaks. Microbiological water quality impairment at drinking water intakes (DWI) during wet weather combined with a malfunction of the treatment at the drinking water plant have led to waterborne disease outbreaks ( Several countries have implemented rigorous regulations on drinking water treatment based on the surveillance and removal of Wastewater micropollutants (WWMPs) have been used as tracers of sewage contamination in surface waters ( In this paper, we set out to investigate the impact of CSOs on river water quality at DWIs located in the Greater Montreal Area as CSOs in drinking water sources can have a measurable health effect ( This study was conducted in a river segment, located in the Greater Montréal area draining a watershed of approximately 146,000 km The river flow rate ranged from 473 to 2678 m WWTP-1serving approximately 7600 people and treating 2900 m A tiered sampling and analysis approach was implemented to compare long-term and short-term monitoring results and to compare various short-term monitoring strategies. A detailed description of the tiered sampling program is provided in The source water characterization of DWI-1 and DWI-2 was performed by compiling weekly A bi-monthly monitoring program was performed at the 9 sampling stations from October 2009 to March 2011 in both dry (n = 16) and wet (n = 11) weather conditions, except in winter when ice covered the river. River water grab samples were collected in both DWIs and from 3 bridges (B1-C, B2-C and B3-C) ( The short-term temporal variation of contaminant concentrations was assessed to evaluate the representativeness of grab sampling results for 9 sampling locations in the study area. Sampling was performed once in dry weather conditions over the course of 6 h at the 2 DWIs and at the bridges (total of 9 sampling stations), every 5 min during 30 min and then each 30 min for the next 6 h (n = 18). A total of 5 specific CSO events were monitored in the river was performed by sampling at bridges B2 and B3 while also monitoring the water quality of a frequently discharging CSO at outfall OA ( During each sampling campaign, 1-L grab samples were collected at the same depth (approximately 50 cm below the water surface to avoid collecting the surface microlayer) using a plunger equipped with autoclaved bottles. Samples were stored in 250 mL pre-autoclaved in polypropylene bottles in the dark at 4 °C. Microbiological analyses were performed within 6 h after sample collection. For CAF analysis, a sample volume of 40 mL was immediately filtered through 0.45 μm mixed cellulose membranes (Millipore, MA, USA) in pre-cleaned glass bottles (12 h-washing in 25% HCl solution followed by 5 h in oven at 500 °C) and acidified at pH 2 using a formic acid solution (purity 98%) (Fluka Analytical, SIGMA-ALDRICH, Oakville, ON, CA) in order to avoid degradation. The CAF concentration measurements were performed within 3 weeks. A volume of 100 mL were used to enumerate Statistics, such as the determination of coefficients of variations (CVs), were performed in Statistica Version 12.5 (Statsoft, OK, USA). A Statistical Process Control (SPC) analysis was used as a tool to interpret As contaminant concentrations measured in rivers were neither normally nor log-normally distributed, non-parametric statistical analyses using Spearman's rank correlation and Kruskal Wallis ANOVA tests were performed. Differences between concentrations in dry and wet weather were considered significant if p < 0.05, unless stated otherwise. From 2002 to 2011, The data collected at both DWIs were used to investigate seasonal variation of fecal contamination. Seasonal  In the case of the studied river stretch where there is very limited input of treated wastewaters, the most probable hypothesis to explain the observed peaks of The The SPC was also used as a statistical tool to assess the variability of Short-term monitoring (over a 6-h period in dry weather conditions) was performed once at each of the 9 sampling stations in the river. No trend of The With regards to transversal sampling at bridge B2, No significant difference of CAF median concentrations was observed between the river center and both river banks. CAF median concentrations ranged from 15.6 ng CAF/L to 22.8 ng CAF/L (  No significant variations of CAF concentrations were observed between dry and wet weather conditions at the river center as well as at river shores ( CSO discharges were monitored during the snowmelt period and in summer at the sewage overflow outfall OA. The results of event-based monitoring of The differences of Numerous studies have shown the impact of CSOs on the microbiological quality of receiving rivers (  As the main objective of monitoring fecal indicators at the water intakes is to evaluate periods of recurring and peak vulnerability to fecal contamination, it is paramount to understand whether long term bi-weekly or weekly sampling is capable of detecting prolonged periods of peak contamination. Our results show that (1) routine sampling, i.e. every week for 10 years (2) bi-monthly Short-time high frequency compliance monitoring, such as every hour during CSO discharges, is challenging to implement at DWIs. From a practical perspective, As the revised regulation of the LT2ESWTR ( The different  Long-term and dry weather monitoring generally demonstrated a good microbiological river water quality. However, Bi-monthly monitoring program over a period of one year identified significant increases of CAF concentrations were correlated with Wet-weather monitoring showed that Current This work was funded by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at