This chapter focuses on the discovery of vitamin D and its uses. It begins with a critical description of the early nutritional views on vitamins. Following this, it presents the experiment carried out by McCollum and Osborne and Mendel, which lead to the discovery of Vitamin A and B Complex. From irradiation of mixtures of plant sterols, Windaus and colleagues isolated a material that was active in healing rickets. This substance was called “vitamin D1,” but its structure was not determined. Vitamin D1 proved to be an adduct of tachysterol and vitamin D2, and thus vitamin D1 was actually an error in identification. Besides bone mineralization, the earliest discovered function of vitamin D is its important role in the absorption and utilization of calcium. For many years, investigators have attempted to show that vitamin D plays a role directly on the mineralization process of the skeleton. Experiments have shown that vitamin D does not play a significant role in the actual mineralization process of the skeleton but that the failure to mineralize the skeleton in vitamin D deficiency is due to inadequate levels of calcium and phosphorus in the plasma. Thus, the action of vitamin D in mineralizing the skeleton and in preventing hypocalcemic tetany is the elevation of plasma calcium and phosphorus. These discoveries finally laid to rest the concept of a role of vitamin D in mineralization. Other reports revealed that microorganic nutrients might be present. The development of scurvy in mariners was a common problem. This disease was prevented by the consumption of limes on British ships (hence, the term “Limey” to describe British sailors) and sauerkraut and fruits on other ships. This led Holst and Frohlich to conclude that scurvy could be prevented by a nutrient present in these foods A key experiment demonstrating essential micronutrients was one carried out at the Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station, engineered by Stephen Moulton Babcock and carried out by E. B. Hart supported by McCollum and Steenbock The conclusion of the Wisconsin Experiment Station study was that there are unknown nutrients present in corn and not found in wheat that are essential for life and reproduction. This led E. B. Hart, Chairman of Biochemistry at Wisconsin, to conceive that a search for these nutrients must begin. Professor McCollum The disease rickets was very likely known in antiquity but was described in the fifteenth century as revealed by later writings. Whistler first provided a clear description of rickets in which the skeleton was poorly mineralized and deformed With the discovery of the vitamins, Sir Edward Mellanby in Great Britain began to reason that rickets might also be a disease caused by a dietary deficiency McCollum, who had moved to Johns Hopkins from Wisconsin, continued his experiments on the fat-soluble materials. McCollum used aeration and heating of cod liver oil to destroy the vitamin A activity or the ability to support growth and to prevent xerophthalmia At the same time that Sir Edward Mellanby was carrying out the experiments in dogs, Huldshinsky Steenbock and Hart had noted the importance of sunlight in restoring positive calcium balance in goats From irradiation of mixtures of plant sterols, Windaus and colleagues isolated a material that was active in healing rickets Windaus’ group provided chemical syntheses of the vitamin D compounds, confirming their structures and thus ending the era of the isolation and identification of nutritional forms of vitamin D and making them available for the treatment of disease. Although Windaus received the 1928 Nobel Prize in chemistry, it was for his general work on steroids. Besides bone mineralization, the earliest discovered function of vitamin D is its important role in the absorption and utilization of calcium. The first report of this finding was in the early 1920s by Orr and colleagues For many years, investigators have attempted to show that vitamin D plays a role directly on the mineralization process of the skeleton. However, early work by Howland and Kramer A final site of vitamin D action to elevate plasma calcium is in the distal renal tubule. Although experiments were suggestive of a role for vitamin D in increasing renal tubule reabsorption of calcium, a clear demonstration of this did not occur until the late 1980s at the hands of Yamamoto et al. With discovery of the receptor for the vitamin D hormone (described below) came the surprising result that this receptor could be found in a variety of tissues not previously appreciated as targets of vitamin D action. It localizes in the distal renal tubule cells, enterocytes of the small intestine, bone lining cells, and osteoblasts in keeping with its known role in calcium metabolism The true pioneer of vitamin D metabolism was Egan Kodicek working at the Dunn Nutritional Laboratory in Cambridge. Kodicek used a bioassay at first to study the fate of the vitamin D molecule and found that much vitamin D was converted to biologically inactive products Professor Kodicek then began to synthesize radiolabeled vitamin D By 1968, the first active metabolite of vitamin D was isolated in pure form and chemically identified as 25-hydroxyvitamin D Proof that 1,25(OH) Immediately after the identification of 1,25(OH) The next important step was the demonstration that it is parathyroid hormone that activates 1α-hydroxylation of 25(OH)D Hypophosphatemia also stimulates 1α-hydroxylation During the course of identification of 1,25(OH) The 24-hydroxylase pathway is the degradative pathway of vitamin D metabolism and is induced by 1,25(OH) The exact gene(s) and enzyme(s) responsible for the initial 25-hydroxylase step remain to be identified, although CYP2R1 is the most likely candidate Zull and colleagues provided evidence that the function of vitamin D is blocked by transcription and protein synthesis inhibitors Cloning of the cDNAs encoding the vitamin D receptor in human and mouse permitted the isolation of the gene encoding the vitamin D receptor From a historical point of view, one of the most important discoveries was vitamin D-dependency rickets type II However, the discoveries of vitamin D-responsive elements in the osteocalcin, osteopontin, preproparathyroid, and 24-OHase genes represent important historical developments Much remains to be discovered regarding the mechanisms through which 1,25(OH) This work was supported by a fund from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation.