Measurements and observations of the phase split occurring at a small diameter vertical T-junction are reported. Time varying, void fraction data obtained using ring-type conductance probes have been analysed to yield valuable information regarding the effect of the junction on flow behaviour. It is shown through comparisons with the work of Stacey et al. [2000. The split of annular two-phase flow at a small diameter T-junction. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 26, 845–856] in a horizontal T-junction of a similar size that the orientation of the junction has no influence on the flow split. This behaviour is attributed to the absence of flooding and is corroborated by our high-speed images. Subsequently, better prediction of the phase split is obtained when the model of Azzopardi [1988. Measurements and observations of the split of annular flow at a vertical T-junction. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 14, 701–710] is modified to account for the absence of flooding. Regarding flow transitions, the methods by Barnea et al. [1983. Flow pattern in horizontal and vertical two-phase flow in small diameter pipes. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 61, 617–620] and Omebere-Iyari et al. [2005. Flow patterns for gas/liquid flow in small diameter tubes. Ninth UK National Heat Transfer Conference, Manchester, UK, 5–6 September] are found to give good predictions of the exit flow patterns in the horizontal side arm and vertical run arm, respectively.Junctions are an often necessary feature of many pipeline or pipework systems. For single-phase flows, there are empirical equations which enable engineers to undertake designs. In the case of two-phase flows, the larger number of variables and complicating factors in the partition and mixing of phases presents many challenges. A common characteristic of two-phase flows through T-junctions is the maldistribution of the phases between the outlets. The occurrence of this maldistribution in equipment downstream of the junction can constitute a major problem in operation and control of the process and power industries as well as in oil and gas production. On a more positive note, the maldistribution of phases that occurs at a T-junction can be used for phase separation in the processing industry. Currently, the large thick-walled vessels being used as separators are expensive to build and the large inventory of flammable material that is contained in such vessels present some challenges to safe operation. Hence, the partial separation of gas–liquid mixtures possible by using a T-junction will help reduce the load on the main separator, possibly leading to smaller units. A survey of the existing literature shows that most of the previous work on dividing two-phase flow at a T-junction has been for sizes greater than 30 Various models have been developed for predicting the flow behaviour at a T-junction. The model by The main aim of this study therefore, is to conduct an experimental investigation on the phase split occurring at a 5 The experimental facility used by Air was drawn from the compressed air main and supplied to the mixing unit where it combines with water drawn from a storage tank by means of a centrifugal pump. The mixing unit consisted of an annular section surrounding a porous wall. Water enters the main pipe from the periphery to form a film on the wall whilst the air passes along the middle. Inflow of air and water are controlled using separate banks of calibrated rotameters. Downstream of the mixer, the two phases flow vertically upward along a 1.3 The T-junction is smoothly machined inside a rectangular block of acrylic resin. The transparent block facilitates visualisation while the flat external surface minimises the distortion due to refraction. Beyond the T-junction, the two-phase flow stream in the run arm travels vertically upwards for 1.42 The pressure and phase split at the T-junction is controlled using gate valves positioned at the inlet to each separator. After separation, the liquid is collected from the bottom of each separator and air passes out through a pipe at the top. The exit liquid could either be recycled or taken off to be measured. During measurements, water is diverted into a measuring cylinder where the volumetric flow rate was measured for a sufficiently long time to minimise uncertainty of measurement. Air is metered at the top of a pipe using a calibrated wet gas flow meter which allowed the flow rates to be measured over a period of time. The liquid level in the separator vessels were kept constant to ensure accuracy. The pulsations associated with slug flow meant rotameters would be inappropriate because of the large oscillations in gas flow rate. Time varying, cross-section averaged void fractions were measured using eight identical conductance probes placed along the test section. The probes consist of two stainless steel ring electrodes mounted in acrylic resin housing. They were carefully manufactured so that the electrodes had the same diameter as the test section. A conductance probe is placed at 0.07 The conductance technique has been chosen to measure void fraction because water is an electrical conductor, albeit a poor one, while air is essentially resistive. For each test, the flow rates emerging from both the run and side arms out of the T-junction were recorded, and the fraction of the air and water flow taken off through the side arm was calculated. Furthermore, mass balances were carried out between the inlet and outlet flows. For water and air, all reported data agree within To ascertain the observed flow patterns, the experimental data have been compared to the flow pattern map by The measurements of the phase splits taken at gas superficial velocities of 10.8–14.6 The effect of the inlet gas flow rate is highlighted in The effect of the inlet liquid flow rate is shown in  The flow pattern on approaching the T-junction is annular for the experiments discussed in The flow patterns observed in the horizontal side arm and vertical run arm are compared to the respective flow pattern maps by  The models by At the respective liquid and gas velocities of 0.02 and 14 From the above, the following conclusions can be drawn: There is little effect of the inlet gas flow rate on flow split at a 0.005 The inlet liquid flow rate affects the flow split for conditions where entrainment decreases significantly and the increased liquid film leads to more liquid being taken off. Probability density function (PDF) plots are a useful means for studying the void fraction distribution for two-phase flow in a T-junction. Good predictions of the flow patterns for the two-phase mixture flow exiting the horizontal side and vertical run arms of a small T-junction are obtained using the flow pattern maps by Comparisons with phase split data from a similar sized horizontal T-junction for different inlet flow regimes shows little variation suggesting that gravity has little effect on the flow split in a small junction. The model of This work has been undertaken within the Joint Project on Transient Multiphase Flows. The author(s) wish to acknowledge the contributions made to this project by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), the Department of Trade and Industry and the following: Advantica; AspenTech; BP Exploration; Chevron; ConocoPhillips; ENI; ExxonMobil; FEESA; Granherne/Subsea7; Institutt for Energiteknikk; Institut Français du Pétrole; Norsk Hydro; Petrobras, Scandpower; Shell; SINTEF; Statoil and TOTAL. The author(s) wish to express their sincere gratitude for this support.