Abstract
                  Upper cervical fractures of the axis and atlas (C1 and C2, respectively) typically occur in children and in the elderly population. The anatomic characteristics of the craniocervical junction allows for unique fracture patterns. Jefferson fractures of the atlas are the classic fracture presentation of the C1 vertebrae. Odontoid fractures and traumatic spondylolisthesis of the axis are the most commonly reported fractures of the C2 vertebrae. This chapter will review the anatomy, injury mechanisms, and fracture types seen in the C1 and C2 vertebrae. In addition, several nonoperative and operative treatment options, supported by the literature, will be discussed.Fractures of the axis and atlas are most often encountered in children and in those aged >60. The osseoligamentous complex that protects the upper cervical spine is anatomically and functionally distinct from those of the subaxial cervical spine. This helps explain the specific modes of injury encountered with fractures in these vertebrae. Injuries to the C1-C2 complex account for up to 70% of all cervical spine trauma in patients older than 60 years, with 57% of these injuries occurring in the odontoid. Improvements in emergency and trauma care in stabilizing trauma victims, and in imaging modalities that can better detect these injuries have greatly decreased mortality and enhanced overall outcome. When applicable, advances in internal fixation techniques have greatly improved overall functional outcomes allowing earlier mobilization and rehabilitation. Upwards of 50% of motion occurs in the upper cervical spine, consisting of the occiput, atlas, and axis. The vertebral artery enters C1 through the foramen transversarium, then crosses along the posterior arch of the atlas thinning it at that location. The vertebral artery may be injured in C1 and C2 fractures ( As there are no disks between the occiput and C1 and between C1 and C2, the upper cervical spine relies heavily on its ligamentous structures for stability. The primary stabilizers of the C1-C2 articulation are the cruciate ligament, the transverse atlantal ligament, the apical ligament, and the alar ligaments ( Muscular attachments also play a stabilizing role in the upper cervical spine. As previously discussed, the superior oblique portion of the longus colli attaches to the anterior and inferior arch of C1. The rectus capitis lateralis and medialis pass from the transverse process of C1 to the lateral and anterior portions of the foramen magnum. The rectus capitis posterior passes from the posterior arch of C1 to the occiput. The superior oblique muscle laterally traverses from the lateral aspect of the ring of the atlas to the posterior surface of the skull, and the inferior oblique muscles pass from C2 to the lateral aspect of the C1 ring. Anatomically, the axis (C2 vertebrae) is distinct from the atlas and the subaxial vertebrae. Injuries to the anterior portion of C2 are included in upper cervical injuries, and those in the C2-C3 facet joints have features similar to subaxial cervical spine injuries. The most unique anatomic characteristic of the axis is the presence of the dens or odontoid process. The dens results from fusion of the axis with the remnant of the vertebral body of the atlas. Its main function is to transition between the upper and lower portions of the cervical spine, which is facilitated by its articulating facets. The superior facets are anterior and lateral, and the inferior facets are posterior. The C2 neural arch is divided into the pedicle, the pars interarticularis, and the lamina. The vertebral artery passes through the foramen transversarium in the superolateral lateral mass of C2, which is adjacent to the pars. Although often interchanged, the pedicle and pars of C2 are distinct structures. The pedicle forms a posterolateral extension of the vertebral body connecting the body to the lateral mass. The pars is a narrow segment of bone that bridges the superior facet with the inferior facet. Because of the spatial separation of the facets, the pars experiences a significant bending force, making it susceptible to injury. The C1-C2 articulation is highly congruent, and its joint capsules may also be secondary stabilizers of the craniocervical junction. The odontoid gets its blood supply from the anterior and posterior ascending arteries as well as the cleft perforating artery. Through their anastomoses, they form an extensive vascular network surrounding the odontoid but create a watershed area at its base. A higher rate of nonunions noted with odontoid base fractures is because of this watershed area. Fractures of the atlas were initially described in 1822 by Sir Astley Cooper. Most atlas fractures are thought to occur through axial load. Axial loading drives the occipital condyles distally into the atlas, fracturing the ring of C1 and displacing the lateral masses outward. Punjabi and Sandler et al demonstrated that in extension, significantly lower levels of axial load are required to produce an atlas fracture. The anatomic location of the fracture and amount of displacement form the classification system. Injuries observed are posterior arch fractures, lateral mass fractures, burst fractures (Jefferson fracture), avulsion fractures from the anterior arch of C1, transverse process fractures, anterior arch fractures, and comminuted unilateral intra-articular lateral mass fractures. The most common is the posterior arch fracture ( Lateral mass fractures ( A 4-part burst fracture or Jefferson fracture is the classic fracture of the atlas vertebrae. It typically involves 2 fractures in the anterior arch and 2 fractures in the posterior arch ( Anterior arch fractures of C1 typically occur in the axial plane through the tubercle and represent an avulsion of the longus colli muscle ( Transverse process fracture ( Fractures of the atlas are often associated with other cervical spine injuries with prevalence ranging from 30% to 70%. Patients typically present with a history of trauma, suboccipital headache, and neck pain or stiffness. They typically occur in young adults because of motor vehicle accidents, diving injuries, or direct blows to the head. Neurologic symptoms are rare because these injuries typically expand the ring of C1 in an area where the spinal canal is already quite large. Patients should be immobilized in a cervical collar in neutral alignment. Neurologic examination should include the cranial nerves as there have been documented cranial nerve injuries with atlas fractures. Diagnostic evaluation can consist of standard radiographs of the cervical spine, including the anteroposterior, lateral, and open-mouth odontoid view. The lateral view may identify a posterior or anterior arch fracture and an increase in the prevertebral soft-tissue shadow may also indicate injury. An open-mouth odontoid view can help identify the presence of a lateral mass or Jefferson fracture. Computed tomography (CT) scanning with sagittal and coronal reconstruction has largely replaced radiographs in assessing the cervical spine in the trauma patient because of accuracy and fracture resolution. This is especially true in the upper cervical spine. Spence et al Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is also being used with more frequency to assess cervical spine injuries. In patients with atlas fractures, it can help identify injury to the transverse ligament. CT or MRI angiography can be used to evaluate for vertebral artery injury in the setting of significant neurological deficit or injury to the transverse foramen. The primary goals of treatment for atlas fractures are to ensure fracture healing while achieving patient comfort, protecting from further injury, and treating any other potential associated injuries. Frequently, it is the associated cervical spine injury that dictates the definitive treatment of the atlas fracture. The most difficult limitation to treatment of atlas fractures is the lack of prospective studies. Most treatment recommendations are made from retrospective reviews and case series with, in some cases, poor understanding of long-term consequences. Isolated posterior or anterior arch fractures can be treated with a rigid cervical collar for 8-12 weeks. These fractures are typically stable, as no major ligamentous disruption has occurred. Callus is evident on plain radiographs in 2-3 months. Avulsion fractures of the anterior ring or transverse process fractures are treated symptomatically with a cervical collar. These are stable injuries. Lateral mass fractures of the atlas that are minimally displaced can be treated in a rigid cervical collar for 8-12 weeks. Radiographic follow-up should also assess C1-C2 stability with lateral flexion-extension images. Comminuted or significantly displaced lateral mass fractures can be treated with either a rigid cervical orthosis or traction reduction followed by a halo vest. Jefferson burst fractures can be treated with rigid cervical collar, halo immobilization, internal fixation (osteosynthesis), or C1-C2 fusion. Treatment is determined by the degree of displacement and presence of transverse ligament injury. Non- or minimally displaced fractures can be managed in a collar or halo vest for 3 months after injury. It is theorized that the intact transverse ligament maintains the C1-C2 relationship even in minimally displaced fractures. Incongruency of the occiput-C1 or C1-C2 joints may lead to joint arthrosis that could restrict motion or lead to axial neck pain. Unstable Jefferson fractures, those with >8.1 mm of lateral mass overhang indicating transverse ligament injury, have a worse prognosis. The first method of treatment is in a halo vest for 12 weeks followed by lateral flexion-extension radiographs of the cervical spine to assess C1-C2 stability. If instability is noted, C1-C2 fusion is recommended. The goal of the halo vest is to maintain alignment not reduction. Even when used with short-term traction, on removal of traction and placement in the vest, fracture reduction is lost. Indications for surgery include correction of malalignment and improvement of C1-C2 joint congruency to prevent future degenerative disease, and avoidance of a prolonged immobilization as part of the fracture management. This is typically done by performing an immediate C1-C2 arthrodesis. For a severely displaced Jefferson fracture, one may need to extend the arthrodesis to include the occiput. This should be avoided if possible due to the significant motion limitations that results after fusion. There are several techniques that can accomplish C1-C2 fusion. The Magerl technique of transarticular screw fixation ( C1-C2 fusion can also be achieved by C1 lateral mass and C2 pedicle or pars screws. This technique allows for segmental fixation that can assist in lateral mass reduction directly and can avoid elevated risk to the vertebral artery. Ruf et al Selection of treatment for an atlas fracture is determined by fracture stability, patient comorbidities, concurrent injuries, and the effect of treatment on the ability to mobilize the patient. Regardless of form of treatment, C1-C2 stability should be assessed and monitored. Management of these fractures is evolving, and prospective studies are needed to determine the best treatment algorithms. Odontoid fractures account for 9%-15% of cervical spine fractures in the adult population. Odontoid fractures are generally classified on radiographic assessment using the Anderson and D'Alonzo Neck pain is the most common clinical finding in patients with odontoid fractures. This can radiate in the distribution of the greater occipital nerve. Spinal cord injuries are uncommon, ranging from 2% to 27% based on multiple reports. Diagnostic evaluation consists of 3 radiographic views of the cervical spine, anteroposterior, lateral, and open-mouth odontoid. As previously discussed, CT has largely replaced radiographs in the initial work-up of trauma patients. This is especially true for upper-cervical injury as the craniocervical junction can be obscured by surrounding anatomy. MRI is considered if there is neurologic deficit. Some have recommended obtaining an MRI to rule out transverse ligament injury. As in atlas fractures, the primary goals of treatment for odontoid fractures are to ensure fracture healing while maintaining patient comfort. Treatment options for odontoid fractures include external immobilization, odontoid screw fixation, and posterior C1-C2 arthrodesis. Historically, external immobilization was used to treat most fractures, with surgery reserved for those that failed this treatment. As more research has been published on this injury, in addition to improved surgical methods, surgical treatment is being performed more frequently for primary treatment in specific types of odontoid fractures. External immobilization options include use of a cervical collar or halo vest immobilization. In general, some inherent stability in the fracture pattern must be present to effectively treat odontoid fractures with external immobilization. This is because even the use of a halo doesn't completely eliminate mobility with some showing that only 75% of normal atlantoaxial motion is eliminated. Type II odontoid fractures are generally more difficult to treat with external immobilization because of higher nonunion rates. Authors have reported mixed results with use of cervical collar alone and have advocated halo immobilization or surgical intervention for these injuries. Management of odontoid fractures in the elderly patients has been the subject of several recent publications. Multiple authors have shown a higher rate of complications and morbidity using halo immobilization in elderly patients, including pneumonia, wound infection, and even death. If surgery is deemed necessary, one option in the acute treatment of odontoid fractures is odontoid screw fixation initially popularized by Bohler The other surgical option in the management of odontoid fractures is by posterior C1-C2 arthrodesis. As the atlantoaxial articulation mobility is eliminated, patients will lose approximately 50% of rotatory motion. C1-C2 arthrodesis should be considered when external immobilization is ineffective or intolerable, and anterior odontoid screw fixation is inappropriate or insufficient. Traditional C1-C2 fixation constructs were primarily posterior wire based as described by Gallie In summary, type II odontoid fractures present the most controversy and difficulty in management. Many factors play a role in treatment choice, including physician preference and comfort level, patient comorbidities, fracture pattern, and patient preference. Further study will help in better decision making and patient counseling. Houghton Effendi et al Levine and Edwards Hangman's fractures most commonly occur secondary to motor vehicle accidents, although other causes include diving accidents and falls. These injuries can be associated with facial trauma, as well as chest and extremity trauma because of the high-velocity mechanism of injury. Concomitant cervical fractures occur in 7%-33% of injuries, Despite the association with judicial hanging, traumatic spondylolisthesis of the axis rarely results in neurologic injury. Neurologic injury is more likely with type III than type I or II injuries, due to the facet dislocation element of the injury pattern. Atypical hangman's, or type IA, fractures theoretically may be associated with a higher incidence of neurologic injury, as the posterior vertebral body can retrolisthese compressing the spinal cord. As previously discussed, upper cervical injuries are best assessed with CT scan. Care should be taken to rule out other concomitant cervical fractures or dislocations. If CT reconstructions demonstrate a fracture that extends into the vertebral foramen, CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography should be obtained to rule out vertebral artery injury. This is especially important, as it may dictate the surgical technique chosen to address the fracture if surgery is indicated. A technique with a lower chance of potential vertebral artery injury should be selected. MRI should be obtained if neurologic injury is present. It can also be useful to help distinguish between type II, IIA, and type III injuries by evaluating the integrity of the C2-C3 disk. It should also be obtained before closed reduction if the patient is not conscious or is noncompliant in neurologic examination. The goals of treatment for traumatic spondylolisthesis of the axis fractures are to obtain healing of the fracture with stability and to maintain patient mobility. Treatment options range from external immobilization in a rigid cervical collar to halo traction or surgery. In 2002, the American Association of Neurologic Surgeons and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons published guidelines for the management of acute cervical spine and spinal cord injuries Type I fractures are considered stable injuries, and treatment can be effective with rigid collar cervical immobilization without need for a halo. Atypical or IA fractures can also be treated with cervical immobilization if neurologically intact. As the fracture line passes through the cancellous vertebral body, union rates are high. If neurologic injury or instability is present, reduction of the fracture with traction and possible surgical intervention may be necessary. Levine and Edwards Type II fractures can be more difficult to manage. Early studies evaluated the results of treatment with 6 weeks of cervical traction followed by 2-3 months of cervical immobilization. The most common long-term complication of hangman's fractures is degeneration of the C2-C3 facet joint. This is most commonly observed in type I injuries where 30% of patients develop symptoms of degeneration. Type II fractures more commonly develop spontaneous ankylosis of the C2-C3 facet joints. In summary, traumatic spondylolisthesis of the axis fractures usually occurs because of high-speed motor vehicle accidents and rarely results in neurologic injury. Treatment of these injuries is dependent on the displacement and the prognosis for treatment, and recovery is good. Upper cervical fractures involving the axis and atlas are relatively common injuries, especially in the elderly population. In the younger population, these injuries are associated with high-energy mechanisms of injury and with concomitant cervical and other traumatic injuries. Appropriate evaluation of the injury, most effectively done with CT imaging, is important. If stable, these injuries are successfully treated conservatively with many fractures adequately immobilized with a rigid cervical collar. If unstable, or if patient factors dictate, surgical intervention may be necessary. Teaching for K2M.