Molecular dynamic simulations were used to examine the initial stages of solvent–coal interactions during solvent swelling. Large-scale (>10,000 atoms) vitrinite-rich Waterberg and inertinite-rich Highveld coal models used in this study were previously constructed. Isothermal–isobaric molecular dynamics simulated the experimental conditions used for the solvent swelling of these coals. Partially solvent swollen structures were constructed by the addition of solvent molecules to the original coal molecules using an amorphous building approach. The various solvated coal models were simulated using pyridine, N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) and CS2/NMP solvents. The changes in bonding and nonbonding energies due to solvent swelling were determined by comparing original coal models to corresponding swollen models. Simulation studies showed that coal–coal nonbonding interactions changed due to disruption of the van der Waals interaction energies. The distributions of hydrogen bonds were calculated and provided a method to evaluate solvent–coal hydrogen interactions. It was found that hydroxyl groups associated with the bituminous coal structure are the dominating hydrogen bond donor in solvent interaction. Therefore, the contributions of nonbonding interactions in coal play an important role during coal–solvent swelling. Molecular modeling and simulation is a useful tool to probe these changes in energies and nonbonding interactions in coal with various solvents.Bituminous coals have a macromolecular network structure that swell in organic solvents. The extent of solvent swelling is dependent on various factors, such as coal rank, solvent molecule size, solvent molecule shape (steric parameters) and coal pretreatment (e.g. pre-extraction) Limited experimental methods exist that can directly probe the type and distribution of nonbonding interactions in coal. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is a method that can be used to study the type and distribution of hydrogen bonds present in coal Molecular modeling is a tool that can be used to probe the type, distribution and influence of nonbonding interactions in coal. Depending on the type of force field, the van der Waals, electrostatic and hydrogen bonding energies can be calculated. Carlson constructed three-dimensional molecular structures using the models constructed by Given The goal of this paper was to probe the influence of nonbonding interactions during solvent swelling using molecular dynamics simulation. Vitrinite-rich and inertinite-rich coals were characterized and previously constructed molecular models were used in the current study Run-of-mine inertinite-rich Highveld coal and commercial cleaned (density separated) Waterberg coal were collected in South Africa. Mean-maximum vitrinite reflectance and maceral composition were previously conducted and the results are presented elsewhere Demineralized coal samples (0.03 Molecular models for vitrinite-rich Waterberg and inertinite-rich Highveld were constructed from various analytical data. The structural characterization The “solvent-swelled” model was constructed with an initial density of 0.5 To examine the initial stages of solvent–coal interactions, solvation and molecular dynamics simulations were used. A solvent box was created using Materials Studio with the coal model centrally placed and then geometry-optimized to constant density. To ensure that the coal model interacted only with the surrounding solvent, a solvent layer of ~ Previous studies found that Waterberg coal was vitrinite-rich (92%) and Highveld was inertinite-rich (88%) The vitrinite-rich coal model consisted of 16,739 atoms and a complex assemblage of 170 unique molecules and the inertinite-rich coal model consisted of 14,242 atoms and 158 unique molecules The inertinite-rich Highveld model was more aromatic than the vitrinite-rich Waterberg model (aromaticity of 75% for vitrinite-rich model and 88% for inertinite-rich model). The bridgehead values (interior, non-protonated aromatic carbons) are an indication of the polycondenced nature of the aromatic structures. The inertinite-rich coal model was more polycondenced, due to a greater bridgehead value (28% for vitrinite-rich model and 34% for inertinite-rich model). The vitrinite-rich coal model was more aliphatic and contained more aliphatic side chains and longer aliphatic crosslinks. Both models contain various nitrogen and sulfur heteroatoms and considerable amounts of oxygen functionality. The oxygen functionally was in the form of hydroxyl groups, aliphatic ethers, phenolic ethers, and to a lesser extent carboxylic acids. Previous work found that these coals, although different in maceral composition, H/C ratio, aromaticity and depositional basin, are similar in their base structural composition Solvation and molecular dynamics simulations were used to examine the initial stages of solvent–coal interactions. Isothermal–isobaric molecular dynamics (NPT) were chosen to simulate the experimental conditions used for the solvent swelling of the coal models. A solvent box was created using Materials Studio with the coal model centrally placed and a solvent layer ~ The various solvated coal models were simulated (using pyridine, NMP and CS To further probe the contribution of nonbonding energies during coal–solvent swelling, the changes in bonding and nonbonding energies due to solvent swelling were determined by comparing original coal models to corresponding swelled models. Materials Studio Amorphous Builder was used to construct “solvent-swelled models” by adding 500 solvent molecules to the individual coal molecules prior to three-dimensional model construction ( Adding 500 solvent molecules ensured that the models were small enough for simulations over short time scales (picoseconds). The greater the number of molecules added to the coal model, the longer the simulation times must be to reach simulation equilibrium. It is noted that the models are not swelled at equilibrium and that the observed behavior during simulation are a “snapshot” of swelling (behavior observed mid-swelling). An example of a pyridine-swelled inertinite-rich structure is shown in It was observed by visual inspection that the solvent molecules were uniformly distributed throughout the molecular model ( In both models the valence energy increased with solvent addition, which is to be expected with the addition of solvent covalent bonds to the system. The total energy changes were minimal, except for CS There were no significant changes in the hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interaction energies ( A Perl script was developed to quantify and type the hydrogen bonds present in each molecular model. This was conducted to further investigate hydrogen bond distribution in the swelled models. The type and distribution of hydrogen bonds for the original models and corresponding solvent-treated models were calculated and are shown in It is again noted that the current results are based on models that are swelled to approximately 30 to 50% swelling extent; therefore these results do not represent hydrogen bonding at equilibrium swelling. The two models exhibited the same trends in hydrogen bonding types and distribution. In the original coal models the O―H The objective of this study was to determine if structurally representative coal models would exhibit comparable solvent behavior (solvent swelling extent) to that of the original coals. Standard molecular dynamics simulations using solvation were conducted in an effort to model the swelling extent of coal. As expected these simulations did not yield useful results due to limited time scales, but early stage coal surface-solvent interactions were created. A method was employed in which solvent swollen structures were constructed by the addition of 500 solvent molecules to partially swell the coal models. This method provided information regarding the changes in energy and nonbonding interactions when solvents are introduced into a coal. It was observed that solvents (for example, NMP and CS The authors thank Coray Colina for assistance and helpful discussion in molecular simulation.