Leaching of rare earth (RE) metals from the Pacific Ocean sea nodule was carried out in H2SO4 medium. Preliminary study was performed to ascertain the existence of rare earth elements in the sea nodule crust. Concentration of H2SO4 and temperature were found as the key factors which enhance the dissolution rate of rare earth metals. The maximum average RE leaching efficiency of 83.03% was obtained using 3M H2SO4. At the above condition, leaching of most of the RE was ≥90% and the remaining metals were; Ce 44.6%, La 55.3%, Nd 84.7%, Eu 85.8%, Pr 76.4% and Th 78.8%, in which the co-extraction of other base metals like Fe, Co, Ni, Cu was high. Dilute acid i.e. 0.2M of H2SO4 and temp. 45°C was found to be best for optimum extraction (57.6%) of total rare earth, where the co-extractions of other base metals (Cu, Co, Ni, Mn and Fe) are very less.Deep sea nodule crust has ~ Many researchers ( The technology developed by KIGAM ( The sea nodule samples were procured from the Clarion–Clipperton fracture zone (Korea mining site) of the north east Pacific Ocean. They were ground in a ball mill to obtain a suitable size fraction. The fine ground fraction of the average particle size of ~ Leaching tests were carried out using a three necked 500 Preliminary leaching tests were performed to ascertain the presence of rare earth metal in the sea nodule crust. As it is well known that the major phases of the sea nodule crust are of Fe Leaching of rare earth metals from sea nodule was carried out using different reagents namely NaOH, H The leaching characteristic behavior of rare earth metals in both the medium (H Leaching was carried out by varying the H The leaching mechanism of base metals from sea nodule in sulphuric acid medium is described in the literature ( Leaching of rare earth metals was carried out as a function of temperature in the range 30 Leaching of rare earth metals from the deep sea nodule was carried out using H The first author P.K. Parhi, thankfully acknowledges KIGAM for the award of Postdoctoral Fellowship. This work was financially supported by the