The breakage of a coal in compression tests has been studied with the aim of obtaining an appearance function giving the distribution resulting from the breakage of each particle type, which can be used in the simulation of vertical spindle mills that are commonly used in coal fired power plants. The appearance functions from the compression tests were found to take a linear form on logit axes (log(x/(xm
                     −x))), thus giving a simpler description than is available on other axes. In common with other breakage analysis methods the lines can be identified by the percent passing one tenth of the initial size, the t10 parameter. An exponential relation between t10 and specific energy was found for each particle group defined by size and density and the parameters of the exponential relation were related to the particle size and density. It was found for this particular coal that breakage did not preferentially concentrate either coal or mineral matter.
                  The relations developed allow the generation of a three dimensional breakage-appearance function for the breakage of both size and density components which can be used in the simulation of a pulveriser for the coal tested. The paper also demonstrates the type of test work required for the generation of appearance functions for other types of coal.Use of fossil fuel fired steam generators is one of the oldest and most widespread means of generating electricity. In 2007 more than 42% of the world electricity generation was from coal ( In the early 1930s, efforts were focused on defining a means of standardising the coal pulverability and relating it to the performance of industrial pulverisers. Coal organisations and researchers proposed different grindability index tests for coal to express its relative hardness of pulverisation. The Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) test was adopted as a Tentative Standard by American Standards for Testing and Materials (ASTM) in 1935 together with the United States Bureau of Mines (USBM) test ( Despite the criticisms, there have been a number of investigations, pioneered by Although the traditional method of selection of pulverisers mainly relies on coal rank for type of equipment and the HGI of coal for equipment capacity, the HGI is more an indicator of the ease of pulverability of coal than an index, it does not provide an entire explanation on the performance of the pulveriser and its response to different coals. More detailed information is required on the breakage behaviour of coal for better prediction of pulveriser performance and building predictive models of these pulverisers. Therefore, the aim of this study was to initiate and contribute to the knowledge on breakage behaviour of individual components as well as the composite particles, i.e. the distribution of daughter fragments to size and density fractions for each size and density fraction in the coal fed to the pulveriser need to be investigated under conditions that are similar to the comminution conditions in the pulverisers, e.g. particle bed comminution for vertical spindle pulverisers, which is the scope of this paper. This information needs to be considered together with other physical operations in the pulverisers. Many researchers have simulated the size reduction conditions in industrial comminution machines, including vertical spindle pulverisers, under controlled conditions in laboratories by stressing multi-layer particle beds having different confinement arrangements between various surfaces ( A particle bed is defined as ideal if it has a homogeneous structure and compaction, the effect of walls on the size reduction achieved can be ignored and the volume or mass of stressed particles is known ( It is desirable to describe the progeny particle size distribution of a breakage event with a simple equation with a minimum number of variables for modelling purposes. The earliest attempt to parameterise the size distribution of broken coal dates back This study is based on the JKMRC appearance function ( The size distributions of the progeny particles, i.e. the appearance function, obtained from breakage tests on most ores, can be described by a family of curves that needs only one parameter to identify a particular curve ( The relation between the size distribution parameter, t However, Eq. Shi and Kojovic argued that Eq. Nonetheless, the appearance function is expected to be a function of both size and grade of ore/coal particles, i.e. to be affected by the proportion of components as well as particle size. An important supporting finding was reported by A compression testing machine was used to comminute coal particles placed in a piston and die pair. The specific comminution energy applied to the particle bed was calculated from the measured force and position using the attached instrumentation. Several tests have been performed on different particle size and density fractions to understand and describe their effect on comminution behaviour of coal, mineral matter and composite particles. An Avery 7240 Hydraulic Servo Controlled Compression Testing Machine ( A hardened stainless steel piston and die pair was used to confine the volume to be compressed by the equipment. The external diameter of the piston and internal diameter of the die were both exactly 80 The coal tested originated from samples from the fresh feeds of an industrial coal pulveriser treating an Australian black coal; and comprised of three size and four density fractions, obtained by sieving followed by float/sink analysis. Representative test samples for the compression breakage test programme were generated by rotary splitting, de-dusting, weighing and, if required, proportioning and mixing. The tests done on the two finer sizes (8.0 At the beginning of every test, the sample was poured in to the die and the piston was placed in carefully. The assembly was placed at the centre of the aluminium plate to which the LDTs are connected ( After releasing the load, the piston and die pair was carefully taken out of the equipment and the sample in the die was recovered. Particle size analysis was done on products of individual breakage tests, using sieves conforming Six energy levels (0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 2 A further thirteen experiments were carried out at 1 The particle size distributions resulting from tests done on 4.0 The product size distributions become progressively finer, as expected, as the overall energy applied to the particle bed increases ( Particle size distributions of individual size and density fractions at different energy levels were plotted on logit–logit axes, as shown in  On the logit–logit scales the progeny size distributions were observed to be linear over most of the particle size range; in particular the coarser part of the distribution, where most of the mass exists. For fine sizes these scales are the same as Rosin–Rammler and log–log scales, and as before the lost of a small amount of fines can account for the occasional curvature at fine sizes. Best fit lines for the data were calculated by minimising the square of residuals from top size of the tested sample down to 45 The parameters of Eq.  Using Eq. The products of breakage tests were analysed for ash content at selected size fractions and energy levels at a commercial laboratory according to The prediction capability of the model introduced in The breakage of coal by bed compression has been investigated as part of a project to obtain a better understanding of commonly used vertical spindle mills. As in previous work t The relation between t Tests on the breakage of mixture of sizes and densities showed that reasonable accuracy is obtained by assuming the components break independently. It is expected that some coals will show preferential breakage, which means that additional test work will be required to determine the extent of the preferential breakage. This work shows that a multi dimensional appearance matrix can be developed for use in the simulation of vertical spindle mills. It demonstrates the test procedures needed to develop a multi dimensional appearance matrix for different feed materials.  Ore dependent parameter Ore dependent parameter Observed cumulative percent passing Logit transformed cumulative percent passing Cylinder diameter Particle bed height Mass-specific impact energy Mass-specific threshold energy Material breakage property Hardgrove grindability index Number of impacts Maximum t The cumulative percent passing the one tenth of the geometric mean of the tested size range (x Geometric mean of the tested size range Observed particle size Logit transformed particle size Maximum particle size Top particle size Authors thank the financial support by