The effect of the following electrolysis parameters on the silver content in cathodic copper was investigated: temperature ranging from 30 to 60°C; rate of electrolyte circulation ranging from 3 to 9 l/h; anode composition–silver content ranging from ca. 0.3 to ca. 1.0 wt.%; and oxygen content ranging from ca. 80 to ca. 1200 ppm. The silver content in the cathodic copper depends on temperature and its highest value has been reached at 60°C. It depends also on the composition of anodes-on both silver and oxygen contents. However, it does not depend on the rate of the electrolyte circulation within the investigated range of this parameter.The silver content in anodes used in the industrial electrowinning of copper varies from a few tens to a few thousands of grams of silver per one tonne of copper. During the electrolysis, the main portion of silver remains in the anodic sludge. However, as a rule, the cathodic copper still contains up to several ppm of silver. The recovery of silver contained in copper to be refined remains an important problem of copper electrowinning. Taking into consideration the annual production of copper in Poland, the content of approximately 10 ppm of silver in the cathodic copper means the loss of a few tonnes of silver per year. The problem of the reduction of silver content in cathodic copper is comprehensively discussed in literature Silver can be transferred mechanically or electrochemically from the anode to the cathode during the electrolysis. To explain this fact, the following processes should be taken into consideration: (i) reduction of silver ions on the cathode (an electrode reaction); (ii) deposition of metallic particles of silver on the cathode (transported together with circulating electrolyte); (iii) deposition of charged colloidal particles of silver on the cathode (cataphoretic transport). There exists a divergence of opinions concerning contribution of these processes to the transport of silver into the cathodic copper Because of a very low concentration of silver ions in refining electrolyte ranging from 10 However, under industrial circumstances, it is observed as a rule that an increase of cathodic current density is accompanied with an increase of silver content in cathodic deposit. The copper electrowinning process is conducted under galvanostatic conditions. An increase of cathodic current density results in an increase of anodic current density and, consequently, an increase of concentration of silver ions in the bath. The anodic process is discussed below. Furthermore, as a rule, an increase of current density results in the increase of the electrolyte flowrate in order to avoid concentration polarisation. This, in turn, results in an increase of limiting diffusion current of cathodic reduction of Ag If under laboratory conditions the electrolyte flowrate is kept constant, no dependence between silver content in the deposit and the cathodic current density has been observed experimentally Application of diaphragms (a collodium layer on the anode) causes reduction of silver content in cathodic copper accompanying an increase of applied current density Mechanical deposition of metallic silver particles on the cathode is conditioned by their transport, which depends on the geometry of electrodes and bath system, location of the electrolyte inlet and outlet, direction and the rate of electrolyte flow and the size of transported particles. There is a lack of quantitative information on the possibility of cataphoretic transport. Fischer et al. Fischer et al. The source of silver in the system is silver contained in anodes. Hitherto an opinion was accepted that a part of silver in copper anodes exists in a form of selenides and tellurides By comparing the results of structural investigations (electron microscope, synthetic alloys containing up to 1% of silver) with calculated values of silver solubility in copper at low temperatures, Sedzimir Grauman et al. Since silver exists in the form of supersaturated solution, the anodic co-dissolution of silver and copper occurs. At the first stage of this process silver passes into the solution in the form of ions and then it takes part in secondary reactions Because of anodic dissolution of silver (from the supersaturated solution), there appear the zones of saturated solid solution (solid solution of silver in copper). The concentration of silver ions in the state of equilibrium with the saturated solution is lower than in the case of equilibrium with the supersaturated solution. Therefore, silver dissolving from the supersaturated solution cements on the surface of the saturated solid solution The reaction of cementation of silver ions with metallic copper belongs to the sequence of consecutive reactions and it could be expressed in the form of the following The second, independent consecutive reaction is the reduction of silver ions with cuprous Cu(I) ions according to the formula (2): The secondary reactions (1) and (2) can occur on the anode or in the near-electrode layer. The cuprous Cu(I) ions necessary for the reaction (2) are formed The Cu(I) ions may also appear as a result of the reaction: The present work is aimed at the determination of optimal conditions of the electrolysis in order to reduce the amount of silver in the cathodic deposit. It seemed purposeful to arrange the experiments under the conditions similar to the industrial processes. Therefore, the electrolysis processes were run with vertical set-up of hanging electrodes and using the electrolyte with composition corresponding to the refining bath. The electrolyte was not doped with silver. In accordance with industrial conditions, the anodes were the only source of silver. The investigations have been performed at constant current density of 200 A/m The initial electrolyte did not contain silver ions. The variable parameters were: (i) composition of anodes ( The following quantities were determined as a function of time: (i) concentration of silver ions in the electrolyte; (ii) mass of slime remaining on the anode and mass of slime contained in the electrolyte; (iii) anode potential, electrolysis voltage; (iv) silver content in the cathodic deposit. Furthermore, a morphology of the slime (from the reaction of cementation or reduction of silver ions by means of cuprous Cu(I) ions) has been analysed using a scanning electron microscope. Samples of the electrolyte for chemical analyses were sampled by gravimetric method. Copper content was determined iodometrically while sulphuric acid concentration was measured by titration with ammonia solution using methyl orange. The concentration of silver in the electrolyte (silver passes into the solution as a result of dissolution of copper anodes containing silver) was determined using the atomic absorption method. A system with two electrodes was used. The surface area of the anode and the cathode was equal, which means that the anodic and cathodic current densities were equal. The active surfaces were solely the internal planes of electrodes, parallel to each other. The rear and side planes of electrodes were insulated. In this way the electric field lines were parallel. Ti-plate was used as a cathode. The surface area of the electrodes was ca. 9 cm Potential of the anode was measured against sulphate–mercury electrode The results obtained are presented separately for cathodic and anodic processes. The mass of silver “released” during the electrolysis depends on its content in anodic copper and on the quantity of charge passing the system. It can be calculated using these data. The calculations were performed assuming that only copper had dissolved. In this case the following formula (5) is valid: Similar calculations were performed under the assumption that both components (i.e., supersaturated solid solution of silver in copper) dissolved into the solution. For this case, the following dependence was obtained:  During each experimental run, the silver content was determined in the slime taken mechanically from the anode, in the slime obtained after filtration of the electrolyte after measurements, and in the slime deposited on the bottom of the electrolytic tank. The values shown in  The silver content in the slime can be expressed as a ratio of the slopes of these two straight lines:    The three different slime fractions have been investigated. Within the experimental period of time, the slime adhering to the anode constituted the main portion. On the other hand, the mass of slime circulating in the electrolyte was often comparable to the mass of slime forming a deposit on the bottom of the tank. The morphology of the slime taken out from the anode was analysed by means of a scanning electron microscope. This slime was obtained during the run at 45°C with current density equal to 200 A/m The electrode potential of the anode (measured against the sulphate-mercury electrode) did not depend on the anode composition, temperature, electrolyte flowrate, time of electrolysis (within the scatter of measurement results) and they reached −(305±10) mV. The electrolysis voltage decreases with an increase of temperature as a result of rising conductivity of the electrolyte. At 30°C, the electrolysis voltage was 0.20±0.02 V and at 60°C it dropped to 0.12±0.02 V. Anodes with various oxygen contents were used in the experiments. Oxygen exists in anodes in a form of Cu As an example, It follows from For all the analysed anodes with a given composition, neither dependence of cathodic silver content on the amount of charge passing the system nor on the electrolyte flowrate was observed within the investigated range of these variables.  It can be seen that an increase of silver content in anodes from ca. 0.3 up to ca. 1.0 wt.% results in almost twice higher silver content in cathodes at 60°C and more than twice higher silver content at 30°C. However, it seems that temperature is the crucial parameter for the silver content in the cathode. At 60°C, the silver content in cathodic copper is higher than 10 ppm (ca. 0.3 wt.% Ag in the anode) and it exceeds more than 20 ppm (ca. 1.0 wt.% Ag in the anode). At 30°C and 45°C, lower values of silver content in the cathode are observed. In the case of anodes containing ca. 0.3 wt.% Ag decrease of electrolysis temperature to 45°C would result in reduction of silver content in cathodic copper to ca. 3±1 ppm.  Concentration of silver ions in the electrolyte is presented in (i) In the case of anodes containing ca. 1% of silver, the concentration of silver ions in the electrolyte practically does not depend on the electrolyte flowrate, independently on the temperature. (ii) At 30°C in the case of anodes containing 0.2 to ca. 0.5% of silver lower flowrates correspond to the lower concentrations of silver ions in the electrolyte. It seems that these conditions are favourable for reaching the state of cementation equilibrium. (iii) At elevated temperatures also for the anodes containing smaller amounts of silver (ca. 0.2 to ca. 0.5% Ag), the concentration of Ag (iv) At 45°C a minimum of the concentration of Ag The rate of electrolyte circulation has influence — first of all — on the colloidal transport of silver and on the value of Ag The black circles in Within the investigated range of the variables, i.e., temperature, anode composition and electrolyte circulation rate, the concentration of silver ions in the electrolyte did not depend on the time of electrolysis process. When the amount of silver determined analytically in the slime, in the electrolyte and in the cathodes is compared with that resulting from the total amount of charge passing the system, it can be stated that the silver balance does not fit in. Silver balance is discussed below. The amount of silver determined analytically in the slime is lower at lower temperatures ( (a) standard samples of silver in nitric acid solution (1:1); (b) standard samples of silver diluted at different ratios with refining electrolyte (introduction of CuSO (c) dilution of investigated samples with distilled water or HNO (d) the samples of the electrolyte used in analytical measurements were oxidised with H (e) the samples of the electrolyte were dried, then HNO These analyses were performed using parallel samples (identical). The results of these investigations were not dependent on the procedure followed. It refuted the hypothesis that not all amount of silver in the electrolyte was determined — i.e., both ionic and colloidal silver was determined by atomic absorption. As already mentioned, the shares of three different slime fraction have been investigated. One of them was the slime adhering to the anode. It was not possible to separate it from the surface of the electrode quantitatively. After taking the slime off, dark silver-enriched spots became visible on the anode surface. It has been stated that the slime-to-anode adherence weakens at elevated temperatures. Taking the slime off mechanically at higher temperatures was much easier; however, also in this case, the slime could not be removed quantitatively. A series of investigations have been performed in order to determine silver content in slime remaining on the anode surface. Measurements were carried out using anodes containing 0.2933 wt.% Ag at 30 and 60°C for the electrolyte flowrate 3 l/h. All the hitherto analyses have been performed and — additionally — a thin layer has been cut off from the anode surface. In this layer copper content as well as the total silver content resulting from the initial silver content in the anode material, plus silver enriching the surface were determined. Once these values are known from experimental measurements, a silver balance can be formulated which takes into account: the silver content in slime (three fractions), the cathodic silver content, the silver content in the electrolyte, and the amount of silver enriching the anode surface (the cut layer). The total silver content determined analytically can be expressed as follows: For 30°C, The silver mass calculated from For 60°C and an identical composition of the anode, the following dependence was obtained: The silver mass calculated from Considering the laboratory investigations performed with synthetic anodes doped with silver and oxygen, the following conclusions can be drawn. (a) Co-deposition of copper and silver occurs on the cathode, (b) An increase of concentration of silver ions in the electrolyte is accompanied with an increase of silver content in cathode deposit. It proves that electrochemical deposition of silver within the diffusive range occurs. (c) No influence of the electrolyte flowrate (in the range from 3 to 9 l/h) on silver content in cathodic copper was observed for a given system geometry and the flow direction. It seems that a certain combined effect can be observed in the experiments but the problem itself is much more complicated. According to the conclusion (b) it should rather be expected that the amount of silver deposited electrochemically in cathodic copper is proportional to the electrolyte flowrate (diffusive range). Furthermore, it should make the transport of silver particles easier, including the possibility of broken-out of fine slime particles from the anode, i.e., the amount of silver mechanically incorporated in the cathode should increase. It means that these two independent processes should sum. Based upon the experimental results, another model of mechanical incorporation of silver particles in the cathode can be suggested. This process may occur if a silver particle remains on the cathode for a certain period of time and the growing copper layer incorporates it. If the electrolyte flowrate is high, the silver particle will be pulled out from the cathode prior to the possible incorporation. Therefore, the amount of silver deposited mechanically should decrease with increasing flowrate. In turn, the amount of silver deposited electrochemically on the cathode will increase if the electrolyte flow is intensified. The superposition of these two effects is the reason why the silver content in cathodic copper remains constant independent of the flowrate. (d) At elevated temperatures, the concentration of silver ions in the electrolyte increases. (e) At elevated temperatures an increase of silver content in the cathodic copper is observed. If the temperature does not exceed 45°C, it is possible to obtain the cathodic copper containing ca. 3 ppm Ag. (f) The co-dissolution of silver and copper takes place in the anodic process. (g) The following reactions or consecutive processes occur on the anode-electrolyte phase boundary: (i) reaction of cementation of silver ions with metallic copper, (ii) reaction of reduction of silver ions by Cu (iii) anodic oxidation of Cu (iv) transport of Cu The reactions (i) and (ii) are responsible for anode slime formation. (h) At lower temperatures, the enrichment of the surface of anodes in silver becomes more and more intensified. I would like to express many thanks to the “Polish Copper” Copper Mining and Metallurgy Group, Joint Stock for financial support of these investigations.