The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of adding a jarosite–alunite chemical precipitate, a waste product of a new hydrometallurgical process developed to treat economically low grade nickel oxides ores, in the raw meal for the production of Portland cement clinker. For that reason, two samples of raw meals were prepared, one with ordinary raw materials, as a reference sample ((PC)Ref) and another with 1% jarosite–alunite precipitate ((PC)J/A). Both raw meals were sintered at 1450 °C. The results of chemical and mineralogical analyses as well as the microscopic examination showed that the use of the jarosite–alunite precipitate did not affect the mineralogical characteristics of the so produced Portland cement clinker. Furthermore, both clinkers were tested by determining the grindability, setting time, compressive strength and expansibility. The hydration products were examined by XRD analysis at 2, 7, 28 and 90 days. The results of the physico-mechanical tests showed that the addition of jarosite–alunite precipitate did not negatively affect the quality of the produced cement.The general trend of today for the industrial wastes or by-products, which are produced in industrial countries, is to examine alternative ways for their exploitation in order to eliminate cost of disposal and avoid soil and water contamination. Many of these undesirable industrial materials contain significant amounts of inorganic ingredients, such as oxides of silicon, aluminum, calcium and iron, which, at suitable combinations, can be used in the production of either Portland cement clinker or other special cement types. Such a material is a crystalline chemical precipitate, consisting of basic sulfate salts of iron, aluminium and chromium of the jarosite–alunite types. The jarosite–alunite group of isostructural minerals is described by the general formula M(Fe The application of the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) test It is well known that various industrial wastes, such as metallurgical slags, fly ash, glass, ceramics from the electronic industry, spent catalysts from refineries, sludge from waste water treatment and others, have been successfully used in clinker production However, the so far published literature has given little attention to the use of hydrometallurgical wastes, such as jarosite–alunite precipitate, in the production of Portland cement. The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of using the jarosite–alunite precipitate as a raw material for the production of a typical Portland cement clinker. For that reason, two samples of raw meals were prepared, one with ordinary raw materials, as a reference sample ((PC) The mineralogical phases of the precipitate used, which were determined by XRD analysis, are shown in The sintering process applied was common for the production of both types of cement clinkers. The raw meals were shaped in small spheres, with a diameter of 2 cm, and dried at 110 °C. Then, they were placed inside a furnace at 500 °C, the temperature was increased to 1000 °C, at which the samples remained for 20 min, and, finally, the temperature was further increased to 1450 °C. The samples were sintered for 50 min. At the end of the sintering process, the samples were removed from the furnace and left to cool inside a desiccator in order to avoid the effects of air and moisture. The clinkers produced were analyzed by chemical analysis, X-Ray Diffraction and optical microscopy. The clinkers were crushed and ground in a Bond ball mill to a specific surface area of about 3950 cm The water soluble SO Compressive strength measurements were conducted at the ages of 2, 7, 28 and 90 days on mortar prisms (dimensions 40 For the study of the hydration products, the cement pastes were prepared by mixing 300 g of ground mixtures with 75 ml of water. They were then cured in a tap water at a temperature 20 The results of particle size distributions by a laser scattering analyzer are given in The chemical analysis and the potential mineral composition of the Portland clinkers produced are given in The XRD analyses of the produced Portland clinkers are given in The microstructure of the Portland cement clinkers was examined by optical microscopy in polished sections. The addition of the jarosite–alunite precipitate by 1% did not seem to affect its microstructure and the formation of its characteristic mineralogical phases ( The water requirement and setting time, determined by Vicat probe and Vicat needle apparatus, as well as the results of expansion are reported in The mortars of the samples under investigation were tested for compressive strengths after 2, 7, 28 and 90 days of curing. The obtained results are shown in The XRD patterns of the (PC) The addition of jarosite–alunite precipitate by 1% in the raw meal did not affect either the sintering or the hydration process during Portland cement production. More specifically, the sample with jarosite–alunite presented the following characteristics: The alite phase occurred as small well-formed crystals. The belite crystals were few and evenly distributed in relation to alite, indicating that the clinkering reaction had proceeded extensively in the direction of alite and that the raw mix was homogenous. The liquid phase occurred as fine crystals, uniformly distributed. The values for setting times and water content for standard consistency and expansion were similar to those obtained from the reference ordinary Portland cement sample and within the standard limits. The compressive strengths were at least as high as those of the reference sample during hydration. It is thus concluded that the jarosite–alunite residue, produced during hydrometallurgical treatment of nickel oxide ores with sulphuric acid, can be utilized as a raw material in cement production. The authors are grateful to the General Secretariat for Research and Technology of Greece for financial support in the framework of the Program “Industrial Exploitation of the Solid Wastes Produced from Hydrometallurgical Treatment of Greek Laterites-PENED 99”. They also express their warmest thanks to Mr. J. Marinos, Director in Quality Assurance and R and D Manager of Hercules Cement Company of Greece, for his constant advice.