Solar-grade silicon microparticles have been prepared by a two-stage technique consisting of a combustion process in a SiO2+αMg (α is the mole number of Mg) system in an inert atmosphere and the hydrometallurgical treatment of the combustion product. It has been shown that the refining behavior of the metallic impurities from combustion-synthesized silicon (CS-Si) is better than that of metallic impurities from metallurgical-grade silicon (MG-Si) since CS-Si particles have a unique microporous network structure, which makes the hydrometallurgical treatment process very efficient. Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analysis results indicate that silicon of purity greater than 99.99% can be obtained by the developed technique. The principle of the hydrometallurgical purification of CS-Si is discussed in the context of particle morphology and a comprehensive explanation for porous structure formation is provided.The development and widespread use of renewable energy are urgently required to address energy and environmental issues. Among various types of renewable energy sources, photovoltaic (PVC) solar cells are ecologically clean devices that can be used for the direct conversion of solar energy to electricity. Due to the growing demand for renewable energy sources, the manufacture of solar cells and photovoltaic arrays has increased dramatically in recent years. Currently, 90% of the solar cell market is based on high-purity mono-, poly-, or microcrystalline silicon (also called solar-grade silicon, SOG-Si). There are two SOG-Si-producing conventional methods that are predominant: use of hydrogenous reduction of trichlorosilane SIHCl disproportionation for the production of monosilane SiH In the Siemens process, SiHCl The first area of investigation was directed at refining metallurgical-grade silicon (MG) using a number of approaches and techniques. Among the developed alternatives, the following are notable: directional solidification According to the reports The second area of investigation aimed to produce SOG-Si from silicon dioxide (SiO In the present study, an alternative method for preparing solar-grade-quality silicon is reported. The method developed involves two main stages: combustion of a SiO SiO Our concept for Si powder preparation using SiO In stage I, a controlled amount of SiO After the combustion process, the burned sample was ground into a powder for hydrometallurgical purification, which includes three consecutive Si-refining steps. In this step, 200 This purified Si powder was transferred into a 1 Step III was performed in a solution consisting of 20 Powder morphology and particle size were examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM; JSM 5410, JEOL, Japan). Phases were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Siemens D5000, Germany) measurement. Concentration of metallic impurities was analyzed by ICP-AES. An ELTRA ON-900 Oxygen/Nitrogen Determinator and a LECO CR-412 Carbon Analyzer were used for analyzing oxygen and carbon impurities. A SiO The samples burned under the given conditions were loosely sintered, and mechanical grinding was required to convert them into fine powder. Typical XRD patterns of the combustion products for different In the developed process, the high combustion temperature usually assists partial removal of volatile elements such as Mg, Zn, S, Na, etc., from the reaction sample. Evaporated impurities condense on the inner walls of the combustion chamber and can be visually detected. According to previous reports Our preliminary tests have shown that the samples synthesized in the 1.7< The combusted samples were acid purified according to the scheme described in the “Experimental section”. Many of the metallic (Al, Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni, Zn, Mg, Mn, Co, Ti, etc.) and non-metallic (B, C, O) impurities were analyzed after each purification step. The results obtained are presented in It is notable that the hydrometallurgical treatment procedure is quite slow, until HF is added. After HF is added, active dissolution of Si into the HNO The chemical procedures in step III are similar to those in step II. Most of the impurities are reduced by more than several orders of magnitude ( Typical scanning electron micrograph (SEM) images of CS-Si and MG-Si powders are shown in For performing bulk resistivity measurements, CS-Si powder was heated at 1500 The test results listed in The prospects for the use of CS-Si to manufacture photovoltaic devices can be discussed in the context of the report by Mauk et al. A new, effective, and two-stage process based on the combustion synthesis technique and hydrometallurgical treatment has been developed to produce solar-grade-quality silicon powder from a SiO The test results show that the typical resistivity of CS-Si silicon lies in the range 80–100