Death of tissue and/or deep infection leading to amputation is not an uncommon course of events after massive crush injuries of the central part of the hand. Management of this injury faces the dual problem of having to carry out debridement in the central part of the hand which is radical enough to remove all dead tissue but which, in itself, creates a huge dead space in the depths of the wound. Inadequate debridement and/or leaving a dead space which fills with fluid and detritus behind the flexor tendons leads on to infection, devascularisation of the fingers and amputation. This paper presents the results of very radical debridement of the hand dorsal to the flexor tendons, including the intermetacarpal spaces, and filling the dead space with a well-vascularised free muscle flap in two hands which were referred in a pre-amputation stage, with one already being infected. Both hands were salvaged.Crush injuries of the hand are a common injury. In the typical case, one can expect metacarpal fractures, ragged skin flaps and an unusually high incidence of compartment syndromes ( Less well recognised in the literature is what we call the “massively crushed hand”, in which extremely high energy, such as that resulting from presses for bending metals or plastics, is delivered to the hand and wrist. These injuries include multilevel fractures of the carpal and metacarpal bones, extrusion of loose carpal bones and intrinsic muscle and devascularisation of the fingers ( This paper presents two patients who suffered such massive crush injuries to the hand and wrist which were treated with a free muscle flap to obliterate the dead space deep in the palm with successful retention of the hand and fingers. A 22 year-old male construction worker was referred for amputation of his right hand with uncontrolled deep infection 3 weeks after suffering a severe crush injury when a dumper truck tilted and trapped his hand. He was treated initially by bone stabilisation of several carpal and metacarpal fractures and hand fasciotomies. Disruptions of both the radial and ulnar arteries at the wrist were vein grafted. The postoperative course was complicated by a sudden loss of digital pulses and pain at 24 hours. Deep infection followed 2 weeks after the accident. On admission to our unit, the hand was red and swollen. Doppler signals were absent in all of the digits, with pulp pad necrosis present, particularly on the small finger. Purulent material was discharging through the hypothenar, thenar and dorsal fasciotomies wounds. Enterobacter was isolated in the cultured material. At a first operation, we radically debrided all of the intrinsic muscles and any other devitalised tissue with a rongeur, skeletonising the metacarpals and carpal bones ( The result 6 months after surgery is shown in A 39 year-old male suffered a severe crush injury to his left hand and wrist, with devascularisation of all of the digits ( The likelihood of amputation being necessary was discussed with the patient. Because hand survival was doubtful and even less likely if treatment was delayed, reconstruction was carried out immediately. After removing the necrotic tissue in the first web, a huge dead space filled with blood and debris dorsal to the flexor tendons became evident ( A free gracilis muscle was then interposed between the vital palmar structures, viz. the flexor tendons, vascular grafts and nerves, and the skeleton, to obliterate the dead space. The muscle was passed from the radial skin opening to the ulnar opening ( The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and the exposed parts of the free muscle transfer was skin-grafted 5 days after the free muscle reconstruction. On the tenth day, the swelling in the hand was controlled by wrapping the central part of the hand with Coban In trauma surgery, it is crucial for avoidance of infection to debride doubtful tissues radically, to obliterate dead space and to provide immediate vascularised skin cover ( Massive crush to the hand and wrist is a devastating injury. Axial carpal fracture-dislocations, fractured metacarpals, finger devascularisations with avulsed vessels, devascularised muscle and lack of skin cover, all coexist in this injury. Each of the component injuries is, in itself, a challenge to the most skilled hand surgeon. Tremendous surgical effort is required: the bones are replaced and re-aligned with extreme difficulty, the fingers only revascularised by the use of interposition vein grafts and cover of the vital structures may require an emergency free flap. Unfortunately, over the early postoperative days, everything may slowly go to pieces, with infection developing in the deep tissues of the body of the hand, the skin suffering patchy necrosis, the revascularised fingers dying and, finally, the hand coming to distal amputation. This is not surprising if we consider how we have taken care of this injury in the past ( Taking as an inspiration the treatment of tibial osteomyelitis where, after debridement, a free muscle is used to fit into the tridimensional bony defect created ( The massive crushed hand poses a phenomenal reconstructive challenge. By using a free muscle transfer to obliterate the dead space left on the deep palm after total debridement of all but the vital longitudinal structures, we have been able to clear, or avoid, infection in two cases while preserving the fingers. This approach is recommended in the desperate situation of the massive crush injury to the body of the hand. We are grateful to Mr Robert Jenkins for his help during the English translation of this paper. Dr Pisani was supported by a grant form the University of Milan and Multimedica Hospital (Prof. G. Pajardi). Milano, italy.