Physicochemical (organic matter content, relative humidity, humic acid content, carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous content) and microbiological activities (extracellular enzymatic activities, basal and substrate induced respiration and bioenergetical parameters) were evaluated in salt marsh degraded sediments, during a 1 year revegetation trial starting at the end of the growing season. For this revegetated with Halimione portulacoides and also in nearby sediments with savage H. portulacoides plants and bare sediments were monitored for comparison proposes. Sediments colonized by savage plants showed higher water content, organic matter, carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous contents, in contrast with the low values observed in bare and colonized by transplants sediments. Overlooking the microbial metabolic and respiratory parameters it was observed that the more efficient microbial communities were present in the sediments colonized by the savage plants. Also the extracellular enzymes showed differences. In the transplant colonized sediments and also in the bare ones, peroxidase showed high and similar activities. By the contrary urease showed lower in these last sediments. Only acid phosphatase showed a different trend being higher in the bare sediments and in the sediments colonized by savage plants. Applying a rhizosphere sediment microbial index (RSMI) it was assessed that the more important factors for these sediments evaluation were the Basal respiration, urease activity, metabolic coefficient, total phosphorous content and total carbon content. Using this index for evaluation it showed not only that the sediments colonized by savage plants presented microbial quality, but also it was shown that the bare sediments and the sediments colonized by the transplants after a 1 year period still have the same microbial characteristics and thereby similar microbial qualities. This allowed to conclude that over the duration of this experiment, the revegetated sediments were still far from reaching the quality levels of the sediments naturally colonized, indicating that the 1 year period of revegetation was not enough to a successful restoration of a degraded salt marsh. Although the restoration process was not successful, the elaboration of the RSMI proved to be useful with applications in future monitorization programs.Salt marshes are very important areas for several biogeochemical cycles, sediment accretion, pollution filtration and retention and erosion and stabilization of the river margins ( The Tagus estuary (  The target area to be restored was situated at an abandoned shipyard, formerly used for ship construction at the sides of the Sado river. This area is majorly constituted by mudflats extensions without significant plant colonization. At the end of the growing season, plants grown in hydroponics were transferred to top and bottomless plastic stripes along with non-colonized sediment from the surrounding area. Plastic stripes allowed maintain the transplants in normal field conditions while isolated from interferences from the surrounding sediments. These plants were left in the field for 1 year, until the end of the next growing season. After this period of 1 year the transplants ( All the analyses were carried out in sediment samples from 5 to 8 All enzymatic determinations were carried out with colorimetric methods and the absorbance was read on a TECAN Absorbance Microplate Reader (SPECTRA Rainbow). The use of microplates allowed to perform always three readings of the same sample. Protease activity was assayed according to The RSMI was elaborated according to where Statistical analysis was performed using Statistica Software version 7.0 from Statasoft Inc. Due to the lack of normality and homogeneity of the environmental values obtained, the significance of the results was evaluated using Kruskal–Wallis non-parametrical tests. To better understand the variability of the samples and for RSMI elaboration a principal component analysis was also made, using the same software. Although the similarities of the relative water content ( Several parameters (enzymatic and respiratory activities) were assessed to evaluate the microbial population associated to the bare sediments and colonized sediments. Observing the data relative to the basal respiration ( Overlooking the extracellular enzymatic activities ( A principal component analysis (PCA) of the microbiological parameters (urease, peroxidase and acid phosphatase activity, basal and substrate induced respiration, metabolic coefficient and qCO The factor analysis showed that factor 1 explained the greater percentage (34.18%) of variability of all the axes of the analysis. For RSMI elaboration the five parameters with more weight were chosen: basal respiration (0.905), urease activity (0.862), metabolic quotient (0.765), total phosphorous (0.683) and total carbon (0.552). The RSMI results from the sum of normalized and weighted values of each parameter, as showed in Using the values from Applying the constructed RSMI to the sediment samples evaluated in this work the quality of the sediments was evaluated ( Comparing the physical and chemical characteristics of the sediments it is possible to see great differences in the organic matter quantity and quality of the samples. The sediment colonized with savage plants presented not only more organic matter but it was also richer in carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous, than the bare and transplant colonized sediments. One of the major inputs of organic compounds into the rhizosediments is the roots either throughout litter introduction or organic exudates ( This work pointed out several important aspects to be considered in future longer restoration attempts. Considering the rhizosediments colonized by savage plant as the better adapted situation, as suggested by all the analysis, there were clearly evidences that the restoration process was not concluded at this time, but several indicators were attained for this success evaluation. Although the period of acclimation of the transplants to the sediments proved to be insufficient for the transformation of the sediments, it became clear that also in salt marsh sediments it is possible to use sediment biogeochemical parameters as indicators of the process development. Also it was verified that alone bioenergetics can provide good insights about the sediment ecophysiology as well as the extracellular enzymes and the elemental analysis, although these last should be considered as support data to validate the biochemical results, from the microbial activities. The integration of the all these parameters in a PCA assessment, extraction of the more descriptive ones and integration of these last ones in the RSMI proved to be an efficient tool for restoration processes success evaluation and monitoring also in salt marshes ecosystems. Thanks to ‘Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia’ for funding this research in the framework of the project PTDC/AAC-CLI/104085/2008.