The stripping of copper from the organic extract of bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinodithioic acid, CYANEX® 301, using an aqueous mixture of thiourea, hydrazine and sodium hydroxide has been investigated. The optimal concentrations of the aqueous solution were found to be 1.0 M, 5×10−2 M and 5.0 M, respectively which led to 95% stripping of copper from CYANEX 301 with concomitant regeneration of the extractant. The characterization of the stripped copper product was done using a combination of microanalyses, cyclic voltammetry and X-ray diffractometry (XRD). The product was made up of two non-stoichiometric copper sulfides, Cu
                        x
                     S with x
                     =1.60 and 1.77. Cu1.60S was the major product. Hydrazine appears to play the role of reducing the disulfide species of CYANEX 301, R2P(S)S–S(S)PR2, formed during the extraction step, back into CYANEX 301, whereas thiourea provides a source of sulfur in the formation of the stripping products.Solvent extraction is one of the efficient hydrometallurgical techniques used for the purification, separation or concentration of metals from aqueous media. It has found extensive application in mineral processing. The organo-thiophosphorus ligands have attracted great attention and some review works on their extraction properties are available in the literature ( Studies by other authors include The stripping of metals previously extracted into an organic phase is an important step in industrial applications. It enables the recovery of extracted metals on one hand and regeneration or recycling of the extractant for subsequent use on the other hand. This is necessary from the point of view of economics and also to ensure minimal wastes disposal. The stripping of species such as Ni(II), Pb(II), Sn(II), Sn(IV), Bi(III), Sb(III), etc., from CYANEX 301 extract remains generally difficult and high concentrations of HCl, for instance 6–12 M, are used for their recovery ( The stripping of copper, on the contrary, is particularly difficult even at extremely high concentrations of HCl. These extreme conditions often result in the degradation of the extractant. Along this line, an experiment carried out on the stripping of copper from CYANEX 301 organic phase using an aqueous solution containing 12 M HCl and 1 M CaCl Binary extractant systems consisting of mixtures of CYANEX 301 with basic extractants (Primene® JM-T, Amberlite® LA-2, Alamine® 336 and Aliquat® 336) have been shown to exhibit a large synergistic effect on metal stripping in comparison to CYANEX 301 alone ( Thus, in the case of a mixture of di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphorodithioic acid and tetraoctyl-ammonium salt, more than 90% of copper is stripped in three counter-current steps with 10% aqueous ammonia solution at In the present work, we have investigated another route by considering the stripping of copper from CYANEX 301 organic phase extract via precipitation of both copper(I) and copper(II) sulfides in the presence of a reductant to reduce the disulfide R The extractant CYANEX 301 was kindly supplied by Cytec (now also available from Cognis as LIX® 301) and was used without further purification. The reagent contained 85% (w/w) bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)-phosphinodithioic acid. Other information on the reagent's composition and its physico-chemical properties have been previously described ( In all stripping experiments, the organic phase was previously loaded with copper as follows: the organic phase constituting 0.1 M CYANEX 301 in the diluent was equilibrated for 15 min with an equal volume of aqueous phase initially containing 9.60 A study on the optimization of composition of the aqueous phase used for stripping was also undertaken. This was done in two steps. Firstly, the hydrazine concentration was varied between 1.0 In all experiments, both aqueous (A) and organic (O) phases were fixed at an A/O phase ratio of 1 and at a contact time of 15 min. All experiments were carried out at 20 The precipitates obtained after stripping with THN were characterized by microanalysis, cyclic voltammetry and X-ray diffractometry (XRD) measurement. The microanalysis of the precipitates was carried out at the Laboratoire Central d'Analyses of Centre National de Recherches Scientifiques (CNRS), Lyon, France. The precipitates were washed with ethanol and then air-dried before analysis. The details of the constitution of carbon paste electrode and the experimental set-up have been described elsewhere ( Following In reality, the presence of a mixture of Cu Thus, the presence of a source of sulfide ions and that of a reductant allowing the reduction of the disulfide, R An initial trial experiment carried out using a mixture of 2.06 M hydrazine, 1.0 M thiourea and 5.0 M NaOH led to the stripping of 95% of copper from CYANEX 301 extract within 15 min. The results obtained in respect of the efficient re-use of CYANEX 301 after stripping are summarized in The optimization of stripping (aqueous phase) solution is important for economic reasons and also for good understanding of mechanism involved. For comparative purposes, the stripping of copper was also carried out in two separate experiments with two other stripping solutions: the first stripping solution was 1 M Na Characterization of the precipitate obtained from the stripping of copper is useful for better understanding of the mechanism of copper stripping from CYANEX 301 extract. The results of microanalysis (% Cu: 70.02; S: 21.02; N: 0.41; C: 2.57; P The current-potential curves obtained under the same conditions were then compared with some previously reported works on a commercial copper(I) sulfide, Cu Anodic (A) and Cathodic (C) peaks ( These peaks correspond to different stages of oxidation of Cu The stripped precipitate has a characteristic equilibrium potential of 0.230 V/sce, indicating that it is a mixed product. This is evidenced from In On the other hand, the current-potential curves shown in All the anodic peaks (A The cyclic voltammetric results therefore suggest that the stripped product is likely a mixture of two non-stoichiometric copper sulfide products, Cu The concentrations of the two products have been calculated from the area of their respective peaks. The area of the small peak C The copper precipitate obtained from stripping was also subjected to XRD investigation in order to confirm the existence of Cu The preceding results show that the precipitate obtained from stripping is a mixture of Cu It has been shown in this work that the stripping of copper from CYANEX 301 extract is possible by using an aqueous solution composed of thiourea, hydrazine and sodium hydroxide. The optimal concentrations of the constituting reagents were established to be 1.0 M thiourea, 5.0 The stripping yield was 95%. The resulting copper sulfide precipitate was characterized by microanalysis and cyclic voltammetry, and found to be a mixture of two non-stoichiometric copper sulfides. These are Cu The authors thank Prof. D. Bauer for a helpful discussion, while F. Adekola thanks the Government of France for the award of a research fellowship.