The converter matte contains nickel, iron, and sulfur. It may also contain copper, cobalt, silver, gold, and platinum-group elements to a greater or lesser extent. These elements are ultimately separated and made into metal either hydrometallurgically or vapometallurgically. Often, however, the elements are given a preliminary separation by (i) slow cooling and solidification of the molten matte; (ii) ingot breaking, crushing, and grinding; (iii) magnetic separation; and (iv) froth flotation. This treatment results in (i) an alloy concentrate that is rich in precious metals; (ii) a copper sulfide concentrate; and, (iii) a nickel sulfide concentrate. These concentrates are then transferred to specialist metal refineries for the recovery of metal.magnetic separation of magnetic metal particles from non-magnetic sulphide particles; ball mill regrind; and, second magnetic separation (cleaning) The converter matte contains nickel, iron, and sulfur. It may also contain copper, cobalt, silver, gold, and platinum-group elements to a greater or lesser extent. These elements are ultimately separated and made into metal either hydrometallurgically or vapometallurgically. Often, however, the elements are given a preliminary separation by (i) slow cooling and solidification of the molten matte; (ii) ingot breaking, crushing, and grinding; (iii) magnetic separation; and (iv) froth flotation. This treatment results in (i) an alloy concentrate that is rich in precious metals; (ii) a copper sulfide concentrate; and, (iii) a nickel sulfide concentrate. These concentrates are then transferred to specialist metal refineries for the recovery of metal. The molten converter matte, discussed in These elements cannot be separated while the matte is molten. They are separated by solidifying the matte and treating it by two different techniques as follows: vapometallurgical refining ( hydrometallurgical refining ( However, about half of the global production of converter matte from sulfide smelting undergoes a preliminary treatment before these processes ( between 12 and 25 tonnes of molten matte are poured into large molds; this matte is slowly solidified and cooled in covered molds, which results in the formation of large individual grains of heazlewoodite (Ni the solid matte is crushed and ground, which liberates the grains of the different minerals from each other; and, the ground ore is separated into alloy, copper–sulphide and nickel–sulphide concentrates by magnetic separation and froth flotation. A schematic diagram of the process is shown in The advantages of this preliminary separation are that it simplifies the subsequent metal extraction and minimizes the in-plant residence times. The equilibrium phase diagram for the Ni–Cu–S system is shown in The equilibrium conditions are closely approximated industrially by solidification and slow cooling of the converter matte. Slow cooling encourages the precipitated grains of Ni The nickel converter matte purposely contains slightly less sulfur than is required to form stoichiometric Ni This deficiency of sulfur causes a third phase to form during solidification and slow cooling. This third phase is a magnetic alloy that contains nickel, copper and most of the silver, gold and platinum-group elements in the feed matte. Between 12 and 25 tonnes of molten converter matte, at about 1000°C, are cast into large refractory-lined steel depressions, or molds, at floor level. This is shown in The solidified matte contains grains of three major components: (i) a magnetic nickel–copper alloy (containing most of the silver, gold and platinum-group elements); (ii) chalcocite (Cu As mentioned earlier, the grains are quite large, approximately 100 The ground matte is separated into three concentrates. Two major methods are used for this purpose: magnetic separation of the precious metals-rich alloy particles into a magnetic alloy concentrate; and, flotation separation of the remaining sulphides particles into copper-rich and nickel-rich sulphide concentrates (this separation is not always done; Matte concentrate destinations vary from smelter to smelter. The most straightforward arrangement is that at the Waterval, South Africa, smelter (Anglo American Platinum). A magnetic concentrate that is rich in platinum-group elements and a non-magnetic concentrate are made. The magnetic fraction is upgraded by leaching and then sent to a precious metals refinery. The non-magnetic fraction is sent to a nickel–copper refinery ( The Sudbury, Canada, smelter (Vale) makes three major concentrates: a magnetic alloy concentrate, which is sent directly to its nickel refinery; a copper-rich sulphide flotation concentrate, which is smelted in a copper smelter; and, an nickel-rich sulphide concentrate, which is oxidation roasted to nickel oxide. Residues from the nickel refinery are treated for copper, cobalt and precious metals extraction. The nickel oxide from the oxidation roasting is either sold or it is refined to high-purity nickel in the company's carbonyl refineries in Sudbury, Canada, and Clydach, Wales. Carbonyl refining is described in The converter matte contains nickel, iron and sulfur. It may also contain copper, cobalt, silver, gold and platinum-group elements to a greater or lesser extent. These elements are ultimately separated and made into metal either hydrometallurgically or vapometallurgically. Often, however, the elements are given a preliminary separation by (i) slow cooling and solidification of the molten matte; (ii) ingot breaking, crushing and grinding; (iii) magnetic separation; and, (iv) froth flotation. This treatment results in the following concentrates: an alloy concentrate that is rich in precious metals; a copper sulphide concentrate; and, a nickel sulphide concentrate. These concentrates are then transferred to specialist metal refineries for the recovery of metal.