The rapid depressurisation and discharge of volatile rich silicic magma chamber and the onset of caldera collapse associated with ignimbrite eruption is investigated using combined theoretical and experimental approaches. We first present a scaling analysis of the force balance on the roof of a depressurising magma chamber. This provides a failure criterion for the chamber roof and shows that the chamber underpressure required to trigger coherent (piston) collapse along a vertical or steeply outward dipping reverse ring fault increases with the roof aspect ratio (R=thickness/width). The failure criterion is validated by a series of experiments that reveal a transition, with increasing roof aspect ratio, from piston collapse to either (1) no collapse (low reservoir underpressure) or (2) non-coherent collapse (high reservoir underpressure). Then, taking into account the failure criterion obtained with the scaling analysis, a theoretical model allows calculation of the erupted chamber volume fraction required to trigger caldera collapse. We consider a two stage model, with an initially overpressured chamber that becomes progressively underpressured as the eruption proceeds. The main input parameters are the chamber depth, vertical extent and ellipticity in plan view, the magma water content, the cohesion and coefficient of internal friction of the roof, and the ring fault dip. In the case of a mechanically homogeneous roof and a single, large and rapid eruption, the erupted volume fraction required to trigger piston collapse increases with the roof aspect ratio until the chamber is totally emptied (before initiation of any collapse) at R≈1–1.4, the exact value depending mainly on the ring fault dip and to a lesser extent on the coefficient of internal friction of the roof. As shown by experiments, collapse into reservoirs with R>1–1.4 probably cannot collapse as a piston and, if a surface caldera forms at all, collapse is more likely to occur non-coherently. Data for the onset of caldera collapse during seven well documented major ignimbrite eruptions are in broad agreement with the model.Calderas associated with ignimbrites commonly result from the eruption of tens to hundreds of km Collapse mechanisms and their resulting structures may strongly influence the style, intensity, and duration of ignimbrite eruptions. They have been constrained from field observations Another issue concerns the erupted magma volume required to initiate caldera collapse. Druitt and Sparks In this paper, we investigate the eruption of a silicic magma chamber overlain by a homogeneous roof. Many calderas are strongly influenced by regional faults and tectonics, but the present paper does not address this point. We first present a simple scaling analysis, which provides a failure criterion for piston collapse along a reverse ring fault, and we test the criterion experimentally. We then use the failure criterion to calculate the magma chamber underpressure, and hence the magma volume fraction that needs to be erupted to trigger a caldera collapse as a function of the vertical extent, water content, and shape of the magma chamber. We also take into account the roof aspect ratio ( We present a scaling analysis for the collapse of a piston along a vertical or outward dipping reverse ring fault. Failure under shearing conditions is only considered here, although we acknowledge the possibility of collapse triggered by tensional fractures. We consider the general case of an elliptical ( Let the forces be the weight of the roof (  Piston collapse always started within a few hours after the beginning of the experiment. The experiments validate the scaling analysis by showing that We now extend the model proposed by Druitt and Sparks We consider a two stage eruption. An overpressured magma chamber first fractures the surrounding rocks and generates pathways for the magma to the surface. As the eruption proceeds, the chamber pressure decreases to less than the lithostatic value and the roof collapses when the resistance threshold is reached. Initial overpressure in a magma chamber can result from influx of magma We consider a magma chamber circular or elliptical in plan view, with a flat roof and vertical sides ( For a pressure decrease from the initial chamber pressure (Δ The erupted chamber volume fraction The results are presented in The results show that the maximum roof aspect ratio ( The model is tested using seven well documented caldera forming eruptions for which the chamber roof aspect ratio and the erupted volumes can be estimated ( An assumption made in Another assumption made by several of the authors cited in Taking into account these assumptions, Piston collapse has already been suggested for Crater Lake and Long Valley calderas For likely piston calderas, theoretical values of There is no independent evidence of the collapse style at Pinatubo and Somma Vesuvius calderas. However, owing to their high chamber roof aspect ratio, analogue experiments Although some moderate scale eruptions of a few km The seven selected natural examples presented in Thanks to Charles Bacon, Raffaello Cioni, Jim Gardner, Wes Hildreth and Bruno Scaillet who communicated data respectively on Crater Lake, Somma Vesuvius, Ceboruco, and Long Valley calderas. Reviews by Steve Sparks, Steve Tait, and an anonymous referee were helpful.