This paper aims to analyze the fatigue response of PLA parts manufactured through fused filament fabrication (FFF). The influence of four factors (layer height, fill density, nozzle diameter and velocity) on the fatigue performance of cylindrical specimens is studied through an L27 Taguchi experimental design. This design is run for two different infills: linear and honeycomb. Specimens have been tested on a rotating fatigue bending machine. The optimal set of parameters and levels resulting in the highest number of cycles to failure have been determined, and implemented to manufacture a second set of specimens, which have been tested at different stress levels to represent the Wöhler curve. Fill density proves to be the most influential parameter on fatigue life, followed by layer height. The tests undertaken to represent the Wöhler curve revealed that 35.8MPa can be considered as a lower threshold of the endurance limit for this kind of specimens. This value can be useful to use these devices to manufacture human implants, as PLA is a biocompatible material. The main novelty of this paper is that no previous fatigue life assessment of PLA parts manufactured through FFF has been developed.fused filament fabrication fused deposition modelling polylactic acid acrylonitrile butadiene styrene statistical design of experiments analysis of variance 3D printing is a generic term used to define any kind of additive or layered manufacturing process, that is, a group of techniques used to obtain final parts or prototypes in a short period from a digital design by progressive addition of a raw material The mechanical behavior of 3D printed parts is one of the most difficult properties to define in this kind of parts, for two main reasons. Firstly, because of the high number of parameters to control during the additive process, which makes it complex to analyze. Secondly, because of the high anisotropy that this kind of parts show when tested, which is defined by their manufacturing history, as the resistance of the raw material and the cohesive forces between bonded layers interact in a complex way This paper focuses on the response of 3D printed specimens subjected to dynamic stresses, considering the influence of different factors. One of them is the manufacturing orientation, which determines the preferential stress carrying direction. Previous works show that this direction should ideally coincide with the expected in-service loads of the part to maximize its mechanical performance Researchers have observed this behavior in parts manufactured through other additive manufacturing processes such as Stereolitography The second factor considered in this paper as influential is layer height, that is, the longitudinal value that the extruder rises between the deposition of one layer and the next one. As layer height decreases, parts show a higher cohesion among layers, due to an increase in surface contact between filaments, and the consequent increase in heat transport mechanisms, which favor neck growth among them The infill strategy is composed of two different terms, namely the fill density and the pattern. The first one has showed a relevant effect on the stiffness of 3D printed part, which increases with the decrease of the gap between rasters. This effect can be explained by the positive effect of a higher density of material inside the part volume. As for the infill pattern, it refers to the path that the extruder follows in order to fill each layer. These patterns are usually defined at the slicer software which generates the numerical control interpolations. The rectilinear one is the most generalized approach, as it allows to form the part by piling layers composed of parallel linear rasters, while the direction of those rasters is alternatively changed in 90-degrees ( Other parameters defining the manufacturing process through FFF are the nozzle diameter, which is the nominal expected diameter of the extruded filament, and the extrusion velocity. Both of them show a relevant effect on resistance, but also on other aspects of part quality as surface roughness and part distortion due to residual thermal stresses The manufacturing strategy, executed by the ISO code which commands the different 3D printer functions, is programmed by a slicer software from the only input of an STL model and the decided parameters. Although some authors have published technical recommendations to improve the quality of 3D printed parts The fatigue performance of rapid manufactured parts has been scarcely tackled in the bibliography. The most numerous references are found for laser sintered metal specimens The detected lack of references about the influence of other parameters on fatigue life, as well as a comprehensive study about fatigue behavior of FFF PLA parts has motivated the research presented in this paper. One preferential building orientation has been prefixed for the manufacturing of specimens, and two different infill patterns have been tested. For each of them, a Taguchi orthogonal array was designed and applied, taking into account four factors at three levels: layer height, fill density, nozzle diameter and printing velocity. The best combination of levels and values is obtained, and a second set of specimens are tested subjected to different stresses, to the S-N curve associated with the selected manufacturing strategy.  An L27 Taguchi orthogonal array has been selected to conduct the experimental phase ( The building orientation has not been included as an experimental factor, and the already assumed as preferential bearing direction, that is, the axial direction along the specimen, has been selected to manufacture specimens. The infill pattern is to be studied but has not been included in the experimental design, as only two patterns want to be assessed: rectilinear and honeycomb. The experimental design has been therefore repeated once for each one of them. Consequently, 54 different types of specimens were manufactured. For each one, five specimens were manufactured, to confirm the repeatability of the obtained results, and provide the results of statistical significance. Specimens have been manufactured using a Prusa i3 Steel 3D printer. The parameters that are not object of study have been kept constant among different specimens. All specimens have been manufactured with 2 external perimeters, 5-mm brim support and three solid layers at the bottom of the specimen. At the bottom layers, the printing has been supported with a rectilinear gridded structure that was removed before the fatigue testing. There is no a specific standard focusing on fatigue testing of plastic laminated materials. Therefore, special specimens have been designed, adapting their dimensions to the possibilities offered by the testing machine ( The whole experimental setup is shown at A PCE-TC 3 thermographic camera was also installed to monitor the evolution of the temperature of the specimen at the stress concentrator area, to assess if there is a relevant thermal effect. Its sensitivity is 0.15 Once all experiments were developed and cycles to failure counted, outliers inside each set of data for each printing condition and both infill patters were identified and discarded by applying the Chauvenet's criterion. As fatigue assessment is a purely experimental study, this previous analysis was performed so that the statistical analysis of the Taguchi DOE would not be biased. The surface temperatures were recorded during each whole experiment, and the value at the moment of failure was extracted. All specimens registered temperatures from 42.5 An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on the dataset presented by both Taguchi experimental arrays executed for each infill pattern. Once calculated the associated linear model, an Anderson Darling test to check the residual normality hypothesis of both sets of values was performed. The Interactions between layer height, nozzle diameter and fill density were also assessed through the ANOVA. Only the interaction nozzle diameter – layer height proved to be influential considering a 5% confidence level, as shows Different pictures of the specimen broken areas after the fatigue tests have been taken with a MOTIC SMC binocular loupe equipped with a MOTICAM 3 digital camera. The following figures show singular specimens that have been found interesting to illustrate the fracture process, and to compare both infills. In all cases, the crack begins around the area near the first or the last printed layer, as can be observed in In the specimens printed with the honeycomb infill pattern at 75% of infill, the fracture is fragile over the entire surface ( For the sake of comparison, specimens manufactured with a 25% infill present a ductile break on their outer layers, whereas the core fibers show fragile rupture ( These observations justify the information provided in Crack propagation as a combination of bending and shear stress defines the failure mode of this kind of specimens, as was already discussed by other authors The analyzed results lead to the conclusion that there is an optimal combination of parameters in the defined DOE, which are summarized at With this data, different fatigue tests to construct the Wöhler curve were carried out at each of the indicated stress levels The least-squares regression model used is according to Eq. The S-N equation in logarithms form is (4). Comparing Eqs. A potential curve, corresponding to Eq. The influence of fill density and pattern, nozzle diameter, layer height and printing speed on fatigue performance of cylindrical specimens has been studied through a Taguchi DOE. The following conclusions can be stated: Fill density shows the highest influence in fatigue performance, followed by nozzle diameter and layer height, whereas printing speed shows no relevant influence in PLA specimens. The honeycomb infill pattern is advised to manufacture FDM parts, as it enables a longer lifespan with regards to specimens manufactured using a rectilinear infill, requiring the same approximate manufacturing time. A combination of 75% infill density, 0.5 The interaction between the nozzle diameter and layer height shows that using similar nozzle dimeter and layer height values derives in a detrimental fatigue performance of the part due to inappropriate deposition of material. The nozzle diameter should be, at least, 1.5 times the value of layer height to ensure proper cohesion between filaments for an enhanced part integrity. A combination of brittle and ductile fracture patters has been found in the different specimens. In all cases, the fracture crack starts in the outer layers of the specimens, where the geometrical stress concentrator is found. This fact evidences the need of finishing the outer layers of parts as a mean of enhancing their fatigue behavior. No thermal effect has been observed in the failure of PLA parts due to oscillating stresses.