Visual bubble sizing techniques rely on the representation of bubbles by a single metric, typically an equivalent diameter. This poses a particular challenge when bubbles are large as they are not spherical and change shape when in motion. Using the McGill bubble size analyser, a protocol for assigning bubble diameter based on bubble shape was developed, minimising the error associated with volumetric representation.The final hurdle for bubble sizing using any visual technique is the representation of bubbles by a single diameter. Beyond ∼3 mm, bubbles cease to be spherical, introducing the need for equivalent diameters which attempt to represent a non-spherical object by a single number. These equivalent diameters may be formed using selected metrics from image analysis. As a complication, image analysis techniques present only two dimensions such that the bubble shape in the third dimension must be assumed. Beyond spherical, bubbles assume a variety of shapes, the simplest being the ellipsoid. However, as these large bubbles move, their shape constantly changes due to pressure fluctuations. Along with metrics such as area, maximum and minimum radii, three diameters are output by Empix Northern Eclipse v6.0 (image analysis software used with the MBSA). Diameter (the longest chord across an object through its centre of mass) is the simplest output, and the only one to be directly measured. For a perfect circle, Diameter represents the true diameter of the object. As objects become progressively less spherical, Diameter becomes less representative of the true bubble size. The remaining diameters are the Equivalent Circle Diameter (ECD), and Equivalent Volume Diameter (EVD). For relatively spherical bubbles, ECD is considered the most accurate diameter, and is blanket assigned to most data sets consisting predominantly of bubbles less than 3 mm. EVD, also known as the equivalent spherical diameter, is considered the most applicable to non-spherical bubbles. Other equivalent diameters may be calculated based on other metrics, however these have not been used, as bubble dimension assignment throughout the literature is largely restricted to one of these three diameters ( The current method entails the calculation of the same equivalent diameter (Diameter, ECD or EVD) for each bubble in the set. Distributions may then be produced, typically against number or volume. To calculate a distribution by volume, the selected diameter is assumed to be the diameter of a sphere, thus assigning a bubble volume. As many bubble size distributions contain a variety of bubble shapes, ranging from spherical to irregular, it was thought that a method of diameter assignment based on individual bubble characteristics would increase the accuracy of the overall process. In order to evaluate the accuracy of an assigned diameter, comparison to a standard must be made. In the case of bubble measurement the only absolute standard is bubble volume, being the only true indication of bubble size that may be directly measured. The volume predicted for a sphere based on the assigned diameter may thus be compared to the true volume and an indication of error obtained. Two size classes of bubbles, small (∼3 mm) and large (>3 mm) were generated, and a diameter assignment protocol developed. Generation of single bubbles, ∼3 mm in diameter, was achieved using pressure difference to drive a small volume of gas, producing bubbles from a capillary. The setup, outlined in Bubbles were generated through a 0.5 mm (nominal) glass or plastic capillary without frother, yielding reasonably spherical bubbles of ∼3 mm. To measure bubble volume, an inverted burette with a belled tip was used to capture the bubbles ( Capillaries were again used, but for the selected orifice sizes, 2.5 and 3.5 mm, the pressure drop achieved with the two-tank setup proved inadequate. Instead, a flow meter was employed and air directly fed to the capillaries at a rate of 0.06 L/min. Single bubbles could not be produced, as fine control over the gas rate was not achievable. Instead, several bubbles (a `cluster') of various sizes (typically non-spherical) were periodically produced from the capillary, making independent measurement by burette impossible. To measure the total volume of bubbles in this case, the MBSA was arranged so that bubbles from each cluster entered the sampling tube. The camera field of view was set such that all bubbles passed through it. At the same time the water level in the viewing chamber was measured. At the end of the trial, the sampling tube was sealed, all bubbles allowed to clear the viewing chamber, and the water level measured again to give the total volume of bubbles collected. During image capture every bubble was imaged exactly once using manual capture coupled with slow motion video. It was established that every bubble was counted during processing, thus allowing a comparison of the true total volume with the calculated volume based on assigned diameters. For the purpose of diameter assignment the sphericity of each bubble was assessed and an appropriate diameter selected. Initially only the `small bubbles' were used, as the volume error associated with each individual bubble could be calculated from the true bubble volume. The diameter (Diameter, ECD or EVD) giving a predicted volume closest to the true bubble volume was assigned. It was noted that the error associated with ECD and EVD assignments were comparable, thus only Diameter and EVD were assigned for simplicity. Several means of assessing bubble sphericity apart from the shape factor were devised. The favoured indication, being the most sensitive, was the area ratio (Eq.  The diameter assignment method is summarised below: IF ECD ELSE assign EVD It can be seen that the error associated with small, relatively spherical bubbles is reduced. Generally the reduction was from the order of 20% volume under estimation with the assignment of strictly ECD as in the current MBSA technique, to less than 5% error by the proposed assignment method. The error is also now more random (showing both positive and negative values), compared to the current method which always yielded an underestimation of the true volume. In the case of the large bubble sets, the results show more scatter in the error, particularly the error associated with assigning only EVD. This scatter reflects the irregular nature of the distributions produced. Set 1, showing high error associated with EVD includes significant numbers of small, spherical bubbles, which are better represented by Diameter. In contrast, the two sets with low error associated with EVD contained predominantly irregular bubbles that are considered best represented by EVD, which evidently is the case. The proposed method is a compromise, assigning diameters based on individual bubble characteristics, giving consistently low error for all three sets. A diameter assignment protocol based on individual bubble characteristics, easily automated using MS Excel functions has been presented. To assess the effectiveness, the calculated volume of a spherical bubble having the assigned diameter was compared to the true volume. The volumetric comparison involving the cube of the assigned diameter provides a sensitive test. Generally, assignment of exclusively ECD or EVD led to underestimation, with the proposed assignment method markedly reducing this error and making it random. The error associated with assigning only one diameter showed significant scatter for large bubble sets, reflecting the distribution of bubble shapes present. The diameter assignment method, allowing for a representative diameter to be selected based on bubble characteristics, reduced the error, indicating more accurate representation. Generally, the proposed diameter assignment method, while adding seconds to processing time, yields improved bubble size results over the current technique, for both spherical and non-spherical bubbles. Funding was initiated under the Industry Chair in Mineral Processing co-sponsored by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Inco, Falconbridge, Teck Cominco, Noranda, and now Corem and SGS-Lakefield Research.