In this study adsorption of rhenium ions from single and bi-component solutions (Re-Mo) by Purolite A170 was studied experimentally and described by isotherm, kinetic and thermodynamic modeling. Considering coefficient of determination (R2) and values of root mean squared error (RMSE) for the multicomponent isotherms, the extended model of Freundlich isotherm was found to be successful. Moreover, fitting the time-dependent data into different mechanisms showed that the data comply well with the pseudo-second order model. Results from the binary systems demonstrated that the presence of the secondary metal ions in the system causes a decrease in the adsorption capacity of rhenium, which is mainly due to the competitive effects of metals for adsorption sites. Furthermore, evaluation of thermodynamic parameters showed that the reaction mechanisms are different for both systems; however, due to negative values of ΔH, in competitive condition the adsorption of rhenium becomes more feasible with increasing the temperature.Rhenium with abundance concentration of 1 Separation of rhenium from the solution could be achieved through different methods such as precipitation, ion-exchange, and solvent extraction. But currently due to high affinity of perrhenate anions (ReO Previous studies have shown that in multicomponent systems, amongst all the various involved metal ions (ferrous and nonferrous), just molybdenum due having very similar chemical behavior with rhenium (the ionic radius of Re In a binary Re-Mo system, at pH range of 1–10, perrhenate ions have a stable form of monomeric anion while the structure of Mo ions depends on pH values in the contacting solution tending to form anionic and cationic species. Therefore, it seems that by selecting a proper adsorbent type and grain size and also pH range, these two elements can be separated efficiently ( Literature survey shows that thus far there is no investigation about detection and description of governing phenomena on the processes of Re-Mo joint presence systems processing using ion exchange method. So, it could be of a great importance to study of a such system to discover the selective or successive adsorption and also mutual effect of metal ion on the sorption of other metal ions, since the presence of other metal ions can lead to synergism, antagonism or non-interaction mechanisms ( The present study is undertaken to investigate the rhenium ions competitive uptake behavior from the single (Re) and the binary (Re-Mo) metal ions solutions onto Purolite A170 (weak base/macroporous resin) by the equilibrium, kinetics and thermodynamic relationships. Rhenium and Molybdenum standard stock solutions were prepared by dissolving NH The A170 anionite preliminary was converted to SO The adsorption experiments were carried out under static condition with flasks of 150 Equilibrium studies and development of appropriate isotherm models are basic requirements to analysis and optimize of an adsorption system ( Equilibrium data obtained from both Re and Mo single component systems were analyzed separately, using linear forms of four the most frequently applied isotherm models, namely, Langmuir, Freundlich, Temkin and Dubinin–Radushkevich (Eqs. The calculated isotherm parameters are listed in The Langmuir model is the best-known isotherm for describing adsorption from aqueous solution. This model assumes that there is no interaction between the adsorbate molecules and due to homogenous distribution of active sites on the adsorbent surface the adsorption is localized in amonolayer ( Another empirical equation is the Freundlich model with K The value of E in D-R model is usually applied to distinguish the physical and chemical adsorption of metal ions. When the value is below 8 In multicomponent solutions the interactions and competitions between different adsorbates to reach the adsorbent, complicate the process. To evaluate such systems, several methodologies have been derived and developed from those of the single-component systems. In the present work, since the adsorption behavior of the investigated metals species in the single-component systems obeyed the Langmuir and Freundlich models, their developed forms for multi component adsorption isotherms namely Extended Langmuir, Modified Langmuir, Extended Freundlich and Langmuir-Freundlich models (Eqs. This procedure was performed in MATLAB program. RMSE (root of mean square errors) was also used to evaluate quality of the fitting. RMSE is given as: Fitting parameters, correlation coefficients (R It is evident from the data that the Extended Freundlich model with higher coefficients of determination R Mutual interference effects of metal ions on adsorption capacity can be probe using Analysis of ion exchange kinetics and thermodynamic parameters, such as diffusion coefficient, energy and entropy of activation, or free energy change are of importance as they provide valuable insight into the reaction pathways and into the mechanism of the reaction. In the present work the evaluation of essential parameters for rhenium uptake from both single and binary systems have been done with variation of Re and Mo sorption as a result of temperature changing. Modeling of batch kinetic adsorption performed using linear form of pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order, Elovich and intra-particle diffusion equations (Eqs. The kinetic models parameters and selectivity coefficient (R Identifying the ion exchange process rate limiting step and involved likely mechanism is commonly performed through the intra-particle diffusion model ( The magnitude of A170 affinity for studied metal ions was determined by separation percentage (r Comparing r Differences between average values of r Temperature variations impact on thermodynamic constants of Re & Mo ions adsorption on the A170, including changes in the enthalpy (ΔH), entropy (ΔS) and free energy (ΔG) were calculated using the following equations:  The negative variation of Gibbs free energies show that the adsorption of Re from both systems are spontaneous over the temperature range 299–321 The adsorption mechanism of rhenium on Purolite A170 from single and Re - Mo jointed systems was studied by isotherms, kinetics and thermodynamic modeling. In single systems, the Langmuir maximum adsorption capacity of Re and Mo were found the same (166.67 Investigation of mutual interference effects of Mo ions on Re adsorption capacity indicated that due to trend of molybdenum ions for occupying vacant sites on adsorbent, always the adsorption of perrhenate ions is suppressed. Kinetic studies showed that the adsorption of the discussed metal ions from the both systems follows a second-order kinetic model with R The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the This work was supported by the National Iranian Copper Industries Co. (NICICO).