Ordered mesoporous graphitic carbon nitrides were prepared by directly condensing the uniform mixtures of melamine and KIT-6. After removal of the KIT-6 sacrificial template, the carbon nitrides were characterized with TEM, N2 physical adsorption, XRD, FT-IR, XPS, UV–vis and PL spectrometries, and tested for their RhB photocatalytic degradation activity. Together, these characterizations confirmed the as-prepared tunable mesoporous materials with enhanced charge separation efficiency and superior photocatalytic performance. Compared with a conventional bulk g-C3N4, ordered mesoporous g-C3N4 exhibits a larger specific surface area of 279.3m2/g and a pore size distribution about 4.0nm and 13.0nm. Meanwhile, the reduced bandgap energy of 2.77eV and lower photogenerated electron-hole pair recombination frequency were evidenced by UV–Vis and PL spectra. The RhB photocatalytic degradation activity maximizes with a mass ratio of KIT-6/melamine of 80% (KCN80), and the kinetic constant reaches 0.0760min−1 which is 16 times higher than that of the bulk sample. Reusability of KCN80 was demonstrated by a lack of evident deactivation after three consecutive reaction periods. The direct condensation of the KIT-6 and melamine mixture does not require pre-casting of the precursor into the pore system of the templates. Owing to its high product yield, improved SBET, reduced bandgap energy and limited charge recombination, the facile-prepared ordered mesoporous g-C3N4 is a practical candidate for further modification.With a visible light driven bandgap and proper band edges, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C Introducing mesopores into g-C Herein, ordered mesoporous g-C KIT-6 was synthesized according to a previously published procedure Ordered mesoporous g-C Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken on a Tecnai G2 20 S-twin instrument. N The photocatalytic performance was tested in a quartz glass reactor with a 500 KIT-6, with three dimensionally ordered mesopores, served as a sacrificial template. KIT-6 exhibited a large surface area of S The morphology of the as-prepared catalysts was characterized with TEM and N To further confirm the presence of mesopores, N XRD and FT-IR spectroscopy were conducted to investigate the crystalline structure of the as-prepared samples. XPS spectra were collected to further give insight into the chemical states and composition of BCN and KCN80 (shown in The optical properties of samples BCN and KCN80 were investigated with UV–vis, PL spectrometry and photocurrent test as shown in The photocatalytic performance as well as the reusability of BCN and representative KCNx samples were evaluated with the RhB photodegradation reaction. As shown in The trapping experiments of reactive oxidation species were conducted to identify the reaction mechanism. The species in photocatalytic degradation reaction are most likely hydroxyl radical ( Mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride was prepared from the direct condensation of the uniform mixture of melamine and KIT-6. The KIT-6 templated KCN80 shows an increased mesoporous surface area, enhanced photoabsorption, improved charge carrier separation efficiency, and greater photocatalytic performance. The mass ratio of KIT-6/Melamine has a strong influence on the S This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: