The dynamic fragmentation of gabbro and granitoid tiles, and coarser and finer grained granitoid blocks have been examined for impact energies of 21–6180J. Intra-grain fragmentation and inter-granular frictional melting were observed to be common features of the fragmentation process. Consideration of analytical models indicate these temperatures are achievable under these moderate impact conditions.
                  Median values of the number-based sub-10μm fines, and the number- and volume-based 10μm to 2mm fragments were compared with existing theoretical models predicting dominant fragment size. The simplistic model proposed by Grady predicts reasonably well the median fragment size for the volume-based distribution. More complex models are able to predict reasonably well median values for number-based distributions. Ultra-fine production was not predictable. These results suggest there are two distinct fragment-forming mechanisms during impact testing of natural materials. One mechanism is based on energy considerations of the bulk material, which produces the larger fragment sizes, and the other is associated with micro-scale comminution, which produces sub-10μm fines.scaling parameter for the Levy and Molinari longitudinal wave speed, m/s specific heat, J proportionality constant Young’s modulus, Pa fraction of heat flowing into the surface fracture energy, J/m thermal conductivity, W kinetic energy, J fracture toughness, Pa fractal dimension contact length, m heat flux, W/m average fragment size according to Glenn and Chudnovksy average fragment size according to Grady average fragment size according to Zhou average fragment size according to Levy and Molinari average fragment size according to Glenn and Chudnovksy thickness of target, m characteristic time defined by Zhou  impact velocity, m/s velocity of the sliding surface, m/s yield stress, Pa strain rate, s average strength for the Levy and Molinari Poisson ratio material density, kg/m compressive strength of the material before failure, Pa strength of the weakest link in a probability distribution of defects Hugoniot elastic limit, Pa Comminution is the process of particle-size reduction through crushing or grinding. It is energy-intensive and results from the interaction of poorly understood micro-scale friction, fracture, and plastic deformation processes. During comminution, particle fracture initiates at pre-existing flaws and propagates in response to local tensile stress components acting normal to the crack plane The reduction of particle sizes via comminution is energy intensive A critical size for comminuted fragments has been observed below which no further fragmentation occurs This paper explores the dynamic fragmentation of natural ceramic granitoid and gabbro tiles (10 The impact tests were performed at the French-German Research Institute of Saint-Louis (ISL), France, to investigate the dynamic fracture of natural ceramic materials. The SR 3/60 electromagnetic railgun was used as the launching platform. Materials include: fine ( The Morphologi G3 Post-impact features of the targets ( Shown in Shown in Shown in Kick Characteristics of fragment size and circularity (2 Distributions for both tiles are bi-modal with peaks at sub-10 Corresponding values of Shown in Physical features of the fragmentation process are examined using scanning electron microscopy in Intra-fragment features for the finer grained granitoid block are shown in Finally, shown in The heat source is produced from sliding surfaces and is estimated as the shear stress multiplied by the velocity. The shear stress is obtained from the normal yield stress of plagioclase (10 Formation mechanisms of sub 10 The dynamic fragmentation of gabbro and finer grained granitoid tiles, and coarser and finer grained granitoid blocks has been examined. Substantial intra-grain fragmentation is observed to be a common physical feature of the fragmentation process. This enhances energy dissipation. The generation of temperatures of the order of 1400 Analysis of the rear of the target reveals the formation of cones for the finer grained granitoid block and the gabbro and granitoid tiles. No observable cones are present in the coarser grained blocks. The formation of cones in the targets is commonly observed in impact tests Next, the total volume contribution of the Hertzian cone with respect to the total volume of the target is considered. Assuming the cone has smooth sides and an apex angle of 27°, the ratio of the mass contained in the cone to the target mass is 0.01 for the 10 Greater ejection sensitivity (i.e., power-law exponent) for larger grained materials is associated with increased larger-scale fracturing along, for example, grain boundaries. Secondary effects in the finer grained materials, such as comminution and associated energy dissipation via plastic deformation and heat, further limits the ejection sensitivity of these materials. Finer materials are less resistant to an increase in additional input energy due to increased strength The consideration of fragmentation at sub-2 Fractal dimensions for Fractal dimensions for the volume distribution of fragmentation sizes are smaller than the associated Automated microscopy of sub-200 Median values of automated microscopy, Glenn and Chudnovksy Zhou et al. Shown in The dynamic fragmentation of gabbro and granitoid tiles, and coarser and finer grained granitoid blocks has been examined. Intra-grain fragmentation and inter-granular frictional melting were observed to be common features of the fragmentation process. Consideration of analytical models by Jaeger Circumferential and radial-through cracking, and fracturing along inherent flaws (coarser blocks) was the primary mode of material ejection from the target. Increased inter-granular fragmentation and enhanced surface grinding contributed to lower impact energy sensitivities for material removal. Sub 10 Median values of the number-based sub-10 Important length scales and physical mechanisms identified here can be used to improve and validate multi-scale models of natural ceramic fragmentation. Combined with implementation of damage laws This work was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) PGS-D scholarship to JDH and funding from NSERC, the Canada Research Chairs program and the Canada Foundation for Innovation to JGS. Planetary and Space Science Centre contribution 69. The authors would like to thank the effort and contribution during the experimental phase of the study of Yannick Boehrer, Gregory Vincent, David Bluntzer and Philippe Baumann at ISL. The authors would also like to thank the technical support of Alon Vaisman during measurements at Malvern Instruments and Suporn Boonsue for SEM operation. Karen Shea is thanked for her continued support and preparation of this manuscript.