Scratch testing is one of the most usual characterisation techniques for systems with thin hard coatings. Scratch tests are performed at run at room temperature, due to the risk of degradation of the indenter diamond tip at high temperature and added test complexity. However, results obtained at room temperature may differ from the final system performance in high temperature applications, due to factors such as substrate thermal softening.
                  In this work, a simple and a robust test for the mechanical characterisation of hard PVD coatings at high temperature and open atmosphere has been developed, based on a modification of the scratch test where the diamond tip is replaced by a WC indenter. The test has been used to evaluate the effect of temperature up to 500°C on commercial PVD AlCrN coating deposited on tool steel subject to different surface treatments. Results show a decrease in the failure load Lc2 with increasing temperature, and a very noticeable effect of substrate nitriding.Thin ceramic coatings, and hard PVD coatings in particular, show a series of characteristics, such as very high hardness, chemical stability and oxidation resistance, which make them attractive for many high temperature applications, including tooling for hot metal forming, engine components or wear resistant parts. One of the most common characterisation methods for systems including hard coatings is scratch testing However, it is known that the performance of coated systems is affected by temperature. For instance, Allsopp and Hutchings Another factor that is believed to have a significant influence on the performance of a coated system is the load bearing capacity provided by the substrate. For instance, combined nitriding and coating deposition, as in Duplex processes, is a growing trend in hot work tool steels, which usually attain overall lower hardness than cold work tool steels and which benefit enormously from the additional load bearing capacity provided by a nitrided substrate. He et al. In this work, a simple and robust high temperature scratch test methodology is developed in which the diamond-tipped indenter is replaced by a hard metal blade. These blades can be used at temperatures in excess of 600 Disc samples 40 Samples B and C were subject to nitriding processes. B-samples were subject to a short plasma nitriding process (4.5 Modified scratch tests were performed using a Bruker CETR UMT-2 multifunction tribometer, equipped with a high temperature test chamber. The commonly used Rockwell C indenter was in this case replaced by disposable carbide micro-scratch blades, supplied by CETR. These prismatic blades had a rounded corner with nominal 400 Test procedure was analogous to the conventional scratch test. Blade tips were loaded against the sample surface at an initial load of 1 Coefficient of Friction (COF) and Acoustic Emission (AE) signal were registered online during testing, using sensors integrated in the testing apparatus. Measurement of Acoustic Emission was not possible for 500 Failure load was identified as peaks in the COF and AE signals. Additionally, scratch tracks were analysed by means of optical microscopy and by optical profilometry, using a SensoFar Plμ2300 confocal microscope. Failure load Lc2 was identified as the point at which delamination occurred (Lc2). Mechanical characterisation of the coated systems was performed by means of instrumented indentation with a Berkovich tip at loads up to 30 Results obtained showed both lower hardness and elastic modulus for sample A compared to nitrided samples B and C. However, samples B and C showed almost identical properties. Sample C showed a sudden drop in its properties at the indentation depth of 8 Prior to high temperature scratch testing, samples were characterised by means of the conventional, room temperature scratch test performed with a Rockwell C indenter with a 200 It must be noticed that failure loads obtained with the modified scratch test are much lower than those obtained with Rockwell C indenter. This difference is due to the different morphology of the tip: compared to the spherical contact generated using a Rockwell C indenter, the modified test generates an entirely different stress field. This is consistent with the existing literature; the effect of indenter radius on critical load has been studied experimentally and analytically by various authors, such as Randall et al. In the case of scratches performed with Rockwell C indenters, all samples showed delamination load Lc2 well over 30 Results obtained with the modified test showed good internal consistency. A clear increase in failure load could be observed for the nitrided sample B (13.2 A comparison of scratch results with the previously shown characterisation by means of instrumented indentation is not straightforward. The performance increase observed in scratch results was not detected in E and H curves for the studied samples. This can be related to the different loads applied: indentation tests apply normal load over a localised area, whilst scratch tests create a complex stress field including a friction-generated component and moving over the sample surface.  This study was performed at room temperature, 300 A clear tendency of reduction in failure load with increasing temperature could be observed. This decrease was particularly noticeable from room temperature to 300 In order to identify this possible contribution of substrate thermal softening to decreased performance, scratch tracks were analysed by means of confocal microscopy. The evolution of failure load Lc2 was studied for the three coated systems. Results are summarised in It must be noticed that a relative improvement in failure load decreased with increasing temperature. Sample C almost tripled the failure load of sample A at room temperature (8.8 Scratch tracks were analysed at the moment of failure using confocal microscopy, as shown in The effect of load support was further studied by examining the cross-section of the scratch track at the point corresponding to a load of 5 These results can be used to explain the decreasing failure load as a function of temperature observed in However, it is likely that substrate softening is not the only factor governing failure load. For instance, samples A and B showed a considerable plastic deformation at 300 A methodology for the mechanical characterisation of thin hard coatings on tool steels from room temperature up to 500 System performance is clearly affected by temperature: failure load is reduced as temperature increases. The load bearing capacity provided by surface nitriding notably increases scratch resistance in all the studied temperature range. The presence of a hard white layer further increases this support. Relative performance improvement provided by substrate nitriding is reduced at the highest temperature (500 Both performance improvement through substrate nitriding and reduction in failure load as temperature increases can be explained through the better load bearing capacity provided by a harder substrate. To a lesser extent, however, coating properties are also affected by temperature and affect the overall system performance. Authors declare no conflict of interest in the work presented. The authors wish to thank Dr Arnd Mueller from Oerlikon Balzers for his support and collaboration. This work was partially funded by the