This work describes a methodology for Cd and Pb determination in sewage sludge slurry samples using thermospray flame furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (TS-FF-AAS). The TS-FF-AAS system was equipped with a Ni tube atomizer placed on an oxidizing air/acetylene flame. Two multivariate calibration models based on partial least squares (PLS) were proposed using total peak profiles (recorded during 57s). Metals concentration in the sewage sludge samples were from 1.87 to 6.26mgkg−1 for Cd and from 101 to 327mgkg−1 for Pb. The limits of detection and quantification were, respectively, 0.2 and 0.7μgkg−1 for Cd and 8 and 26μgkg−1 for Pb. These values were three times lower than the limits found when these metals were calibrated using linear calibration with aqueous standard solutions.Lead presents physiological and neurological toxic properties and can affect the human body Atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) is one of the most employed and spread analytical techniques for determination of toxic metals, including Cd and Pb in soils, sediments and sewage sludge. In this case, the development of sensitive and accurate analytical methodologies is necessary. Some fundamental AAS experiments were reported in the 1950s by Walsh Using BIFF-AAS and TS-FF-AAS it is possible to reach residence time of approximately 100 The use of chemometric tools, such as multivariate calibration, could be an alternative to overcome these problems, although its application in AAS is uncommon. For instance, in 2003, Felipe-Sotelo et al. The sensitivity and the simplicity of TS-FF-AAS associated to the characteristics of PLS can be an alternative procedure to overcome problems with concomitant and in the calibration, mainly when slurry samples are analyzed. In this work, we focus on the utilization of PLS in conjunction to TS-FF-AAS for Cd and Pb determination in sewage samples. These samples present high silica content and, using PLS, some problems with different analyte atomization process presented in the slurry sample and aqueous calibration solutions can be avoided. A Perkin-Elmer Aanalyst 300 spectrometer (USA) equipped with a deuterium lamp background corrector was used for Cd and Pb determinations. The metals’ measurement, were performed using electrodeless discharge lamps for Cd (228.8 In the TS-FF-AAS determinations, a Ni tube (99%) with 100 Calibration solutions for Cd (5.0–25 In this work, seven sewage sludge samples were studied. Two of them were certified samples (BCR 144R and 145R, IRMM, Belgium). Additional samples were obtained from a city Sewage Treatment Station. This station is located in São Paulo State, Brazil, which collects domestic and industrial sewage from a city with more than 400,000 inhabitants. This type of sewage can be used, after previous metal, toxic organic material and pathogenic organism evaluation, to amend soils for agricultural purposes. The collected samples were dried (60 For Cd and Pb determinations using TS-FF-AAS, a simple slurry sample introduction methodology was developed. The concentration of slurries ranged from 0.1 to 1.0% (m/v) for Cd (final concentration from 3.9 to 44.9 On the other hand, a comparison test was performed by mineralizing the samples in a digestor block (Quimis, Brazil). In this process, a sample of 100 Four different calibration strategies were studied. The first consists of a linear calibration using aqueous standard solutions (concentrations described in the previous section). This strategy follows a previous methodology presented by Pereira-Filho et al. in biological slurry sample analyses In the second strategy the standard addition method was investigated where Cd and Pb standard solutions were added to the slurries. In the third strategy, a linear calibration was proposed to relate the analytical signals from the slurries (absorbance—Abs and integrated Abs) and the concentrations obtained by the comparison tests (mineralization). Finally, the fourth strategy accomplished a multivariate calibration procedure where models were built using the whole peak profile and the concentration obtained by mineralization procedure. In this case, the analytical data was treated as, for example, a spectrum normally obtained by infrared techniques. In these last 2 strategies, a total of 57 and 50 slurries were analyzed for Cd and Pb, respectively. Slurries were analyzed at least three times. Each signal was recorded during 57 In the third and fourth strategies, several slurries were chosen to build the linear calibration and multivariate calibration set. To select these signals, two principal component analysis (PCA) In the first strategy, the acid type and concentration for slurry preparations were optimized. Two acids were tested (HNO Consequently, another strategy (third strategy) was tried without using the information from the aqueous standard solution. In the slurry preparation procedure, the concentration of HNO For the third strategy, some slurry signals were selected to build a linear calibration. To help in this selection, two PCAs (for Cd and Pb) were performed. In these procedures, only the first two Principal Components (PC) were necessary because they explain about 100% of data variance. The samples used to build a linear calibration covered a wide range from 3.9 to 44.9 Multivariate models were developed using the same slurries set (calibration set) and Cd and Pb concentrations reported in the third strategy, and the data were not pre-processed. To select the most favorable number of latent variables (LV) for the PLS model, some parameters, like PRESS (predictive residual error sum of squares), RMSEC (root mean square error for calibration) and the explained variance in These models were tested in the validation set and a good concordance between the reference and predicted values was also found (0.9860 for Cd and 0.9878 for Pb). The relative errors between both values (reference and predicted) were from −21 to 8% for Cd and from −8 to 10% for Pb.  For the third and fourth strategies the bias and the standard deviation of the validation errors (SDV) were calculated. The bias values were evaluated observing a Finally The Ni tube was used for more than 1300 determinations (around 40 The sensitivity (SEN) for both models using slurry signals was calculated as The limit of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ) were calculated as: An important point worth to be emphasized is that the limits obtained using PLS were three (for both metals) times lower than the limits observed in the first strategy (calibration curve using aqueous standard solution). Cadmium and lead were determined using slurries and PLS and, in addition, a more sensitive methodology was settled. This higher sensitivity observed in the multivariate models was due to the fact that in PLS, 114 parameters were taken into account and not one (Abs or integrated Abs) as in the first strategy. The proposed methodology led to Cd and Pb determination in sewage sludge slurry samples using multivariate calibration and the whole peak profile. It was possible to obtain a good concordance among certified, mineralized and PLS results. The LOD and LOQ were three times lower than the values obtained in linear calibration using aqueous standard solutions. This procedure can be extended to the determination of other metals and sample analyses, where problems with concomitants are observed. The major advantage is that it is possible to work with slurry samples and the calibration model can be improved with additional samples obtained in different occasions. Furthermore, the analytical frequency is high, 60 determinations per hour, while the Ni tube life time is still to be established. The authors are grateful to the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP) for the financial support (process number 04/01970-4) and the fellowship granted to ERPF (process number 04/08796-0).