As a member of the nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates (N-BPs), alendronate (ALN), marketed as Fosamax (alendronate sodium trihydrate), was the first potent and highly effective nonhormonal antiosteoporotic agent available for clinical use. The high potency of ALN (70mg, by month once weekly), which comes despite its very low bioavailability (<1%), can partly be attributed to its specific targeting to the osteoclast on bone. At the time of its introduction, the bioavailability and targeting of ALN were established, although the exact molecular mechanism was still an unknown. Modern drug discovery involves the identification of a ‘druggable’ target, enzyme, or receptor, involved in the disease process. Selection and dosing of function-altering ligands for clinical development is based on the therapeutic window between efficacy and safety. Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination (ADME) play key roles in establishing this window for each compound. For ALN the discovery process established efficacy and safety prior to and during clinical testing. Only several years after its introduction did we make significant progress in elucidating ALN's molecular mechanism of action as an inhibitor of the isoprenoid biosynthetic enzyme, farnesyl diphosphate synthase. This chapter will discuss briefly the nature of osteoporosis and the utility of ALN as an effective antifracture, antiosteoporotic agent. The greater part will focus on the mechanism of action of ALN and how this mechanism was discovered.Osteoporosis is a reduction in bone mass and bone microarchitecture leading to increased bone fragility and fracture risk. The most common cause of osteoporosis is increased bone turnover with excessive bone resorption (destruction) that exceeds bone formation. Among women, this is often caused by estrogen deficiency following menopause. A second large and independent contributor is glucocorticoid use. Later in life, a combination of vitamin D insufficiency, reduced 1,25(OH) Incidence of fracture increases with age, and associated increased risk of trauma with falls, which is an independent contributor. The most common fractures occur in the spine, and their frequency increases progressively in women and men beginning in the sixth and seventh respective decades of life. The most serious fractures are of the hip. The incidence of these increases steadily, reaching a rate of about 5% per year in the ninth decade of life. Approximately 70–75% of all hip fractures occur in women, likely due to their earlier and more dramatic bone loss, gender-based differences in bone mass, and greater longevity. Men reach the fracture threshold about a decade later than women. With the continued increase in life expectancy due to medical and other advancements it is projected that the incidence of osteoporotic fractures will reach epidemic proportions within the next couple of decades if effective means to combat them are not implemented. Alendronate (ALN) has had the most extensive clinical use to date in terms of the number of patients, over 4 million, and duration of monitored treatment, over 10 years. Its ability to reduce hip and other fractures is documented in large randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials, and 10 years of follow-up data are available from the extension of phase III ALN clinical trials. In postmenopausal osteoporosis, bone turnover increases an average of 2–3 standard deviations above mean premenopausal levels. Interestingly, the increase in BMD at some skeletal sites with ALN (10 Bisphosphonates (BPs) are analogs of pyrophosphate (P–O–P) in which the geminal oxygen has been substituted by carbon ( The P–C–P backbone of ALN endows it and the entire BP class with several common properties, especially regarding pharmacokinetics. The highly charged phosphonate moieties of ALN limit absorption in the gut to around 0.6%, when administered fasting and formulated as the trihydrate monosodium salt of alendronic acid, with similar values seen for other N-BPs. Entry into the bloodstream is by paracellular transport, and renal excretion is the only route for elimination in part by glomerular filtration and by a secretory process that remains to be elucidated. On bone ALN binds to the mineral surface with no known interactions with the protein matrix. Because the resting surfaces of bone are covered with cells (osteoblasts and lining cells), the most exposed sites are those undergoing active bone resorption. It was shown that these are the preferential sites for ALN uptake in bone at pharmacologically relevant doses. The calculated terminal half-life for ALN is measured in years rather than days. The ALN released during this phase mostly includes BP previously buried beneath the bone surface. This is because ALN preferentially labels the bone resorption surface, and the resorption cycle is always followed by a subsequent cycle of bone formation at the same site. The ALN localized on the resorption surface is therefore covered by de novo synthesized bone, as has been demonstrated in the rat. Although tested for clinical use since the mid-1980s, the molecular target for ALN, along with other N-BPs, was not identified until 1999. Over the years, BPs were shown to affect several biochemical pathways. For example, ALN and numerous other BPs were found to inhibit the activity of several protein tyrosine phosphatases. Over 15 years ago, it was shown that certain BP derivatives (isoprenoid (phosphinylmethyl) phosphonates) weakly inhibit the cholesterol biosynthetic enzyme squalene synthase. The ability of ALN to inhibit sterol biosynthesis upstream of squalene synthase FPP synthase is responsible for the production of isoprenoid lipids FPP (15 carbon) and geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) (20 carbon). While FPP, formed by the condensation of three isopentenyl diphosphates (or isomers), is primarily used to synthesize cholesterol, it also can be used for protein isoprenylation. FPP can also be condensed with a fourth isopentenyl diphosphate to form GGPP. The blockade in synthesis of GGPP, albeit through indirect effects on FPP synthase, is critical for N-BP effects on suppressing osteoclastic bone resorption The ability of ALN and other N-BPs to inhibit the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway and protein isoprenylation was actually first demonstrated in J774 macrophages. The molecular actions of the N-BPs, described above, have been confirmed in vivo using surrogate markers. The relationship between molecular action and antiresorptive effects has been documented for BPs lacking and containing nitrogen. For the non-N-BPs, which are intracellularly metabolized to form toxic analogs, the mechanism is accepted based on the ability of the toxic analogs to reproduce the effects of the parent BPs when administered to the osteoclast. In addressing the downstream cellular mechanisms related to suppression of bone resorption, substantial evidence has accumulated to link loss of geranylgeranylation to induction of osteoclast apoptosis, disruption of the actin cytoskeleton, and altered membrane trafficking. The signaling pathways involving geranylgeranylated small GTPases that are affected by bisphosphonates and that lead to osteoclast apoptosis remain to be determined. Perhaps most proximal to the GTPases is the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)/ribosomal protein S6 kinase (S6K) signaling pathway. Downstream consequences of ALN inhibition of mTOR signaling include induction of (proapoptotic) Bim expression and suppression of protein translation. Independent effects of translation inhibitors such as cyclohexamide on the osteoclast do include the rapid induction of caspases, leading to osteoclast apoptosis. While induction of apoptosis will lead to a decrease in the number of osteoclasts and in turn suppress resorption, this effect is usually seen in vivo only after extended treatment with bisphosphonate. An observation that defines the N-BPs as a class is actually the increase in osteoclast number found in vivo within about 48 Based on these observations, other mechanisms of suppressing osteoclastic bone resorption seem more likely for ALN when administered at clinically relevant doses. As mentioned above, all BPs are rapidly taken up by the skeleton and localize preferentially on exposed mineral at bone resorption surfaces. Osteoclasts, the bone-resorbing cells, attach to the exposed mineral and start the bone resorption process. The result of the intracellular action of N-BPs, shown for pamidronate and ALN, During resorption osteoclasts internalize the content of the resorption lacunae via the ruffled border and translocate it through the cell by a process of transcytosis. Osteoporosis and other types of bone loss are associated with increased bone turnover and elevated levels of bone resorption. Osteoclastic bone resorption is a 2-week process that begins the bone remodeling process. Resorption itself can be effectively slowed or controlled by inhibiting osteoclast generation, reducing osteoclast activity, or both. ALN is one of the most effective inhibitors of bone resorption. ALN improvement of mechanical strength, reflected in a reduction in fracture risk, is caused by an increase in bone mass and mineralization (discussed above) as well as by an improvement in architecture, attributable to a reduction in bone turnover. A higher number of bone remodeling sites, where excessive osteoclastic destruction of bone takes place, leads to loss of bone tissue, formation of areas of stress concentration, and increased fracture risk. By reducing turnover, bisphosphonates reverse this condition. Effects on bone turnover can be estimated by measuring either cross-linked C-terminal or N-terminal bone collagen degradation products or deoxypyridinoline (formed from type 1 bone collagen) in the urine or in the blood. These degradation products come as a result of proteolytic activity within the resorption lacuna, followed by their release during transcytosis and subsequent extraskeletal metabolism. ALN-induced suppression of these markers can be detected within days, and maximal effects are reached within a few weeks whereupon levels stabilize and remain reduced at a stable level for the duration of treatment, followed up to 10 years for ALN so far. Very high doses of ALN (six times above clinical dosing), like risedronate, when administered for a period of 1 year, were reported to suppress bone turnover in dogs by up to 95% and cause accumulation of microcracks in both cortical and cancellous bone. Toxicological animal studies have been published on ALN, clodronate, etidronate, incadronate, pamidronate, and tiludronate. When bisphosphonates are administered subcutaneously, local toxicity can occur, with local inflammation and necrosis. This is especially the case for the N-BPs. Clinical evidence of upper gastrointestinal irritation is observed in some patients. To examine the mechanism of esophageal adverse events after oral administration of N-BPs, The effect of BPs does not appear due to be primarily due to an extracellular physicochemical effect on the mucosa. To address the issue of intracellular mechanism, recent studies have examined apoptosis and suppression of cell growth in in vitro models of the esophageal stratified epithelium and the large intestine. Ultimately, it is the randomized, placebo-controlled trials that provide the highest level of evidence with regard to the upper gastrointestinal safety of the BPs. Interestingly, an analysis of numerous clinical trials found no detectable increase in upper gastrointestinal adverse events, suggesting that the increase in risk is small. In conclusion, recent data have identified the mevalonate pathway enzyme FPP synthase as the primary molecular target of ALN. Inhibition of this enzyme reduces the isoprenylation of regulatory proteins in osteoclasts, thus reducing bone resorption. The specific loss of protein geranylgeranylation, and not farnesylation, is responsible for osteoclast inactivation. Because of the low bioavailability and short circulating half-life of ALN, the osteoclasts are the only nongastrointestinal cells exposed to high enough concentrations to allow ALN inhibition of FPP synthase. As such, these are the only bone-associated cells that respond to ALN treatment, as documented in their morphological and functional changes, as well as their selective loss of FPP synthase activity. The gastrointestinal mucosal irritation occasionally produced by N-BPs is a function of their very high local concentration immediately following an oral dose and appears to be related to effects on the same metabolic pathway. No other cells (briefly) exposed to circulating ALN display any similar response. In retrospect, the targeting of FPP synthase in the osteoclast provides an excellent mechanism for inhibition of osteoclast activity. Of note, the mechanism was identified when Fosamax had already been marketed for several years.