In order to recover pure alumina and synthesize magnesium spinel from black dross, a hydrometallurgical process was developed. This process consisted of 1) NaOH leaching of the mechanically activated black dross, 2) removal of silicate(IV) from the leaching solution by adsorption followed by coagulation, 3) precipitation of aluminum hydroxide from the purified leaching solution, 4) synthesis of magnesium spinel. Continuous experiments on the above-mentioned steps at optimum conditions were performed. Magnesium spinel was synthesized at 1000 °C for 5 hs by the co-precipitation method. The purity of spinel was 99.99 % and its characteristics were analyzed by XRD and SEM. Mass balance of the whole process indicated that the recovery percentage of alumina from the black dross was only 34 % owing to low leaching percentage. Further work on the pretreatments of black dross to improve its dissolution behavior is needed.Aluminum dross results from the re-melting of used aluminum cans and contains some aluminum metal together with other metal oxides. Treatment of aluminum dross to recover aluminum metal results in black dross, which consists of alumina, metal oxides and some kinds of salts In previous works, the effect of ball milling treatment on the leaching behavior of the oxides present in black dross was investigated by employing NaOH solution. Alumina together with some of silica was selectively dissolved in NaOH solution, while iron oxides and calcium and magnesium oxides were not dissolved Some methods such as nano-filtration, reverse osmosis, precipitation, coagulation, adsorption were employed to remove silicate(IV) Crystallization of aluminum hydroxide from the purified aluminate solution is an important step in the recovery of alumina from the black dross by the hydrometallurgical method. Aluminum hydroxide can be precipitated by reaction with hydrogen peroxide from the strong alkaline solution Several literatures have reported that magnesium spinel powder can be synthesized by solid-state reaction In previous studies, we have reported the synthesis of magnesium spinel by both ball milling and co-precipitation methods Our previous works were obtained from the synthetic solution of each step. The presence of minor elements in the real solution would have some effect on the purification of the leaching solution and the characteristics of the synthesized spinel. In developing a process, it is of immense importance to verify the process and report the process efficiency and mass balance of the important elements. Therefore, we conducted continuous experiments for the recovery of pure alumina from the black dross produced in a company. In each step, the optimum conditions which had been reported in the literature were applied. Finally, magnesium spinel was synthesized by using the recovered aluminum hydroxides and its characteristics were measured. Based on the results, a hydrometallurgical process was proposed to treat black dross and synthesize magnesium spinel. The black dross employed in this work was provided by a company in Korea. This black dross contained the oxides of Al, Ca, Fe, Mg, Si, and Ti together with some salts like KCl and NaCl. The salts present in black dross were dissolved in water at the following conditions: pulp density, 100 g/L; temperature, 90 °C and leaching time, 2 h. The residues were dried in an oven for 2 days and then milled at 400 rpm for 1 h. The XRD pattern of the black dross is shown in After the black dross was treated with water, the residues were mechanically activated at 400 rpm for 1 h (Fritsch Pulverisette 7 BeadMill, Fritsch, Idar-Oberstein, Germany). This mechanically activated dross was dissolved in a 5 M NaOH solution at 50 °C for 2 h at a pulp density of 100 g/L. In the leaching experiments, the mechanically activated dross was put into the NaOH solution in 1000 mL three-neck flat bottom beaker on the hot plate. During all the experiments, the beaker was kept closed by the cover to prevent the loss of the solution, and mixed solution was stirred by the magnetic stirrer bar. After the required reaction period, the samples were obtained at desired time intervals and separated from the solution by using vacuum filtration. For the removal of silicate(IV) from the leaching solution, various dosage of hydrocalumite/polyacrylamide (PAM) was added to 50 mL of real leaching solution in covered 100 mL beakers. The experiments were done by employing heating mantle with a magnetic stirrer bar. The mixture of hydrocalumite/PAM and leaching solution was stirred at desired temperature. The residue was separated from solution by using vacuum filtration. The concentration of Si(IV) and Al(III) in the filtrate was measured by ICP-OES (inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometers, Spectro Arcos). The removal percentage of silicate (R, %) was calculated by using equation (1) Aluminum hydroxides were obtained from the pure aluminate solution by reaction with hydrogen peroxide. The precipitated aluminum hydroxides were separated by vacuum filtration, washed several times with warm deionized water. Magnesium spinel was synthesized by co-precipitation method In the leaching of the mechanically activated black dross with NaOH solution, only alumina and silica were dissolved, while other oxides were not dissolved In order to remove silicate(IV) from the real leaching solution of black dross, adsorption experiments were performed by varying the dosage of hydrocalumite from 10−90 g/L. However, the removal percentage of aluminate(III) was very low when the hydrocalumite dosage was below 50 g/L but nearly 20 % of aluminate was removed when hydrocalumite dosage was in the range from 70 to 90 g/L. The results indicate that the removal of silicate(IV) alone from the real leaching solution of black dross is possible by adjusting the adsorbent dosage. At 50 g/L dosage of hydrocalumite, the removal percentage of silicate(IV) was about 95 %, while that of aluminate(III) was nearly zero. Therefore, 50 g/L dosage of hydrocalumite will be employed in the following experiments. In adsorption, reaction temperature has a significant effect on the removal of silicate(IV) and thus the effect of temperature was investigated. In these experiments, the removal of silicate(IV) was carried out for 2 h at 400 rpm. The results show that reaction temperature greatly affected the adsorption efficiency of silicate, while that of aluminate(III) was not affected (see The stirring speed has an important role in promoting the adsorption of silicate(IV) onto hydrocalumite. In these experiments, stirring speed was varied from 200 to 800 rpm in order to evaluate the effect on adsorption efficiency. The effect of stirring speed was investigated using 50 g/L hydrocalumite at 60 °C for 2 h. As shown in In order to find an optimum condition for the removal of silicate(IV), the effect of reaction time was investigated. The effect of reaction time was performed by varying reaction time from 2 to 8 h at 50 g/L hydrocalumite and 50 °C. After removal of silicate(IV) by reaction with hydrocalumite, about 60 mg/L of silicate(IV) still remained in the leaching solution. This silicate(IV) would be co-precipitated into aluminum hydroxide, which decreases the purity of the recovered alumina. Therefore, further removal of silicate(IV) was investigated by employing coagulation with polyacrylamide (PAM). In previous experiments on the removal of silicate by treatment with PAM and hydrocalumite, nearly complete removal of silicate(IV) was possible. However, it was difficult to remove silicate(IV) by either method from the real leaching solution. This might be due to the interference of other minor ingredients in the real leaching solution, which were not detected through ICP measurement. Therefore, it is necessary to employ consecutive steps to remove most of the silicate(IV) and other minor impurities from the real leaching solution of black dross. An important step in the recovery of alumina and synthesis of some compounds from the NaOH leaching solution of black dross is the crystallization of aluminum hydroxide from the solution. Aluminum hydroxide can be precipitated from the sodium aluminate solution by reacting with hydrogen peroxide In strong alkaline solution, metal ions may be entirely coordinated by hydroxide ions, like Al(OH) This hydrogen ion can react with aluminate(III) to precipitate aluminum hydroxide as shown in Eq. The precipitated aluminum hydroxides were separated by vacuum filtration, washed several times with warm deionized water, till the filtrate became neutral to litmus paper. The SEM image of the aluminum hydroxide powders obtained is shown in The optimum conditions obtained from the previous studies were employed to synthesize magnesium spinel  A hydrometallurgical process has been developed for the recovery of pure alumina and synthesis of magnesium spinel from black dross (see Compared to other processes developed to recover pure alumina from black dross, the advantage of our process lies in the fact that fewer steps are involved in the recovery of either alumina or spinel with purity higher than 99.99 % and the process can be considered as an environmentally-friendly one. In order to recover pure alumina and synthesize magnesium spinel, a hydrometallurgical process has been developed. For this purpose, real alkaline leaching solutions of black dross were employed in the experiments. First, silicate(IV) was removed from the leaching solution by adsorption onto hydrocalumite. Then the silicate(IV) remaining in the solution was successfully removed by coagulation with PAM. Aluminum hydroxides were precipitated from the purified leaching solution by adding hydrogen peroxide. These aluminum hydroxides were employed as starting materials for the synthesis of magnesium spinel by co-precipitation method. Analysis of the characteristics of the synthesized spinel verifies that pure magnesium spinel with high intensity was obtained at 1000 °C for 5 h. Mass balance of the continuous process indicated that magnesium spinel with 99.99 % purity was obtained from the black dross. However, the recovery percentage of alumina was only 34 %. Therefore, further work is necessary to improve the leaching percentage of black dross. The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the article. This work was supported by the Global Excellent Technology Innovation of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (