In early 1950s, Kelsall visualised the classification process in which a fraction of feed solids reaches underflow without undergoing classification in a hydrocyclone. We bring to light that this notion of ‘bypass’ is beyond experimental reach and is purely imaginary. This implies that the corrected efficiency, which is a key performance characteristic in all the successfully used hydrocyclone models and for which bypass is the foundation is also hypothetical.
                  We discuss the reasons for the continued acceptance of a physical meaning to ‘bypass’ among the hydrocyclone practitioners. Following a discussion on why the classification process as visualised by Kelsall is purely notional, we bring to light the lack of an experimental basis for ‘bypass’ and why no physical meaning can be attributed to it. A mathematical interpretation of the method suggested by Kelsall for calculating corrected efficiency is also presented.
                  A general method for normalising any function y=f(x) where x and y vary between xmin to xmax and ymin to ymax respectively into Yn(x) where the range of Yn is from 0 to 1, is then proposed. We show that this normalisation can be done in an infinite number of ways by choosing user defined normalising functions and demonstrate our method with a numerical example. Taking into consideration that classifications function is a special case of y=f(x), we show that it too can be normalised in an infinite number of ways. While illustrating our method with examples, we show that the procedure suggested by Kelsall is the simplest method to normalise actual efficiency curves. The similarity between bypass and normalising functions is illustrated with examples; it is shown that both of them are purely notional and have no physical significance.
                  We bring to light the possibility of development of improved hydrocyclone models using a normalised cut size other than Kelsall cut size. Finally, we propose that the corrected efficiency be denoted as Kelsall efficiency and the corrected classification size as Kelsall cut size, as a tribute to the landmark contribution of Kelsall towards modelling of hydrocyclones.A conspicuous feature of the efficiency curve, of a hydrocyclone classifier, that is, the size-recovery relationship of the feed particles to the coarser product, is its non-zero minimum value. To explain this regular observation, Kelsall In this paper, we discuss how a perception regarding a physical meaning to bypass evolved and strengthened. We bring to light that the parameters such as tonnage of feed bypassing to underflow, feed subjected to cyclone action and the feed reaching underflow due to cyclone action are only notional and cannot be determined experimentally. We show that as such, bypass can only be notional as it is derived from notional quantities and therefore cannot be part of the classification process actually taking place within the cyclone. This is followed by a mathematical analysis of the method suggested by Kelsall for transforming the actual efficiency to corrected efficiency. We propose a general method to normalise any function y We illustrate the normalisation procedure of a typical actual efficiency curve by generating different normalised curves from it using different normalising functions. We show that the method suggested by Kelsall is the simplest. The analogy between Kelsall bypass and normalising functions is also illustrated with a numerical example. Evidently, lack of an experimental basis for bypass is not a constraint for the normalisation of actual efficiency curves and its continued usage in the modelling of hydrocyclones. In fact, it is now possible to choose a normalising function so that the normalised curve is closer the actual efficiency curve than the Kelsall curve. That is, there is a scope for exploring the possibility of using a normalised cut size other than Kelsall cut size and the corresponding reduced efficiency curve for development of improved hydrocyclone models. Finally we propose that it would be highly appropriate that the corrected efficiency be denoted as Kelsall efficiency and the corresponding cut size as Kelsall cut size, as a tribute to the landmark contribution of Kelsall towards modelling of hydrocyclones, In the development of modelling of hydrocyclone classifiers, ‘corrected efficiency’, the notion conceived by Kelsall The classification process as visualised by Kelsall The above conceptualisation on the mechanism of classification is the basis for transforming the actual efficiency curve which varies from R The corrected efficiency curve and the corrected cut size could be used conveniently and effectively to compare the performance of cyclones at different design and operating conditions and accordingly received acceptance without any reservations. Notably, Yoshioka and Hotta Bradley and Pulling Successful application of the Lynch–Rao model The Lynch-Rao model paved the way for continued usage of the bypass concept and corrected classification size in all hydrocyclone models developed since then Kelsall assumed the bypass fraction to be equal to water recovery for particles of all sizes. Significantly, he did not offer any justification why it should be same for all sizes. Subsequently, when reports of non-monotonic efficiency curves started appearing in literature, Finch Significantly, the basic notion of bypass was not questioned by any. This further strengthened the perception of a physical meaning to bypass. The near zero sized particles (or ultra fines, say of size ε) just flow with water. As such, a fraction of those particles equal to water recovery report to underflow. This is a common observation in hydrocyclone practice. Based on this observation only, Kelsall conceived the notion of bypass by postulating that a fraction of particles of all sizes equal to water recovery must leave through the underflow. While it is reasonable to expect that ultra fines flow along with water to underflow, it is inconceivable that particles of all sizes also flow along with it in the same proportion. There is no rational basis for such a hypothesis. It is significant that, Kelsall did not offer any explanation on why coarser particles in the feed too should flow along with water in the same proportion as ultra fines. In spite of this crucial limitation, the basic notion of bypass retained its ground, though assuming it to be constant for particles of all sizes was questioned Attributing zero efficiency to near zero (ε) sized particles is a contentious outcome of the notion of bypass. We emphasise here that it is due to ‘cyclone action’ that water splits into two streams and so do the fines along with it. It is therefore realistic to visualise the efficiency of these ultra fine particles to be always equal to water recovery under all conditions of cyclone operation. That is, based on phenomenological considerations perfect separation of near zero sized particles suspended in water is unattainable due to ‘cyclone action’. This means that It is important to bring to light that Kelsall did not explain explicitly why the corrected efficiency of near zero sized particles should be zero. As such, we can only surmise possible reasons for his visualisation. One plausible explanation could be a consequence of the near zero settling velocities of these particles. Taking into consideration the general consensus among hydrocyclone practitioners that settling velocity and efficiency are related, Kelsall presumably perceived that near zero settling velocities result in zero efficiency of fines. Whether Kelsall suggested bypass purely as a justification to convert the efficiency curve so that it is zero at near zero sizes or he presumed the efficiency of zero particles to be zero and therefore proposed bypass mechanism is only a matter of speculation. What is of interest is that bypass cannot be verified experimentally; zero efficiency of near zero sized particles is unrealistic; Kelsall did not provide any justification whatsoever for either of them. Obviously, physical significance to bypass is as realistic as perfect separation of near zero sized particles. Nevertheless, acceptance of zero efficiency for zero sized particles is so widespread that it is not a topic of discussion or research in literature. In fact, simplified physical models to represent classification proposed by Plitt In this context, it is appropriate to mention the observations of Schubert and colleagues The observations of Bradley and Pulling It is noteworthy that Yoshioka and Hotta The above issues apart, when the notion of bypass is applied to the feed stream we get a curve for which the corrected efficiency varies from 0 to1. Hydrocyclone practitioners readily accepted this hypothetical efficiency curve for comparing the cyclone performance at different design and operating conditions; Kelsall's argument is also ingenious and innovative. It was convincing enough to explore the possibility of its usage for analysing cyclone performance. Successful industrial application A crucial issue which is totally ignored while accepting the notion of bypass is the lack of experimental evidence to verify it. Experimental data generally obtained from a hydrocyclone are the mass flow rates of solids and water in the feed, underflow and overflow streams in addition to the particle size analyses of each stream. Obviously, from these data we cannot determine the mass flow rates (or fraction) of feed solids which reach underflow due to bypass and which are subjected to cyclone action. Similarly, we can determine only the total mass flow rates to underflow and not those due to bypass and cyclone action separately Moreover, even if bypass actually took place, we cannot distinguish which of the particles or group of particles in the feed have actually bypassed. More significantly, we cannot even conceive an experiment by which we can determine whether a particle (or a group of particles) which reached underflow reached there through bypass or due to centrifugal action. Further, it is simply inconceivable to visualise that the centrifugal forces acting on solid particles in the cyclone selectively ‘bypass’ a fraction of particles and classify the remaining particles only. Furthermore, intuitively, we can say that if the water reporting to undertow could carry a fraction of feed solids without allowing them to be subjected to classification, there is no reason why we should not expect that water reporting to overflow also does the same. Clearly, in such a situation the cyclone operates as a splitter only. In this context, the observation of Napier-Munn and Lynch All the above considerations lead us to conclude unequivocally that That is, the procedure suggested by Kelsall to construct the corrected efficiency curve is to be regarded as a simple mathematical transformation only. This means that the purely notional bypass with a numerical value equal to the minimum value of E It is worthwhile to mention in this context, the demarcation criterion proposed by Popper The above scrutiny based on the demarcation criterion of Popper gives credence to our conclusion that what Kelsall proposed is simply a mathematical transformation. A discussion on the steps involved in this transformation follows. The procedure suggested by Kelsall for constructing the corrected efficiency curve can be seen as a mathematical transformation carried out in two simple steps as elaborated below. The range of efficiency as a result varies from 0 to 1- R Kelsall is innovative; instead of simply suggesting that the efficiency be reduced by its minimum value (= a fraction of particles of all sizes bypass to underflow; the bypass fraction is same for all sizes; the bypass fraction is equal to the recovery of near zero sized particles. We reiterate that all of (i) to (iii) above are beyond experimental reach. Nevertheless, they are taken for granted to represent the classification process. The fraction which reaches underflow due to cyclone action is then calculated as (E After step 1, the efficiency values range between 0 and (1 Kelsall suggested calculation of the corrected efficiency from the fraction which reaches underflow as a result of cyclone action (that is, E We can note that the calculation of corrected efficiency is a simple two step mathematical procedure only. However, Kelsall explained this procedure in terms of purely notional quantities such as (i) fraction of particles reaching underflow due to bypass (ii) fraction of feed particles subjected to cyclone action, and (iii) fraction of feed particles reaching underflow due to cyclone action. We reiterate that it is impossible to determine experimentally any of the quantities, (i)–(iii). Therefore, no physical meaning can be attributed to any of them or to the steps involved in the calculation of corrected efficiency. Accordingly, the procedure suggested by Kelsall should be treated as is a mathematical transformation only. Nevertheless, as detailed in Yoshioka and Hotta Their method of calculation is a simple mathematical procedure; the corrected efficiency of near zero sized particles is equated to zero (a correction equal to R From On rearrangement of Eq. Noticeably, Yoshioka and Hotta did not attribute any physical meaning to their method of calculation of corrected efficiency; they visualised it as a simple mathematical transformation only. Let y Let Y(x) be defined as If y We can now normalise Y(x) so that the range of the normalised function Y The above condition (Eq. We illustrated earlier Evidently, the simplest method to normalise is by choosing N(Y) as constant. In that case, N(Y) can only take the unique value equal to Y We illustrate the normalisation procedure of a typical function y The above example clearly shows that any function y Classifier efficiency function, E We can now rewrite Clearly, the range of E This is the simplest option available for normalising E The important point to be noted is the above is nothing but a simple mathematical transformation. Here, all the values of E It is possible to generate normalising functions which vary with E A few examples of normalising functions and corrections required to E We show in Of all the normalising functions, the normalised curve with What is to be noted is that we cannot verify through any experimental campaign if the fraction of bypass is equal to R We recall that Ever since Finch It is worthwhile to mention here that for classification of cement, Altun and Benzer From As discussed earlier, the success of the corrected and reduced efficiency curve based hydrocyclone models entrenched the perception that bypass is a real physical phenomenon and an integral part of the true classification process within the hydrocyclone. In fact, Wills and Finch We wish to emphasise here that in the above data, only the total mass flow rates in feed (16 It is important to note that there is no way we can verify experimentally whether or not the bypass fraction is 4 To illustrate this issue further, we calculated normalised efficiencies for the data of Wills and Finch using the normalising functions shown in column 3 It is important to bear in mind that there is no method by which we can evaluate whether any one of the normalising functions represents the physical process more accurately than the others. The provision to choose any value for bypass is a clear indication that it is only a notional quantity, a mathematical object with no physical significance. Precisely for this reason, the procedure involved in transforming the actual efficiency to corrected efficiency curve is to be treated as a mathematical transformation only. From an inspection of the normalising functions, shown in The correction to E Any normalised curve generated by the functions in column 3, always lies between the actual efficiency curve, E Of all the normalising functions, the normalised curve with Development of improved hydrocyclone models Fortunately, lack of an experimental basis for bypass is not a constraint for the normalisation of actual efficiency curves. The present well established model structure of hydrocyclones consists of equations for: (i) pressure-throughput (ii) recovery of water to underflow (iii) corrected cut size, d As shown earlier, there is no physical significance to any of the normalising functions and hence to the normalised efficiency curves. As such, it is inconceivable that theoretical models for any of the normalised cut sizes including the Kelsall corrected classification size, d There is no doubt that the Kelsall method, which has been in continual use for more than six decades, is highly satisfactory. However, we may note that normalised curves closer to the actual efficiency curve can be generated by a judicious choice of the normalising function and the degree of the normalising function, n. This offers a possibility of using a normalised cut size other than Kelsall cut size and the corresponding reduced efficiency curve in future hydrocyclone models. It is particularly relevant here to recall that assuming the reduced efficiency curve to be material specific is an approximation only, though highly reliable for all practical purposes Undoubtedly, the concept of ‘corrected’ efficiency curve introduced by Kelsall caused a paradigm shift in quantifying the performance of hydrocyclone classifiers. The cut size, d  Kelsall visualised the classification process as one in which a fraction of the feed solids bypasses to underflow and the remaining fraction only is subjected to classification action. This notion of bypass led to the concept of corrected efficiency, which continues to be the foundation of all hydrocyclone models currently in use. At present, hydrocyclone practitioners perceive bypass as an integral part of the classification process in hydrocyclones There is no rationale for bypass; it is purely notional. Further, an outcome of the notion of bypass is equating the corrected efficiency of near zero sized particles to zero. However, phenomenological considerations show that these ultra fines split with water and their recovery shall always be equal to that of water. This means that perfect separation of these particles is unattainable. As such, it is impossible to obtain experimental evidence of zero efficiency for near zero sized particles under any conditions of cyclone operation. We showed that it is not possible to determine experimentally the fraction of feed which reaches underflow due to bypass or which reaches there due to cyclone action. This means that the so called bypass is purely notional. Significantly, we cannot even conceive an experimental programme to test bypass. The method suggested by Kelsall for calculating corrected efficiency is shown to be a simple mathematical procedure. Yoshioka and Hotta independently proposed a method to calculate the corrected efficiency. They visualised the procedure as a simple mathematical transformation only and did not attribute any physical significance to the steps involved. A general method for normalising any function y The classification function is a special case where the actual efficiency, E The method suggested by Kelsall to derive the ‘centrifugal/corrected efficiency’ is the simplest method of normalisation. Here the normalising function is constant with a numerical value equal to R Normalisation of a typical actual efficiency curve is illustrated using different normalising functions with examples. The analogy between Kelsall bypass and normalising functions is also illustrated with a numerical example. The possibility of development of improved hydrocyclone models using a normalised cut size other than Kelsall cut size is explained. It is proposed that the corrected efficiency be denoted as Kelsall efficiency and the corresponding cut size as Kelsall cut size, as a tribute to the landmark contribution of Kelsall towards modelling of hydrocyclones. particle size, μm size of particle with recovery of 50% on the gross/actual efficiency curve size of particle with recovery of 50% on the Kelsall ‘corrected’ efficiency curve actual recovery of particles of size, d, to underflow normalised recovery of particles of size, d, to underflow degree of the normalising functions for function to normalise Y function to normalise actual efficiency recovery of water to underflow. minimum and maximum values of x function of x minimum and maximum values of y dimensionless y; equal to y/y minimum value of Y; equal to y very small positive number close to zero I am extremely grateful to Satya Simha for introducing the Works of Sri Aurobindo on Nature, which have a profound influence on my understanding of particulate systems.