What are the comparative benefits and harms of general and local anesthesia in patients with traumatic facial injury? In adults with acute facial trauma, in order to improve patient satisfaction and reduce pain and adverse effects, anesthesiologists, surgeons, and patients should participate in shared decision-making regarding selection of local or general anesthesia based on fracture localization, severity, comorbidities, and individual patient preferences.   Children or adults with facial fractures due to facial trauma Patient demographics Location of fracture: Upper: cranium, cranial base, orbital roof, frontal sinus Middle: nasal, naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) fractures, zygoma, zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fractures, Le Fort fractures, orbital floor, medial wall Lower: mandible Surgical intervention (open, closed, septoplasty, septorhinoplasty, rhinoplasty) General anesthesia Local anesthesia Patient and surgeon satisfaction with anesthesia and surgical results Pain, need for rescue analgesics Quality of life Treatment utilization, need for subsequent corrective surgeries All harms, including postoperative nausea and vomiting, postoperative sore throat Adults with acute nasal bone fractures Inpatient General anesthesia Local anesthesia Adults with mandibular fracture Inpatient General anesthesia Sedation with a regional block, with the use of a peripheral nerve stimulator  This guideline recommends assessment of favorable therapeutic outcomes from anesthesia: Recovery of the patient from the anesthetic effects, returning to his or her preanesthetic physiological and psychological state within an appropriate time after the cessation of the administration of the anesthetic drugs Agreement that the anesthetic experience was satisfactory by both the surgeon and the patient Recovery from the administration of sedatives, anesthetic agents, and other adjunctive medications Patient (family) acceptance of procedure and understanding of outcomes This guideline recommends general or local anesthesia, depending on patient preferences and at the discretion of the treating surgeon and anesthesiologist. Facial trauma presents difficulties in managing the patient's airway and sharing it between the anesthesiologists and surgeons. Our team conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Elsevier text mining tool database including the National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and the We identified a meta-analysis of 3 randomized and 5 nonrandomized studies and the additional publication of a single RCT. Low-quality evidence from observational studies suggests that general anesthesia is associated with greater patient satisfaction with anesthesia and patient satisfaction with appearance of the nose (RR 3.3; 95% CI 1.4;7.9) when compared with local anesthesia in adults with acute nasal bone fractures ( Very low-quality evidence from a single RCT suggests that there are no differences in patient or surgeon satisfaction between general and regional anesthesia in adults with acute mandibular fractures ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and imprecision in treatment effects from small studies. The evidence regarding comparative effectiveness and harms of specific pharmacological agents used in anesthesiology regimens was insufficient. We found one guideline that describes general goals of various types of anesthesia but does not recommend specific indications to select general over local anesthesia. In adults with acute facial trauma in order to improve patient satisfaction and reduce pain and adverse effects, anesthesiologists, surgeons, and patients should participate in shared decision-making regarding selection of local or general anesthesia based on fracture localization, severity, comorbidities, and individual patient preferences. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CI, confidence interval; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; MD, mean difference; NNT, number needed to treat to achieve an outcome in 1 patient; NR, not reported; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar AH, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Anesthesia in patients with traumatic facial injury. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. May 11, 2017. What are the benefits and harms of preventive antibiotic treatment in patients with traumatic facial injury? In adults with facial trauma, in order to reduce mortality and infection rates, clinicians should not recommend postoperative antibiotics in addition to pre- and perioperative antibiotics.   Children or adults with facial fractures due to facial trauma Patient demographics Location of fracture: Upper: cranium, cranial base, orbital roof, frontal sinus Middle: nasal, naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) fractures, zygoma, zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fractures, Le Fort fractures, orbital floor, medial wall Lower: mandible Preventive antibiotics: type, dose, route, duration Preoperative: ≥2 hours before surgery Perioperative: <2 hours before surgery and during surgery Postoperative: after surgery No antibiotics or placebo All-cause mortality; infection-related mortality Infection, defined as purulent drainage from the surgical or fracture site, increased facial swelling beyond postoperative day 7, fistula formation at the surgical or fracture site with evidence of drainage, fever associated with local evidence of infection (swelling, erythema, or tenderness) Severity of infection, defined as: Grade I: Erythema around suture line limited to 1 cm Grade II: 1–5 cm of erythema Grade III: Greater than 5 cm of erythema and induration Grade IV: Purulent drainage, either spontaneously or by incision and drainage Grade V: Fistulae Quality of life Treatment utilization All harms, including antibiotic adverse effects and resistance Adults with upper facial fractures: basilar skull fractures Inpatient Preventive antibiotics administered at the time of primary treatment of the basilar skull fracture No preventive antibiotics Adults: orbital blow-out fractures Inpatient Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1.2 g intravenously every 8 hours from admission until 24 hours postoperatively, followed by amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 625 mg orally every 8 hours for another 4 days Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1.2 g intravenously every 8 hours from admission until 24 hours postoperatively Adults with middle facial fractures Inpatients Preventive postoperative antibiotics administered after pre- and perioperative antibiotics Preventive pre- and perioperative antibiotics without postoperative antibiotics Adults with lower facial fractures Inpatient Preventive postoperative antibiotics administered after pre- and perioperative antibiotics Preventive pre- and perioperative antibiotics without postoperative antibiotics  This guideline recommends the use of antimicrobial rinses and systemic antibiotics to prevent infections related to surgery in certain circumstances. The decision to employ prophylactic perioperative antibiotics is at the discretion of the treating surgeon and should be based on the patient's clinical condition as well as other comorbidities that may be present, including diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, and autoimmune or immune-deficit disorders. Prevention of infectious complications is among the most important goals in the management of facial injuries. Our team conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Elsevier text mining tool database including the National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and the We abstracted the number of patients with and without outcomes among treatment groups and means and standard deviations of continuous measures of pain and quality of life. We used random effects models with inverse variance weighting at 95% confidence limits and examined heterogeneity based on I-squared variation in relative risk or absolute risk difference attributable to heterogeneity in treatment effects. We used Stata software for all calculations. Correction coefficients for zero events were used as a default option in Stata software, and intention to treat analyses were used for evidence synthesis. For statistically significant differences in absolute risk difference, we calculated number needed to treat and attributable events per 1000 treated. For randomized studies, we used the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool at outcome level. A low risk of bias was assumed when RCTs met all the risk-of-bias criteria, and a high risk of bias was assumed if 1 or more risk-of-bias criteria were not met. An unknown risk of bias was assigned for the studies with poorly reported risk-of-bias criteria. We assigned the quality of evidence ratings as high, moderate, low, or very low, according to risk of bias in the body of evidence, directness of comparisons, precision and consistency in treatment effects, and the evidence of reporting bias, using GRADE methodology. Treatment effect estimates were defined as precise when the total number of events was greater than 250. Justification of the sample size was not included in grading of the evidence. We did not conduct post hoc statistical power analyses. A high quality of evidence was assigned to well-designed RCTs with consistent findings. The quality of evidence was downgraded to moderate if at least 1 of 4 quality-of-evidence criteria was not met; for example, moderate quality of evidence was assigned if there was a high risk of bias in the body of evidence or if the results were inconsistent or imprecise. The quality of evidence was downgraded to low if 2 criteria were not met, and to very low when >2 criteria are not met. A low quality of evidence was assigned to nonrandomized studies and upgraded if there was a strong (relative risk > 2) or dose–response association. Evidence was defined as insufficient when no studies provided valid information about treatment effects. This approach was applied regardless of whether the results were statistically significant. We identified 1 high-quality meta-analysis, 5 systematic reviews, 8 RCTs, and 12 nonrandomized studies. Low-quality evidence suggests that preventive antibiotics administered at the time of primary treatment of the basilar skull fractures did not reduce all-cause (RR 1.5; 95% CI 0.4; 5.5) or meningitis-related mortality (RR 1.0; 95% CI 0.1; 9.6), incidence of meningitis (RR 0.8; 95% CI 0.4; 1.6), or any other infections, regardless of the presence of cerebrospinal fluid leakage (208 patients in 4 RCTs; Very low-quality evidence from a single RCT suggests no reduction in the risk of local wound infections after a postoperative 4-day course of antibiotics in adults with orbital blow-out fractures (RR 2.3; 95% CI 0.2;23.8). Very low-quality evidence from single RCTs and observational studies suggests that preventive postoperative antibiotics administered after pre- and perioperative antibiotics did not prevent infections in adults with zygomatic fractures or fractures of maxillary sinus when compared with pre- and perioperative antibiotics alone (585 adults, 3 RCTs and 2 observational studies; Low-quality evidence suggests that preventive postoperative antibiotics administered after pre- and perioperative antibiotics did not prevent infections when compared with preventive pre- and perioperative antibiotics alone in adults with mandibular fractures (783 adults, 3 RCTs and 1 observational study; Very low-quality evidence from single small RCTs suggests that preventive postoperative antibiotics administered after pre- and perioperative antibiotics did not prevent infections when compared with preventive pre- and perioperative antibiotics alone in adults undergoing orthognathic surgery (34 adults, 1 RCT; Published systematic reviews of a few old RCTs, case series from single institutions, and expert surveys suggest that preoperative antibiotics are effective in reducing the risk of infections in patients with facial trauma. We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and heterogeneity and imprecision in treatment effects from small studies. We did not meta-analyze and did not grade the quality of evidence from case series that described institutional experiences and failed to provide adjusted relative measures of associations. The evidence regarding comparative effectiveness and harms of specific antibiotics was insufficient. Primary studies did not report pain, depression, or quality of life. We found one guideline that recommends preoperative antibiotics in patients undergoing oral and maxillofacial surgery at the discretion of treating surgeons. In adults with facial trauma, in order to reduce mortality and infection rates, clinicians should not recommend postoperative antibiotics in addition to pre- and perioperative antibiotics. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CI, confidence interval; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; NNT, number needed to treat to achieve an outcome in 1 patient; NR, not reported; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar AH, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Antibiotic use in patients with traumatic facial injury. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. February 14, 2017. What are the benefits and harms of postoperative imaging following facial fracture repair? In adults with acute facial trauma in order to ensure correct alignment, facial surgeons should practice postoperative imaging. Provider experience, baseline complication rates and the quality of provided care should guide a decision to use post-surgical imaging in individual patients instead of routine post-surgical imaging.   Children or adults with facial fractures due to facial trauma repaired by open reduction and internal fixation Patient demographics Location of fracture: Upper: cranium, cranial base, orbital roof, frontal sinus Middle: nasal, naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) fractures, zygoma, zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fractures, Le Fort fractures, orbital floor, medial wall Lower: mandible Any postsurgical imaging No imaging Hospital length of stay, reoperation rate, readmission rate, differences in management, optic nerve damage, cost-effectiveness, medicolegal actions Noncomparative outcomes in imaged patients: bone alignment, plate position in those receiving plates Adults with facial fractures Any Unfavorable postprocedural imaging Unremarkable (favorable) postprocedural imaging  This guideline does not address postprocedural imaging in patients with facial trauma but acknowledges that outcomes assessment may include an imaging evaluation. Therapeutic goals in treating patients with facial trauma include patient satisfaction with facial appearance and function without complications or repeated surgical procedures. We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Elsevier text mining tool database including the National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and the We identified one qualitative narrative review, Very low-quality evidence suggests that unfavorable postprocedure imaging is not associated with lower rates of reoperation and has very low predictive value for early detection of postsurgical complications ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and imprecision in treatment effects in small nonrandomized studies. The evidence regarding the effects of postsurgical imaging on quality of life, patient satisfaction, and medicolegal actions was insufficient. Future research is needed to examine the comparative effectiveness and safety of various imaging techniques in association with provider experience and the quality of provided care. In adults with acute facial trauma in order to ensure correct alignment, facial surgeons should practice postoperative imaging. Provider experience, baseline complication rates and the quality of provided care should guide a decision to use post-surgical imaging in individual patients instead of routine post-surgical imaging. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CT, computed tomography; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; NR, not reported; OR, odds ratio; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar AH, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Postoperative imaging following facial fracture repair. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. February 23, 2017. What is the optimal time to surgery in patients with traumatic orbital fracture? In children and adults with orbital fractures in order to achieve a complete recovery and prevent postsurgical enophthalmos and residual diplopia, clinicians should not delay indicated surgical repair.   Adults with orbital fractures Inpatient Shorter timing between the trauma and surgical intervention Delay in timing between the trauma and surgical intervention  This guideline considers time elapsed since injury as a risk factor for poor outcome but does not specify the optimal time for the surgery of orbital fractures. Orbital fractures are common and result in patients suffering with enophthalmos (displacement of the eyeball within the orbit), diplopia, orbital soft tissue entrapment, and nerve injury. We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Elsevier text mining tool database including National Institutes of Health RePORTER grant database, and We identified one clinical and two systematic reviews, 1 RCT, and 16 nonrandomized studies. Very low-quality evidence suggests that a delay in surgical repair is associated with poor clinical outcomes in most case series ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and heterogeneity and imprecision in treatment effects from small observational studies. We could not meta-analyze the data from case series due to differences in timing of surgery and definition of patient outcomes. The exact reason for surgical delay was not reported in the studies. A single guideline defines a delay in surgical treatment after injury as a risk factor for poor outcome after any facial trauma but does not specify the optimal time for the surgery of orbital fractures. In children and adults with orbital fractures, in order to achieve a complete recovery and prevent postsurgical enophthalmos and residual diplopia, clinicians should not delay indicated surgical repair. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CI, confidence interval; CT, computed tomography; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; NR, not reported; OR, odds ratio; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar A, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Optimal time to surgery in patients with traumatic orbital fracture. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. March 1, 2017. What is the comparative effectiveness of surgery versus medical treatment for traumatic optic nerve compression? In children and adults with traumatic optic nerve compression, in order to achieve some improvement in visual acuity, clinicians should recommend systemic corticosteroids and consider rescue surgery in individual patients who do not improve after systemic corticosteroids.   Adolescents or adults with traumatic nonpenetrating optic nerve compression Inpatient Systemic steroids within 7–14 days after injury Placebo, no active treatment, or active comparators Adolescents or adults with traumatic nonpenetrating optic neuropathy Inpatient Surgical optic nerve canal decompression Systemic Corticosteroids or Observation This guideline lists the following procedures for the management of orbital injuries but does not address preferred treatments for optic nerve compression: Observation based on limited severity of fracture, displacement, and mobility Open treatment (including endoscopically assisted and computed tomography-guided navigation) Orbital reconstruction Medial and/or lateral canthopexy Nasolacrimal reconstruction Antimicrobials as indicated Control of pain Drains for management of dead spaces or contaminated wounds when judgment dictates Instructions for posttreatment care and follow-up Treatment options for traumatic optic nerve compression include observation, large dose of systemic corticosteroids, or surgical treatments, with no consensus on which option is superior to the others in preventing devastating blindness. We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Elsevier text mining tool database including National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and We identified 4 meta-analyses, 1 systematic review, 3 RCTs, 1 controlled International Optic Nerve Trauma Study, and 42 publications of case series. Low-quality evidence suggests that systemic corticosteroids increase the rates of improved visual acuity when compared with observation in adolescents and adults with traumatic nonpenetrating optic nerve compression ( Early (within 24 hours from trauma) versus delayed (within 7 days from trauma) prednisolone administration does not result in greater rates of improved visual acuity in children with traumatic nonpenetrating optic nerve compression ( Very low-quality evidence suggests that surgical optic nerve canal decompression alone or in combination with systemic corticosteroids increases the rates of improved visual acuity when compared with observation in adolescents and adults with traumatic nonpenetrating optic nerve compression ( Indirect comparison of uncontrolled case series suggests that the rates of the improved visual acuity are slightly lower after observation and are very similar after systemic corticosteroids alone or after surgery in patients who did not experience improved vision after systemic corticosteroids ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to high risk of bias in the body of evidence and heterogeneity and imprecision in treatment effects from small studies. The evidence regarding comparative effects from various steroids and surgical techniques on complete vision restoration, mortality, quality of life, and treatment utilization was insufficient. Small studies attempted to examine correlation between baseline vision loss and treatment outcomes but failed to identify valid evidence for individualized treatment decisions. Authors came to the somewhat obvious conclusion that patients with minimal baseline vision loss have better vision after the treatments. Studies did not report outcomes in patients with different demographics or comorbidities. We found one guideline that describes treatment options for orbital injuries but does not address preferred treatments for indirect optic nerve compression. In children and adults with traumatic optic nerve compression, in order to achieve some improvement in visual acuity, clinicians should recommend systemic corticosteroids and consider rescue surgery in individual patients who do not improve after systemic corticosteroids. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CI, confidence interval; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; log MAR, log of the minimum angle of resolution; MD, mean difference; NNT, number needed to treat to achieve an outcome in 1 patient; NR, not reported; OR, odds ratio; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar AH, Davidson E, Reddy S, et al. Role of surgery versus medical treatment for traumatic optic nerve compression. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. March 1, 2017. What are the benefits and harms of various point fixation techniques in patients with traumatic zygomaticomaxillary complex fractures? In adults with isolated, laterally displaced zygomatic bone fractures, in order to achieve stable fixation and reduce vertical dystopia, clinicians should use 3-point over 2-point fixation with miniplates.   Adults with isolated, laterally displaced zygomatic bone fracture Inpatient Open reduction and 2-point internal fixation with miniplates Open reduction and 3-point internal fixation with miniplates Adults with zygomatic complex fracture Inpatient Open reduction and 1-point fixation in the zygomaticomaxillary area in patients without fracture displacement or comminution Open reduction and 2-point fixation in the zygomaticomaxillary area and frontozygomatic areas in patients with fracture displacement or comminution  This guideline recommends to assess treatment effectiveness according to the following therapeutic goals: Restoration of premorbid ocular function Correction or prevention of enophthalmos/exophthalmos Restoration of premorbid antral function Restoration of mandibular range of motion The guideline defines the following risk factors leading to treatment complications: Presence of compound or comminuted fracture Degree of displacement Presence of congenital maxillofacial deformity (e.g., Crouzon syndrome) Presence of paranasal sinus infection or disease Presence of coexisting maxillofacial fractures This guideline recommends open reduction in the following cases: Fractured zygoma Fractured zygomatic arch Panfacial fractures Proper fixation of zygomaticomaxillary complex fractures is essential to ensure complete restoration of the function and cosmetic appearance of the midface and orbital area. We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Elsevier text mining tool database including National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and We identified 2 RCTs and 1 case series that directly compared different fixation points, an additional 3 RCTs, and 14 uncontrolled case series that reported patient outcomes in single arms treated with 1–4 fixation points. Very low-quality evidence suggests that 3-point fixation results in higher rates of stable fracture fixation and smaller vertical dystopia when compared with 2-point fixation in adults with isolated, laterally displaced zygomatic bone fractures ( A single-point fixation in patients without fracture displacement or comminution results in better patient satisfaction and less pain and complications than 2-point fixation in patients with fracture displacement or comminution ( Uncontrolled case series suggest that the rates of beneficial treatment outcomes including patient satisfaction with postoperative appearance, facial symmetry, or stable fracture are more than 90% across various fixation points ( A single case series reported that 4-point fixation using the preauricular approach resulted in bony union and facial symmetry in all 14 patients with isolated zygomatic arch fracture and insufficient intraoperative reduction after closed reduction and a single fixation point ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and imprecision in treatment effects from small studies. We did not grade the quality of evidence from uncontrolled case series, because such studies do not provide valid evidence for decision-making. Wide 95% confidence intervals of outcome rates and substantial variability in complication rates across single institutions precluded calculation of valid average rates of the outcomes. We found one guideline that recommends open reduction and internal fixation in patients with zygomatic complex fracture but does not recommend specific fixation points as superior to the others. In adults with isolated, laterally displaced zygomatic bone fractures, in order to achieve stable fixation and reduce vertical dystopia, clinicians should use 3-point over 2-point fixation after open reduction. In adults with zygomaticomaxillary complex fracture and an isolated zygomatic arch fracture who failed 1-point fixation, in order to achieve bony union and facial symmetry, clinicians may recommend 4-point fixation. Adults with unilateral isolated zygomatic complex fracture and no comminution Inpatient Open reduction and 1-point fixation in the zygomaticomaxillary area Active comparators as various fixation methods AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CI, confidence interval; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; NNT, number needed to treat to achieve an outcome in 1 patient; NNTp, number needed to treat to prevent an outcome in 1 patient; NR, not reported; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar A, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Fixation points for traumatic zygomaticomaxillary complex fractures. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. February 14, 2017. What are the comparative effectiveness and safety of fixation with 2 versus 1 miniplates in patients with traumatic mandibular angle fractures? In adults with mandibular angle fracture, in order to lower the risk of failed hardware and overall complications, clinicians should use fixation with a single miniplate placed on the external oblique ridge.   Adults with mandibular angle fracture Inpatient 2 miniplates: 1 placed on the external oblique ridge and 1 placed on the ventral surface of the mandible 1 miniplate + 2 screws placed on the external oblique ridge Adults with isolated unilateral mandibular angle fractures Inpatient Internal fixation using a single 2.0 mm locking miniplate and four 8 mm length screws Internal fixation using a single 2.0 mm non-locking miniplate and 8 mm length screws  This guideline does not specify which technique is superior to the other in the management of mandibular angle fractures. Mandibular angle fractures are very common and prone to postsurgical complications. We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Elsevier text mining tool database including National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and We identified 2 systematic reviews of 3 RCTs and 7 observational studies and a subsequent publication of a single RCT. Low-quality evidence suggests that fixation with a single miniplate placed on the external oblique ridge results in lower risk of failed hardware and overall risk of complications when compared with 2 miniplates in adults with mandibular angle fracture ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and imprecision in treatment effects from small studies. We found one guideline that acknowledged challenges in the management of mandibular angle fractures but does not recommend specific fixation miniplates as superior to the others. In adults with mandibular angle fracture, in order to lower the risk of failed hardware and overall complications, clinicians should use fixation with a single miniplate placed on the external oblique ridge. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; NNT, number needed to treat to achieve an outcome in 1 patient; NNTp, number needed to treat to prevent an outcome in 1 patient (when the outcome is more probable with control intervention); RCT, randomized controlled trial; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar A, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Fixation with 2 versus 1 miniplates in patients with traumatic mandibular angle fractures. February 17, 2017. What are the comparative effectiveness and safety of retention versus removal of teeth in the line of mandibular fractures? In adults with mandibular fractures treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with standard postoperative care, clinicians may choose to retain asymptomatic third molars to lower the risk of inferior alveolar nerve injury and other complications. Removal of erupted teeth should be performed at the surgeon's discretion.   Adults with mandibular angle fractures and teeth in the line of fracture treated with ORIF with standard postoperative care Inpatient Retention of asymptomatic third molars Removal of asymptomatic third molars Adults with mandibular angle fractures and teeth in the line of fracture Inpatient Retention of teeth in the line of fracture Removal of teeth in the line of fracture  This guideline does not specify which technique is superior to the other in the management of teeth in the line of mandibular angle fractures. Mandibular angle fractures are very common and prone to postsurgical complications. We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Elsevier text mining tool database including National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and We identified 1 RCT, 2 systematic reviews of observational studies, and a total of 23 case series. Very low-quality evidence from a single RCT suggests that retention of asymptomatic third molars results in lower rates of inferior alveolar nerve injury when compared with the removal of asymptomatic third molars in adults with mandibular angle fractures treated with ORIF with standard postoperative care ( Multiple case series reported crude rates of the outcomes after retention or removal of teeth in the line of fracture. Low-quality evidence suggests that retention is associated with lower rates of complications, including malocclusion ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and imprecision in treatment effects from small studies. We found one guideline that acknowledges challenges in the management of teeth in the line of mandibular angle fractures, but it does not recommend one therapeutic approach as being superior to the others. To lower the risk of inferior alveolar nerve injury and other complications in adults with mandibular angle fractures treated with ORIF with standard postoperative care, clinicians may choose to retain asymptomatic third molars. Removal of erupted teeth should be performed at the surgeon's discretion. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CI, confidence interval; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; NNT, number needed to treat to achieve an outcome in 1 patient; RCT, randomized controlled trial; OR, odds ratio; NR, not reported; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar AH, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Teeth in the Line of Mandibular Angle Fractures. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. May 25, 2018. What are the comparative benefits and harms of open surgical repair and closed repair in patients with condylar fractures after traumatic facial injury? In adults with displaced condylar fractures after traumatic facial injury, in order to reduce long-term temporomandibular joint (TMJ) pain and improve function, clinicians should recommend open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF) or endoscopically assisted open reduction over closed treatments, with preventive measures against posttreatment infection.   Adults with acute condylar displaced fracture Inpatient ORIF Closed treatment Adults with acute uni- or bilateral condyle fractures with displacement Inpatient ORIF without endoscopic assistance Endoscopically assisted ORIF with or without transbuccal insertion of the screws  This guideline recommends closed reduction in the following cases: Nondisplaced or displaced fracture of a mandibular condyle where form and/or function can be restored and there are no medical contraindications to maxillomandibular fixations Fracture dislocations or comminuted fractures in the growing child where form and/or function can be restored Medical and/or anesthetic contraindications to open reduction This guideline recommends open reduction (including endoscopically assisted) in the following cases: Fracture dislocation of a mandibular condyle Mechanical interference with mandibular function by the condyle or a foreign body Condylar fractures with loss of anterior–posterior and vertical dimension that cannot be managed by closed reduction (e.g., edentulous patient, multiple facial fractures) Compound fracture Displacement of a mandibular condyle into middle cranial fossa Patient or surgeon preference for early or immediate mobilization or function  Experts developed a consensus that ORIF is a treatment of choice for condylar base and neck fractures in adults, with a growing tendency to perform ORIF in condylar head fractures. Endoscopic approaches should be considered for selected cases, such as condylar base fractures with lateral displacement. The experts also agreed to treat children (>12 years old) in the same way as adults and to consider open reduction in severely displaced and dislocated fractures even in younger children. Experts recommend that nonsurgical treatment should be the first choice for children <6 years of age. The decision to perform surgery in children was based on factors influencing facial growth, appropriate age for ORIF, and disagreement about using resorbable materials in children. Condylar mandibular fractures are common in patients with traumatic facial injuries, with remaining controversy regarding the optimal open surgical or closed treatment options. Our team conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Elsevier text mining tool database including the National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and the We identified 4 good-quality meta-analyses of 7 RCTs and 31 non-randomized studies that compared open surgical and closed treatments for condylar fractures. Low-quality evidence suggests that ORIF results in lower rates of TMJ pain, lateral deviation during maximum interincisal opening, and malocclusion and increases the range of protrusion and maximal interincisal opening, at the expense of higher rates of posttreatment infection, when compared with closed treatments in adults with displaced condylar fractures ( Very low-quality evidence from a single small RCT suggests that there are no differences in pain, function, or occlusion between surgical and endoscopically assisted open reduction for adults with acute uni- or bilateral condyle fractures with displacement ( We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and imprecision in treatment effects from small studies. Observational studies did not use adjustment, and, therefore, patient and provider characteristics could contribute to differences in outcomes between open surgical and closed treatments. The guideline from the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons recommends open surgery only for dislocated mandibular condyle fractures that cannot be managed by closed reduction, for compound fractures, or for fractures with a displacement of a mandibular condyle into the middle cranial fossa. In adults with displaced condylar fractures after traumatic facial injury, in order to reduce long-term TMJ pain and improve function, clinicians should recommend ORIF or endoscopically assisted open reduction over closed treatments, with preventive measures against posttreatment infection. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; MD, mean difference; NNT, number needed to treat to achieve an outcome in 1 patient; NNTp, number needed to treat to prevent an outcome in 1 patient; NR, not reported; ORIF, open reduction with internal fixation; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar AH, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Comparative benefits and harms of open surgical repair and closed repair in patients with condylar fractures after traumatic facial injury. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. March 16, 2017. What are the comparative effectiveness and safety between load-sharing miniplate and load-bearing plate fixation in geriatric mandibular fractures with different degree of bone atrophy (mandibular height)? In adults with atrophic and edentulous mandibular fractures, in order to achieve a complete functional recovery without complications or infections, clinicians may use internal rigid fixation using 2.0 mm versus 2.4 mm large profile locking systems.   Adults with atrophic and edentulous mandibular fractures (mandibular height <20 mm) Inpatient Open reduction and internal load-bearing rigid fixation using 2.0 mm large profile locking system Open reduction and internal load-bearing rigid fixation using 2.4 mm large profile locking system Adults with atrophic and edentulous mandibular fractures (mandibular height <20 mm) Inpatient Load-bearing plate or load-sharing miniplates fixation NA  This guideline does not specify which technique is superior in the management of atrophic and edentulous mandibular fractures. Traumatic mandibular fractures in aging adults with frequent multimorbidity are associated with higher mortality and longer hospital stay. We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Elsevier text mining tool database including National Institutes of Health RePORTER Grant database, and We identified 1 high-quality Cochrane review, The high-quality Cochrane review found no randomized trials examining fracture management in edentulous mandibles. Very low-quality evidence from a single small controlled case series suggests that there are no differences in functional recovery, complications, or infections between open reduction and internal rigid fixation using 2.0 mm versus 2.4 mm large profile locking systems in adults with atrophic edentulous mandibular fractures ( Uncontrolled case series suggest that more than 90% of the patients had complete functional and morphological restoration after locking reconstruction plates and autogenous bone grafting or rigid fixation using horseshoe-shaped Kirschner wire with a 2 mm diameter after conservative reduction with the Interrami intraoral Kirschner wire fixation (IRIF) technique ( The majority of patients across institutions experienced primary healing and clinical bony union ( Case reports demonstrate that load-bearing reconstruction plate combined with autogenous bone graft resulted in complete functional and morphological restoration in 2 patients who failed load-sharing miniplate fixation. We downgraded the quality of evidence due to risk of bias in the body of evidence and imprecision in treatment effects from a small controlled case series. We did not grade the quality of evidence from uncontrolled case series, because such studies do not provide valid evidence for decision-making. Wide 95% confidence intervals of outcome rates and substantial variability in complication rates across single institutions precluded calculation of valid average rates of the outcomes. We found one guideline that acknowledges challenges in the management of mandibular fractures in patients with bone atrophy and other comorbidities but does not recommend one therapeutic approach as superior to the others. Evidence suggests that the majority of adults with atrophic and edentulous mandibular fractures experience clinical bone union after either load-bearing or load-sharing fixation. However, complication rates vary, likely due to patient comorbidities unreported in the studies, surgeon experience and training, and the quality of care in different institutions. AGREE II, Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation; CI, confidence interval; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation; NR, not reported; OR, odds ratio; RePORTER, National Institutes of Health Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools Dorafshar A, Shamliyan TA; Elsevier Evidence-based Medicine Center: Evidence Report: Comparative effectiveness and safety of load-sharing miniplate or load-bearing plate fixation in geriatric atrophic and edentulous mandibular fractures. Elsevier Evidence-Based Medicine Center. March 8, 2017.