A novel process for the integral treatment of polymetallic sulphide ores is proposed. The process consists of a global flotation, two stages of ferric leaching, the first stage dissolves the sphalerite and the rest of secondary sulphides, and the second dissolves the chalcopyrite with a silver catalyst, and finally a brine leaching to recover lead and silver (added as catalyst). The proposed process offers several advantages comparing to traditional pyrometallurgical techniques. This study is focused on the sphalerite dissolution with ferric sulphate, as the first stage of the treatment of Cu-Zn-Pb concentrates. The ferric ion concentration, the temperature and the particle size have an important role in the sphalerite oxidation. However, the initial sulphuric acid, ferrous ion and sulphate ion concentrations have no influence in the process rate. The formation of an elemental non-porous layer of sulphur along the reaction hinders the ferric ion transport to the sphalerite surface. Two kinetics regimes are proposed, in the beginning the chemical reaction is the rate controlling step, and, at 30% Zn extraction, the rate controlling step changes to diffusion through a non-porous film of elemental sulphur. The activation energy obtained for the chemical reaction has a value of 51.3 kJ/mol, and the apparent activation energy in the diffusional stage is the 47.7 kJ/mol. The reaction order with respect ferric ion is 0.26 and the reaction rate is proportional to the zinc sulphide amount in the first stage. The behaviour of sphalerite, contained in a bulk concentrate, is similar to the pure sphalerite or the sphalerite contained in a differential concentrate.Almost all of the world’s primary zinc production is derived from the treatment of sulphide concentrate, obtained through differential flotation, in which sphalerite is the dominant zinc mineral ( Most of these processes need a previous concentration of zinc sulphide through a differential flotation. Differential flotation has several disadvantages regarding global flotation, where a concentrate of all non-ferrous metals is obtained, such as a lower recuperation of non-ferrous metals, high content of impurities in the concentrates or a greater grinding energetic consumption ( Global concentrates obtained from polymetallic sulphides of the Iberian Pyritic Belt (IPB) are composed, basically, of sphalerite, chalcopyrite, galena and pyrite, as majority sulphide ( From a conceptual point of view (see In this medium, chalcopyrite is passivated due to the formation of a metal deficient film according to Various secondary reactions take place, as the lead sulphate precipitation Sphalerite leaching reaction with ferric ion has been extensively studied in zinc sulphide concentrate and natural crystals of pure sphalerite ( Fe content in sphalerite structure has a great influence on sphalerite leaching reaction rate. The increment of iron impurities in sphalerite enhances the sphalerite leaching rate, decreasing the activation energy. An activation energy of 70 kJ/mol was observed for a sphalerite with 0.04% wt of iron, instead, for a sphalerite with 12.5% wt of iron the activation energy was around of 40 kJ/mol ( The presence of other sulphides can change the reactivity of sphalerite due to the formation of galvanic couples. Sulphides with a higher rest potential than sphalerite enhance the sphalerite dissolution, and the sulphides with a lower rest potential, such as galena and chalcocite, decrease the sphalerite leaching rate ( Many authors have found a great influence of sulphuric acid concentration on sphalerite leaching rate, according to The rate controlling step is a reason for discrepancy between authors. Some authors have observed that chemical reaction is the rate controlling step ( From the above, the sphalerite behaviour has a great dependence on the ore nature and the treatment performed. Unlike samples (high-grade or pure sphalerite) used in previous studies, bulk concentrates are low-grade in copper, zinc and lead, can present galvanic-couples formation (due to the presence of different sulphide phases) and the leaching behaviour of these sulphides can be affected by reaction products formed along dissolution reactions, such as PbSO The exhaustive knowledge of kinetic and thermodynamic aspects of these solid-liquid reactions is crucial to the optimisation of processes and industrial plants ( This work is part of a research project for the integral treatment of bulk concentrates through the proposed hydrometallurgical process and aims the study of the sphalerite dissolution with ferric sulphate as the first stage of this process. This work consists of two sections: the first is an exhaustive study of the effect of variables that can affect the process rate (Temperature, pulp density, particle size, elemental sulphur film and the concentrations of ferric ion, sulphuric acid, ferrous ion and sulphate ion), and the second is the evaluation of the sphalerite dissolution kinetic by the application of several models. The concentrate used in this work is a bulk concentrate of polymetallic sulphide ore from Cobre las Cruces Mine (Spain). The concentrate was separated in two fractions: one higher than 25 μm (Cl-A) and other lower than 25 μm (Cl-B), also, a part of the bulk concentrate was reground (Cl-C). The chemical composition of the bulk concentrate and the different samples is shown in Ferric leaching experiments were carried out in a cylindrical 3L-reactor, with mechanical agitation fixed to 600 rpm, 3 deflectors and a heat exchanger connected to a thermostat. Leaching liquors were prepared from a commercial ferric solution (210 g/L Fe Kinetic equations shown in In order to compare kinetic parameters obtained from different kinetic models, the initial rate of sphalerite dissolution is determined through the fitting of experimental data to a hyperbolic equation (Eq. And for all purposes, K can be written as K = A·k Hyperbolic equation adjustment to experimental data is carried out with MATLAB 2017a software, using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm, where Eq.  Ferric ion is directly involved in sphalerite leaching reaction, so it is expected an important role of ferric ion in reaction rate.  In all leaching commercial processes there is an initial ferrous concentration, as during the leaching process ferric ion is reduced to ferrous ion ( These results are not in concordance with those obtained by Particle size plays a key role in sulphide dissolution reactions.  Many authors ( With the aim to determinate the effect of elemental sulphur layer, two experiments with the same experimental conditions are performed. In one of them, after 30 min of reaction, the pulp is filtered and the elemental sulphur is removed from the solid with CS A non-acceptable linear relationship is obtained when kinetic model are fit to the set of experimental data. Models with diffusion as the rate controlling step have a R Two kinetic regimes are proposed in view of these observations. A first stage, where the process rate is the maximum and the rate controlling step is the chemical reaction on sphalerite surface; and a second stage where the rate decreases due to a passivating film formation that changes the rate controlling step to the diffusion through an elemental sulphur layer. This change of mechanism is produced around 30% Zn extraction. The hypothesis of two kinetic regimes is according to Models F1, F2 and R3 are the models with the best linear relationship at the first stage, and the models D3, D4, D5 and D8 have a good linear fit to the second stage. The model D8 supposes a cylindrical geometry with a slight surface area, therefore this model is discarded to explain the reaction in a rough bulk concentrate. To check the kinetics parameters obtained from the kinetic model applied in the first stage, where the experimental data is limited, the initial rate of different tests is calculated. In order to observe which model estimates better the sphalerite dissolution reaction, the kinetic parameters are calculated from the different models and from the initial rate determination. In Kinetic parameters, for chemical stage, from model F1 are those that have a greater similarity with respect IR determination, this is according to In the second stage, models D3-D5 have a high value of R Kinetic parameters of sphalerite leaching reaction with ferric sulphate of the two kinetic regimes are estimated from model F1, model D4 and the IR. Two different apparent activation energies are observed for the different kinetic regimes. The activation energy of the chemical stage is 51.3 kJ/mol (model F1) that corresponds with the activation energy of the chemical reaction on the sphalerite surface, this value is similar to Ea calculated from IR (50.7 kJ/mol) because at the beginning of the reaction the rate controlling step is the chemical reaction, supporting the chemical control at early reaction time. The apparent activation energy for the diffusional stage (47.7 kJ/mol) is lower than for the first stage, as the rate controlling step is the diffusion. This activation energy is high for a diffusionally controlled process, with a typical value about 12.6 kJ/mol, but in a mixed process, the activation energy can be similar to processes with a chemical control ( The reaction order calculated for ferric ion is 0.26, a low value that supports a chemical control at the beginning of the reaction, as the diffusional control order expected with respect to liquid phase is 1. Other authors found an order of 0.34 (100 °C) and 0.39 (75 °C) with respect to ferric ion, as Fe Concentration of solid reagent is not usually a meaningful term in solid state reaction. However, the reaction rate depends on the reaction surface area, and this depends on the sphalerite amount. It is expected that the process rate is proportional to the sphalerite amount in a concentrate with a high specific surface area, according to Eqs. The values of k for model F1, obtained with different particle sizes, show a linear relationship with respect to 1/r In the same way, Solid residues obtained after ferric leaching have the mean composition in Cu, Pb and Ag shown in The kinetics of the sphalerite dissolution contained in a bulk concentrate with ferric sulphate is studied for the first time. Only the variables that are directly involved in the oxidative dissolution of sphalerite play a key role in the leaching rate (Ferric ion, Temperature and particle size). The addition of sulphuric acid (0.2–1.0 M), ferric sulphate (0–0.36 M) and magnesium sulphate (0–0.36 M) have no influence on the reaction rate. When the elemental sulphur is removed from partially leached solid, the reaction rate does not suffer a deceleration at long reaction times. At the beginning of reaction, experimental data fits a first order-kinetics to solid particle model (F1), where the rate controlling step is the chemical reaction on the sphalerite surface. At 30% Zn extraction, experimental data is deviated from model F1 and is fit to model D4, possibly due to the formation of a non-porous film of elemental sulphur. The estimated activation energy of the chemical reaction has a value of 51.3 kJ/mol. When the diffusion is the rate controlling step, the second stage, the apparent activation energy is 47.7 kJ/mol. Order-kinetics to ferric ion is 0.26 and 1 in the chemical and the diffusional stage, respectively. The process rate is proportional to the sphalerite amount. When samples are lesser than 25 µm, the reaction rate is proportional to surface area of bulk concentrate, because at higher particle sizes part of the sphalerite is occluded. These results evidence that the ferric leaching of sphalerite in the presence of other sulphides has a similar behaviour to that of the high-grade sphalerite. These observations show the possibility to obtain Zn from a bulk concentrate and enable the treatment of the solid leaching residue through a hydrometallurgical process to extract the rest of valuable metals, in this case Cu, Pb and Ag. Authors appreciate the financial support of AGQ Mining & Bioenergy and CLC supplied the samples of the bulk concentrate.