The photocatalytic fuel cell is under consideration as a potential alternative system for recovering energy from the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants. In this study, a single-chambered photocatalytic fuel cell using ZnO/Zn as the photoanode and platinum loaded carbon as the cathode was constructed, and Reactive Green 19 was used as the organic pollutant. Operating parameters such as aeration, organic pollutant and photoanode were evaluated. Electricity generation and degradation efficiency were investigated in the presence of different supporting electrolytes such as sodium chloride, sodium sulfate and magnesium sulfate. The results indicated that the addition of sodium sulfate as the supporting electrolyte afforded the highest short circuit current: 2.64 mA cm−2 and a maximum power density of 1.2696 mW cm−2. However, in terms of photocatalytic degradation, the presence of sodium chloride as the supporting electrolyte led to the highest dye degradation efficiency. In addition to electrolytes, the voltage output and degradation rate were significantly affected by different initial concentrations of dye. Ultraviolet–Visible spectroscopy and chemical oxygen demand analysis determined that 100% decolorization and 92% mineralization of 10 mg L−1 of dye could be achieved after 8 h using sodium chloride as the supporting electrolyte in an aerated photocatalytic fuel cell.Various wastewater treatment technologies have been employed to treat dye-containing wastewater. Although conventional biological processes degrade dye effluents, it has been found that these technologies are ineffective due to the recalcitrant nature of synthetic dyes ( In this study, the performance of a PFC based on the ZnO/Zn photoanode was evaluated. The effects of variables such as different types of supporting electrolytes and initial dye concentration on electricity generation and RG 19 degradation were investigated. A Zn plate (thickness 1 mm, purity 99.9%) with dimensions 5.0 cm × 3.0 cm was used to prepare the ZnO/Zn photoanode via an anodizing method. First, the surface of the Zn plate was scrubbed using silicon carbide paper and polished to a mirror finish. The Zn plate was then ultra-sonicated with a solution of acetone, ethanol and distilled water and was set as the anode. A stainless steel plate of equal dimensions was used as the cathode. The anodizing process was conducted in 500 mL of 0.1 M oxalic acid solution at 30 V for 2 h using a laboratory DC power supply (GW Instek GPR-25H30D). The anodized ZnO/Zn was rinsed thoroughly with deionized water and dried at room temperature. Finally, the ZnO/Zn plate was annealed at 300 °C in air for 3 h. The anodized ZnO/Zn photoanode was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Shimadzu XRD-6000) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), JEOL (Model: JSM 6460 LA). A PFC using ZnO/Zn plate as the photoanode and Pt/C paper as the cathode was constructed. The distance between the two electrodes was set at 5 cm. An ultraviolet A (UVA) lamp (Philips, 7.7 W, 350–400 nm) was used as the light source, and the distance between the lamp and the ZnO/Zn photoanode was fixed at 15 cm. Aeration was provided at the cathode side, and the study was conducted at room temperature. The PFC study was carried out in a Pyrex glass cell filled with 200 mL of RG 19. Sampling of the dye solution was performed every hour, and its concentration was determined using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi U-2800, Japan). The COD concentration was measured using a colorimeter (HACH DR/890). Each experiment was repeated three times. The voltage output of the study was recorded using a data logger (Midi LOGGER GL820 GRAPHTEC). The circuit current was calculated from the voltage across 1000 Ω except when different external resistances were used to determine power generation as a function of load. The power generated was calculated using the formula P     In the absence of supporting electrolyte, the lowest efficiency of RG 19 color removal was obtained: 73% after 8 h of UV irradiation ( Complete decolorization of RG 19 could be achieved within 2 h when NaCl was employed as the supporting electrolyte in the PFC. This indicated that NaCl promoted the oxidation of RG 19 directly via reaction with hydroxyl radicals generated by adsorption onto the surface of the ZnO photoanode. Indirect oxidation might also have occurred due to the presence of hypochlorite ions; these can be produced from NaCl solution ( The presence of chloride ions generates oxidizing species that contribute to a direct, powerful oxidation reaction at the anode surface and consequently improved dye color removal. The decolorization rates of Na  In addition, it was observed that decolorization efficiency declined with an increase in the initial concentration of dye (   In conclusion, the PFC system under study was affected by various operating conditions, such as the presence of dye, aeration, the photoanode, different supporting electrolytes and the initial dye concentration. The presence of dye enhanced electricity generation, while the photoanode and aeration significantly increased the degradation of dye in the PFC. The addition of supporting electrolytes improved the J The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of Science Fund (Grant No. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at