The water wettability of coal is a major factor affecting its flotation performance, and thus it is imperative to explore the wetting mechanism. Previous studies on wettability mainly focused on the contact angle and interfacial tension, and there are only a few reports on the electronic properties that affect the adsorption behavior of H2O. In this study, the electronic properties of perfect and defective surfaces of coal, the adsorption behavior of H2O on the surface, and wettability were tested using molecular simulations. X–ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of anthracite was performed, and two–layered graphite was used as an anthracite model. The results show that the aromatic structure of anthracite is very similar to the crystal structure of graphite; the difference lies only in the crystallite size: anthracite crystallites are smaller than graphite crystallites. Therefore, the modified graphite structure can be used to simulate the local structure of coal. The bandgap of defective surfaces is lower, their electronic density of states near Fermi energy is greater, and their electronic activities are better than those of perfect surfaces. Defects decrease the energy gap of frontier orbitals (ΔE
                     LUMO–HOMO) between H2O and the surface, and strengthen the interaction between H2O and the surface·H2O adsorbs physically on the coal surface with two hydrogen atoms facing the surface. Defects increase the wettability of the coal surface, and the order of wettability improvement by defects is: double vacancy defect > single vacancy defect > Stone–Wales defect.Flotation, which involves solid, liquid and gas phases, is one of the important methods of mineral separation. A mineral surface with good wettability can easily adsorb H Coal flotation is the most important method for fine coal upgrading; its recovery varies with the coal rank. The oxygen-containing functional groups such as hydroxyl, carbonyl, and carboxyl on the oxidized surfaces of low rank coal generally enhance the wettability and easily form hydrogen bonds with H Coal and graphite are mainly composed of carbon. However, while coal contains both ordered and disordered carbon, graphite contains a higher percentage of ordered carbon, characterized by a larger crystallite size and less heteroatoms. The ordered carbon present in coal has been generally considered to have a graphite-like structure. Molecular simulations have been hence simplified by considering the structure of coal identical to that of graphite. In particular, Lu et al. It is well known that the true hydrophobicity of pristine graphite is still an open question now. Some researchers agreed that the graphite surface was hydrophobic. Fowkes and Harkins Graphite wettability, as well as the influence of interfacial tension, functional groups, and roughness on coal wettability, has all been studied extensively; however, the effect of vacancy defects on the electronic properties (e.g., band structure, electronic density of states) and wettability of coal surfaces is still understudied. This investigation, via molecular simulations, demonstrates the electronic properties of defective coal surfaces and the impact of defects on coal surface wettability. A better understanding of wettability can help improving coal flotation. The ultra–pure anthracite from Ningxia and natural graphite from Jilin were used for this investigation. The proximate analysis is presented in The carbon structure of coal and graphite were analyzed by XRD. XRD of anthracite and graphite was performed on a Shimadzu XRD–6100 X–ray polycrystalline diffractometer with Cu K The parameters of aromatic structure can be obtained from XRD pattern using Bragg equation and Debye–Scherrer equation, which can be expressed as follows. The diffraction angle and In order to simplify the calculation and analysis, graphite was used to model the coal structure. Stone–Wales, single vacancy, and double vacancy defects on the graphite surface were introduced to simulate the defects on the coal surface The graphite model was constructed using the CASTEP module of Materials Studio software. Firstly, after optimizing the 4 × 4 × 1 graphite supercell, two layers of graphite were cut out as the perfect surface (PG), and then a C–C bond of the perfect surface was rotated by 90° in the horizontal plane to obtain the Stone-Wales defect (SW) DMol The wettability of the surface was evaluated using the adsorption energy of H  The electronic density of states of the perfect and defective surfaces is presented in The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of H The HOMO of each surface and LUMO of the water molecule are illustrated in The adsorption configurations of H These initial adsorption configurations were optimized, and the adsorption energy and adsorption distance were calculated and are summarized in As shown in  The (0 0 2) and (1 0 0) peaks in the XRD pattern of anthracite indicates that there are microcrystalline structures in the anthracite piled up by aromatic layers. The average inter–layer spacings between the aromatic layers of anthracite and graphite are similar, showing that the aromatic structure of anthracite is very similar to the crystal structure of graphite. Defects on coal surface could make the electronic properties of coal surface change significantly. Compared with the perfect surface, bandgap of the surfaces with Stone–Wales, single vacancy, and double vacancy defects are lower; the electronic density of states near the Fermi energy greater, and the surface electronic activity higher. The defects reduce the energy gap of frontier orbitals (Δ The adsorption of H  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFC0604702),