Colloid chemistry deals with the investigation of substances in dispersed state focusing on the phenomena taking place at interfaces. The dispersed state and interfacial phenomena cannot be separated from each other, as interfacial phenomena determines the characteristic properties of disperse systems as well as the means by which such properties are controlled. Heterogeneous systems (and primarily microheterogeneous systems consisting of two or more phases), in which at least one phase is present in the dispersed state, are referred to as disperse systems. If the shape of particles forming the system is more or less close to isometric, the extent of dispersion fineness can be characterized by the particle linear dimension, degree of dispersion, and the specific surface area. The degree of dispersion is determined as the ratio of the total surface area of particles forming the dispersed phase to the total volume of these particles. The breadth of the distribution function characterizes the system polydispersity. The dispersed state and interfacial phenomena can not be separated from each other, as interfacial phenomena determine the characteristic properties of disperse systems as well as the means by which one can control such properties. In most chemical disciplines the properties of substances are usually considered within the framework of two “extreme” levels of organization of matter: the macroscopic level, which deals with the properties of continuous homogeneous phases, and the microscopic level, dealing with the structure and properties of individual molecules. In reality, material objects (both natural and man-made products and materials) exist, in nearly all cases, in the One of the main objectives of colloid and surface science is the investigation of peculiarities in the structure of systems related to their One of the central tasks of colloid science is the investigation of changes in the properties of systems due to changes in their degree of dispersion. If the shape of particles forming the system is more or less close to isometric, the extent of dispersion fineness can be characterized by the particle linear dimension (some effective or mean radius, A more complete description of the dispersion composition of the The range of disperse systems of interest in colloid science is very broad. These include Based on the aggregate states of the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium one can recognize different kinds of disperse systems, which can be described by the abbreviation of two letters, the first of which characterizes the aggregate state of the dispersed phase, and the second one that of the dispersion medium. In these notations gaseous, liquid and solid states are labeled as G, L, and S, respectively. In the case of two phase systems, one can outline eight different types of disperse systems, as shown in the table below. Systems with a liquid dispersion medium represent a broad class of dispersions. The main portion of the book is devoted to these objects, the examples of which include various systems with a solid dispersed phase (S/L type), such as finely dispersed sols (in the case of unstructured systems) Systems with a gaseous dispersion medium, known under the common name of aerosols, include smokes, dusts, powders (systems of S/G type) and fogs (L/G type systems). Aerosols containing both solid particles and liquid droplets of dispersed phase are referred to as smogs. Since gases are totally miscible with each other, the formation of disperse systems of G Systems with a solid dispersion medium are represented by rocks, minerals, a variety of construction materials. Most such systems are of the S It is worth outlining here that the subdivision of disperse systems according to dispersed phase and dispersion medium The principal peculiarity of fine disperse systems is the presence of highly developed interfaces. These interfaces and the interfacial phenomena occurring at them affect the properties of disperse systems, primarily due to the existence of excessive The existence of developed surfaces in systems consisting of fine particles results in the need of external energy for the formation of such systems by both the comminution (dispersion) of macroscopic phases and condensation from homogeneous systems. The excessive interfacial energy is the reason for the higher chemical activity of dispersed phases in comparison with macroscopic phases. The result of this higher activity is increased solubility of the dispersed phase in the dispersion medium and an increase in the vapor pressure above the surface of fine particles. The smaller the particle size, the greater the increase in the vapor pressure. The elevated chemical activity and the availability of strongly developed interfaces are the reasons for the high rates of interactions between the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium, and the high rates of mass and energy transfer between them in heterogeneous chemical interactions. The presence of surface forces that lead to changes in the structure and composition of interfaces may have a great influence on these transfer processes. A high free energy excess, particularly in systems with a fine degree of dispersion, is the cause of thermodynamic instability, which is the most important feature of a majority of disperse systems. Thermodynamic instability in turn entails various processes aimed at decreasing the surface energy, which results in the saturation of surface forces. Such processes may occur in a number of ways. For example, in a free disperse system partial saturation of the surface forces may take place in the contact zone between the A further decrease in the surface energy of disperse system may be caused by a decrease in the interfacial area due to the Destabilization due to coagulation, coalescence and diffusional mass transfer leads to changes in the structure and properties of disperse systems. It is important to point out that due to coagulation and bridging of particles, a disperse system acquires qualitatively new structural-mechanical (rheological) properties which entail a conversion of the disperse system into a material. In the end, coalescence may result in the disintegration of a disperse system into constituent macroscopic phases. In a number of applications such degradation of colloidal systems is a desirable goal, as, e.g., in making butter by churning, or dehydration and desalination of crude oil. Along with the classification of disperse systems based on the phase state of the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium, and their classification as coarse dispersed or colloidal, structured or unstructured, dilute or concentrated, one can also subdivide disperse systems into lyophilic or lyophobic types. Systems belonging to these principally different classes differ in the nature of colloid stability and in the intensity of interfacial intermolecular interactions. High degree of similarity between the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium, and, consequently, compensation of the In controlling the stability of disperse systems, the The use of electrolytes and surfactants allows one to effectively control It is necessary to point out that finely dispersed state of substance is the primary condition for a high degree of organization of matter. Fine disperse structure is the basis for the strength and durability of materials, such as steel, ceramics and others, and for the strength of tissues in plants and live organisms. Heterogeneous chemical reactions in both industry and living organisms take place only at highly developed interfaces, i.e. in finely dispersed systems. Only fine disperse structure consisting of many tiny cells allows an enormous amount of information to be stored in small physical volumes. This relates to both the human brain and new generations of computers. Since the tendency towards lowering the excess of surface energy in disperse systems may take the form of various types of degradation of such systems, the problem of colloid stability is the central problem, not only in colloid and surface science but in all natural sciences as well. Along with factors responsible for the stabilization of different disperse systems, the conditions necessary for the formation of such systems from macroscopic phases are also part of colloid stability studies. It is clear from everything said so far that colloid and surface science Close interaction between colloid science and other related disciplines helped in the establishment and further enrichment of its experimental basis. Along with classical experimental methods specific to colloid science (determination of the surface tension, ultramicroscopy, dialysis and ultrafiltration, dispersion analysis and porosimetry, surface forces and measurements of particle interactions, studies of the scattering of light, etc.), such methods as various spectroscopic techniques (NMR, ESR, UF and IR The specific interdisciplinary nature of colloid science makes it of fundamental importance for such adjoining sciences as biology, soil science, geology and meteorology. Colloid and surface science forms the general physico-chemical basis of modern technology in nearly all areas of industry, including chemical, oil, mining, production of construction, instrumental, and composite materials, pulp and paper, printing, food, pharmaceuticals, paint and numerous other areas. It is very important in agriculture for solving problems related to increasing the soil fertility, application of pesticides and herbicides, etc. Colloid science also plays an important role in handling numerous environmental problems, such as waste water treatment, trapping of aerosols, fighting soil erosion, etc. The close interaction of colloid and surface science with molecular physics and a number of theoretical disciplines has determined its role in the development of natural sciences as a whole. The discovery of the nature of, and the further investigation of Brownian motion, the development of direct The work of Thomas Graham (circa 1760) marks the birth of colloid chemistry as an independent branch of science. Like other areas, colloid chemistry has its own long history: some specific colloid-chemical recipes were known to the ancient Egyptians and medieval alchemists. J. Gibbs, W. Thomson (Kelvin), J. Maxwell, A. Einstein, J. Perrin, T. Svedberg, G. Freundlich, I. Langmuir, M. Poliani, S. Brunauer, and other great physicists and chemists took active part in developing understanding and knowledge in various areas of colloid chemistry. The results of their work are reflected throughout this book. In this book the authors acknowledge and pay special attention to the views on general and specific problems of colloid chemistry developed by Russian scientists and the different scientific schools founded by them. Among the great scientists who made significant contributions to the area and are less known to the world scientific community, one should name F.F. Reiss, famous for his discovery of electrokinetic phenomena, A.V. Dumansky, the inventor of a centrifuge and the organizer of the first scientific journal on colloid chemistry, also known for his studies on biopolymers as lyophilic colloidal systems, N.A. Shilov, M.M. Dubinin, A.V. Kiselev (theory of adsorption), I.I. Zhukov (electrosurface phenomena), N.P. Peskov (stability The current literature in the area of colloid and surface science and interfacial phenomena represents the knowledge and techniques developed in