Proper treatment of food processing wastes, including the recovery of valuable products, is important both environmentally and economically to the food processing industry. The quantity and quality of wastes and wastewaters generated in the food industry vary widely. The characteristics of a specific waste depend mainly on the product being processed, the processing methods, and the amount of water used to wash raw materials and clean equipment. Segregating waste streams at the source will facilitate resource recovery and reduce the amount of waste that has to be treated. That often results in simpler operations, less energy consumption and lower treatment costs. One simple but effective segregation practice is to separate liquid streams from solid streams. This chapter discusses both the theoretical basics and practical applications of different separation technologies. A separation process may be defined as a unit operation that divides multi-component or multi-phase material into two or more components and/or phases, using physical, thermal, chemical or biological principles. It may involve changing the phase of the matter.Dimensions of the adsorbent (i.e. diameter or surface area). Structure of the adsorbent. pH of the liquid. Solubility of the solute. Molecular size of the solute. Molecule geometry. Degree of ionization. The presence of materials for surface tension modification. Proper treatment of food processing wastes, including the recovery of valuable products, is important both environmentally and economically to the food processing industry. For this industry, as for many others, environmental regulations and disposal costs for waste/wastewater are two major forces driving the use of alternative treatment technologies that will recover valuable products from waste streams and recycle water effectively. The quantity and quality of wastes and wastewaters generated in the food industry vary widely. Depending on the operations and the products, wastes can amount to over 50% of the raw materials on a weight basis ( This chapter reviews both the theoretical basics and practical applications of different separation technologies. The suitability of each for specific food processing wastes and wastewaters is discussed, and the quality and final uses of the products recovered through separation are presented. A separation process may be defined as a unit operation that divides multicomponent or multi-phase material into two or more components and/or phases, using physical, thermal, chemical or biological principles. It may involve changing the phase of the matter. Some separation technologies combine two or more of these principles. The basic process for separating three phases of matter, with each phase containing three components, is shown in Separation can be achieved in a single- or multiple-step operation. Adding steps may increase the quality of the final product but may also increase capital and operation costs. If the separation involves Overall recovery = With different recovery efficiencies for each of Overall recovery = This section presents the theories of various physical and chemical separation technologies and the application of each for treatment of food processing waste/wastewater. According to Screening is commonly used as a primary separation process to remove solid materials from food processing wastes and other waste streams. The separated solids can be converted into valuable products by other technologies such as drying. Screening is widely used in food processing operations, including seafood, vegetable, meat, poultry, winery, distillery and canning plants ( Sedimentation is the separation of solids from a liquid by means of gravity. It depends on the differences in specific gravities between the suspended matter and the solution. Gravity clarifiers are often equipped with skimming mechanisms for removing floating materials such as grease and fibers. They are commonly used to treat waste streams from sugar beet, meat, fish and poultry processing operations. Sedimentation can sometimes be done naturally without adding chemicals. However, for many applications, use of chemical coagulants can be very helpful in enhancing the removal efficiency of suspended colloids ( Flotation involves the separation of suspended matter from an aqueous solution due to the differences in their specific gravity. Some applications use gas bubbles to enhance the separation by attaching the bubbles to the solid particles, causing them to rise to the surface through the buoyant effect. Depending on the methods used to generate the gas bubbles, flotation technologies can be divided into dispersed-air, dissolved-air and electrolytic flotation ( Crystallization is the formation of solid particles within a homogeneous phase ( Impurities such as minerals and protein are believed to hinder crystallization of lactose and should be removed beforehand. For example, in separating lactose from whey,  The most important parameters affecting the design and performance of a system for crystallization are temperature and pH of the liquid, concentration and solubility of the intended component, and the presence of nucleation seed and its origin. For crystallization of a specific protein, Centrifugation is an effective pre-treatment process for food processing wastewaters. It separates suspended solids by increasing their gravitational forces. Stokes' law may be modified to apply to centrifuges as follows ( Centrifugation is widely used in fishmeal plants to separate fish oil from processing wastes ( Centrifugation has also been used for recovering protein precipitates. Hydrocyclone technology, which takes advantage of centrifugation forces, has been suggested as a practical technology in solid–liquid separation of biological materials. Adsorption is considered to be an effective method for treatment of dilute effluents ( Much research has been done on the use of adsorption for recovery of various chemical substances (e.g. polyphenolics) from food processing wastes. Polyphenolics are highly valuable compounds that may be used as functional food ingredients and as natural antioxidants. Three thermal processes can be used as solid–liquid separation technologies. Freezing is one: as it occurs, ice crystals are formed from pure water molecules, while other molecules are rejected to crystal boundaries where they can be recovered. The process is energy intensive if freezing is manmade, but natural freezing can be economic in cold regions ( Evaporation, another thermal process, is used to concentrate a solution consisting of a nonvolatile solute and a volatile solvent ( Generally, the major factors that affect the choice of thermal technologies are the energy consumption and the required characteristics of the recovered product. The most important design parameters are: (1) operational temperature and pressure; (2) surface area for heat transfer; (3) type of media used for heating or cooling; (4) relative flow rates between the waste and the heat-transfer media and (5) design of the equipment used. Chemical separation processes use chemicals to bring about reactions that change the surface characteristics of solid particles, and change compounds from soluble to insoluble forms to enhance the separation. The chemical treatment processes are usually used in conjunction with physical processes. Three chemical treatment processes – precipitation, coagulation and colloidal gas aphrons – and examples of their application are described in the following sections. Precipitation involves converting a soluble compound into an insoluble form by adding a chemical to an aqueous medium ( Precipitation has various applications in treating food processing wastewater, including separation of soluble phosphorus, and recovery of sugar and protein from wastewater. Precipitation can easily be adapted to a large scale using simple equipment (  Protein can be precipitated by using one of the following methods ( Isoelectric precipitation refers to the separation of a protein from a solution when the protein loses its charge at its isoelectric point (pI), reducing its solubility. The surface charge of the protein is largely affected by the pH of the solution. Protein has a net positive charge at low pH levels and a negative charge at high pH levels. At the pI, it has no net charge. This leads to reduced solubility because the protein is unable to interact with the medium and will then fall out of solution ( Adding large amounts of neutral salts (e.g. ammonium sulfate) and organic solvents (e.g. ethanol and acetone) can also lead to protein precipitation. The choice of a precipitating salt depends largely on its cost and solubility, and the stability of the protein ( In addition to isoelectric and salting out precipitation, heat can also be an effective means of changing the physical properties of protein and bringing about coagulation/precipitation. The heat-enhanced separation method can be used when the biological properties of the protein are not important ( Coagulation generally is a process that causes destabilization and aggregation of colloidal particles in a solution. In chemical coagulation, insoluble colloidal particles are agglomerated by the action of a chemical additive to produce flocculant materials, which can then be removed by sedimentation or flotation ( Many factors influence the effectiveness of coagulation, including the characteristics and dosage of the coagulation chemical and the pH of the wastewater. In a study conducted by Good clarification (up to 96%) of suspended solids in slaughterhouse wastewater was achieved using aluminum sulfate and a commercial polymer (   Coagulation, like precipitation, is a practical process for reducing pollution and recovering byproducts from food processing wastewaters. The characteristics of the wastewater affect the choice and the optimum dosage of coagulants as well as the operational parameters. Although inorganic coagulants are widely used, organic coagulants such as chitosan and carboxymethylcellulose are more attractive due to the fact that the recovered products can be safely used as an animal feed. Many factors affect the design of a chemical coagulation process, including wastewater characteristics (e.g. pH, protein content) and the type and dosage of the coagulant. Colloidal gas aphrons (CGAs) are defined as microbubbles created by intense stirring (5000–10000 rpm) of a surfactant solution ( They expose a large interfacial area per unit volume for the adsorption of molecules. They exhibit relatively high stability, measured in terms of the time required for their collapse. They have flow properties similar to those of water. The aphron phase separates easily from the bulk liquid phase because of its buoyancy.  According to It is clear that the use of CGAs is an efficient and economic separation technique for protein recovery from food wastewater and for recovery of oily products from citrus and seafood processing wastewaters. CGAs may also be used for oil recovery from wastewaters produced during vegetable oil processing. Other advanced technologies are being applied for separation purposes ( Reactive separation refers to the process that combines reaction with separation in a single operation. This integrated design is intended to solve particularly difficult separation problems, such as thermally unstable systems, by means of selective and reversible reactions ( According to Reactive separation could be a promising technology for the recovery of gases and liquids such as hydrogen, methane and ethanol from food processing wastes. Separation of intermediate products, for example volatile fatty acids during anaerobic digestion, could be an important help in preventing reactor failures. EC is a rather complicated process. It involves a number of chemical and physical phenomena that use consumable electrodes to supply ions into the wastewater stream ( To the authors' knowledge, this technology is not commonly used for food processing wastewaters. Research is needed to examine whether CGAs can be used to separate proteins from complex mixtures ( Many separation technologies are being used to treat wastes and wastewaters from the food processing industry. This chapter reviews the theories behind, and the applications of, many of the different technologies. The most important design parameters for each are presented. The major purpose of using the various separation technologies is to reduce environmental pollution by the waste or wastewater discharge. The recovery of valuable products for human, animal or industrial uses is, in many cases, a secondary purpose. In some cases, the product recovery is necessary in order to make the treatment process an economically viable option. The separation technologies use one or more of the physical, thermal, chemical or electrical processes or a combination of them. The choice among different technologies depends mainly on the characteristics of the waste stream, the technical and financial considerations, and the final use of the recovered products. Increasing the number of separation steps increases the purity of the final product, but sometimes at an unacceptably high cost. Some physico-chemical processes do not usually provide the selectivity necessary for producing valuable products for reuse. Screening and sedimentation are applied as a primary treatment of wastewater. Crystallization can be applied for protein recovery from milk processors. Chemical coagulation is applied for removal of insoluble colloidal particles. Many inorganic or organic coagulants of different origin (natural or synthetic) are currently used. The most preferred ones are those produced from biological origins, such as chitosan, because the recovered product can be safely used as animal/human feed additives. Another physico-chemical process uses CGAs; it can be a cost-effective technology for the recovery of protein and oil products from wastewaters. Some other technologies, such as reactive separation and EC, can also be used for treatment of food processing wastewater. Reactive separation could be a promising technology for the recovery of hydrogen, methane, ethanol and volatile fatty acids from food processing wastes. EC was found to be effective for the removal of oil and grease from food processing and olive mill wastewaters. 