Zinc was known in China from about 1400 and was produced by reducing zinc oxide with charcoal. Zinc was later imported into Europe and brass, the alloy of zinc and copper, was first used in 1781. After Champion invented his distillation process in 1738, zinc use became common. Annual world mine zinc production in 1998 was 7.5Mt and smelter production 8.2Mt. In 1999 there were some 78 zinc smelters, of which 61 were electrolytic and 12 used the Imperial Smelting Process (ISP). Most plants process sulfide concentrate; some treat oxide fumes and recycled materials. Environmental and economic concerns continue to force significant change in production technology. About 180 zinc-bearing minerals are known. By far the most important mineral is sphalerite (ZnS); others include zincite (ZnO), smithsonite (ZnCO The hard-rock zinc ores are mined by open-pit or underground mining techniques. Ore is beneficiated by comminution—crushing and grinding—followed by selective flotation to produce separate zinc, lead, and copper concentrates. Recently developed resources tend to be fine-grained, needing liberation to a particle size as fine as 7–10μm. The mineralogy of some ores presents such difficulty that it is necessary to produce a bulk zinc–lead concentrate. Most traded zinc concentrate contains 50–60% zinc. The early method of producing zinc was through reduction of zinc oxide by carbon, with condensation of zinc metal vapor. The original process used small externally fired horizontal (Belgian) retorts. (The Chinese heated a mixture of calamine (ZnO) and charcoal in an earthenware pot, recovering the zinc as an encrustation on the inside of the pot.) The reactions involved are The arduous manual operation of horizontal retorts was eliminated by development in the USA of the externally-heated vertical retort (VR), and of the electrothermic (St Joseph) vertical retort using internal electrical resistance heating of the charge of sinter and coke. The VR process uses briquettes of roasted concentrate, coal, and binder. In 1998 two VR plants and two electrothermic plants were operating worldwide. Dominant in zinc production is the electrolytic or roast–leach–electrowin (RLE) process, first used in 1916 by Anaconda and Cominco. A variant is the direct leach–electrowin process. Zinc sulfide concentrate is roasted to make a largely oxide calcine; the sulfur dioxide produced is converted to sulfuric acid. Calcine or oxide fume is leached in sulfuric acid (spent electrolyte) from electrowinning. The objectives in roasting are to produce in an energy-efficient manner a calcine with low residual sulfur and minimal zinc ferrite (ZnO.Fe Particular care is needed in roasting ultrafine concentrate, which may require microagglomeration to prevent premature loss of concentrate from the bed, resulting in high sulfur content in the calcine. Some concentrates can cause sticking and agglomeration in the bed. In VM–Lurgi roasters, control of moisture in feed is important, as is bed temperature control through water-cooling coils and sprays. The Dynatec (formerly Sherritt) zinc pressure leach process is applied to supplement roast-leach at three plants, and as a stand-alone leach process at one plant. The main leach reaction is Atmospheric pressure leaching is now used as a supplement to the roast-leach process. The process relies on use of ferric sulfate as the oxidant: Calcine from roasting is leached with spent electrolyte and make-up sulfuric acid. Leach practice varies widely, with up to three leach stages—neutral, acid (or hot-acid), and super hot-acid. Another variant includes sulfur dioxide reduction. Correspondingly, zinc extraction from concentrate to solution varies from about 90% to over 99%. The stages operate in series, each leach followed by thickeners for liquid–solid separation. Leach liquor flows back progressively to neutral leach, from which it goes to iron precipitation and purification. Although there are wide variations, average leach conditions may be A simple neutral leach allows iron precipitation as Fe(OH) A major development from about 1970 was replacement of the acid leach with hot-acid leach, combined with precipitation of iron as a jarosite, MFe Goethite, hydrated ferric oxide FeOOH, can be precipitated from hot acid-leach solution at a pH of 2.0–3.5 and at 70–90°C. In the Vieille-Montagne goethite process, ferric iron is reduced to ferrous by the addition of zinc sulfide concentrate, following which oxygen is used to produce the goethite precipitate: In the hematite process, zinc ferrite-bearing residue is dissolved by sulfur dioxide and acid and, after purification, iron is precipitated as Fe Deposition of zinc at reasonable current efficiency depends on maintaining a high hydrogen overpotential at the zinc surface. Deposition of traces of elements with low hydrogen overpotentials (such as Sb, As, Ge, Cu, Ni, and Co) permits discharge of hydrogen ions, so ruining current efficiency. Levels of these harmful elements in electrolyte must therefore be very low. Many other impurities cause problems: fluoride causes the zinc deposit to stick to the aluminum starter sheet; and chloride causes anode corrosion. Magnesium, sodium, and potassium can build up in the electrolyte, and must be controlled. Within limits, manganese in solution is needed for anode conditioning. The main method of solution purification is by cementation with zinc dust, by reactions such as Cells are generally made from concrete and lined with lead or PVC. Current densities range from 300 to 800Am Purified solution at 130–180gl The zinc blast furnace or Imperial Smelting Furnace (ISF) was developed in the 1950s. The furnace is charged with zinc–lead sinter and coke, both preheated to 700–800°C. Sinter is made from concentrates, recycled materials, and fluxes, and sulfuric acid is produced from the sintering gas. Coke burns at the tuyeres level with air preheated to 950–1150°C. Crude lead bullion and slag are tapped into a forehearth. Furnace gas, which is strongly reducing, leaves the shaft top at over 1000°C so that zinc metal vapor in the gas is not reoxidized to ZnO. The gas passes to a lead splash condenser, where zinc dissolves in molten lead. Zinc is separated from the lead by circulating it around an external cooling launder. This zinc contains about 1% lead, and therefore suits Prime Western Grade (0.5–1.4% Pb), but requires further refining to meet the Special High Grade standard. ISF slag contains 6–10% zinc, so zinc recovery through this process is lower than that achieved by the RLE process. The need to use metallurgical coke is a disadvantage. The major advantage of the Imperial Smelting Process (ISP) is its ability to take a wide variety of feed unsuited to RLE. These include bulk zinc–lead concentrates, and a range of secondary zinc-bearing materials which may be hot-briquetted. Product lead bullion acts as a collector for copper, silver, and gold, which are subsequently recovered in lead refining. The overall primary energy requirement of the ISP is less than that of the RLE process. ISF and vertical retort zinc can be refined to Special High Grade by distillation in the New Jersey Zinc column. The column comprises about 50 externally heated shallow silicon carbide trays. Zinc and cadmium vapor from the top of the column is condensed, while zinc enriched in lead leaves the bottom. The zinc–cadmium liquid flows to a second-stage cadmium column which operates at a lower temperature, so that refined zinc flows from the bottom. Fuming of lead blast furnace slag is an important source of zinc oxide as feed for zinc electrowinning. Slag containing 12–18% zinc is reduced in a water-jacketed furnace at 1150–1200°C by injection of pulverized coal and air through tuyeres. Zinc metal vapor is reoxidized to ZnO above the bath, and collected in a baghouse. Halogens are removed from raw fume by roasting in a kiln, or by leaching with sodium carbonate. The Waelz kiln performs a similar function with recycled materials such as zinc-containing steel-plant dusts and neutral leach residue. The Sirosmelt submerged lance bath smelting technology is increasingly used for treatment of zinc leach residue, ISF slag and secondary zinc materials. Secondary zinc (including brass recycling) accounted for 24.8% of American supply in 1997, and about 28% for western countries. However, less than 50% is reclaimed as metal. Alternative recycling processes include the plasma-arc furnace with splash condenser, and hydrometallurgical options. Work continues to develop solvent extraction as a means of purifying zinc leach liquor. Commercially successful zinc solvent extraction operates with the Zincex process in Spain and Portugal. Potential processes include ferric chloride leach and Zinclor solvent extraction–electrowin. The EZINEX and CENIM–INETI processes use ammonium chloride. Bioleaching and direct concentrate fuming methods show promise. On the London Metal Exchange, ‘‘Special High Grade’’ traded zinc must be at least 99.995% purity. The annual average LME price per tonne during the period 1990–1998 ranged from $962 to $1465. Major uses are in galvanizing, zinc alloys/diecasting, pigments and compounds, and brass. 