This paper presents a numerical study on the phase changing of cyclohexane–copper nano-PCM in a square porous cavity in the presence of a magnetic field. The horizontal walls of the cavity are insulated and its initial temperature is T
                     i. In the beginning, the temperature of the left vertical wall changes to a temperature higher than the melting point of nano-PCM. Four pertinent dimensionless parameters of porosity (ε), solid volume fraction (φ), Hartmann number (Ha) and Rayleigh number (Ra) are considered. The effects of these parameters on the flow and temperature fields, the heat transfer rate, and the melting time examined. The results show that changing the porosity has greater influence than changing the solid volume fraction on the melting time. The presence of an intensive magnetic field leads to a decrease in the melting time and prevail of the conductive heat transfer in the cavity. It changes the curvature of the melting line and converts it to a straight line being parallel to vertical walls of the cavity. As the Rayleigh number increases, the convection heat transfer becomes stronger and consequently, the melting speed in the cavity increases.magnitude of magnetic field, kg/Am specific heat, J/kg ○C Fourier number modified Fourier number gravitational acceleration, m/s height and width of the cavity, m enthalpy of fusion of nano-PCM, J/kg electric current, A Hartmann number permeability of the porous medium, m thermal conductivity, W/m ○C mean Nusselt number Nusselt number pressure, Pa Rayleigh number dimensionless horizontal distance from the heated wall to the melting front, horizontal distance from the heated wall to the melting front, m Stefan number temperature, ○C time, s velocity component in x-direction, m/s velocity component in y-direction, m/s dimensionless horizontal velocity dimensionless vertical velocity horizontal and vertical coordinate, m dimensionless horizontal and vertical coordinate, thermal diffusivity, m volume fraction (=volume of the nano-particle/total volume of nano-PCM) porosity of the porous medium (=void volume/total volume of porous medium) dimensionless temperature difference volumetric thermal expansion coefficient, 1/K viscosity of the nano-PCM, N s/m stream function, m dimensionless stream function electric conductivity, 1/Ω m effect of nanoparticles' coefficient in momentum equation symbol in convergence criteria equation temperature difference density, kg/m mean specific heat ratio cold wall fluid hot wall initial maximum nano-fluid nanomaterial (solid or liquid phase) nano-particle porous medium mean value between porous medium and nanomaterial The heat transfer in porous media has increasingly received attention in various modern technologies and industrial applications. In particular, the thermal performance of heat exchangers, reactors, electronic components, heat insulators and geothermal energy systems have extensively been studied Some researchers studied cases where the heat energy was either applied to the cavity walls or was placed inside the cavity. Pop and Saeid Vynnycky and Kimura Reported studies in literature have used both single-phase and two-phase models to examine the behavior of nanofluids. The single-phase model has obviously been more popular due to its simplicity in the analysis; however, some researchers have used the two-phase model to ensure more realistic simulation results. Sheikholeslami et al. Chamkha and Muneer The study of porous media saturated with materials has attracted the attention of researchers in the field of energy efficiency of thermal systems. There are mainly two methods to save energy in storage materials: 1—sensible thermal energy storage; and 2—insensible thermal energy storage Beckermann and Viskanta Researchers have conducted a number of studies in the field of fast melting/freezing due to their various emerging applications Many studies on melting and freezing in porous media have been reported in literature; however, to the best knowledge of authors, the study of melting process of nano-PCM in porous cavities and in the presence of a magnetic field has not been conducted. An effective thermal control system is highly desired due to the increased heat generated from the tight integration of electrical components or atomic reactors. It is increasingly difficult when the systems are operating at a high temperature with a narrow space and strong magnetic field and/or nuclear radiation. For this problem, the thermal storage system can be simulated as a two-dimensional square cavity. One of the mechanisms that affects the melting process is the volume force due to the magnetic field, which in turn controls the melting or solidification processes. In this study, the effect of magnetic field intensity (by changing the Hartmann number) on melting processes is investigated. The effect of magnetic field on “weak-magnetic” materials is small; however, it must be considered for polymeric materials and PCMs. They are too small to be detected easily under the field strengths as low as generated by permanent magnets and electromagnets. The advent of liquid-helium free superconducting magnets has facilitated the use of high magnetic fields, which have resulted in a number of new findings that would have been impossible under low magnetic fields. In this context, the phase change in a porous cavity and in the existence of magnetic field has been studied by several researchers because of the high magnetic force acting on diamagnetic materials. In this case, the phase change material (PCM) experiences a Lorentz force. This force suppresses the convective flow, which in turn affects the growth rate of melting process A schematic diagram of the geometry studied in this study is illustrated in It is considered that the porous medium is homogeneous, isotropic and fully-saturated. Nanoparticles are distributed homogeneously in the phase-change material. The nano-PCM and the porous medium are in local thermodynamic equilibrium. The frictional waste effect and the inertia term in the energy and momentum equations are neglected. The thermodynamic properties of the porous medium and the fluid, except the fluid density in the buoyancy term, are constant. The fluid density is changed according to the Boussinesq theory and the fluid in porous medium follows the Darcy model. The effect of magnetic field on fluid movement in the porous medium is based on the models reported by Revnic et al. The electric current is a scalar: The electric current is related to the electromagnetic field based on the following equation: The melting line equation can also be written as The definitions of the parameters applied in the above equations are described in The above equations can be rewritten based on the following stream function: According to Dimensionless momentum Dimensionless energy Dimensionless melting line In the abovementioned equations, Ra is the Rayleigh number given by: Ha is the Hartmann number given by The other parameters are given by: As it can be seen from the definitions for Ω and Δ, the effect of presence of nanoparticles in the base fluid will be introduced to momentum equation by these parameters. This will be achieved in energy equation by The important point for introducing this parameter is to separate the porosity effect in the melting line equation (Ste/ The thermophysical properties of materials are presented in Boundary conditions Initial conditions In this study, the local and average Nusselt number (Nu and The finite volume method (FVM), used in this study, is a method for representing and evaluating partial differential equations in the form of algebraic equations  That Π could be Ψ or For obtaining exact solutions, the proportional grid and time step should be used. The grid independence study was carried out by considering four grid sizes. The results are presented in The results of comparison with reference As mentioned earlier, the use of metal structure with high conductivity coefficient as the porous medium is one of the melting mechanism control and improvement methods. Regarding the selection of aluminum as the medium solid structure, the effect of porosity change, which is saturated volume with nano-PCM to whole medium volume ratio, is investigated in this section. Hence, the investigations is carried out for constant values of Ra The amount of melting percent changes in the cavity for different values of medium porosity with time is shown in In order to examine the variation of melting process in the cavity with time, the time history of isotherms and streamlines at constant Rayleigh and Hartmann numbers, nano-PCM volume ratio and medium porosity parameters and for three values of The scope of this section is to examine the effect of Rayleigh number (50  It was previously mentioned that a mechanism to effect on melting process is creating volume force like magnetic field which leads to control of melting process. In this section, the effect of magnetic field intensity change by changing the Hartmann number is investigated by considering Ra The effect of adding copper nanoparticles to the base material (cyclohexane) is investigated. Hence, the location of melting line for This paper presented the results of a numerical investigation on the phase-change nano-PCM (cyclohexane–copper) melting in a square porous cavity and in the presence of a magnetic field. Four parameters of Ra, Ha,