With increasing quantities of biomass being combusted in coal fired power stations, there is an urgent need to be able to predict the grindability of biomass in existing coal mills, but currently no standard biomass grindability test exists. In this study, the applicability of the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) and Bond Work Index (BWI) as standard grindability tests for biomass were investigated for commercially sourced wood pellets, steam exploded pellets, torrefied pellets, sunflower pellets, eucalyptus pellets, miscanthus pellets, olive cake and Colombian La Loma coal. HGI predicts the behaviour of fuels in vertical spindle mills and BWI for tube and ball mills. Compared to La Loma (HGI of 46), all biomasses tested performed poorly with low HGI values (14–29). Miscanthus pellets had the highest BWI or Wi
                      at 426kWh/t. Despite similar HGI values, some untreated biomasses showed lower BWI values (Eucalyptus pellets Wi
                      87kWh/t, HGI 22) compared to others (sunflower pellets Wi
                      366kWh/t, HGI 20). Torrefied pellets had the lowest Wi
                      (16kWh/t), with La Loma coal at 23kWh/t. Wood, miscanthus and sunflower pellets exhibited mill choking during the BWI test, as the amount of fines produced did not increase with an increasing revolution count. An approximate correlation between HGI and BWI was found for the biomass samples which did not experience mill choking in the BWI test. Milling results in this paper suggest that biomass pellets should be composed of pre-densified particles close to the target size in order to minimise the energy use in mills and possibility of mill choking. Our findings would also suggest that the BWI is a valid test for predicting the potential for mill choking of biomass in a tube and ball mill. HGI, however, appears to be a poor method of predicting the grindability of biomass in vertical spindle mills. A new standard grindability test is required to test the grindability of biomasses in such mills.Global coal consumption by power generators is growing annually The Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) test is based on Rittinger’s theory that “the work done in grinding is proportional to the new surface produced” The Bond Work Index (BWI or As McIntyre and Plitt noted However, these correlations have not been tested on biomass samples commonly used in the power sector. An increasing number of legacy coal fired power stations are being converted to burn biomass. There is an urgent need to understand the grinding behaviour of a wide range of biomasses in all types of mills, not least because incorrect operation of existing coal mills during biomass milling increases the risk of fires in biomass mill hoppers The samples used in this work are either routinely co-fired in coal fired power plants or have been used in biomass co-firing trials, as illustrated in The particle size range of the biomass particles (prior to densification) was obtained using the British standard BS EN 16126:2012 Limited information was available on the source and species of the material, for commercial reasons. Thermal profiles were produced using TA Instruments Q500 Thermogravimetric Analyser (TGA). TGA runs used 10–15 The HGI test used followed BS 1016-112:1995 The BWI is determined using a dry grinding test in a standardised testing machine, the Bico Ball Mill In addition there are the three theories of comminution which describe empirical size reductions, these being Rittinger’s The energy required for size reduction is proportional to the new surface area generated The equivalent relative reductions in sizes require equal energy The net energy required in comminution is proportional to the total length of the new cracks formed The application of Kick’s and Rittinger’s theories has been met with varied success and are not realistic for designing real size reduction circuits where where The Rosin–Rammler distribution equation was originally developed to describe the distribution of coal fines from coal mills where  Ohliger et al.   The work input The results from the BWI tests show a wide spread of BWI values amongst the biomass samples. As expected the wood, miscanthus and sunflower pellets had  Eucalyptus shows a different behaviour to the other untreated biomasses. It has a The La Loma coal showed adequate grindability in the mill for its much finer target size of 90     However it should be noted that this correlation is based on a very limited number of samples and is only applicable for the test equipment and experimental conditions used to obtain the The applicability of two standard grindability methods for coal; Hardgrove Grindability Index and Bond Index test, have been tested on several biomasses and one coal commonly used in the power sector. For the BWI test, particle size characterisation, thermal composition and analysis of mill behaviour were used to analyse mill phenomena such as mill choking. HGI is a poor indicator of the grindability of biomass in a vertical spindle mill, and can give misleading results when analysed alone. Grindability tests which aim to analyse the grindability of biomass to 75 The BWI results show that there are two stages of milling occurring in biomass pellets. The first is the breaking down of the pellets into smaller parts or back to the pre-densified particle sizes, where the cohesive forces involved in holding together the pellets are weak and easy to overcome in the mills. The second stage of milling is the breaking down of the pre-densified particles into smaller particles. However, the forces involved in this second stage are much greater than the initial pellet breakage stage. Therefore, to optimise milling in a coal mills, biomass pellets should be composed of particles close to the required size so that only the pellet comminution stage occurs. Whilst it has been shown that the BWI test is a useful test for analysing and predicting the mill behaviour of biomass in a tube and ball mill, the HGI test is not suitable for predicting the grindability of biomass in vertical spindle mills. A new standardised grindability test is therefore required to test the grindability of biomasses in these types of mills. This research is funded and supported by the Biomass & Fossil Fuel Research Alliance (BF2RA) and EDF Energy plc, as well as the EPSRC. The project is an Engineering Doctorate at the Efficient Fossil Energy Technology Centre in the Energy & Sustainability Research Division at the University of Nottingham. The authors would like to thank all those involved for their support and cooperation during the course of the research.