Frequency distribution (histogram) calculated on the basis of igneous and detrital zircon U-Pb ages has been commonly utilized to interpret the age (range) of magmatic events. The temporal properties revealed by these types of data have also been integrated with other types of isotope data (e.g., neodymium, hafnium, and oxygen) to describe the high magmatic addition rate (MAR) and its association with the growth or reworking of the continental crust. Major peaks are picked to associate with pulses of high-volume magmatic flare-ups related to episodic evolution of continental crust. With the development of modern isotope identification technology which results both in reduction of analytical error of isotope data and rapid accumulation of massive high-quality data, the temporal and frequency variances of these types of data ought to be quantitatively analyzed to study magmatic evolution with respect to tectonic background. A new fractal density concept and a local singularity analysis (LSA) method have been recently and successfully applied to analyze the geometric property of the age peaks in global zircon U-Pb age database by power law models. The anomalies of age peaks identified are linked to deeply rooted avalanches associated with short spurts of convection during formation of supercontinents and continent crust growth. In this paper, the method is further used to analyze a small dataset of U-Pb ages from Gangdese arc to characterize the causational relationship of age peak and India-Asia collision. The results show that the age density around peak at 51Ma can be fitted by power law functions. Both the scaling range of the age distribution and the exponents of the power law functions observed from the data suggest that the age peak may reflect magmatic flare-ups which would have been caused by superimposing of subduction, exhumation and slab breakoffs. It has been demonstrated that the LSA can be used as a new way to quantitatively characterize magmatic flare-ups based on U-Pb age data from a fractal density point of view.Study of igneous activities is important in many ways not only for understanding plate tectonics, continental crustal growth and recycling, but also for assessments of mineral resources, thermal energy and as well as global CO There are several mechanisms in the context of plate tectonics as introduced in The ordinary density, or more precisely, the volumetric mass density, can be calculated by the following equation: The preceding density exists only if the limit converges when the volume becomes infinitesimal. As a generalization of Eq. The value of The existence of fractal density can be proved by multiplicative cascade processes which mathematically generate the distribution of measures with multifractal density ( If the fractal density exists, the ordinary density and fractal density are associated by the following power law relation: where ε represents a linear scale of an With the concept of fractal density and definition of singularity as shown in Eq. As introduced in There have been numerous studies with focus on India – Asia collision in the Himalaya Orogen ( To evaluate the abnormality of the peak distribution of U-Pb age spectra by LSA, the U-Pb ages were grouped using a 2-Myr bin and the numbers of ages per group are plotted as yellow dots connected by red line segments in The singularity analysis applied to the zircon U-Pb crystallization ages of the intrusive rocks from the Gangdese Batholith from Himalaya Orogen ( It is important to note that the value of a singularity of fractal density estimated from the age data may be affected by the representativeness of the data available for study. Similar to many other empirical analyses, as more data become available, the statistical results, and hence their interpretation, may change. Nevertheless, singularity analysis from the perspective of fractal density might open a path for future research in subduction and collision related magmatic activities. While the singularity analysis in the current paper is only applied to a small dataset of U-Pb ages, a similar approach can be applied to other types of age data from different orogens to further demonstrate the applicability and effectiveness of the method. Thanks are due to Professor Frits Agterberg for his comments. This research has been financially supported by the