Elastin degeneration and calcification occur in many cardiovascular diseases, including medial arterial elastocalcinosis, atherosclerosis, and bioprosthetic heart valve mineralization. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that the onset and progression of elastin-oriented calcification is associated with matrix remodeling and elastin degradation events. We studied whether aluminum ions inhibit elastin calcification by reducing elastin degradation and altering remodeling events. Subdermal implantation of pure elastin in juvenile rats resulted in a time-dependent calcification of elastin, reaching high levels 21 days after implantation. In situ hybridization showed that elastin calcification was associated with an up-regulation of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) mRNA expression, specifically MMP-9 and MMP-2. Gelatin zymography demonstrated increased MMP-9 and MMP-2 enzyme activities in early stages of elastin calcification. Calcified elastin displayed a time-dependent pattern of tenascin-C (TN-C) and alkaline phosphatase (AP) expression. Pretreatment of pure elastin with aluminum ions prior to implantation resulted in complete inhibition of elastin calcification. Aluminum ion binding to elastin was found to protect elastin against MMP-mediated degradation in vitro. Noncalcified, explanted aluminum-pretreated elastin exhibited reduced activities of MMPs. TN-C expression in elastin implants exhibited a time-dependent pattern that was also affected by pretreatment of elastin with aluminum ions. In conclusion, elastin calcification is accompanied by matrix remodeling events, and the efficacy of aluminum pretreatment in inhibiting elastin calcification may be related in part to its effects on elastin remodeling.Elastin is the predominant extracellular matrix component of elastic fibers present in cardiovascular connective tissues. Elastic fibers are responsible for elastic recoil of the aorta, heart valve cusps, and arterial walls We have developed a rat subdermal implantation model where pure elastin implants undergo progressive calcification with high levels of calcification observed at 3 weeks The objective of this study was to elucidate the pathogenic events that accompany the onset and progression of elastin calcification. In addition, we investigated whether AlCl Elastin fibers from bovine neck ligament (product E164, Elastin Products, Owensville, MO) were used in this study. We have extensively characterized this commercially available pure elastin preparation and have shown that it is similar in amino acid composition to pure aortic elastin and is not contaminated with cellular lipids or collagen Explanted tissues were lyophilized, hydrolyzed in 6N HCl, and calcium contents determined using atomic absorption spectrophotometry Explants were analyzed for cell infiltration by standard hematoxylin and eosin staining of paraffin sections. DNA was extracted from tissue explants using the Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega, Madison, WI) and assayed with Hoechst 33258 dye using a calibration curve with 0–500 ng/ml DNA (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR). Values are expressed as nanograms DNA per milliliter extract ( In situ hybridization for MMP-9 and MMP-2 was performed using HybriProbe Custom Design TriSeq kits (Biognostik Göttingen, Germany) and the TSA fluorescence systems kit (Perkin-Elmer, Wellesley, MA) according to kit instructions. Sections were hybridized with MMP-9, MMP-2, poly-dT, β-actin, or random control probes (20 U/ml) and mRNA expression visualized using DAB staining (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) followed by hematoxylin counterstaining. Intensity of staining in the explanted capsule and elastin regions was qualitatively assessed on randomized slides by four independent reviewers blinded to the source of slides and given a score of 0 to 4 ( Explanted elastin samples were analyzed in triplicates by gelatin zymography as described before Orcein-labeled bovine neck elastin (200–400 mesh, Elastin Products) was treated with 0.1 mol/l AlCl Control and AlCl Elastin samples explanted with surrounding tissue capsule were assayed for AP activity following the method reported by Levy et al. Data are reported as mean±S.E.M. Student's Calcification in elastin samples was first noted after 4 days of subdermal implantation and showed progressive increase, reaching highest levels on Day 21 Host cells infiltrated both control and AlCl Positive MMP-9 and MMP-2 mRNA expression was found by in situ hybridization in both control and AlCl Gelatinase positive bands were associated with both control and AlCl The enzymatic susceptibility of control and AlCl The extracellular matrix glycoprotein TN-C, showed a time-dependent activity in elastin implants. In control elastin implants, TN-C was first noted at Day 4 by Western blotting AP activity was present in all explants obtained from various time points Pathologic calcification occurs in many cardiovascular diseases and several studies now confirm that it is an active, cell-mediated process MMPs have a specialized function in turnover of the extracellular matrix. MMPs are accurately regulated and precisely targeted to specific extracellular substrates by a wide variety of cells during numerous normal tissue processes, such as wound healing, bone resorption, and morphogenesis TN-C is often coexpressed with MMPs and was shown to be associated with pathologic matrix remodeling AlCl Based on currently available data, we hypothesize that aluminum-induced molecular alterations in elastin structure reduced MMP-mediated elastin degradation in vivo, possibly reducing amounts of soluble elastin peptides. This resulted in alterations of remodeling events and finally inhibition of elastin calcification. The pathways underlying this hypothetical mechanism are unknown. We speculate that elastin peptides may interact with cells in vivo via the elastin–laminin receptor (ELR). This receptor has been localized in a variety of cell types including fibroblasts It should be noted that subdermal rat implantation is an accelerated model for calcification and extrapolation of these results to human pathologic calcification (which has a time course orders of magnitude longer) needs to be performed with caution. Further vascular calcification studies in a circulatory animal model and detailed analysis of gene expression are currently underway in our laboratory. In conclusion, we have shown that pathogenic mechanisms that underlie elastin-oriented calcification include matrix-remodeling events such as activation of MMPs and time-dependent expression of TN-C and AP. The efficacy of aluminum pretreatment in reducing elastin calcification may be related in part to its effects on elastin remodeling. Experimental calcification of pure elastin is associated with modulation of remodeling factors such as MMPs, tenascin and AP. Aluminum ion pretreatment protects elastin against enzyme-mediated degradation in vitro and results in complete inhibition of calcification in vivo, an effect that is associated with significant alterations in expression of matrix remodeling factors. This work was supported in part by NIH grant HL61652 and a Scientist Development Grant from the American Heart Association (to NV).