Quantification of biomass and estimation of cell numbers are essential tasks in the calculation of specific bioleaching rates and thus are important for process characterisation and optimisation. As a fast and convenient alternative to the laborious and expensive technique of qPCR, we present here a fluorometric approach which allows the sensitive and reliable quantification of the iron-oxidising Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans.
                  
                  Following two different methods of sample preparation, total fluorescence of PicoGreen-stained cells could be measured with good reproducibility by means of a microplate reader. Calibration of these data with results from a parallel cell enumeration by epi-fluorescence microscopy allowed the reliable estimation of cell densities as low as 1.0×105
                     cells/mL.
                  In order to determine the potential respiration activity of the investigated cells we provide an oxygen-specific optode-based approach. Due to its fast response, the lack of oxygen consumption, and the insensitivity towards mineral deposits the optode was shown to be an attractive alternative to the frequently used Clark electrode.
                  Moreover, respiration rate and total oxygen consumption could easily be followed of iron-oxidising (and bioleaching) cultures of At. ferrooxidans over days and weeks using the manometric OxiTopC system. The observation of transitional plateaus during the pressure decrease of a gas phase from a ZnS-leaching culture of At. ferrooxidans indicated the occurrence of different oxygen-consuming processes.Microbial leaching of metal sulphides is a well studied process ( Another methodical challenge frequently turns out to be the determination of metabolic cell activity in bioleaching cultures. Most frequently this is done either by the quantification of metal release (i.e. leaching success) ( In the present paper we report on the successful adaptation of (i) a fluorometric approach for cell number estimation, (ii) an optode-based technique of respiratory control, and (iii) a manometric technique for respiratory control in order to characterise cultures of iron-oxidising Compared to the enumeration of cells by epi-fluorescence microscopy the described determination of total fluorescence means a considerable reduction of working steps and thereby of potential sources of error. The commercially available OxiTopC system as well as the oxygen-specific optode have frequently been used for purposes like the determination of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or other issues of environmental analysis. We describe here their adaptation in order to follow the respiration activity of  Two methods were performed in order to separate cells of 1 To 1 Samples which were pre-treated by both methods were immediately subjected to cell staining and quantification. 50 Depending on the measured total fluorescence of the pre-treated sample, an aliquot which refers to a total fluorescence of 10–30 RFU was diluted to a final volume of 1 The optode (Fibox 3, PreSens – Precision Sensing GmbH, Regensburg, Germany) consisted of a combined excitation and detection module which is coupled by means of a fibre-optic to a sensor spot, coated with an oxygen-sensitive fluorophor. Sensor spot and fibre-optic were located exactly opposite to each other at the inside and outside of a 2.2-mL glass cuvette, respectively. The cuvette was capped by means of a glass lid. The optode signal (data sampling rate 5–60 For a standard respirometric assay, 2 The OxiTopC® system (WTW, Wissenschaftlich-Technische Werkstätten GmbH, Weilheim, Germany) was used in combination with 500-mL amber bottles, which were operated on a magnetic stirrer (IS12). The stirring speed was automatically adjusted and frequently varied between 180 and 450 For a typical respiratory assay, 100 In order to determine the effect of bioleaching on the respiration rate of Growth of By means of two different methods it was possible able to separate To investigate the response type between total fluorescence and cell number, several dilutions of pre-treated samples from two In order to show up to which RFU-value a linear relation between cell density and resulting fluorescence intensity can be granted, a culture, grown in modified DSMZ medium no. 882, was diluted as well as concentrated. In the measurements a good linearity ( A parallel analysis of the pre-treated culture samples by fluorometry and epi-fluorescence microscopy was made in order to calibrate the technique and to determine cell densities. Again, a linear response was observed with good correlation ( Taking into account a typical signal noise of a blank assay of ±0.33 RFU, an RFU value of 5.5 should reflect the detection limit of the system and thus a cell density of 1.0 Compared to the results of The by far easiest and most simple method for cell density estimation is still counting with a counting chamber. However, prior to a counting a concentration of the samples might be necessary in order to get reliable cell counts. Furthermore the cell counting depends highly on experience and is very fatiguing ( The only drawback of the proposed is the high cost of PicoGreen. Unfortunately cheaper dyes like ethidium bromide (2.0 In summary, the method proposed here, including the sample preparation, is on the one hand an easy and fast approach and on the other hand delivers trustworthy results. It was possible to obtain a high reproducibility with low variances. Consequently this method is quite superior to traditional cell counting. In addition to cell density and biomass content, the estimation of metabolic activity is another measure in order to characterise a bacterial culture. When energy conservation occurs by aerobic respiration, as it is the case for Because of the low Δ Determination of dissolved oxygen depletion is a sensitive measure in order to determine the respiration rate of cells. The Clark electrode which is most frequently used for this purpose has certain disadvantages, especially during long-term measurements. The membrane is sensitive towards iron precipitates ( For these reasons and because optode spots can easily be fixed inside and read out through glassware, we decided to adapt this technique in order to characterise acidophilic iron oxidisers. We modified a 2.2-mL glass cuvette by fixing an optode spot at the inside of the optical pathway that could be read out through the glass from the outside by means of an optical fibre. After filling the cuvette with the sample, it was immediately closed bubble-free and the decrease of fluorescence was followed over time. Because of a strong temperature dependence of both, the fluorescence and the metabolic activity, the respirometric process was thermally controlled. Another important point was to supplement cells with fresh Fe After addition of the ferrous iron substrate and subsequent mixing, the cuvette was immediately sealed with a lid and the oxygen depletion was continuously followed ( The reproducibility and the dependency of measured rates on the applied culture volume were investigated. As shown in The effect of temperature on the metabolic activity of It should be emphasised that the obtained rates do not necessarily reflect the ones which might be obtained under optimal growth conditions. Relevant parameters like ferrous iron content and temperature, have not been further optimised for this purpose. However, under defined and stable conditions a reproducible correlation of respiration activity to the applied amount of active biomass was shown and the method can be used as a relatively simple strategy in order to follow population dynamics in bioleaching approaches. According to Eq. The OxiTopC® system represents a commercially available system to determine soil respiration, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), or anaerobic biogas formation. A piezoelectric device frequently measures the pressure of a head space within a closed cultivation bottle typically containing an organic substrate inoculated with microorganisms. Data are automatically stored and can be downloaded by an infrared control. Due to the temperature dependence of gas pressure and microbial activity, OxiTopC measurements have to be performed in a thermostat cabinet. In addition, carbon dioxide has to be removed from the gas phase by means of an absorbent, if respiration rate of heterotrophs is of interest. The latter point is not necessary, and even harmful if chemolithotrophic ferrous iron oxidation is analysed and the removal of carbon dioxide would rather result in growth limitation of autotrophs. In order to prevent oxygen limitation, the amount of substrate did not exceed 2.2 Five 100-mL batches, each containing different amounts of ferrous iron (0.4, 1.0, 1.3, 1.7, and 2.2 Since OxiTopC allows to control both, the overall stoichiometry and the kinetic of oxygen depletion, also ferrous iron oxidation in presence of zinc sulphide was investigated. Ferric iron acts as a strong oxidant and liberates zinc ions from the sulphide in a process of indirect bioleaching. According to As a consequence, the additional presence of 1.03 Comparison of the oxygen consumption of a 2.3 Determination of total fluorescence was proven to be a relatively simple and sufficiently sensitive technique for cell enumeration of slow-growing chemolithoautotrophic bacteria. Cell densities as low as 1.0 In order to characterise aforementioned cultures with respect to their metabolic activity, two approaches of respiratory control were successfully adapted, allowing the detection of short-term consumption of dissolved oxygen (optode) as well as the long-term depletion of oxygen from the head-space of a culture (OxiTopC). Both instruments are quite easy to handle and obtained results showed good reproducibility and reliability. Thus, using cultivation of The work for this paper was supported by the