Microwave heating of mineral ores offers a mechanism to induce fractures around grain boundaries due to the different rates of microwave power dissipation and the differences in thermal expansion coefficient among various minerals in the ore particles. As a consequence, this has the potential to reduce the energy required in subsequent grinding and to enhance liberation of valuable minerals. In this paper, numerical simulation using a bonded-particle model was undertaken to provide a better understanding of the mechanism of microwave-induced micro-fracture and to predict the effect of microwave power delivery and ore texture on microwave treatment of ores. Computational simulations of microwave heating and thermal damage have been carried out on two-phase conceptual ores. It was shown that the extent of damage and the crack pattern in an ore sample for the same microwave energy input depend strongly on the applied power density and the microwave absorbent phase grain size. It is possible both to reduce the energy input and to localize the microwave-induced damage around the grain boundaries by operating at high power density. It was also shown that high power pulsed equipment would be more efficient than continuous wave equipment for treating fine-grained ores.density of mineral (kg/m Young’s modulus (GPa) Poisson’s ratio bulk modulus (GPa) shear modulus (GPa) tensile strength (Pa) power density (W/m frequency of the microwave radiation (Hz) permittivity of free space (8.854 dielectric loss factor electric field (V/m) heat flux (W/m volumetric heat intensity (W/m specific heat capacity (J/kg temperature change (K) ball density (kg/m minimum radius of the ball (mm) maximum radius of the ball (mm) radius multiplier used to set the parallel-bond radii Young’s modulus at each particle–particle contact (GPa) ratio of particle normal to shear stiffness Young’s modulus of each parallel-bond (GPa) ratio of parallel-bond normal to shear stiffness particle friction coefficient normal strength of the cement (MPa) shear strength of the cement (MPa) thermal expansion coefficient of the particle (1 normal component of the bond force (N) radius of the ball (mm) bond normal stiffness (Pa/m) area of the bond cross section (m expansion coefficient of the bond material (1 bond length (m) Mineral comminution equipment requires a large capital outlay and is energy-intensive, possibly accounting for up to 70% of hard rock processing energy costs ( Thermally assisted liberation (TAL), in which heating and quenching are used to induce fracture in the ore, was identified some years ago as a potential method to improve comminution and liberation of ores. It takes advantage of the differences in thermal expansion and contraction in anisotropic grains or in adjacent grains, resulting in the development of localized stress ( In contrast with TAL, which relies on conduction to heat the bulk of the sample, and hence in which the maximum temperature gradients and thermal stresses are limited, microwave heating offers the possibility of selective and volumetric heating, as microwave energy is delivered directly to materials through molecular interaction with the electromagnetic field. Thus, very large but localised temperature gradients can be created within and around mineral grains. Much of the early test work concerning microwave treatment of minerals was carried out using standard multi-mode cavities, similar to those found in a conventional kitchen microwave oven ( Application of microwave energy at very high power density and with very short exposure time has been the focus of recent work. Clearly the development of localised thermal stresses is maximised by very high rates of microwave power dissipation over short treatment times. It is well known that microwave power density in a material is directly proportional to the square of the electric field strength within the material. Thus, applicator designs which maximize the electric field through volumetric localization result in very high heating rates ( Previous numerical simulation work showed the patterns of stresses generated inside microwave treated ore particles using continuum analyses ( In this study, bonded-particle modelling was utilized to provide a better understanding of the mechanism of microwave-induced micro-cracks and to predict the effect of microwave power delivery and ore texture on microwave treatment of ore. The distinct element method (DEM) implementation of bonded-particle modelling simulates the mechanical behaviour of solids by modelling them as bonded granular objects, where the “grains” making up the solid object are non-uniformly sized discs or spheres ( In the present work the bonded-particle modelling was based on the commercial PFC2D software (  In the present paper, computational simulations of microwave heating and thermal damage were undertaken on two-phase conceptual mineral ores. The effects of power density and microwave absorbent grain size on the development of fractures are discussed and particular emphasis is given to the most efficient method of microwave power delivery. The software used for the study was the particle flow code (PFC2D Version 4.0) ( The model materials were produced by using the material-genesis procedure in PFC ( The conceptual binary ores were assigned a composition of 10% of microwave absorbing mineral (galena) and 90% transparent matrix (calcite) by area. This composition was deemed to be representative of common sulphide ores and approximated a lead zinc ore used in experimental testing of the technology for industrial sponsors. Two different textures were simulated: coarser-grained (grain size The microscopic moduli were chosen to match Young’s modulus by performing a biaxial test. PFC simulates a biaxial test by confining a rectangular sample (comprised of a compacted disc assembly) within four walls. The loading rate should be set sufficiently slow enough to ensure the sample remains in quasi-static equilibrium throughout the test and should be stable so as not to induce any possible strength increase or unexpected material responses within the simulated models ( Many authors have reported that PFC significantly over-predicted the tensile strength of a material calibrated with its uniaxial compressive strength ( However, as previous theoretical studies on microwave treatment of ore clearly demonstrated, the main cause of the damage after microwave treatment is the thermally-induced tensile stresses, which occurred during the thermal expansion of the absorbent phases, exceeding the tensile strength of the material ( The simulated Brazilian test was performed by varying the mean value of the cement strengths to match the tensile strength of the materials. The test was made upon specimens created in polyaxial cell. The specimens were trimmed into disk shapes of diameter 20 In PFC, the thermal material is represented as a network of heat reservoirs (associated with each disc) and thermal pipes (associated with the contacts). Heat flow occurs via conduction in the active pipes that connect the reservoirs. Each disc represents a heat reservoir. A pipe joins two reservoirs, and heat flow only occurs through pipes. Each pipe has a finite length that is equal to the distance between the centroids of the two connected discs and a thermal resistance. In this study, the external boundaries of the model material were assumed to be thermally insulated, as the microwave exposure times were very short. Accordingly, convection and radiation were not incorporated into the model. The heat-conduction equation for quasi-static mechanical problems for solids is given by The amount of thermal energy deposited in to a material due to microwave heating (power density), which is equated to the volumetric heat intensity is given by: Combining Eqs. Thus, the temperature rise within the material for a given microwave treatment condition (power density and exposure time) can be obtained by solving Eq. The power density values used in this study were based on electromagnetic simulations reported elsewhere ( Microwave exposure times between 0.05 and 0.4 In PFC, thermally-induced strains for a temperature change (Δ It has been previously shown that the thermally-induced stresses within a material after microwave treatment significantly depend on its thermal properties ( The specific heat capacities of the minerals were obtained from The thermal conductivities of the minerals at room temperature were obtained from The thermal expansion coefficients of the minerals were obtained from  It is important to note that the energy input that was required for inducing significant micro-cracks in the ore was the order of 1 It is apparent that the specific energy input required to induce significant damage in the ore is quite low compared with that needed in conventional thermally assisted liberation. It has been reported that up to 107–129 The reason for the improved energy efficiency in the case of microwave heating is due to the selective dissipation of energy in the microwave absorbing mineral phase. This has two important consequences. First, no energy is wasted in bulk heating of the ore. Second, the transfer to the absorbing grain is very rapid, as microwave energy is delivered directly to materials through molecular interaction with the electromagnetic field. In contrast, in conventional thermal processing, energy is transferred to the material through convection at the particle surface and conduction through particle with convective heat occurring from the surface as well. Clearly this relatively slower and more uniform heat transfer process will generate smaller temperature gradients and lower thermal stresses for the same specific energy input. The results of simulation of coarse-grained galena–calcite treated at a power density of 1 It can also be seen that the cracks pattern obtained for the two power densities were quite unlike. As can be seen, for the high power density case, the cracks were more localized around the grain boundaries and there was almost no damage in the absorbent phase. In mineral processing operations, this is of vital importance, as it is likely that such localized damage would effectively facilitate liberation of minerals at native grain size. This has the potential to allow recovery of coarser liberated material in an appropriately designed flow sheet and to reduce the circulating load, overgrinding and slimes losses. It is evident that by operating at high power density (e.g. by using high power pulsed equipment), it is possible both to reduce the energy input and localize the damage around the grain boundaries. It should be noted that operating at high power density needs high capital cost for producing the required microwave equipment. As significant damage was still obtained for this ore at the lower power density, the choice of microwave equipment (pulsed or continuous wave) should be carried out by trading off energy savings and increases in liberation against the increased capital cost.  The results of simulation of fine-grained galena–calcite treated at the higher power density of 1 In general, it can be noted that for the same mineralogy and volume of microwave absorbent mineral, the energy input and the power density that were required to induce significant damage in the ore sample (and hence reduce the required grinding energy and enhance liberation in downstream processing) depend strongly on the absorbent phase grain size. Higher power density or higher energy input was required in order to induce significant damage in the fine-grained one. The practical implication of this is that pulsed equipment (capable of producing high power density) would be more efficient than continuous wave equipment for treating fine-grained ores, as very high power density is required in order to have significant damage in these ores at economic energy inputs. This can only be achieved by using high power pulsed microwave equipment. In order to elucidate the effect of power density on crack pattern in an ore sample, another set of simulations was undertaken by placing a single galena grain of different shapes (circular, square, irregular), with nominal size 2  The results of simulations performed at the higher power density of 1 Currently development of industrial pulsed microwave equipment for microwave assisted comminution and liberation of mineral is underway ( The effects of power density and absorbent phase grain size on the extent of fracture and crack pattern in microwave treated ores were elucidated. It was shown that for the same energy input and mineralogy, the amount of micro-cracks and also the cracks pattern in an ore sample after microwave treatment significantly depend on the applied power density and the absorbent phase grain size. It has been shown that it is possible both to reduce the energy input and to localize the damage around the grain boundaries by operating at high power density regardless of the shape of the microwave absorbent phase. It has also been shown that a higher power density is required for treating fine-grained ores at economic energy inputs. Financial support via AMIRA Project P 879 A is gratefully acknowledged.