Zinc-substituted cobalt oxide nanoparticles (ZnxCo3-xO4, 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5) were produced by microwave refluxing technique. The structural, microstructural and magnetic properties of these samples were studied using X-ray diffractometer (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmission electron microscope (TEM) and magnetic property measurement system (MPMS) respectively. XRD and TEM analyses confirmed the single phase nature for all the samples. Rietveld analysis of the samples further confirmed the substitution of Zn-ions into the Co3O4 lattice. The chemical states of the elements were studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), which suggest the presence of Zn2+, Co2+, and Co3+ ions in the samples. The maximum saturation magnetization (MS) values of 0.33 Am2/kg was obtained for x = 0.01 sample, and then it continuously reduced with increased Zn content. The dielectric property of the samples was studied in the frequency range of 40 Hz–110 MHz. The samples x = 0.05 and 0.5 displayed the lowest conductivity due to the narrow size distribution of grains.Currently, the researches on magnetic, optical, catalytic, and electrochemical properties of Co Interestingly, a weak ferromagnetic behavior is also noticed for cobalt oxide nanoparticles [ Further, Moro et al. produced cobalt oxide nanoparticles by the continuous-flow hydrothermal method [ Cobalt oxide nanoparticles have been synthesized by various techniques such as hydrothermal [ In this paper, we report the synthesis of Zn substituted Co The precursors ZnCl X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded using a Phillips X'pert Pro advanced powder X-ray Diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15431 nm). The crystallite size was calculated using Debye-Scherrer's equation after correcting for instrumental broadening. The morphology of nanoparticle was identified by transmission electron microscopy (200 kV-FEI TECHNAI G The X-ray diffraction peaks for Zn TEM bright field images for   Magnetization The weak ferromagnetic behavior for nanoparticles of The variation of AC electrical conductivity with frequency is shown in The samples with Zn concentration The frequency variation of dielectric constant (έ On the other hand, the rest displayed an increase in the dielectric constant with increase in zinc concentration, which might be explained based on electronic polarization. It might be due to comparatively larger ionic radius of zinc compared to the cobalt ions. The larger radius always favors the electronic polarization of atoms, since the electronic polarization is proportional to the cube of the ionic radius. Furthermore, well-developed grains in the samples From Single phase Zn-substituted Co