This paper reports the effect of the remoulded soil strength of a footprint on the reinstallation of jack-up rigs near the footprint. The footprint creation is from an earlier spudcan penetration and extraction process in which the soil is remoulded. Dissipation of pore pressures between the footprint creation and jack-up reinstallation causes further consolidation of the soil around the footprint. Large-deformation finite-element (LDFE) analyses were performed using the Coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) approach. A recently developed novel spudcan shape with a flat base and four holes is studied to mitigate spudcan-footprint interactions during spudcan reinstallation. The installation of a whole three-legged jack-up rig is modelled considering a simplified global jack-up unit. The LDFE results were validated against existing centrifuge test data prior to undertaking a detailed parametric study, assessing the effects of consolidation occurred after footprint creation, the offset distance of spudcan installation from the footprint centre, and spudcan shape. Compared to a footprint of the same shape, but virgin intact soil strength, the footprint with remoulded soil strength enhances the maximum horizontal force, maximum moment, maximum lateral displacement, and rotation, by 12–20%. The critical offset distance is found to be one spudcan diameter with the spudcan centre being at the crest of the footprint. The novel spudcan shape is shown to be effective at easing spudcan-footprint interactions, reducing horizontal force, moment, lateral displacement and rotation by about 50%; and total stress on the jack-up leg by 41%.bottom area of jack-up rig hull area of δR dilatational wave speed of the material spudcan diameter at largest section prototype spudcan diameter hole diameter spudcan diameter in LDFE penetration depth of spudcan base initial penetration depth normalised penetration depth where the maximum horizontal force occurs elapsed time vertical force eccentricity eccentricity at maximum moment leg eccentricity imbalance force induced by δR acceleration of gravity horizontal force at spudcan base level maximum horizontal force at spudcan base level largest H spring stiffness of buoyancy initial vertical, horizontal and moment foundation stiffness calculated by LDFE analysis horizontal location of remoulded soil strength mapping leg length of a jack-up rig minimum element dimension in the Eulerian meshes vertical location of remoulded soil strength mapping moment at spudcan base level additional bending moment at RP1 maximum moment at spudcan base level moment at leg top maximum moment at leg top operating time reference point that is the intersection point of the centre line and largest cross section of the spudcan (see reference point at leg just below jack-up rig hull (see remoulded soil ratio soil sensitivity undrained shear strength reference undrained shear strength remoulded undrained shear strength vertical force spudcan penetration rate in field spudcan penetration rate in LDFE penetration depth below soil surface friction ratio spudcan base angle distance between the footprint centre and spudcan centre time increment notional time increment critical time increment shear strain spudcan lateral displacement at RP and maximum lateral displacement difference of remoulded soil ratio specified displacement for each time increment remoulded strength ratio shear strain rate reference shear strain rate rate parameter for logarithmic expression Coulomb friction coefficient spudcan rotation at RP and maximum rotation density of sea water structural total stress (= σ structural bending stress structural normal stress maximum shear stress cumulative plastic shear strain cumulative plastic shear strain required for 95% remoulding Modern jack-ups typically consist of a buoyant triangular platform supported by three independent truss legs, each attached to a large-diameter spudcan. After completing the planned operation at a site, the legs are retracted from the seabed, which leave depressions - referred to as a crater or ‘footprint’. Jack-ups often return to the previous operation site for further drilling where the footprints from previous explorations are present. Where one of the jack-up legs is located near an existing footprint slope, there is a tendency for the spudcan to slide towards the centre of the footprint, inducing excessive lateral displacements and bending moments or rotations of the rig. These detrimental foundation behaviours can result in an inability to install the jack-up at the required position, and even worse the occurrence of leg splay and structural damage to the whole jack-up system. The frequency of offshore incidents during installation near footprints has increased by a factor of four from the period 1979–88 to the period of 1996–2005 To investigate this issue, the characteristics of spudcan-footprint interactions have been investigated by a number of researchers, mostly through physical modelling. Leung et al. Recently the spudcan-footprint interaction problem has been addressed through numerical modelling. Zhang et al. Unlike spudcan penetration into a flat seabed, the excessive horizontal force and moment induced by the spudcan-footprint interaction may cause a global lateral or rotational movement of the whole jack-up rig. However, in the reported physical and numerical modelling, a single leg connected with a flat plate or generic spudcan, and fixed head condition at the top of the leg [ In this paper, a series of three-dimensional LDFE analyses were carried out to investigate the effect of spudcan-footprint interactions. Due to the limitations noted previously, the footprint was not created in the real field way of penetrating and extracting a spudcan. Instead, the measured soil strength profiles and footprint geometries from a centrifuge test 3D LDFE analyses were carried out using the coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) approach in the commercial Finite Element (FE) package ABAQUS/Explicit An extensive parametric investigation was undertaken varying the relevant range of parameters, such as the (a) remoulded soil zone and strength underneath a footprint surface; (b) elapsed time (ET: time between the formation of a footprint or extraction of a spudcan and re-installation of a spudcan) i.e. effect of re-consolidation through dissipation of the induced excess pore pressure; (c) offset distance (β: distance between the footprint centre and reinstalling spudcan centre); and (d) spudcan shapes. Finally, the effect of a prior spudcan installation on spudcan-footprint interactions was quantified for each parameter by comparing with the results for an artificial footprint with intact soil strength. Considering the symmetry of the problem, half of the spudcan and soil were modelled. The lateral extension of the soil domain was 4.5D from the centre of the footprint (D is the spudcan diameter) on the spudcan penetration side and 2.5D on the opposite side, and the depth of the soil domain was ~5.5D to avoid boundary effects during the installation process (as obtained from preliminary convergence studies and considered by researchers including Jun et al. The reinstallation of spudcans in clay is completed under undrained conditions. In addition, clay exhibits strain-rate dependency due to viscous rate effect and also softens as it is sheared and remoulded. Thus, following the work of Einav and Randolph The parameter definitions are given in the notation list. The maximum shear strain rate, In this study, an equal spudcan diameter was considered for LDFE analysis and field i.e. D The soil-spudcan interface was modelled as frictional contact, using a general contact algorithm with Coulomb friction law. Two different contact properties were applied for the side and bottom of spudcan, respectively. For the side friction of skirt and holes, the Coulomb friction coefficient was set to a high value of μ A simplified global jack-up rig modelling technique was adopted to consider the behaviour of a whole jack-up rig including three legs and corresponding spudcans. The technique was developed and detailed by Jun et al. The LDFE modelling techniques were validated against previously published centrifuge test data (Group I, The results of the analyses are plotted in The detailed mapping (see The effect of the global modelling was quantified by comparing with the results for the fixed head condition (simplified strength contour). The maximum horizontal force (H To examine the effect of various factors on jack-up rig spudcan-footprint interactions, an extensive parametric study was carried out varying the (a) remoulded soil zone (b) elapsed time between footprint creation and reinstallation (ET = 1 year and 100 years); (c) offset distance (β = 0.25D–1.25D); and (d) spudcan shape (generic spudcan and novel spudcan; D = 15 m). The intact undrained shear strength of soil (s The effect of the remoulded soil zone from the initial penetration-extraction of the spudcan was investigated by comparing the results considering a footprint with the remoulded zone or simplified strength contour (see inset in  Interestingly, the maximum horizontal force (H The moment (M) distributions show a slightly different trend, compared to the horizontal force (H). With the reference point at the centre of the spudcan (see RP in In the field, spudcan-footprint interactions generally result in the buckling of the leg at just below the hull because of the additional bending moment M To examine the effect of elapsed time ET, additional analyses were performed for ET = 100 years (operating time, OP = 0; Group III,  In summary, with increasing elapsed time (and hence recovering soil strength), the size of the remoulded zone, created by initial penetration and extraction, reduced gradually, leading to a reduction in the imbalanced soil strength between the left and right hand side of the spudcan, and hence in maximum horizontal force and moment. A consistent tendency was reported by Gan et al. In order to show the effect of offset distance, spudcan penetration response profiles are plotted in  In this study, the generic spudcan shape was used in all the analyses already presented. This section assesses the performance of a novel spudcan shape on easing spudcan-footprint interactions and the consequent influence of this shape on the structural integrity of the jack-up leg. Currently, there are several mitigation methods reported, including (a) infilling the crater The performance of the novel spudcan installation on the footprint with the remoulded soil strength is assessed here for a more realistic condition. For this analysis, the critical offset distance of β = 1.0D, ET = 1 year and OP = 0 year were selected (Group V in The effectiveness of the novel spudcan is also illustrated by the soil flow mechanisms and the schematic diagram of imbalance force at the depth of H The effectiveness of the novel spudcan on the structural integrity of the jack-up leg is shown in Spudcan penetration on an existing footprint has been investigated through large deformation finite element analyses, accounting for the soil strength that remoulded during creation of the footprint and then regained strength partly during the elapsed time before reinstalling another spudcan. The footprint was set based on the measured strength contour from existing centrifuge test data. A global jack-up rig model was also included, allowing spudcan lateral displacement and rotation to be quantified. The following conclusions can be drawn from the results presented. The maximum horizontal force (H The maximum horizontal force and moment reduced with increasing elapsed time between the creation of the footprint and reinstallation of the spudcan. The critical offset distance of reinstallation of the spudcan from the footprint centre was identified at 0.5–1D. The novel stpudcan shape with a flat base and four holes was shown to reduce horizontal force, moment about RP1, lateral displacement and rotation by about 50%; and total stress on the jack-up leg at RP1 by 41% relative to that obtained with the generic spudcan; confirming the effectiveness of the spudcan shape for easing spudcan-footprint interactions and ensuring structural integrity of the jack-up legs. The global modelling technique can be used to investigate other offshore structures such as jacket structures, wind turbines. The technique of considering remoulded soil strength contour or true soil conditions around an object can be a very efficient (less time consuming but more precise) for exploring various geotechnical boundary value problems such as the effect of dynamic laying process on the lateral and uplift capacity of pipelines, the effect of installation on capacity of anchors under operational loadings. To protect the integrity of authorship, only people who have significantly contributed to the research or project and manuscript preparation shall be listed as coauthors. The corresponding author attests to the fact that anyone named as a coauthor has seen the final version of the manuscript and has agreed to its submission for publication. Deceased persons who meet the criteria for coauthorship shall be included, with a footnote reporting date of death. No fictitious name shall be given as an author or coauthor. An author who submits a manuscript for publication accepts responsibility for having properly included all, and only, qualified coauthors. I, the corresponding author, confirm that the authors listed on the manuscript are aware of their authorship status and qualify to be authors on the manuscript according to the guidelines above. Please check the following as appropriate: All authors have participated in (a) conception and design, or analysis and interpretation of the data; (b) drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and (c) approval of the final version. This manuscript has not been submitted to, nor is under review at, another journal or other publishing venue. The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript. The following authors have affiliations with organizations with direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript: I, the corresponding author, confirm that the authors listed on the manuscript are aware of their authorship status and qualify to be authors on the manuscript according to the guidelines above. The research presented herein was undertaken with support from the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 