In this study, novel in-house synthesized hybrid polyacrylamide-grafted nanoparticles (Hy-PAM) were used to enhance the recovery of phosphorus bearing minerals from plant tailing by the froth flotation process. Characterization assays, including X-ray diffraction (XRD) and mineral liberation analysis (MLA) indicated that apatite, fluorapatite and quartz are the major crystalline phases in the tailing sample. Flotation experiments were performed using a bench scale Denver flotation cell with 1 L capacity in the presence of sodium oleate, which was used as a collector. Several influencing parameters such as polymer dosage, pH, and the flotation time were investigated to optimize the flotation outcomes in terms of recovery and grade of phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5). Results indicated that the P2O5 content in the plant tailings can be enriched from 21.6% to 28.6% at a recovery value of 80.5% in the first 4 min of flotation without the need to add a pH modifier. Moreover, flotation kinetics was investigated using classical first order kinetic model which was evaluated based on the flotation rate constant, the ultimate phosphorous recovery and the correlation coefficients obtained by non-linear regression analysis. Results indicated that the ultimate recoveries and the flotation rate constant values were affected by the change of the pulp’s pH.Froth flotation of mineral ores is considered as one of the most selective techniques to enhance the separation of particulate matter in aqueous suspensions ( There are three closely related components in any flotation system ( Among the different categories of chemical reagents used in froth flotation, both natural and synthetic polymers have received considerable attention due to their tunability and the opportunity they provide to enhance the flotation performance at a low cost ( Organic-inorganic (hybrid) polyacrylamides have shown promising separation efficiency in mineral processing and have been successfully applied to enhance the flotation of fine coal, dewatering of oil sand tailings and flocculation of fine kaolinite dispersions ( The purpose of the current study is to evaluate the performance of hybrid polyacrylamide-grafted-nanoparticles (Hy-PAM) as a novel aid for phosphate enrichment by conventional flotation. Influencing parameters such as polymer dosage, pulp pH and flotation time were examined for the purpose of process optimization. Advanced characterization techniques were carried out to acquire fundamental knowledge about the flotation feed characteristics, the polymer characteristics and the interaction modes of the polymer with mineral surfaces. A conceptual view of the hypothesized role of the polymer in phosphate flotation process is depicted in Representative tailing samples were provided from a phosphate production plant located in USA. All chemicals used in this study were purchased from Fisher Scientific Company, USA. This includes: sodium oleate which was used as collector, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) which was used as frother, and sodium carbonate (Na XRD was conducted on the flotation feed and products to investigate the crystallinity of the associated minerals in the samples. The intensities of XRD pattern of an individual mineral are known to be proportional to the concentrations of the different minerals present. The XRD spectra were obtained by scanning in the 2θ range of 5–90°. A Philips XRD apparatus with Cu-Kα radiation was used to obtain the X-ray diffraction patterns. Prior to MLA, the particle size distribution (P The hybrid polyacrylamide grafted nanoparticles (Hy-PAM) were synthesized according to the procedure described elsewhere ( The molecular weight of Hy-PAM was determined by static light scattering (SLS) using Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments Ltd., USA). Polymer stock solution of 10,000, 15,000 and 20,000 ppm were prepared and then filtered by a Millex-AA Filter Unit with a pore size of 20 µm before the SLS measurements. Before measurements were conducted, calibration was made by using pure (>99.5%) toluene. SLS measures the intensities of the scattered light of the polymer sample and automatically calculates the molecular weight. The typical size of Al(OH) The aim of any direct froth flotation process is that the mineral of interest should selectively attach to air bubbles while leaving other associated minerals in the pulp ( The flotation feed size used throughout this study was the −125 + 45 µm size fraction obtained from sieving according to ASTM Denver D-12 flotation machine with a 1-liter tank and a 3.88-inch diameter impeller was used in all flotation tests. The rotor speed of the flotation machine was set at 1200 RPM. The pulp was mixed for 5 min before adding any reagent. The experimental conditions used in this study are presented in The classical first order kinetic model was used to analyze the effect of two parameters, pH and polymer dosage, on the flotation kinetics. The floating products (concentrates) were collected at time intervals of 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 min and the cumulative phosphate recoveries were fitted using the first order model ( The P The molecular weight of Hy-PAM was determined to be approximately 6 million Dalton. The Polymeric Structural Transitions (Compositions and functional groups) of Hy-PAM was further confirmed by FTIR analysis ( Zeta potential measurements were conducted to compare and explore the surface properties and electrical characteristics (surface charge) of mineral suspensions of pure apatite and quartz (the two major minerals in the flotation feed), as well as to identify the interaction mode between the mineral and different reagents (  The baseline experiments were performed at the conditions listed in It is believed that the flotation recovery and the concentrate grade is higher at pH 9 as compared to the natural pH of 6.87 because the interaction of the collector with the apatite surfaces is stronger at pH 9 as indicated by the change of zeta values (Δζ) before and after the addition of sodium oleate at the two pH values ( Liberation was similar for all samples, ranging from 44% to 50% liberation for particles of 95% apatite grade as obtained by MLA analysis. The particle size distribution of baseline concentrates ranged from 70 to 90 µm. The mineral content of the concentrate products was consistent. Primary phosphorus-containing phases, as fluorapatite and apatite, ranged from 29% to 35% each, and collectively were 60% to 62% of the mineral content of the samples. Quartz was around 18%, mica (K-Al silicate) was about 10%, K-Feldspar was 4% and fluorite was 3–4%. The anticipated role of Hy-PAM polymer is to preferentially adsorb on the surface of silicates particles through electrostatic attractive forces followed by bridging flocculation so they will settle in the flotation tank and thus their entrainment probability in the froth layer will be minimized ( A series of flotation experiments were conducted to investigate the effects of Hy-PAM at various dosages (i.e., 150, 200, 250, and 300 g/ton) on both the recovery and grade of phosphate minerals in concentrate products. In this set of experiments, the collector, Hy-PAM polymer, and the frothing agent were sequentially added to the feed slurries at pH 9. The concentrates were collected over a period of 10 min. As indicated in The pH value in the flotation tank plays an important factor in the froth flotation performance as pH may affect the electrical characteristics of minerals and reagents at different interfaces ( Previous investigations on the flotation of similar feed under similar conditions (natural pH, 60 wt% and 4 min flotation time) indicated that in the presence of 250 g/ton of sodium silicates (commercial silicates dispersant), the P The flotation experimental results were fitted against the classical first order flotation kinetic model on the cumulative recovery-time plot. The flotation rate constant (k), the ultimate phosphorous recovery (R∞) and the correlation coefficient (R As far as the pH is concerned, comparing the k values shows that the ultimate recoveries and the flotation rate constants were influenced by the change of pH. The pH affects the flotation kinetics by affecting the activation kinetic and the adsorption of chemical reagents. It can also be seen that the ultimate recovery for the baseline experiments has the largest values at pH 9 while the ultimate recovery when the Hy-PAM polymer was used has the largest values at natural pH. This observation is consistent with the experimental results shown in This study investigated the potential to upgrade the phosphorus content in the tailings produced from phosphorus production plant by the froth flotation process using hybrid polyacrylamide grafted nanoparticles (Hy-PAM) as silicates depressant. Bench scale flotation tests were carried out using a D12-Denver flotation cell at 60 wt% solid content in the presence of in-house synthesized Hy-PAM. Several influencing parameters such as polymer dosage, pulp pH and flotation time were investigated to optimize the flotation outcomes in terms of froth recovery and grade. The following conclusions may be drawn from this study: Zeta potential measurement performed on pure apatite and quartz suspensions before and after mixing with different reagents indicated that the collector has a preferential adsorption on apatite surface as compared to quartz. Zeta measurements also demonstrated that Hy-PAM polymer would have a preferential adsorption on the surface of quartz. Data obtained from zeta potential measurement indicated that the collector showed stronger interaction with apatite surface at pH 9 as compared with natural pH of 6.87. However, the polymer interaction with apatite surface is weaker at natural pH. In the case of baseline experiments when no Hy-PAM was added, the best flotation performance was at 10 min of flotation time when the pH of the pulp was increased to 9. Under these conditions, the average recovery of P In the presence of 250 g/ton of Hy-PAM, the recovery of phosphates minerals significantly improved when the flotation was performed at natural pH as compared to alkaline pH at both shorter and longer flotation time. At natural pH and flotation time of 4 min, the grade of the concentrates increased to 28.6% as compared to ∼27% at alkaline pH. Moreover, when the flotation time increased to 10 min, the grade of the concentrate products marginally changed at both natural and alkaline pH. At natural pH and in the presence of 250 g/ton Hy-PAM polymer, the recovery of phosphates minerals at 10 min of flotation increased to 84.5% as compared to 80.5% at 4 min of flotation time while the grade marginally decreased by ∼0.2%. However, from economic point of view, only 4% increase in recovery with more than double increase in time makes it less expensive and more valuable to run the process at shorter time as there is no improvement in the grade. Under these conditions, the average recovery of P