A personal memento is given concerning how the author became interested in the ideas of fibre reinforcement in 1960 and how he watched as a close consultant the invention of very stiff fibres at Farnborough by Watt and Phillips. Some account is also given of the early work at Farnborough both before during and after the second world war and the part played by de Bruyne and then by J.E. Gordon and his team. The early development of the materials science of composites by the author and his colleagues and the discovery and enunciation of the principles of how all brittle materials can show appreciable works of fracture are dealt with.
                  Some short remarks follow on the part played by academics in the development of a new technology.I read physics for my first honours degree and in those days great attention was paid to teaching practical skills – we measured the charge on the electron by Millikan’s method for instance. The domain structure in a ferromagnetic was a modern development and we examined Bitter patterns – the designs formed by iron filings on the surface of a ferromagnet. This last led me as an undergraduate to an interest in what were called subgrains in metals. I heard of these through reading the wonderful I applied to enter the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge – at that time widely regarded as the foremost academic physics laboratory in the world. Prospective research students then were not molly coddled with suggestions by prospective supervisors eager for graduate students but were expected to indicate a real problem on which they would like to work. I was lucky to have mentioned subgrains in metals since this was a burning interest of the Cavendish Professor Laurence Bragg (of Bragg’s law) and so he was to be my official supervisor when I was accepted by the Cavendish and also by Trinity College. At Cambridge one enters the University through one of its colleges. I worked on detecting subgrains in metals and through that route became a metallurgist. Bragg, during my time at the Cavendish, lost interest in metals and turned passionately to encouraging the elucidation of the structure of biological materials by means of X-ray diffraction. It was that interest which enabled Crick and Watson to meet and to work out in a spectacular and intuitive fashion the structure of DNA – the secret it seems of the genetic code – the physical means by which hereditary features are transmitted from generation to generation Having been converted to Metallurgy I fell under the spell of Alan Cottrell; he examined my PhD Thesis and later offered me a job, or suggested that I apply for a job at Cambridge some years later. I left the Cavendish Laboratory in 1953 and worked in the United States with Paul Beck at Illinois – where I met and came greatly to admire Fred Seitz who was in the Physics Department and whose brilliant lectures based on his massive text book Modern theory of Solids I returned to England briefly for the calendar year of 1955, became engaged to be married and then returned to the USA having been recruited by Morrie Fine to teach X-ray crystallography to students of a newly formed department of Metallurgical Engineering in the Technological Institute of Northwestern University in Evanston Illinois – just north of Chicago and the home of the Women’s Christian Temperance Union one of the forceful progenitors of the move to prohibit the sale of alcohol within the USA after World War I. Fine was and still is, now well into this ninth decade, a very forward-looking man in his science. Before coming to Northwestern he had taken part in the Manhattan project (the making of the first atomic bomb) at the University of Chicago and subsequently at Los Alamos. Through him and others at Northwestern I met Oppenheimer – the father of the fission bomb – whom I remember as a wise and kindly man who much encouraged me in my researches with well-spoken words of praise. Fine it was who led our department at Northwestern to attach to its name the study of Materials Science in 1957. We could rightly claim to be the first department in the world to adopt this in our title. So our horizons were broadened from the study of metals to include plastics or polymers, at that time the fastest growing of the materials producing industries. Of course, we already knew a little about ceramics – the third major component of materials science – through the use of these as refractories for furnace linings and as tundishes, etc. Cottrell accepted the Goldsmiths Chair of Metallurgy at Cambridge and went there from the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell in September 1958. In 1956, he had mentioned to me the great likelihood of this occurring and had asked me whether I would join him there if he could secure a lectureship – a post not lightly created at Cambridge in those years. I treasured this thought in the intervening years at Northwestern but when the opportunity finally arose I was sad to leave Evanston. Cottrell asked me (I knew very little of Metallurgy at the time) to give a set of lectures on ceramics. I came to Metallurgy at Cambridge with the first Instron tensile testing machine imported to Britain and set about preparing these lectures. I did this by reading Slater’s It is difficult to appreciate nowadays that in those years some very obvious data were missing from the literature, e.g., the elastic constants of boron, or even of fully dense graphite. At Cambridge I started some work on ceramics, notably, for what comes later, on the investigation of graphite single crystals and on magnesium oxide. My own special interest was in precipitation hardening of metals and I discovered that, in aluminium–copper and copper–beryllium and such like, precipitation hardened alloys in the overaged condition developed very strong rates of work-hardening. Cottrell, at the time, was becoming a very fashionable young scientist and was invited to give lectures such as the Royal Society’s Bakerian, and discourses to the Royal Institution, Royal Society of Arts, etc. He often used to give me the text of these lectures to read before delivering them. In a discourse delivered to the Royal Institution on 15 June 1960 It is all there. It was new to me. And in those days in pounds per square inch! The discourses of the Royal Institution give no references, or rather AHC gave no references, to that particular talk. ‘Had he dreamt the principle up for himself?’, was the question I asked, ‘Was there some literature unknown to me?’ The hint that there was an extensive literature occurred in the list of exhibits in the library, listed at the end of his lecture. These were from the Royal Aircraft Establishment. People there had approached strong materials in a completely different fashion from that of the metallurgist. Cottrell will have learnt of this from his membership of various quasi-confidential Government committees, which abounded in that period and on which most academics interested in physical metallurgy sat. The situation of modern fibrous composite science at that time in Britain, and its subsequent development, paying special attention to the work at the Royal Aircraft Establishment is well described by McMullen The beginning of research and development on composites for aircraft structures began in the UK in 1937 when N.A. de Bruyne, an engineering don at Cambridge, read a paper to the Royal Aeronautical Society entitled “Plastic materials for aircraft construction” In 1936, de Bruyne had noted, following Meyer and Lotmar In 1938, J.E. Gordon a young man just trained as a marine engineer was hired at Farnborough and asked to evaluate new non-metallic materials. Among these was Gordon-Aerolite (flax fibre-reinforced phenolic resin) invented by M.F. (Malcolm) Gordon, J.E.’s namesake – but no relation – working at Aero Research Ltd., a firm founded by de Bruyne. It was Malcolm Gordon one of de Bruyne’s students who, because he had a connection with a Belfast linen mill, (in the charge of his father) suggested the use of flax as reinforcement. A supply of unbleached flax thread was impregnated with phenolic resin, wound into a skein and hot-press moulded to form what was probably the first example of a high performance composite. M.F. Gordon went on to become managing director of a spinning company and an honoured Engineer/Industrialist in Northern Ireland. We know that M.F. and J.E. met but I know no more of any interaction between them. Gordon One of the first composite components of any consequence tested by J.E. Gordon was an experimental full-scale main wing spar made by de Bruyne’s company for the ‘Blenheim’ bomber. This was of lattice construction using Gordon-Aerolite but was designed like conventional metal structures, and so was a misuse of this novel material. A similar abortive exercise involving a ‘Spitfire’ fuselage was conducted at the outset of the war (WW-2) when there was a temporary shortage of aluminium alloys in Britain. A Gordon-Aerolite replica of the real thing was made but the structure was hopelessly overweight. Throughout World War II, cellulose fibre composites were developed with moderate priority and with some real success. Aircraft drop tanks saw service, while wing tip tubes and ducting were in production and a composite seat was made for the ‘Spitfire’. Work at the RAE on cellulose fibre-reinforced plastics ceased in 1946 and, although only a partial success, enough had been demonstrated and learned to justify further composites R&D. It was realised, for example, that the reinforcing fibre had to be inherently inert to climatic changes, it had to be possible to give it a high degree of orientation and it had to be possible to achieve a good bond between it and phenolic resins – the only types available at that time. The resin/fibre pre-impregnate had to have a good ‘shelf-life’ and it had to be possible to mould it at low pressures in low-cost tooling and the resulting laminates had to develop a high proportion of the properties of the fibre. The work on cellulose fibre composites also led to the beginnings of the understanding of fibre orientation theory, the realization of the importance of strict control of moulding conditions and the appreciation that these new materials would require the development of new methods of test. In short, much of the technology learned in this early work formed the basis of all that followed. At the end of the RAE work on cellulose fibres in 1946, samples of glass fibre obtained from the USA were examined as a possible reinforcement for plastics for primary structures. By comparison with cellulose fibres they are heavy and thus their specific stiffness is about half that of flax – one of the best of the cellulose fibres – but they have an enormous advantage in strength and can of course be highly oriented. Earlier developments of GRP ( The years from 1952 saw, however, an enormous growth in the glass-reinforced plastics (GRP) industry due to the advent of polyester and epoxy resins. Due to their prior developed expertise RAE were well placed to take advantage of this especially when glass fibres, stiffer than E glass became available in the late 1960s The filament winding technology developed by RAE in conjunction with Bristol Aerojet Ltd. and Imperial Metal Industries Ltd. led to successful firing trials of all-plastic rocket motors in 1951/1952 and to equally successful flight trials of guided weapon boost-motors soon afterwards. The Admiralty Research Establishment in Dunfermline pioneered the use of glass fibres in mine hunters under the direction of CS (Charles Stuart) Smith (1936–1991). Of course, fibreglass boats were displacing wooden boats. The Admiralty made the very courageous decision to displace wood with grp in large vessels (ships rather than just boats) with greater than 500 tonnes displacement – see for example When RAE work on cellulose-reinforced plastics ceased in 1946, a search began for other, stiffer and more inert fibre reinforcements. There was interest in the potential of asbestos as a reinforcing fibre and it was a happy coincidence that in 1947 Turner Brothers Asbestos Company produced Durestos – a chrysotile asbestos fibre-reinforced phenolic resin. In temperature resistance for example, it can readily out-perform GRP and aluminium and can be used for the venturii of short burning time rocket motors. The great disadvantage of this material is the health hazard associated with asbestos. Chrysotile is very stiff and strong, inert to the effects of moisture and is well bonded by phenolic and other resins. The big drawback in 1947 was the absence of technology for highly orientating the fibre. In the years 1948–1954, J.E. Gordon’s section at RAE demonstrated beyond doubt the feasibility of making large high performance composite structures. The main demonstrator structures were delta wings for the Fairey experimental E10/47 aircraft. A description is contained in the proceedings of the Third Anglo-American Aeronautical Conference 1951 Nevertheless these developments during the 1950s were a significant milestone in the development of aircraft composite structures and showed beyond any doubt the potential advantages to be gained. Above all they demonstrated that composites for aircraft primary structures would have to have specific stiffness properties substantially greater than aluminium alloys if worthwhile structure weight savings were to be achieved. At that time ( This was the approximate position when I first heard of the field in 1960. The principles of fibre composite science/engineering were known but not widely and the fibres being considered were whisker crystals, asbestos fibres, glass and possibly metal wires. In the late 1950s and very early 1960s the ideas for controlling cracks following the ideas of fracture mechanics were only slowly being used in practice. There was a great and understandable fear of using all brittle systems in load bearing applications based on the experience of the spectacular Liberty ship failures in World War II My associates and I were very fortunately placed in the early 1960s in that we were elucidating the principles of the strengthening of metals and yet were lucky enough to spot the advantages of non-metallic solids as the major strengthening agents, because I was lecturing on ceramics. In the summer of 1961 Phillip Bowden, Cottrell and others organised a closed conference at Caius College Cambridge, financed by the National Research Development Corporation (a forerunner of the British Technology Group), which discussed fibre reinforcement and we at Cambridge learnt, through our colleagues from Oxford, of work on directional solidification of eutectics, both in the USA and at Oxford. Work started at Cambridge on this topic. I mentioned the high rates of work hardening of alloys in the overaged condition, which appeared to support the idea of fibre reinforcement with a metal matrix. This was because we knew that particles of a strong solid within the metal were being elastically strained as a result of the motion of dislocations in the metal. The dislocations being unable to shear the strong particles, piled up around them and consequently the metal appears to become very much stronger as plastic strain is increased I immediately asked Bill Tyson (who joined me with an Athlone Fellowship from Canada) to investigate the validity of Cottrell’s idea with a metallic matrix as the adhesive or solder. We tried to produce aligned rods of a very hard phase in a metal by cold working and by directional solidification of a eutectic and other means, since whisker crystals were difficult to use experimentally. This Bill did but without exciting results. What really got us going was a review by Gene Machlin from Columbia Tyson went to work with a will and we produced in a relatively short time a set of principles, which could be, called the colligative mechanical properties of an aligned fibre-reinforced system. We could explain adequately the strength of the system in terms of the strengths of the two components and how it depended upon volume fraction and on the relative elongation of the two components; on the length of the fibres and more important, the ratio of length to diameter. We explored the idea of minimum and critical volume fraction. I remember with surprise the work being described as being elegant, but I thought it was rather straightforward, but necessary to establish the principles. In the course of doing it we made one of the fundamental discoveries needed. We found a new means of dissipating energy. The fibrous composite, of course, broke. Since we were working with metals and were aware of the emerging concepts of fracture mechanics, we were able to recognise immediately the significance of pull-out at a fracture surface. Tyson found that when a fibrous composite breaks all the fibres in the fracture plane do not break at once. This is particularly pronounced with brittle fibres. The fracture surface, therefore, had a jagged appearance and the sliding apart of the two faces or the pull-out of the fibres from holes in the matrix, dissipates a lot of energy and provides a quasi-ductile form of behaviour. That was the discovery and that this would dissipate energy was the natural suggestion. Cottrell and I (I do not remember whether Tyson was present) discussed the finding before the Royal Society meeting on New Materials in 1963. With his wonderful facility for doing the physics immediately with simple algebra Alan Cottrell produced the first formula for estimating the work of fracture due to pull-out. He altered his original draft of the introductory paper to the Conference in order to include it. His simple formula was much quoted for a few of the succeeding years This behaviour is not confined to metals and, from Tyson’s work, sitting on the numerous quasi-confidential committees I have mentioned, I remember saying that this would probably happen with forms of fibrous composites made from all-brittle systems and would provide an energy absorbing mechanism. A little later, Leslie Phillips (see below) said, ‘and it broke, just like Dr. Kelly said it would’. This may seem all very obvious to people nowadays, but at the time it was something genuinely new. Other people had described types of pull-out but no one recognised its importance as a source of dissipating energy around a crack. We announced our results at the Royal Society meeting in 1963 to which I refer again below. J.E. Gordon left RAE in 1954 and went to TI Research Laboratories, where I met him for the first time. He worked principally on whiskers with C.C. Evans and N.J. Parratt. He returned to what is now the DERA fold in 1962 at ERDE Waltham Abbey. There, he and his colleagues developed methods of growing and handling large quantities of whiskers, principally of Si Remember that at this stage we are still looking for a fibre stiffer than steel (200 GPa) and of much lower density. Talley, working in the research laboratory of the Texaco Company for the Office of Naval research invented a method of making boron fibre – depositing boron from the vapour phase onto a tungsten wire in 1958. The stiffness was 460 GPa and the strength 2.3 GPa I became a member of the graphite community for a few years in the early 1960s due to my interest in ceramics. High stiffness carbon fibres were invented almost simultaneously in the UK, USA and Japan at about that time and I was familiar with much of the relevant work in those three countries. My early work on ceramics stemmed from Cottrell’s obtaining funds from the Atomic Energy Authority for work in support of the high temperature atomic reactor – the Dragon project. And three of my research students worked directly on graphite. Earl J. Freise who followed me from Northwestern was the first of these – a most dedicated man who obtained a PhD at Cambridge in record time. He went on to become a University administrator finally in a high position at Caltech. Clive Baker – the twin brother of Colin, who later did seminal work at Alcan on metal matrix composites, studied radiation damage in graphite and Murray Gillin who came to Cambridge in 1962 and investigated the mechanical properties of graphite at very high temperatures. Gillin came from the Australian government research centre at Fisherman’s Bend near Melbourne and when he finished his PhD in early 1965 he had seen as an avid spectator, as had I, the invention of high performance carbon fibres at Farnborough. This knowledge he took back to Australia and being a government employee was able to influence and initiate Australian research in composites. Gillin has cited this experience in a number of publications My three students worked with me on single crystals of graphite – large naturally occurring single crystals. Freise and I were able to obtain these because I had worked at Northwestern on a US Airforce contract (AP 1438 if I remember correctly) and so had contacts in that organisation. Through these, and they gave ready help, we obtained natural crystals from the pyroxene bearing rocks at the Lead Hill Lead mine in Ticonderoga New York. Freise published the definitive work on twinning Baker’s studies of the change of stiffness of graphite crystals when irradiated led me to urge him to carry out and for me to interpret the results of one of the pieces of work of which I am most proud Gillin constructed a unique apparatus for carrying out tensile tests at temperature as high as 3000 °C. The detailed results still remain unpublished, though an account of the construction of the machine has appeared As a result of these researches I got to know Willie Watt at Farnborough who was working on pyrolytic graphite. Gillin and I obtained specimens of the material from him. The Atomic Energy Authority also supported Watt and our association lasted until his death in 1985. I became a consultant at RAE. Work on graphite at that time involved naturally the Union Carbide Corporation and on a visit to the USA in 1962 I met Roger Bacon. There were clues to the possibility of very stiff carbon fibres in the late 1950s and early 1960s, which were emphasized by some of us at the time. These were, Roger Bacon’s graphite whiskers (now fashionable again following the terrestrial manufacture of fullerenes). Bacon made these in a carbon arc under pressure in 1960 The graphitization of polymers such as polyacrylonitrile can lead to a preferred orientation and Shindo in 1961 In June of 1963 the Royal Society held a discussion meeting on New Materials Cottrell and I returned to Cambridge having discussed stiff graphite on the train, and on that evening I put some cotton wool in our graphite tube furnace overnight. The resulting carbonised cotton wool was not stiff – one had to be much more sophisticated. Watt, Phillips and Johnson at the RAE succeeded. Three groups almost simultaneously invented stiff carbon fibres in 1963-64: Bacon in the USA, Shindo in Japan and Watt, Phillips, and Johnson. Of these three original processes that invented by the last three named became dominant The first experiments on the production of carbon fibres by Watt were according to Watt, stimulated by the Royal Society Discussion Meeting. Phillips always vigorously denied this. He said Willie Watt and Bill Johnson asked for a meeting with him in order to get his views on the polymer chemistry connected with making silicon carbide. Anyway, it was Leslie who suggested trying black Orlon and referred Watt to the observations of Houtz who had shown that, on heating a proprietary fibre based on PAN, viz. Orlon, in air for up to 20 h, it underwent a colour change to yellow, then brown, then black and became insoluble in PAN solvents. The key step in the process developed at RAE is the oxidation of the PAN fibre while under longitudinal constraint. The possibility of shrinkage was pointed out by Bill Johnson and according to his own account Leslie Phillips banged the table and said ‘we must not let it’. Phillips’ recollection at the time was that it would have been relatively easy to get a high elastic modulus carbon fibre – it depended (cf. Kotlensky) on the coking temperature. The difficulty was to obtain a useable high strength, which depended on clean fibre, optimum time and temperature of heat treatment so as to decompose the PAN. The initial batch process in which PAN fibres were wound on frames were made of graphite and ‘Meccano’ and later of glass. This was to provide the tension during the oxidative stabilising process, which was the key to the invention so as to stop the fibres shrinking. In effect they were stretched during the oxidation stage. It was this step which had eluded the Japanese. The RAE fibres were some three or four times stiffer than those produced in Japan. Watt and Johnson actually made the first fibre and Phillips showed these fibres to be compatible with epoxy and polyester resins. After the invention carbon fibres were made on a pilot scale at AERE Harwell. The RAE patents covering the production of carbon fibre from PAN were assigned to NRDC (later BTG) and three licensees established: Courtaulds, Rolls-Royce and Morganite. Details of the invention were given in an exceptionally complete and detailed form. All three licensees used Courtaulds PAN (a variant of their Courtelle) as a precursor. Rolls-Royce set up production facilities at Hucknall to produce material for the RB211 jet engine and excellent carbon fibre prepreg was produced under the name of Hyfil The business passed to Bristol Composite Materials. Production ceased around 1980. Morganite made carbon fibre under the name of Modmor, but ceased production in the early 1970s. Courtaulds continued to produce until 1991 when they ceased production in the UK and sold their American interests to a Japanese company. They continue strongly in Advanced Composite Structures. A later comer, RK-Textiles, maintain a carbon fibre manufacturing capability in the UK. During the establishment of the processes in industry, Phillips played a leading part in advising the licensees, drawing attention to the dangers (avoided) of sodium cyanide and HCN evolution, to the need for controlled flow rates of all the gases and to the removal of tars In the early days Phillips was also concerned with the treatment by hydrogen peroxide to essentially make pores on the surface of the fibre so as to vary the adhesion to the resin. It was he, I believe, who made the crucial decision that, since carbon fibres were likely to be expensive, they should be married with the expensive resins and it was I think the development of carbon fibres which led very much to the development of improved properties of epoxy resins. Watt’s main interest was in the chemistry of making high performance carbon fibre and he continued to work on these until his death. I felt privileged to have been able to attract him to work at Surrey University where I was then the Vice Chancellor when he retired from the RAE. Watt, through his position as a Fellow of the Royal Society – he was elected in 1976 – had an interest in composites of course and organised several successful meetings. The aerospace industry saw the potential of carbon fibres immediately but it was Phillips of the three British inventors who undertook the prosecution of the widespread application of these things not only into aerospace but also into much more fashionable and exciting artefacts, such as kayaks, golf clubs, fishing rods (he was a keen fisherman), motor car bodies, furniture, textile machinery and many other forms. For many years the body of the Maclaren racing car – a sweeping Grand Prix winner – embodied the largest piece of carbon fibre moulding ever made. Phillips was also the man who realised, with others, that the most important product form would be fabrics and fibre hybrids and he recognised the need for the invention of simple manufacturing processes. He would be delighted today with the prospect of non-woven, two-dimensional arrays of fibres, which are becoming available. He was always concerned with finding widespread uses for carbon fibres and avoiding solely esoteric ones like, as he said ‘black piano keys and false teeth for soldiers on night operations’. He will be particularly remembered for his efforts to introduce carbon fibres into thermoplastics, first by compounding and then by the invention of the film stacking method and also of course of various types of vacuum moulding. He said: After the invention of carbon fibres the scientists and engineers at RAE pioneered the proper evaluation and use of carbon fibre-reinforced plastics – principally in epoxy resins. They developed manufacturing methods, validated test methods, and carried out design studies. They showed how to design in the presence of fillets and notches and understood that most important property and one so elusive of definition, toughness. This property-toughness under impact conditions – defeated the brave attempt by Rolls-Royce to introduce carbon fibre fan blades for the RB 211 in 1969–1970. The names of Ham, Ewins, Potter, Dorey, Sidey, Cook, Bradshaw, Moreton, Wadsworth, Parratt and lately Bishop and Curtis have become very well known either for work related to advanced composites at RAE or at other centres of British Defence research. In the early 1960s engineers were fearful (as indeed we still are to some extent) of putting brittle materials under tensile load. The recognition of pullout as a source of dissipating energy around a crack went some way to assuaging this worry for fibre composites and particularly for those with discontinuous fibres. I noted above that we announced our results on this at the Royal Society meeting in 1963. J.D. Bernal summing up at the end of the conference, said the contributions on fibre reinforcement were all obvious; he had seen it all done during the war! As, indeed, he could claim: though I would argue that the mode of conferring toughness he was referring to is of a different type. He knew the story of ‘Pykrete’. ‘Pykrete’ was ice reinforced with wood fibres, named after Pyke who proposed to make a floating aircraft carrier out of it for emplacement in the mid-Atlantic during World War II G.A. Cooper was the second of my research students to work on fibre reinforcement. Since we had discovered pull-out, it was his job to professionalise that and explore it as a means of dissipating energy; a task that he did very well. He also demonstrated, most elegantly, that a crack could not extend if faced with an interface which yielded easily in shear. George was (is?) a superb experimentalist, somewhat difficult to restrain, and he discovered while at Cambridge, though we did not investigate it fully until we had both gone to the NPL, the principle of multiple fracture. The actual experiment performed by George was as follows. He strained in tension a resin, of elongation to failure, 6% at room temperature and 1% at 77 K, containing silica fibres coated with carbon of strain to failure 4% at both temperatures. At room temperature, then, the strain to failure of the resin exceeded that of the fibre; at 77 K the reverse was the case. At room temperature the system was quite brittle but at 77 K a large extension occurred. The load extension curve is striking Here, indeed, was a very striking phenomenon; we had produced ductility. You could produce it with the metal matrix; that is commonplace, but to produce it in an all-brittle system was magic. We had made a fully brittle system show the sort of load extension curve which metallurgists were always willing to find acceptable because the material appeared to be ductile. Of course, it had been done before, as Bernal would have recognised, but we were the first to name it clearly and to analyse it. The whole subject is now covered under the sobriquet of internal cracking in laminates. So Tyson and Cooper had each separately discovered a totally new method of dissipating energy in a material so that it could resist fracture: pull-out is one; what is now called microcracking or multiple fracture another. Both will work in all-brittle systems though, as I have said, we discovered pull-out first in a metallic matrix system. They are both vital for understanding the materials science of composites and form contributions from the materials scientist to composite science, which is otherwise a very engineering discipline. Pull-out, as I said, represented a new mode of dissipating energy and gave people confidence that all brittle fibre systems would not be fragile. It has been used to produce energy-absorbing structures and the idea developed using helically conformed fibres. It is one of the principal means by which ceramics may be toughened. Multiple fracture, whether of laminates, or of aligned fibre composites, or of planar matted composites, or of oxide layers on a metal, or of protective coatings, is of the utmost importance. Under various other names, like microcracking, or given the initials MC, its control is vital in all fibre-composite systems of brittle constituents. Control of this phenomenon determines how, for example glasses or ceramics are, or will be, used in gas turbine engines Both those two new methods of dissipating energy in or around a crack were discovered; they were not predicted. I was lucky enough to be able to recognise their significance and to partly and imperfectly analyse them. They illustrate to my mind together with carbon fibres and whiskers, ceramic superconductors and now carbon nanotubes the central dogma that new materials are always discovered experimentally. They are not predicted. When I had written this account I fell to wondering what had been the contribution to the development of composite materials by an academic such as my self. I, and my associates, through our work on reinforced metals, namely copper reinforced with tungsten wires, introduced the idea of fibre reinforcement to metallurgists who were the dominant practitioners of structural materials science at the time. Being academics we aimed to enunciate principles-in this case the principles of the colligative rules governing strength (stiffness had already been done). Secondly, we attracted bright new persons into a new field through our teaching and researches at a well-known university. Students, those from overseas in particular, carry the ideas with them and effectively disseminate the knowledge – see the example of Gillin cited above. Thirdly, we publicise the subject; and this role continues today in collaboration with younger colleagues who are at the forefront of current research I am grateful to Professor A.J. Kinloch, Trinity College and Michael Gordon for tracing the personality M.F. Gordon.