New methods were explored to intensify the precipitation of gibbsite from seeded caustic sodium aluminate liquor: gibbsite crystal seed was activated by boiling in distilled water and 15-crown-5-ether was used as additive in this investigation. Both methods promoted precipitation under selected conditions. The stability of pure sodium aluminate solution decreases in the presence of a high concentration of 15-crown-5-ether, this effect was examined using 27Al NMR. Particle size analyses showed that the product became finer when either intensifying method was introduced. The intensifying mechanism was proposed as follows: desorption of organic contaminants and adsorption of additive molecules primarily take place on the surface of large seed particles where active sites are denser, thus precipitation is promoted; available supersaturation for the small seed particle decreases as the large seeds grow rapidly thereby decreasing agglomeration giving a finer product. Scanning Electronic Microscope (SEM) images of samples support this mechanism.The notoriously low rate of precipitation of gibbsite from seeded caustic sodium aluminate liquors in Bayer process has bothered researchers and producers of alumina for many years. Considerable effort has been devoted to uncovering the mechanism of precipitation in order to find out ways to accelerate the precipitation process. To date, more research is still required before the mechanism is perfectly understood, for the chemical steps that involve in the gibbsite crystal growth and nucleation are still obscure. Many investigations have been undertaken on this topic and several intensifying methods have been established. Optimizing the operating conditions, activating the seed and using additives are the main measures that have been employed in the production of alumina. The low extent precipitation of gibbsite from seeded supersaturated aluminate liquor can be partly attributed to the inactive status of crystal seed. In the process of gibbsite precipitation, the activity of seed significantly influences the rate of precipitation. Though the term of seed activity is widely used in various publications, to the best of our knowledge, there are no strict definition of seed activity till now and generally it is roughly evaluated by the capability to accelerate precipitation ( Using various additives is another generally accepted method in promoting productivity. A range of additives have been reported to improve precipitation rate during gibbsite crystallization from supersaturated sodium aluminate liquor. The published investigations ( A major concern in the intensifying investigations is to overcome the refinement of product in addition to continue to improve the productivity of gibbsite in Bayer process. However, more research is still required before final goal of obtaining high precipitation rate of gibbsite with optimum size can be complete. In this study, a new and simple method was explored to activate the seed; and a very particular member in the “family” of ethers for whose special molecular structure, 15-crown-5-ether, was selected as additive. It is expected to elucidate the mechanism of refinement of product in the intensifying attempts and highlight the investigations of intensifying precipitation of gibbsite in Bayer process. Distilled water was used to prepare all solutions. Aluminum hydroxide (industrial grade, supplied by Zhengzhou Research Institute of Aluminum Corporation of China of limited) was washed, dried and then screened with a 45 μm sieve. The fine powder was used as primary seed. Activated seed was obtained by treating the primary seed with boiling distilled water for 90 min, and then drying for 24 h at 65 °C. 15-crown-5-ether was used as additive (from Alfa Aesar, chemical grade). Supersaturated sodium aluminate solution used for precipitation experiment was prepared by dissolving aluminum hydroxide in hot NaOH solution. After the aluminum hydroxide had completely dissolved, the solution was filtered twice and then diluted to the required volume. In all cases, the initial concentration of alkali (Na Sodium aluminate solution was also prepared by dissolving high purity aluminum (from Xinwei Company, Henan, China) in hot concentrated NaOH solution and then filtering. Supersaturated sodium aluminate solution prepared by this method is very stable ( 900 mL of prepared sodium aluminate solution was transferred to a 1 L batch crystallizer, which is a stainless steel vessel with double jacket and an overhead stirrer. After the temperature of the solution reached 75 °C, the seed was added to the solution. In the control experiment, the primary seed was added, while treated seed was used in the experiments that investigated effect of seed activation on gibbsite precipitation. Experiments were also performed in the presence of 2 Samples were taken at intervals and centrifuged. Optical clean solution was used for aluminium and alkali analysis. Metallurgical industry standard method YB-817-75 was adopted for the determination of chemical components. This is a titrimetric method based on the work of The three sodium aluminate solutions derived from high purity aluminum were The percentage of Al The increase of specific surface or defect sites is known that closely correlates with seed activity, which involves the enhancing methods of mechanical and thermal activation, however with no relating to the activated seed in this study. A new point of view is required to explain this phenomenon. It is well known that organic impurities are present in the plant pregnant liquor, these are usually derived from organics present in the bauxite ore or their degradation products. The nature of organic impurities and various effect on different stages of the process have been fully described ( In some investigations ( When the seed was treated with boiling distilled water, the conjugate bases tend to hydrolyze into polycarboxylate acid in the neutral liquor and then polycarboxylate acid was desorbed from the acidic sites. The exposed acidic sites increase with the desorption of polycarboxylate acid, therefore the activity of seed is improved. Effect of various concentrations of 15-crown-5-ether on precipitation over 10 h is presented in Many investigations concerned with enhancement of precipitation rate by introducing organic additives ( Details of the experiment that probed the effect of 15-crown-5 ether on stability of sodium aluminate solution were described in  Both the treatment of crystal seed with boiling water and using 15-crown-5-ether as additive were found to increase gibbsite precipitation, so the combined effect was also studied. In this experiment, activated seed and 8 The enlargement of gibbsite crystals is due to crystal growth and agglomeration. As the growth rate is very low ( No apparent difference of PSD is seen between the primary and treated seed, which implies that it is not an increase of specific area of seed but the availability of extra active sites contributing to the enhancement of seed activity. The size of product particle is much larger than that of the seed in all cases, which indicates that obvious agglomeration process occurs during the investigation stage. Refinements of product are seen in the cases of intensifying methods have been introduced compared with control A, especially when 2  This model suggests that with other conditions keep constant, speeding up precipitation rate should favour agglomeration. However, the degree of agglomeration decreases in spite of precipitation rates being speed up by the seed activation and charge of additive in this study. Moreover, the refinement of product repeatedly took place in the investigations of intensifying precipitation of gibbsite ( As discussed in The proposed mechanism also can explain the particle size refinement when 15-crown-5-ether was added. Since the active sites are denser on the surface of large particle the 15-crown-5-ether molecules are preferentially adsorbed onto the surface of large particles. The adsorption then accelerates deposition of aluminium hydroxide on the large particle. The degree of agglomeration decreases because excessive supersaturation is consumed by the large particle compared with the control. The problem of refinement of product in the attempts to intensify precipitation has puzzled researchers for a long time. The proposed mechanism explains it fairly well in this investigation, and the SEM images of the sample have sustained our hypothesis, which will be described in detail in The two intensifying methods were found to promote precipitation from initial time recorded. At this stage, second nucleation will not take place, so precipitation of crystallites occurs on the interface between seed and liquor. Different amount of crystallites precipitate on the seed surface should lead to variations of morphology.  On small crystals the effect is different, Gibbsite crystal seed activated by boiling in distilled water for 90 min, was found to promote gibbsite precipitation up to 10 hours at the selected conditions. The additive, 15-crown-5-ether, can also promote precipitation, and the effect is more apparent at relatively high concentration (8 A high concentration of 15-crown-5-ether (1 mol/L)was found to decrease stability of pure sodium aluminate solution significantly. The PSD of primary crystal seed and activated seed are almost the same, clearly the particle size was not a major factor in enhancing precipitation. The PSD of the products show that the product was finer when intensifying methods were employed, despite the increased precipitation rate. SEM images of the larger crystal seeds after 1 hour show that fewer microcrystallites were present on the surface of the control than those activated or with 8 The experimental results allowed us to propose a mechanism of intensification: the activity of large crystal seed is promoted more apparently than small one in the intensifying experiments, which leads to variations of PSD of product and morphology. Authors are grateful to the financial support of National Basic Research Program of China (‘973’ project) “Fundamental research on extracting alumina from concentrated bauxite with high efficiency” (project number: 2005CB623702).