During chewing, food is reduced in size, while saliva moistens the food and binds the masticated food into a bolus that can be easily swallowed. Characteristics of the oral system, such as bite force, number of teeth and salivary flow, will influence the masticatory process. Properties of the food, such as hardness, moisture and fat content, will also have an influence on chewing. Numerous receptors in the mouth and nose respond to the ingested food and monitor the changes during chewing. This leads to perception of taste, odour and texture of the food. An overview of the neuromuscular control of chewing and swallowing is presented. Finally, the influence of age on oral physiology, food perception and nutrient intake is discussed.Chewing is the first step in the process of digestion and is meant to prepare the food for swallowing and further processing in the digestive system. In the mouth, the food is subjected to several mechanical and chemical processes. Taste and texture of the food are perceived and have their influence on the chewing process. The water in the saliva moistens the food particles, whereas the salivary mucins bind masticated food into a coherent and slippery bolus that can be easily swallowed. In  Food perception is discussed in In In All ingested solid foods, regardless of bite size and initial texture, are processed in a stereotyped way by humans ( Characteristics of the oral system, such as bite force, number of teeth and salivary flow rate, will influence the masticatory process, e.g. size reduction of food particles, salivation and mixing of food particles into a food bolus that can be swallowed. The number of chewing cycles needed to prepare food for swallowing (stage I transport until swallowing), defined here as swallowing threshold or moment of swallowing, is fairly constant within a subject for one type of food, whereas large variations in the number of chewing cycles until swallowing were observed among subjects (  Masticatory performance can be determined by quantifying the degree of fragmentation of an artificial test food (Optosil, a silicon rubber) after a fixed number of chewing cycles ( The number of chewing cycles needed to prepare the food for swallowing also largely varied among people. However, the moment of swallowing was shown to be only weakly correlated with the chewing performance ( In a study on 10 healthy subjects the food boluses ready for swallowing were analysed for six different foods, nuts and vegetables ( The production of sufficient saliva is indispensable for good chewing. The water in saliva moistens the food particles, whereas the salivary mucins bind While saliva and chewing have been shown to be interrelated, the relationship between amount of saliva and mastication has not been studied extensively ( Mechanically stimulated salivary flow rate can be determined in a standardized way from chewing on a piece of tasteless Parafilm. Over a period of 5 Physical properties of a food can be determined from rheological measurements. An important objective method to determine properties for solid foods is a compression machine and for liquid foods a rotary viscometer. Universal testing machines can be set up to use a number of different test procedures, including deformation, puncture, extrusion, cutting-shear and crushing ( The influence of food characteristics on the chewing process has been extensively studied. Food hardness is sensed during mastication and affects jaw muscle activity ( A clear relationship between food hardness and jaw muscle activity has been reported in numerous studies. Increased jaw muscle activity and longer burst duration of the muscle activity were observed for harder foods ( The influence of food characteristics on chewing was also studied using model foods ( Chewing force has been measured using a multiple-point sheet-type sensor ( Jaw movement was reported to be influenced by food hardness ( Food characteristics do have a large influence on the number of chewing cycles needed to prepare the food for swallowing (  Several texture and sound attributes of melba toast, cake and peanut were also significantly affected by the additional fluids ( In a recent article the particle size distributions of the food boluses suitable for deglutition and the number of chewing cycles until swallowing were determined for 10 natural foods (  During chewing, the food bolus or food particles are reduced in size, saliva is produced to moisten the food and flavours are released. As a result, jaw muscle activity and jaw amplitude decrease while mastication proceeds as the food bolus is softened ( Food undergoes many events on its way from the plate to the stomach, e.g. spooning, stirring, ingestion, mastication and swallowing. In the oral cavity, food is subjected to several mechanical and chemical processes. It is fractured by the teeth, manipulated by the tongue, diluted and broken down by Sensation is the receptor response to bodily stimulation, whereas perception is awareness through the senses interpreted in the light of experience. The conventional categorization of the senses is touch, including temperature, in addition to taste, smell, hearing and sight. Perception can be the awareness arising through one single sense or through a combination of many. Perception of food is the result of food characteristics interacting with the processes in the mouth, as interpreted by the brain. In literature, a number of definitions of texture can be found. One frequently used definition was stated by Szczesniak, who defined texture as ‘the sensory manifestation of the structure of the food and the manner in which this structure reacts to the applied forces, the specific senses involved being vision, kinesthesis, and hearing’ ( When asking lay people to describe food, taste and flavour are most often mentioned. However, texture of food is of great importance for the appreciation of food ( Research on food texture has focused mainly on rheological measurements, frequently correlated with sensory data of the same product ( Another indication that oral processes are important is that human volunteers (subjects) assessing the same stimulus do not only differ largely in their ratings of that stimulus, but the oral physiological parameters also exhibit large inter-individual variations. In this light, oral physiology, e.g. oral processes (manipulation, mixing and dilution of food in the mouth) and oral sensitivity and receptors, is possibly the ‘missing link’ in understanding the relationship between food structure and texture perception ( There are numerous factors, both product and subject related, that can influence texture perception ( Starting at the top left in Texture is also perceived outside the mouth (extra-oral). Before the food enters the mouth, visual cues such as colour, shine, grains and heterogeneity (lumps) provide information on the texture of the food. Additional information can be obtained by handling the food, e.g. stirring, spooning and cutting. The time until swallowing was shorter and fewer chews were observed as palatability of the food increased ( Intra-oral factors that are subject-related can affect the food itself and how it is perceived. These are: thermal perception; sensitivity of the mouth to touch and size; dentition; swallowing; movements of the tongue in relation to the palate; and saliva amount and composition. Finally, the central nervous system (CNS) is an important determinant in texture perception. The memory and emotional state of the person eating the food, social background, time of day and expectations could be of importance. During exposure to different foods, the perception and appreciation of food will change due to experience. In different cultures, different textures are favourable, such as stickiness and pliability in Japan ( A selection of factors related to oral physiology have been shown to influence texture: oral sensitivity, added particles, tongue movements, temperature and saliva ( The next paragraphs offer a general overview of a few aspects of physiology that could affect the perception of texture. Humans have four classes of receptors, each of which is sensitive primarily to one type of physical energy – chemical, mechanical, thermal and electromagnetic. In the mouth all types of receptor, except the photoreceptors sensitive to electromagnetic energy, are present. Chemical receptors include taste and odour. Thermoreceptors sense the temperature of the body and objects that we come in contact with, and nociceptors signal sensations of pain. Mechanoreceptors mediate sensations of touch and proprioception. Proprioception is the most important sense from inside our bodies. It is the sense of what the muscle itself is doing: sense organs in the tendons signal how hard the muscles are pulling, and sense organs within the muscles signal how much and how fast the muscles are being stretched ( The mouth is a very sensitive organ. The oral cavity is one of the regions of the body most densely innervated with nerve fibres and receptors ( The major types of receptors include mechanoreceptors responding to tactile stimuli, thermoreceptors, responding to cold and warm stimuli, and nociceptors, responding to pain. Mechanoreceptors respond to tactile stimuli, such as pressure or tapping. In the mouth and lip, three different types of mechanoreceptors have been described: slowly adapting type I and II (SA I and SA II) and rapidly adapting type I (RA I) ( Saliva is always present in the mouth, where it serves many functions. The amount and composition of saliva, however, varies with the state (sleep/awake; relaxed/stressed) of the individual ( Saliva is expected to be involved in our perception of the taste, flavour and texture of foods. The effects of saliva on food leading to changes in perception are plentiful. Mixing saliva with food can have a diluting effect ( The movement of the jaw, and thus the neuromuscular control of chewing, plays an important role in the comminution of the food. Chewing requires muscle activity to make the movements of the jaw and to exert forces in order to cut or grind the food. A relatively low level of muscle activity is observed in the surface electromyography of the closing muscles of subjects making pseudo-chewing movements without food. Surface electromyography (EMG) is obtained from electrodes placed on the belly of the muscle. The electrodes record the electrical potentials generated by the motor units of the muscles. More muscle activity is generated if the closing movement is counteracted by food resistance ( The brain stem has been shown to be an essential part of the central nervous system that is necessary for mastication, because decerebrate animals and animals without a cerebellum or spinal cord can still chew ( Comparison of the movements and the activity patterns in the motor nerves evoked by cortical stimulation of the paralysed animal with those of natural chewing before paralysis has demonstrated the important role of sensory feedback in mastication ( The neuromuscular control of chewing in humans has been studied in our laboratory (e.g. The masticatory system is mainly closed-loop controlled. A reason for this may be the fact that the relatively large forces needed for food fragmentation must be controlled under uncertain conditions. First, no optical feedback is available in the chewing process. Furthermore, food resistance may vary largely from cycle to cycle. Thus, immediate muscle response is necessary to maintain a constant chewing rhythm. Force–velocity properties of the jaw-closing muscles play a major role if food resistance suddenly disappears ( An experiment with rhythmic arm movements, comparable to the rhythmic jaw movements described above, showed that arm and jaw muscles respond differently to loading ( The crispy/crunchy nature of food products is an important sensory characteristic on which consumers base their appreciation. When we chew crispy food, the jaw decelerates and accelerates as a result of resistance and breakage of food particles. The characteristic breakage behaviour of a crispy food Another approach to study the chewing of crispy foods is to simulate the mechanical resistance of a crispy food (  Ageing involves various changes in the oral physiology such as teeth loss, muscle fatigue, bite force reduction and decrease of tongue motor skill. Salivary flow rate and saliva composition may also change with age. A substantial number of older people have a compromised chewing performance, which may result in a diet low in fruits and vegetables. The ensuing monotonous food consumption may lead to inadequate nutrient intakes. It is commonly believed that the sense of smell decreases with age. The sense of taste, however, remains relatively robust throughout the lifespan. Texture perception appears well preserved during healthy ageing. Elderly people may have deficiencies in masticatory performance because of deteriorated muscle strength, loss of teeth, malocclusion or periodontal disease ( In order to improve the masticatory function, missing teeth are often replaced by fixed or removable prosthodontic appliances. The provision of dental implants significantly improves oral function. After the implant treatment the patients report high levels of satisfaction regarding various aspects of their denture function and they are more satisfied than patients with similar problems who received a conventional denture without implant support ( In a study on the determinants of masticatory function it was reported that age had a direct effect on bite force and on occlusal units ( It is well established that sensory acuity diminishes with age and that, within the chemical senses, the sense of smell is more prone to losses with age than is the sense of taste ( By understanding the processes in the mouth while eating, a better understanding of the sensations and the perceptions of the food can be gained. Knowledge of physiological parameters may be of importance when performing and designing rheological/instrumental measurements for a food. The following review issues/articles may be helpful in further study: Special issue of the Special issue of Special issue of Review article on ‘Human oral function’ ( Review article on ‘The neurocognitive bases of human multimodal food perception: sensory integration’ ( Review article on ‘Oral physiology and texture perception of semisolids’ ( Review article on ‘Food oral processing’ (