This work presents a techno-economic & environmental analysis of a CO2 mineralization process, intended to examine its potential for CO2 reduction and economic feasibility. The CO2 mineralization technology of this study is composed of the CO2 carbonation process and the brine electrolysis process, producing various chemical compounds such as sodium bicarbonate, hydrogen, and chlorine. Notably, the CO2 mineralization process is able to utilize flue gas with a low concentration of CO2 that has not been subjected to CO2 capture processes. For the technical feasibility analysis of the CO2 mineralization process examined in the study, performance evaluation is conducted for a bench-scale CO2 mineralization test unit (2 kg/day CO2 utilization capacity), yielding sodium bicarbonate of over 97% purity. It is also estimated that the CO2 utilization process of this study produces 0.65 tons of CO2 emissions per ton of sodium bicarbonate produced, which indicates a 2.09 ton CO2 reduction compared to the conventional processes which produce 2.74 tons of CO2 emissions for the same amount of sodium bicarbonate production. With these results as a basis, an economic evaluation is conducted for a commercial-scale CO2 utilization plant (sodium bicarbonate production capacity: approximately 5000 tons/year) which utilizes CO2 in flue gas produced from thermal power plants. The evaluation supports the economic feasibility of the process with a benefit/cost ratio (B/C ratio) of 1.12 and internal rate of return (IRR) of 10.4%.CO CO This study focuses on mineralization as means of CO Regarding the potential CO Motivated by the current state, this study proposes a reliable technological means for CO The techno-economic evaluation of this study involves a technical feasibility analysis, CO Key performance data based on a bench-scale CO Feasibility of the CO The CO CO For the economic feasibility analysis, the key metrics are B/C ratio (Benefit/Cost ratio), NPV (Net Present Value) and IRR (Internal Rate of Return) (refer to Appendix A). B/C ratio is the ratio of the benefits of a project relative to its cost, and is frequently used in economic feasibility analyses. NPV is the total of the present values of all cash flow minus the present values of all capital investment, and IRR is the rate of return that sets the net present value of all cash flows from the investment equal to zero [ The CO As mentioned in Section As mentioned above, the CO The sodium bicarbonate produced from the carbonation process, which is in the form of slurry, can be processed into powder through dewatering & drying processes. Alternatively, the sodium bicarbonate can be used as a slurry for flue gas cleaning to remove acidic gases such as SOx and HCl [ For the brine electrolysis process, concentrated or saturated sodium chloride solution is subjected to electrical energy to produce chlorine (Cl Taking into consideration the above factors, this study also developed a bench-scale membrane cell-based brine electrolysis process. The reactions at the anode and cathode side are as follows [ The main objective of the CO While increased production capacity of a chemical plant correlates to increased economic potential, the production capacity should not exceed the market size of the product. Therefore, a thorough analysis of the market sizes of the products of the CO Analysis results determined the size of the sodium bicarbonate market in Korea as approximately 178,000 tons in 2017 [ With the above survey results as a basis, this study assumed a sodium bicarbonate production capacity of approximately 5000 tons per year for the proposed CO The system boundaries of the CO The CO In the CO Carbonation Reaction Bi-carbonation Reaction Overall Reaction The above formulae represent the followings: The carbonation reaction forms carbonic acid (H A reaction regime was determined through the Hatta number analysis for reactor design considering the above carbonation reactions. The Hatta number, a dimensionless parameter, is the ratio of the reaction rate in a liquid film to the diffusion rate through the film, and is defined by Eq. (9) [ From the analysis results, it is found that the Hatta number of the carbonation reaction is substantially different from the Hatta number value for the bi-carbonation reaction, with the former being greater than 100 and the latter being less than 1. This indicates that the reaction rate is substantially faster than the mass transfer in the carbonation reaction, while the reaction rate is substantially slower in the bi-carbonation reaction. Therefore, as the carbonation and the bi-carbonation reactions for sodium bicarbonate production occur at different reaction regimes, it is necessary to select a reactor type that takes the difference into consideration. This study utilized a packed column for the carbonation reaction and a bubble column for the bi-carbonation reaction to counterbalance the relatively slow reaction rate of the reaction. Equipment sizing (column diameter & height) was determined by using the method suggested by some references [ The CO The brine electrolysis process for the production of caustic soda, chlorine, and hydrogen is configured in a membrane cell setup. This study utilizes a zero-gap membrane cell proposed by the Los Alamos National Laboratory in the US in 2010 for brine electrolysis [ The configuration of the zero-gap membrane cell involves a current collector, a flow field in anode side, anode, a cation exchange membrane, cathode, a flow field in the cathode side, and a current collector. The cation exchange membrane touches the cathode and anode for the Na For this study, the Aciplex-F membrane developed by Asahi Kasei is applied for the zero-gap membrane system in bench scale. The Aciplex-F membrane was developed for the chlor-alkali process applications and is mainly composed of perfluorinated sulfonic acid (PFSA) polymer. The membrane also possesses thin carboxylic acid layer for improved durability and enhanced barrier property to hydroxide ion for the chlor-alkali processes [ A bench-scale CO Graphite flow fields and titanium electrodes (anode & cathode) with the dimension of 10 cm x 10 cm are used for the bench-scale brine electrolysis cell. For the cation exchange membrane, an Aciplex-F membrane (Asahi Kasei, average thickness: 250 μm) is used. De-ionized water and NaCl (25 wt%) solution are fed to the cathode and anode side, respectively, through a diaphragm pump at a flow rate of 25 mL min The caustic soda produced from brine electrolysis is temporarily stored in a storage tank (made of quartz material) and fed to the top section of the packed column of the CO The details of the performance evaluation results of the continuous operation of the bench-scale unit(BSU) are as follows. For the production of caustic soda of a fixed concentration (15 wt%) from the brine electrolysis process, the conductivity of the caustic soda storage tank is monitored in real time during continuous operation as aforementioned. The caustic soda is used for the CO Electric power consumption is a key performance figure of the brine electrolysis process. By analyzing the electric power consumption according to operation temperature changes of the electrolysis cell (25 – 90℃, operation conditions of the commercial brine electrolysis cells are 80 – 90℃ [ As mentioned above, the caustic soda produced from the brine electrolysis is injected into the carbonation column. The caustic soda (15 wt%) used in the carbonation process is injected with a flow rate of 8.3 g/min, while the flue gas is injected at a flow rate of 5 L/min (CO The sodium bicarbonate slurry produced from the operation of the bench-scale CO The mass balance of the CO Using the key performance data (CO Using the direct/indirect CO Details of the CO In addition, the energy consumption and the corresponding amount of direct/indirect CO From the results of the above analysis, it is found that for the carbonation process of the CO All these processes produce CO Case 1: Coal-fired power (baseline case). Case 2: Natural-gas power. Case 3: Korean grid mix. Case 4: Solar photovoltaics. Case 5: Offshore wind. (lifecycle CO The evaluation results are shown in Economic feasibility analysis of the CO The key financial parameters for the cash flow analysis are shown in As mentioned above, the plant is assumed to possess an annual capacity of approximately 5000 tons of sodium bicarbonate production for economic evaluation. The capital costs and O&M costs are calculated based on the corresponding mass & energy balance. Regarding the calculation of capital costs, process equipment costs are determined using data provided by a contractor in Korea based on the equipment sizing data shown in Raw material costs and product pricing for the calculation of O&M costs are obtained through investigation of literature and direct inquiry of traders and consumers of the raw materials and products. The determined raw material costs and product pricing are used for the cash flow analysis (refer to Sensitivity analysis is conducted to observe the effects of various variable changes on the economic performance of the CO The following approaches are proposed as possible ways to improve the CO The CO This work was funded by Korea Electric Power Company (KEPCO) under the project # R16VA08 and by the Korea Carbon Capture & Sequestration R&D Center (KCRC) under the project # N01170680. The metrics used for the techno-economic evaluation and environmental evaluation of the CO CO The metrics used to calculate the techno-economic evaluation of the CO B/C ratio is the ratio of the benefits of a project relative to its cost, and is represented by Eq. (A.3). NPV (Net Present Value) is the total of the present values of all cash flow minus the present values of all capital investment, and is represented by Eq. (A.4). IRR (Internal Rate of Return) is rate of return that sets the net present value of all cash flows from the investment equal to zero, and is represented in Eq. (A.5). The metrics used to evaluate the environmental effects of the CO 1) Direct CO For the analysis of the proposed process, CO 2) Indirect CO The amount of CO 3) CO 4) Net CO Where, The proposed CO a. Packed Column The most important factors in the design of packed columns are flooding limitation and pressure drop [ In this study, the column diameter was calculated using the above method, with the gas/liquid composition and loading data obtained from the mass balance of a CCU plant. Following this, the column height was calculated using the method proposed by Ludwig [ b. Bubble Column Depending on the operating conditions of bubble columns, various flow regimes can form inside the column. For optimal gas/liquid reactions, the process should be conducted in the homogeneous bubble flow regime [