Ion exchange resins have found increasing application in the metallurgical sector over the last few decades through resin-in-column (RIC) technology. These processes are usually simulated by using some form of resistance model. Furthermore, of these, a dual resistance approach incorporating both film and pore-wall diffusion is the most popular and widely used technique for simulations involving ion exchange and adsorption processes. This procedure assumes that equilibrium exists at the solid/liquid interface, an assumption easily applied to single-component systems. However, in multicomponent systems, this assumption makes the simulation procedure cumbersome. In addition, the inability of frequently used isotherms to accurately describe equilibrium conditions over a wide range of solution concentrations results in significant errors. This study investigates the use of a simple film-diffusion mechanism to describe mass transfer kinetics. Furthermore, a simplified Fritz and Schleunder isotherm was used to overcome complex iterative techniques in order to obtain equilibrium conditions at the solid/liquid interface. The procedure was evaluated using a chelating resin in a ternary system and proved to be very effective with reversibility well explained. Moreover, it has been shown that the effect of the counter-ion may be ignored in batch operations but not in column configurations because of the significant increase of the counter-ion in solution.The most popular simulation techniques for ion exchange and adsorption processes involve the use of resistance modelling with the mass transfer processes in solid/liquid systems defined by Diffusion of ions form the bulk of the liquid to the external surface of the adsorbent particle. Diffusion of ions inward through the solid to the site of exchange. Exchange of ions. Outward diffusion of counter ions to the surface of the solid. Diffusion of released ions from the surface of the solid to the bulk of the liquid. Ion exchange kinetics have also been predicted and explained with some success using the unreacted core model where it is assumed that exchange rate is controlled by one of three rate-controlling steps ( film diffusion, intraparticle diffusion, or chemical reaction rate. Furthermore, intraparticle diffusion takes place via surface diffusion along the pore walls of the adsorbent and pore diffusion in the liquid phase down the adsorbent pores. The effect of pore diffusion is believed by some to be negligible with surface diffusion being the determining transport mechanism ( In an attempt to limit the number of resistances in the modeling technique, a dual resistance model, incorporating only film transport and pore-wall diffusion, was developed and used by various authors with success ( The dual resistance model can be applied to single solute systems without difficulty. However, as the number of dissolved species increases, this method becomes increasingly difficult to apply. This is the result of the difficulty in obtaining liquid-phase concentrations at the solid/liquid interface. Furthermore, equilibrium for multicomponent systems is not well defined. In addition to the above, reversible ion exchange is not described. The application of the dual resistance model is further complicated in multi-solute systems by the molecular interactions between adsorbed species resulting in difficulties when evaluating the magnitude of This study investigates the use of a simplified resistance procedure where equilibrium conditions at the solid/liquid interface describe reversibility in order to simulate resin-in-column (RIC) performance using a selective chelating resin in a ternary system.  Ion exchange kinetics is film transport controlled as a result of the macroporous structure (>100 nm) of the resin. At worst, intraparticle diffusion is rate limiting only for a small section of the sorption profile. Equilibrium conditions for the species for which the resin is selective may be described by a single-component isotherm. Equilibrium conditions for species for which the resin is not selective may be described by a two-component isotherm in which the selective species is included but not other nonselective species. Reversible ion exchange is fully described by equilibrium conditions at the solid/liquid interface. As a result of assumption Batch experimentation was conducted in a 1-L unbaffled reactor, agitation provided by a flat blade impeller at 200 rpm. RIC experiments were conducted using a packed bed up-flow configuration in a 6-cm diameter column with height of 1 m. The flow rate was constant at 400 mL/min. The pH for all experiments was four with little or no change detected as a result of the resin being in the sodium form. Duolite C467, a chelating copper selective resin, was used, with 10 mL of this ion exchanger added to the batch experiment. Copper-, nickel-, and cobalt sulphate of an analytical grade was used with solution concentration obtained by using an atomic absorption spectrophotometer. A The Cu solution concentration at the solid/liquid interface is determined first from which that of the Ni and Co is obtained. Hence, no iterative technique is required and an ‘Excel Solver’ approach, utilizing the minimization of the difference between the estimated and measured solution concentrations as objective function, could be used. Equilibrium conditions at the solid/liquid interface are evaluated over the entire ion exchange profile and not only at the final equilibrium point. The parameters obtained are shown below and graphically illustrated in By visual inspection of The column simulation is based on subdividing the column into one hundred sections, each operating as a perfectly mixed batch reactor. The equilibrium terms, as obtained in the batch reactor, were employed with only the mass transfer coefficients adjusted in order to correlate experimental data to simulated results. However, this proved to be unsuccessful. As experienced by The optimum mass transfer coefficients obtained are: An interesting observation from the original simulations is the “lag” of the simulated results for Ni and Co. An example is shown in A batch experiment was conducted, similar to that shown in The following was obtained when using the sum of error squared criteria and an Excel Solver approach: The column model predictions together with experimental values are graphically illustrated in It has been shown that a simple diffusion model can be used to simulate ion exchange when using a macroporous resin. In addition, a single-component isotherm can be used to describe equilibrium conditions for the selective species while a simplified It was found that equilibrium conditions in a batch reactor are not similar to that in a column configuration for identical systems, and that the parameters obtained in a batch configuration cannot always be applied directly to RIC operations. It is concluded that discrepancies in equilibrium conditions are the result of the counter-ion that is present in relatively large quantities in RIC operations. Concentration [mg/L] Diffusivity [m Diameter [m] Film transfer coefficient [m/s] Mass of exchanger [kg] Loading [mg/g] Time [s] Volume of reactor [m macropore particle surface The authors thank the NRF for their financial contribution and MINTEK for valuable technical input.