The melting point of solid substances can be depressed considerably by using supercritical fluids that are highly dissolvable in the molten substance. This fact can be used in micronization processes where thermo-labile materials are liquefied at a temperature lower than their normal melting point in order to produce fine particles. In the present study, the melting points of four different materials under various pressures applied by CO2 were determined visually with the first melting point method: phenanthrene, beta-sitosterol, an insecticide, and a pharmaceutical active. The aqueous suspensions of all materials except phenanthrene were also studied. Thus, it was possible to determine the solid–liquid–vapor equilibrium lines of these materials on a temperature–pressure plane. Finally, a thermodynamic model for describing the phase equilibria of such binary systems was developed implementing the Peng–Robinson equation of state and two different approaches concerning the fugacity of the solid phase.The manufacture of micronized particles, as dry powder or in liquid suspension, is one of the most important processing steps in pharmaceutical, foodstuff or crop protection industries In principle, problems arise when the traditional micronization methods, like dry powder comminution or bead milling, cannot be used because of a lack of comminution efficiency in the sub-micron particle range or due to the elevated product temperatures which are caused during these processes. Alternatively, fine particles of active agents can be produced by a melt dispersion process: the solid particles are dispersed in a liquid and heated above their melting temperature. This melt emulsion is treated mechanically to produce fine droplets. Subsequently the emulsion is cooled down and a dispersion of fine solid particles is achieved, which may be transformed into a dry powder formulation by a final drying step. For many temperature sensitive substances, this process has the disadvantage that heating above the melting temperature causes degradation of the substance or is unfavourable from an economic point of view. In a novel process ( The reason for this melting point depression is the solubility of the lighter component (dense gas) in the forming liquid phase (heavier component). However, at higher pressures, the pressure dependence of the solubility becomes smaller. From a certain point on, SLV equilibrium temperatures will increase with increasing pressure because the dominant effect becomes the increase in melting temperature with pressure In general, the shape of the SLV line is dependent on the mutual solubilities of the binary system components, and the kind of behavior that was described is observed for materials that are not chemically related. A broader and more detailed theoretical analysis of these systems can be found elsewhere The knowledge of the SLV line shape is necessary for the design of the micronization process because it provides information of vital importance. In the most usual case where the SLV curve presents a temperature minimum, this value is indicative of the lowest possible temperature that could be reached in the process. If this maximum melting point depression is not satisfactory, then a more appropriate micronization technique should be sought. Furthermore, if the SLV curve bends back towards higher temperatures after a certain pressure, then this pressure should be the maximum operating temperature of the process. The melting point depression can be enhanced dramatically in the presence of a third component in the system, which in the case of the micronization process is the substance, e.g. water, that is used as a carrier for the solid particles that under the influence of the supercritical fluid melt. As a carrier, water has the advantage that it forms a second liquid phase with many molten organic substances, which is essential for the formation of an emulsion in the micronization process. Another advantage is, that traces of water that are left in the micronized substance are usually acceptable, while this is not true for many other solvents. The tendency to hydrolize substances at higher temperatures is a disadvantage of water. In this work, the phase behavior of active agents (insecticide, pharmaceutical) and model compounds (beta-sitosterol and phenanthrene) was investigated with CO Phenanthrene was supplied by Acros Organics (98+% w/w). A practical grade reagent rich in beta-sitosterol was supplied by MP Biomedicals (55–65% w/w beta-sitosterol, 30–40% w/w campesterol and 5% w/w stigmasterol). From this point forward, this mixture will be referred as “beta-sitosterol”. An insecticide and a pharmaceutical active were supplied by Bayer CropScience AG and Bayer HealthCare AG respectively. Carbon dioxide was used with all solid materials as the pressure inducing gas, and was supplied by Linde Gas Deutschland (99.995% w/w). In the ternary aqueous systems, water was demineralized before use. All materials were used without any further purification. For performing the melting point determination experiments, a high-pressure view cell (material: Hastelloy C4; volume 250 cm The pressure inside the cell was raised with the help of a manually operated high-pressure screw pump. For rapid equilibration in the ternary systems, a specially designed magnetically driven stirrer was used. Four electromagnets are positioned on the circumference of the cell. A rotating magnetic field is driving a magnetic stirring rod in the cell For determining the melting point of the solid material, the first melting point method was applied. According to this technique, the temperature and pressure pair for which the first solid crystal turns into liquid is noted as a melting point. For measuring the melting point in a binary system, the sample was imported into a glass vial that served as a sample carrier. Inside the cell the vial was put in a horizontal position, uncapped, and with its bottom turned to the front window. The micronized substance inside the vial formed a solid bed with its bulk quantity of material closer to the bottom of the vial. Concerning the sample's preparation, it is preferable that a few crystals remain stuck on the glass of the vial's bottom. Such isolated crystals may sometimes prove to be more sensitive than the bulk of the material's solid bed (due to heat and mass transfer phenomena) and may help in acquiring more accurate measurements. Finally, after the sample is loaded and the cell sealed, the contained air is removed from the cell by letting in and out small amounts of CO For applying the first melting point method and determining the melting point of solid crystals under high CO A relatively high initial pressure is set, e.g. 5 MPa, by letting in an amount of gas inside the view cell. Then, the device is being heated in steps to the desired temperature. Due to the temperature rise the pressure inside the cell will also rise along and eventually the SLV line of the system will be intercepted and the solid substance will melt. The heating rate should be in general quite low (about 0.1 K/min). A low heating rate is necessary in order to avoid a wrong temperature reading, since the thermocouple in the high-pressure view cell is not positioned inside the material's bed in the glass vial. A relatively low initial pressure is set, e.g. 0.1 MPa, by letting in an amount of gas inside the view cell, and the system is brought to the desired temperature. When both the pressure and the temperature are stable (but nevertheless below the SLV line), the pressure is raised in small steps (1–3 bar depending on the system's position on the temperature–pressure plane) by letting in small amounts of CO The accuracy of method 1 is dependent on the heating rate whereas the accuracy of method 2 is dependent on how big the pressure elevations are. However, in both cases it is advisable that after every temperature or pressure rise enough time is given to the system to equilibrate (15 min as a minimum). Method 1 should be applied for melting point determinations at the upper steep part of the SLV line, while method 2 should be applied for the lower part of the SLV line. When determining the melting point of a solid substance in a ternary system, the general experimental technique is very much the same, only that no glass vial is used as a sample carrier. At first, the solid substance is loaded into the cell and after the device is sealed the air is removed. Then, with the help of the high-pressure pump a relatively big amount of demineralized water is conveyed into the cell. The remaining volume is occupied by the vapor phase that mainly contains CO At this point it is necessary to emphasize that every solid substance has its own melting behavior. In general, the following points are indicative of the melting of the solid material in a pressurized binary system: The solid structure of the particles is no longer clear. A liquid interface between the solid particles and the glass wall is noticed. A change of shape and a decrease in volume of the solid bed are noted. A further rise of pressure or temperature should accelerate the phenomenon. A color change towards darker tones (that usually is a sign of degradation) for some materials is a clear indication of melting (beta-sitosterol — When a ternary system is examined, the melting of the solid suspension is much easier to observe and due to the stirring the change of the material from its solid to its liquid form is much faster. Moreover, the darkening and the agglomeration of the solid particles indicates that melting is imminent. The black liquid melt that is observed is much more viscous than water and so it is easy to distinguish even when the stirrer is in motion. Unlike in the case of the binary system, the flow of the forming melt is also visible because of the stirring (insecticide — A model employing the Peng–Robinson EOS with van der Waals mixing rules was used. Two binary interaction parameters were used ( The accuracy of Eq. For solving the SLV equilibria, the following three equations were used (subscript 2 represents the lighter component that is abundant in the gaseous phase) Using the first of these three equations, the composition of the gaseous phase can be calculated for a given temperature and pressure by guessing an initial value for the heavier component's solubility in the gaseous phase and iterating until the equation is satisfied. The other two equations are solved in the same way for the liquid phase, only that this time each component's molar fraction is calculated separately. Then, the sum of the calculated liquid phase molar fraction is checked. Depending on this value, the temperature is adjusted accordingly and the calculations are repeated for the same pressure If the sum of the molar fractions is greater than 1, the temperature is decreased, while the opposite takes place if the sum of the molar fractions is less than 1. In case the value is equal to 1, the given conditions are recorded as an equilibrium point. By repeating these calculations for a number of pressures, the system's SLV line is constructed. The most important factors in Eqs. The results of Eq. The experimental results for the insecticide can be seen in The experimental results for beta-sitosterol under CO The melting point of beta-sitosterol in a ternary system (beta-sitosterol First, at low pressures (< If the pressure is isothermally dropped (either at once or gradually to a value below the gel-formation pressure but higher than the vapor pressure of water at the respective temperature) the gel starts to disintegrate in the exact reverse way. This procedure is quite slow and, like the forming procedure, it is aided by the stirring. Clusters of water will be visible in the gel mass, the gel will become thinner and eventually the nebula-like formations will reappear in an aqueous suspension. If the pressure is elevated isothermally once more, the gel forming procedure will take place again and the gel will be reconstructed at 12.5 MPa. The experimental results for the pharmaceutical active under CO Another point of interest is that melting of the pharmaceutical takes place at temperatures where degradation already occurs. This can be misleading for melting point determination because the melting substance then already has a dark color and the liquefaction is hard to distinguish. In In It can be noticed that the binary interaction parameters obtained for this system with the two models tested are not very far from each other. In addition, in the literature Regarding the model using Eq. Regarding the binary interaction parameters of the EoS, it is interesting to notice that If the In the case of phenanthrene, the negative  By dissolving a supercritical fluid in an active agent a reduction of the melting temperatures of 30 K–50 K compared to the melting temperature of the pure active agent can be obtained. The specific behavior of the material during the phase transition (form of the substance, degradation) and the eye of the experimentalist are two significant factors because of the fact that the phase transition is observed visually. Experimental results for phenanthrene can be represented with different thermodynamic models based on cubic equations of state. Qualitative results may be obtained for the system of interest by using binary interaction parameters obtained from other types of equilibrium, e. g. solubility data.