Acute compartment syndrome (ACS) in tibial diaphyseal fractures has been associated with such complications as infection, delayed fracture healing or non-union, sensory and motor deficits, deformities, and poor functional outcome. Essential condition of an uncomplicated recovery is early diagnosis with prompt decompression. A comprehensive review of the literature was performed to evaluate the impact of compartment syndrome and leg fasciotomies on the time to fracture union and the incidence of delayed union and non-union in tibial diaphyseal fractures. A total of 16 articles, which included 245 tibial fractures complicated with compartment syndrome were analysed. There were statistically significant differences in the time to healing, being longer by 4.90 weeks (p
                     <0.001), and in the rates of delayed union or non-union (55% versus 17.8%) (p
                     <0.001) when these fractures were compared to tibial fractures without compartment syndrome. Patients with ACS of the tibia undergoing leg fasciotomies should be informed about the increased risk of impaired fracture healing and longer time to union.Acute compartment syndrome (ACS) of the lower extremity is a relatively uncommon, however potentially devastating complication, seen in orthopaedic practice. It requires early recognition and prompt appropriate treatment with fasciotomies. Although it is well known that ACS after a tibial fracture is associated with a higher rate of complications and poor functional outcome, Aim of this literature review is to assess the impact of compartment syndrome and the subsequently performed fasciotomies on the time to fracture union and the incidence of impaired fracture healing (delayed union, non-union) in tibial diaphyseal fractures. The PubMed Medline and Ovid Medline databases were explored, from June 1979 to June 2011, using the following Keywords: “tibia” “fracture/s”, “compartment syndrome”, “fasciotomy/ies”. The search was limited to articles concerning tibial fractures with compartment syndrome and bone union, delayed union or non-union. The reference lists of the identified articles were manually searched, as well as the “related articles” in PubMed Medline. The search was restricted to human studies and those published in English language. Papers referring to pathological fractures or patients with co-morbidities that could influence the rate of bone healing such as metabolic bone disease and systemic inflammatory disease processes were excluded from this review. We categorised the patients into two subgroups: Group A patients less than 18 years of age and Group B including patients over 18 years of age, in an effort to identify the impact of age on the healing time. Furthermore, we isolated patients from the literature with similar characteristics but without the development of compartment syndrome, and thus no need for fasciotomies. This group of patients formed the Control Group of the study. Out of each article that fulfilled the inclusion criteria a number of factors were identified and documented including fracture-related parameters, methods of fracture stabilisation, clinical and/or radiological assessment of fracture union, and parameters regarding the diagnosis and treatment of ACS. Fracture-related parameters included fracture anatomic location (proximal shaft, mid-shaft, distal shaft or multilevel), and whether the fracture was closed or open. Open fractures were all classified according to Gustilo and Anderson classification. All the recorded data were entered in an Excel database (Microsoft Office Excel, 2007) and SPSS (SPSS 16.0, Student Version for Windows). Descriptive statistics were computed and differences between the groups amongst categorical variables were compared with the chi-squared and the weighted means were compared using a two-tailed independent samples student's Out of 97 articles identified from our search, 16 met the inclusion criteria, The adult control group consisted of 424 tibial fractures without compartment syndrome. Group A consisted of 10 papers The control group for Group A consisted of 24 tibial fractures The diagnosis of compartment syndrome was made in 81 patients (33.1%) only with clinical assessment, The fractures were stabilised with various methods: a cast was used in 40 cases (16.4%), external fixation in 70 patients (28.7%), open reduction and internal fixation in 27 cases (11.1%), an intramedullary nail in 85 (34.8%), traction in one case (0.4%), in 21 cases it was not clearly defined (8.6%) whereas one patient underwent amputation (0.4%). Bone union was assessed clinically The time to fracture union was extracted from 11 of the 16 articles including 222 cases. When we did the subgroup analysis the mean time to union in patients over 18 years of age (Group B) was 31.7 weeks (range 16–58), whereas in group A was 19.5 weeks (range 8–31). This difference was statistically significant ( Comparison of the time to union between Group A and the group of patients with tibia fractures but without compartment syndrome, Of the 238 patients, a total of 19 cases (7.98%) required at least one secondary procedure to achieve fracture union. Malunion were present in 9 patients. It is well accepted that the ACS represents a potentially devastating complication of tibial diaphyseal fractures and decompression of all compartments should be performed as soon as possible to avoid or minimise the risk of often irreversible complications. Certain limitations of this effort should not be underestimated. Our findings are affected by the clinical and methodological heterogeneity of the analysed original studies. Therefore they are exposed to systematic and random errors. Additionally the clinical outcome and healing rate of fractures is influenced by numerous co-factors as the type of fixation, administration of drugs, smoking habits, and other co-morbidities which was not possible to control completely in our analysis. A statistically significant difference was detected in the union, delayed union or non-union rates between patients with compartment syndrome and fasciotomies compared to patients without compartment syndrome ( Currently there is a definite lack of hard experimental or clinical evidence explaining the causative factors of the effect of compartment syndrome to the fracture healing process. As intracompartmental pressure increases, progressive decrease in the perfusion leads to ischemia and cell death. From the analysis of the cumulative data statistical significant differences were also identified in-between the different age groups. The adult group had a prolonged union time (difference between the mean in each group Patients with tibial fractures who develop compartment syndrome and undergo fasciotomies should be informed about the increased risk of a delayed union or non-union of their fracture, the potential need of further bone stimulating procedures, prolonged hospital stay and aesthetic consequences. Further clinical and experimental evidence is anticipated to elicit in more detail the molecular sequel regulating the delayed fracture healing process and guide its management. All authors declare no conflict of interest.