The beneficiation of phosphate ores containing carbonate gangue by conventional techniques such as physical separation methods or flotation is very difficult due to the similarities in physico-chemical properties of constituent minerals present in the system. Carbonate-rich phosphate deposits can be processed by calcination and by selective acid leaching methods. However, calcination has some drawbacks and selective leaching with organic acids is a promising method for the beneficiation of this type of ore.
                  In this paper, the leaching of calcareous phosphate ores proposed in the literature is reviewed with the aim of identifying the important factors involved in the dissolution process. The literature indicates that the organic acid reagent, acid concentration, reaction time, solid/liquid ratio, temperature, particle size distribution and stirring speed are important parameters in the process. The range and optimum values of these parameters reported in the literature are summarized, but there is still some doubt regarding the optimum reaction time. Analysis of the leaching kinetic data and activation energy show that the leaching reaction is chemically controlled.
                  Limited consideration is given to the economic aspects of organic acid leaching. The leaching method appears to be cheap, but a complete economic evaluation is required for each ore, dependent upon the local price of the organic acids used and the cost of their recovery. It is proposed that future research should focus on the leaching characteristics of specific calcareous phosphate ores and on the development of a methodology to optimise leaching using organic acids.Phosphate rocks are vital non-renewable resources and essential components in fertilizers and phosphorous-based chemicals. It is neither substitutable nor recyclable, therefore, the total demand must be provided through the mining, beneficiation and chemical processing of natural resources. Phosphate deposits may be divided in three major groups, according to their origin: 1 — deposits from sea sediments; 2 — igneous and metamorphic deposits; 3 — biogenetic deposits. It should be mentioned that most of world's phosphate resources are sedimentary deposit ( Phosphate ore requires processing to reduce the content of gangue minerals such as carbonates, silicates, feldspar, mica, calcite, dolomite and clays to meet the requirements of the phosphate industry ( Effective beneficiation can be achieved by various processes, depending upon the liberation size of phosphate and gangue minerals and other ore specifications. Different processes like screening, scrubbing, heavy media separation, washing, roasting, calcinations, leaching and flotation may be used ( The presence of free carbonates in the phosphate rocks usually requires additional acid (sulphuric acid) during the manufacture of phosphoric acid and superphosphates by the “wet process”. In addition, the carbon dioxide produced during the acid addition causes more foaming and results in the production of smaller size gypsum crystals that may blind the downstream phosphor-gypsum filters. Hence, a low quality phosphoric acid is produced ( The beneficiation of sedimentary phosphate ores containing carbonate gangue is a worldwide problem and adequate technology for processing such ores on an industrial scale does not exist at present. It is usually difficult to remove the carbonate minerals efficiently from such ores by conventional techniques as flotation, or by physical separation methods ( Calcination is used in areas having low cost energy and limited water resources like the Al-Jalamid phosphate ore in Saudi Arabia which contain 40–50% carbonate, 8–10% organic matter and 16–25% P Calcination is best carried out in fluidised beds from both a technical and economic perspective. There are numerous advantages of this technique, particularly the ease of material handling and the excellent thermal properties ( Flotation of calcareous phosphate ores may be effective only if the phosphate particles are highly liberated from the gangue materials and exhibit a relatively coarse size. The flotation process seems to work best on ores containing well crystallized carbonates. When the ore contains soft or chalky carbonates, the results are less satisfactory ( With sedimentary phosphate ores, the separation of phosphate from carbonate gangue using flotation is extremely complex due to their similarities in physico-chemical and surface chemistry properties of the constituent minerals and complicated solution generated by the dissolution of salt minerals present in the system ( The surface chemistry and flotation reagents have major effects on phosphate flotation. The reagents effects in the phosphate–carbonate systems, their solution chemistry and the analytical aspects of the calcite or dolomite/apatite/water system have been studied by several investigators ( With due regard to the problems with sedimentary phosphate ores, acid leaching is a promising method that can be applied to treat the calcareous phosphate ores and more attention being given to leaching methods. Since nearly 80% of the world's phosphate resources are calcareous ores, a review of the literature regarding the key factors involved in the leaching using organic acids is presented. The calcareous and dolomitic gangue material in phosphate ore can be reduced by leaching using both strong inorganic acids and organic acids depending on the process parameters ( In the past, various studies have been carried out regarding the acid leaching of different phosphate ores ( Investigations regarding the dissolution of carbonate ores using organic acids, such as acetic acid, lactic acid, formic acid and succinic acid, are limited ( Although organic acids are promising leaching agents, there are some restrictions in the selection of the organic acids and this beneficiation method has some drawbacks that should be taken into consideration ( Using this leaching method, many of the problems encountered during the manufacture of phosphoric acid and superphosphates are resolved. At the same time, both calcium and magnesium carbonates are removed in the form of highly soluble salts. The reaction time needed for leaching is small, thus the destructive action of dilute organic acid on the phosphate minerals is minimum. Typically, organic acid extractions are carried out under moderately acidic conditions (pH 3–5) and their degradation is biologically easy (  In the most of leaching investigations, the phosphate rock samples were crushed and then sieved to collect various size fractions for analysis of combined water and organic matter, P The type of analysis usually conducted is defined as below: Moisture content: weight loss of the original sample after being dried at 105–110 P Tri-calcium phosphate has been traditionally referred to as ‘bone phosphate of lime’ (BPL), reminiscent of earlier times when animal bones were consumed widely in fertilizer manufacture (%P Acid insoluble residue (AIR): amount of un-reacted residue after treatment with standard HNO Loss on ignition (LOI): decrease in weight of the beneficiated sample after being ignited from 550 to 950 Loss in weight (LIW): weight difference in the original sample and the dried beneficiated sample. This loss in weight is mainly due to the loss of the carbonates. Combined water In the case of acetic acid, the reaction between acetic acid and calcareous materials can be written as follows ( The acid ratio (used/stoichiometric) is the ratio of the used amount of acetic acid and the required amount for reaction Reaction The mechanism of carbonate dissolution in acetic acid solution involves the initial formation of Ca(CH However, acetic acid should not attack the phosphate minerals and thus reaction Similarly, in the dissolution of carbonate minerals using lactic acid, the reaction between lactic acid and calcareous material is as follows: Under normal conditions, reaction Again, lactic acid should not attack the phosphate minerals and thus reaction The leaching reactions and selectivity of succinic and formic acid are similar to acetic and lactic acid and one can substitute X with succinate and formate in Eqs. The main factors investigated by researchers were: leaching reagent, acid concentration, reaction time, liquid/solid ratio (pulp solid percent); temperature, particle size distribution, stirring speed and type and nature of the ore. The organic acids most commonly used in carbonate leaching are: acetic acid, lactic acid, formic acid and succinic acid which are all fully miscible with water, although succinic acid has a lower solubility (67 According to the literature, all the organic acids give good results for the selective leaching of calcareous material. Acetic and formic acids may cause corrosion effects on the equipment, along with a tendency to attack the phosphate minerals, whilst lactic acid causes less corrosion on the equipment with minimal risk of phosphate mineral dissolution ( It is reported that by dilution of the acid with water, the surface area of contact between the acid and the carbonates will increase ( Acetic acid is a weak, mono-protic acid in aqueous solution (pK Using acetic acid as a leaching agent, It is possible to improve the P Formic acid (pK Succinic acid ((pK Overall, there do not appear to be any clear differences in organic acid capability, acidic properties and advantages in leaching carbonate minerals. However, from the separation perspective of the leachate and phosphate concentrate, soluble acids are better than succinic acid and cause less corrosion effects. Acid concentration is one of the key factors in achieving good results in the selective dissolution of calcareous mineral in phosphate ores. In general, the P   Under optimum concentrations, there are no physical or chemical changes in the phosphate rock, or losses of its TCP content. As shown in The effect of reaction time on the dissolution of carbonate minerals in the leaching process was studied by all investigators. It is clear that with increasing reaction times up to the optimum value, the P The effects of reaction time on leaching performance using acetic acid have been studied by  Overall, it appears that the optimum leaching time varies from 30 to 60 The leaching rate of carbonate minerals and its efficiency increased with a decrease in particle size and associated increase in surface area, as well as the liberation of more calcareous material from the phosphate minerals matrix.   As shown in  It is reported that the efficiency of the leaching process can be increased by fine grinding of the phosphate feed, but the very fine fraction is usually lost in the de-sliming process in the hydrocyclone during product separation. It is believed that the very fine fraction should not be leached a priori, unless it is needed for itself. The problems related to handling, filtration, and marketing of fine phosphate, may not allow grinding to exceed a certain limit. Furthermore, the higher amounts of energy for grinding and size reduction would cause an extra cost to the process. Moderate speeds for agitating the reaction mixture were usually used in most of the investigations. The P    Some investigators performed the leaching experiments at ambient temperatures. They stated that temperature tends to vaporize organic acids and water and contaminates the vapor phase stream with mainly carbon dioxide. They concluded that room temperature is the optimum temperature for this type of reaction because higher temperatures tend to decrease the solubility of the reaction by-products in water and it makes the separation difficult ( The use of high temperatures can lead to an increase in the leaching performance as shown in It is reported that the weight loss and P We conclude that using higher temperature (40–60 In solid–liquid heterogeneous reactions, the soluble reactants diffuse across the interface and/or through the porous solid layer and then chemical reactions occur. In a fluid–solid reaction system, the shrinking core model considers that the leaching process and its rate is controlled either by the diffusion of reactant through the solution boundary layer, or through a solid product layer, or by rate of the chemical reaction at the surface of the core of unreacted particles. The rate of the process is controlled by the slowest of these sequential steps ( In the absence of an ash/product layer around the unreacted core during the reaction, there would be only two controlling steps, fluid film diffusion or chemical reaction control. Assuming that surface chemical reaction is the slowest step, the following expression of the shrinking core model (Eq. Similarly, when the diffusion through the fluid film is the rate controlling step, the shrinking core model can be written as follows (Eq. In the kinetics study, it is possible to calculate activation energy using the Arrhenius equation, In the diffusion-controlled process, the activation energy will be lower than 25 In the most of studies on the dissolution calcareous material in low grade phosphate ores, it has been concluded that the overall rate of dissolution is controlled by chemical reactions (  For the dissolution of calcareous material from the Greek phosphate rock with acetic acid, In another relevant study by The analysis of the kinetic data obtained from upgrading low grade calcareous phosphate rock with succinic acid again indicated a chemically controlled process with mixed chemical-diffusion control at higher temperatures ( By using organic acids as selective leaching agents for the beneficiation of calcareous phosphate ores, many of the problems encountered during the manufacturing phosphoric acid and superphosphate are resolved. It is estimated that the amount of water needed for slurrying and washing in conventional beneficiation plants is not less and somewhat equivalent to that required in this leaching process ( The overall economic analysis of the operation decides whether the leaching process can be used ( Generally, the reaction of the calcium salts produced during the leaching process with any strong acid produces an insoluble salt and the organic acids will be recovered by filtration. Clearly, sulphuric acid is a promising and important reagent for recovering organic acids from the leach solution. For example, acetic acid could be recovered by the following reaction from calcium acetate ( It is noted that the by-products such as calcium sulphate (gypsum) could be used and/or sold to meet the cost of acetic acid and its recovery by sulphuric acid. Thus, it is necessary to consume sulphuric acid in the reaction and recover acetic acid which should be pure and absolutely free from sulphuric acid in order to prevent any attack on the phosphate minerals. Another possible route is by the reaction of the leach solution with the hydrofluoric acid produced during phosphoric acid production. During the production of phosphoric acid from fluorapatite (3Ca It is possible to regenerate the organic acid by the reaction of the leach solution (which is produced during the leaching process) with the hydrofluoric (which is produced during the phosphoric acid manufacturing process). However, this method needs further investigation for economical recovery of the used organic acids ( Finally, there are other methods to recover organic acids from solution. One of them is the use of ion-exchange resins. By this method, it is possible to recover the whole of the organic acids in the reaction. No acid is expected to be lost as long as the leach solution is recycled to the process ( In this review of the selective leaching of low grade calcareous phosphate ores, several interesting features have been revealed. Most of the world's phosphate resources are sedimentary deposits containing carbonate gangue and their beneficiation is a worldwide problem. However, there is not industrial process for treating such ores at present. Selective leaching using organic acids can be used as promising method for processing sedimentary phosphates. The investigation regarding the dissolution of carbonate ores using organic acids are limited and there is still doubt about leaching agent and optimum leaching conditions and this warrants further investigations. As a corollary, it would be valuable to determine the most promising organic acid type and leaching mechanism and its kinetics. Understanding the chemistry of the leaching process and rate controlling mechanism has been advanced in recent years. It is arguable if there is a need to develop a better understanding of selective leaching reaction. This review shows that leaching conditions have very pronounced influences on the overall dissolution performance and leaching kinetics. Because of the complexity within the leaching systems, the key to understanding the influence of dissolution conditions depend on determining important parameters, such as reaction time, reaction temperature, liquid/solid ratio, acid type, acid concentration and particle size. As a result of the findings highlighted by this review, the following general observations can be made: Using the leaching technique, the P The type, nature and the particles size of the phosphate ores have a direct influence on the leaching time, speed and overall performance. For example, hard phosphate ores require more leaching time for the dissolution of the carbonate minerals. It is stated that the optimum leaching time lies between 25 and 60 The acid concentration that gives the best results depends on the liquid/solid ratios, acid types and carbonate content. However, the most suitable and promising concentration varies from 4 to 15% in different studies. It is important to take into account that further increases in acid concentration will have negative effects on the phosphate minerals as the acid starts to dissolve the phosphate minerals. Regarding the temperature effects we can state that leaching temperature has a great influence on the leaching performance and using higher temperature (40–60 The efficiency of the leaching reaction is increased as the particle size decreases. But further size reduction increases process cost and has other problems related to handling, filtration and marketing of fine phosphates. The leaching reaction is not significantly affected by the increase of stirring rate under the moderate range used in lab experiments, which is consistent with the reaction mechanism. The analysis of the kinetic data and activation energy for leaching studies show that the chemical reaction controls the process in most of the studies. However, some studies are consistent with the mixed chemical-diffusion control. The economic aspects of the leaching process are essential considerations. The process economics depends on the local organic acid price and the cost of their recovery. Organic acid can be recovered from the solution, by several methods, including sulphuric acid addition or ion-exchange. The leaching method is cheap in capital cost and has less environmental hazardous issues because waste organic acids are degradable. Further research is needed to study the phenomena of the calcareous phosphate ores leaching to indicate more effective conditions of dissolution. In addition, it is imperative to perform more investigations on the dissolution kinetics of low grade calcareous phosphate ores using organic acids since the kinetics vary with the type and structure of each ore. This review shows that organic acids can effectively reduce the carbonate content in phosphate ores and suggests that if economics favors upgrading a phosphate ore by organic acid leaching, this technique should be seriously considered as it is environmentally less hazardous. The authors wish to thank the editor and anonymous reviewers for their helpful discussions and valuable comments on the manuscript.