The aim of this work is to map the wear debris concentration with wear rate. A wear debris attenuation function is proposed to depict quantitatively the removal of wear debris. The total residual mass of wear debris in lubrication systems can be stated as the convolution of the wear rate and the wear debris attenuation function. Additionally, the dynamic responses of the wear debris concentration under different wear rate excitations are also presented. To simulate and verify how the debris concentration changes, an oil lubrication system test rig is built, and on-line visual ferrograph (OLVF) is used to monitor the debris concentration. Two experimental results indicate that the variation of the wear debris concentration is consistent with the model result.time of machine running (min) wear rate (mg wear rate at the initial moment and steady-state stage, respectively (mg White noise which obeys a Gauss distribution at the running-in stage White noise which obeys a Gauss distribution at the steady-state wear stage White noise which obeys a Gauss distribution at the severe wear stage wear debris attenuation function (mg the attenuation coefficient ( debris loss factor by other removal factors (e.g. sedimentation, comminution and sticking to surfaces, etc.) the Beta ratio for describing a filter's performance where the nominal oil flow through the filter (L mass of wear debris generated over the time interval residual mass of debris in the oil over the time interval residual mass of wear debris generated at time over the time [0, initial oil volume in a lubrication system (L) volume of oil vs. oil loss rate (L fresh oil replenishment rate (L wear debris concentration (ppm) initial debris concentration in an oil lubrication system mean function of stationary concentration of wear debris (ppm) sampling oil interval of OLVF (s) residence time of wear debris in a lubrication system (s) high concentration of oil contaminated wear debris in the beaker (ppm) flow rate of the wriggle pump (ml the time when a debris concentration of With the development of predictive maintenance, a variety of machine condition monitoring techniques have been widely used by the industrial enterprises On-line monitoring sensors are the tool of obtaining wear debris information. In many literatures, a variety of on-line/in-line wear debris sensors such as electrostatic sensing, optics, acoustic emission, capacitance sensing, and bulk inductive sensing have been reported Wear occurs in tiny gaps between contact surfaces. The wear rate is a time-varying parameter, which can quantify the wear extent and wear state progression. But it is difficult to real-time measure wear rate without changing contact states of tribo-pairs. Comparatively, the wear debris in oil is products of the tribo-pairs wear. On-line monitoring wear debris concentration becomes relatively easy due to the development of on-line/in-line wear debris sensors. Therefore, determining the relationship between wear debris concentration and wear rate becomes crucial to the practical application of oil monitoring. Efforts have been made to research the mapping relationship. During the early 1980's, most research pointed out that the wear debris concentration from the ferrography can reach a dynamic equilibrium. At first Anderson and Driver In these models mentioned above, the wear debris removal usually is described by a simple debris loss factor. The influence of those factors such as filtration, sedimentation, comminution and sticking to surfaces, etc on the debris concentration are blurred by this way. However, the explicit expression for the wear debris removal can be not provided. In addition, the models need to solve the complex differential equation, in which wear rate is assumed to be given. But if the removal of wear debris, replenishment and consumption of lube oil are all considered, an analytic solution of the equation can be hardly obtained. Moreover, in practice, the wear rate is usually unknown due to the complex structure and poor working conditions of machines. Based on the models mentioned above, it is very difficult to explain and analyze the wear debris concentration time-series data from a machine in service, and also to quantify and predict the wear process of the machine. In this work, to overcome this drawback, a wear debris attenuation function is proposed to depict quantitatively the removal of wear debris, in which the filtration and other removal factors are considered separately. A general mathematical model is developed to map the wear debris concentration with wear rate. Moreover, to illustrate the evolution of the wear debris concentration in lubrication system of machines, the dynamic responses of the wear debris concentration under different wear rate excitations are also presented based on proposed model. An oil lubrication system test rig is built, and an on-line visual ferrograph (OLVF) is used to on-line monitor the debris concentration. The proposed model is verified experimentally by two simulation tests. The study provides a new approach for the explanation of on-line wear debris concentration data and the evaluation of wear state. In any machine with oil cycle system, the oil is always in the condition of cycle flow and stir. Moreover, the wear debris is generated and removed continuously in the oil lubrication system. A simplified lubrication system of machines is shown in Wear debris produced are instantaneous and homogeneously mixed in oil Oil top-up can be assumed as a continuous process The history of a machine is from the beginning of its lifetime. The wear rate is equal to the wear debris produced rate. Sampling location is set in the oil tank. Due to the impact of filtration, sedimentation, comminution and sticking to surfaces, etc, factors, wear debris suspended in oil is continuously removed or lost. In this work, the wear debris attenuation function is defined to characterize quantitatively the removal capacity of the oil lubrication system for the wear debris. Its meaning is the residual percentage of wear debris generated at For the filtration, a Beta ratio ( As shown in After integration, we have When Therefore, in From Eq. The debris in oil is produced and removed continuously as the machine is running. Therefore, the wear debris concentration in oil lubrication system is related to the wear rate and the wear debris attenuation. Assuming a machine has been run continuously for some period of time. The running time A debris attenuation function mentioned above is used to express the removal. After Accordingly, at time Let Consequently, the total residual mass of wear debris in the lubrication system is the convolution of wear rate and attenuation function. Taking into account oil consumption and replenishment, the volume of oil The wear debris concentration From Eq. A full-life wear process often has three stages, that is, running-in, normal (steady-state) and severe wear. The different stages of wear are characterized by different wear rate. Based on the model mentioned above, the dynamic responses of the wear debris concentration in lubrication system of machines are investigated under different wear rate excitations. For a running-in of a new machine, initially the wear rate is high which reduces exponentially with time and reaches steady-state after some time Substituting Eqs. Substituting Eq. The mean function of If the quantity of oil replenishment is equal to the oil consumption exactly, i.e., The responses of the wear debris concentration with different size ranges under running-in wear rate excitation are shown in During a steady state, the contact condition of the friction pair remains relatively steady. The wear rate can be expressed as follows In practice, to prolong the life of the machine, oil change is usually performed in running-in end. Therefore, we assume that the wear debris produced during the running-in period have been removed from the oil lubrication system. Similarly, substituting Eqs. Similarly, if the quantity of oil replenishment is equal to the oil consumption exactly, i.e., When In the formulas above, for the debris size larger than the micron rating of the filter, a dynamic equilibrium still exists in steady-state wear stage, unless the wear rate increases or filter failures occur. If After a long time steady-state wear, the contact status of the friction pair gradually and irreversibly deteriorates. The wear rate m( Assuming the initial concentration of wear debris in an oil lubrication system equals to zero. Similarly, substituting Eqs. Similarly, substituting Eq. If the quantity of oil replenishment is equal to the oil consumption exactly, i.e., The mean function of The responses of the wear debris concentration with different size ranges under severe wear rate excitation are shown in Based on the analysis above, a full-life wear process of a machine can be modeled by the wear debris concentration. If the concentration of wear debris with different sizes are real-time monitored, the full-life wear process of a machine can also be quantified and predicted based on the proposed model. As shown in In this work, the oil containing high concentration wear debris was prepared. During the tests, the oil containing wear debris was pumped into the oil tank by wriggle pump, whose flow rate was controlled to simulate the variation of the wear rate with time. The dispersion rate of wriggle pump flow rate is The OLVF was directly connected to the lubrication system for real-time monitoring the wear debris concentration. As shown in Different wear modes combined with wear debris size, as described by In addition, the wear rate function is like a bathtub curve in the full-life cycle of machine. To simulate how the concentration of debris changes in full-life period, the oil containing wear debris was continuously drawn into oil tank by a wriggle pump, whose flow rate was controlled in accordance with the bathtub curve, as illustrated in To illustrate how the concentration of debris with different size ranges changes in full-life period. Two tests were performed on the test rig, in which the debris size ranges were chosen to overlap the ranges defined in To research how the concentration of debris (>13 The results from test 1 show that the IPCA grows up rapidly in initial stage and then drops down slowly to reach stationary condition in about 60 Based on the proposed model, the concentration of wear debris in full life-cycle period is numerical simulated. During the test 1, the oil loss and fresh oil replenishment did not occur, i.e., For the debris size smaller than the micron rating of the fine filter, such size ranges of wear debris tend to stay suspended and build up over time. To illustrate how this small size range debris concentration changes in full-life period, the test 2 is performed in the rig. In addition, the debris size smaller than the micron rating of the filter are assumed not be removed by normal oil filters in the model. Therefore, both fine filter and coarse filter did not work during the test 2. The OLVF monitoring results from the test 2 are shown in A measure of small wear debris concentration Similarly, the concentration of small wear debris in full life-cycle period is also numerical simulated based on the proposed model. During the test 2, the oil loss and fresh oil replenishment did not also occur, i.e., It can be seen from two tests that the presented method can map the wear debris concentration with wear rate (wear debris produce rate), and explain the concentration of wear debris time-series data well. Provided that the lubrication system is specified, and the concentration of wear debris with different size ranges are real-time monitored, the wear rate in different stages can be quantified and predicted. And a full-life wear process of a machine can be also modeled by the concentration of wear debris. Additionally, when the variation of abnormal wear occurs but no failures happen, the state is called a “marginal state”. From In practice, oil change may occur due to the performance degradation of the lubricating oil. In this case, initially the concentrations of large and small debris will become near zero. Since the small wear debris concentration is an integrated history, the small wear debris concentration, after oil change, will not return to its original configuration but will resume the rate of increase previously established. Large wear debris, will quickly return to equilibrium (the stationary concentration of large wear debris Hence, define a quantity Solve Eq. Essentially, the large wear debris concentration at time The study provides a foundation for explanations of the on-line wear debris concentration time series and evaluation of wear state. In future work, it is interesting to quantitatively analyze the wear evolution of specific machines in service based on the method proposed. According to the theoretical analysis and experimental checking so far, the main conclusions are drawn as follows: The study provides a new approach for explaining quantitative the on-line wear debris concentration. In lubrication systems, the total residual mass of wear debris is the convolution of wear rate function and debris attenuation function. The removal of wear debris can be stated as an exponential attenuation function. Additionally, the relationship between wear debris concentration and wear rate is also determined, as given by In an oil lubrication system, the dynamic responses of the wear debris concentration under different wear rate excitations are presented based on the proposed model. The two simulation experiment results show that the presented method can map the wear debris concentration with wear rate (wear debris produce rate) and explain the concentration of wear debris time-series data well. The evolution of the large and small debris concentration is also consistent with the modeled results. The debris size is larger than the micron rating of the filter, whose residence time in an oil lubrication system is equal to the time from changing oil to the instant at which a stationary concentration is reached. In addition, an easy-to-use formula is also proposed to evaluate approximately the residence time, as given by This work was supported by