A process is described for the separation of uranium from partially neutralised and diluted phosphoric acid (PNDA) which is generated in fertiliser plants when phosphoric acid is used to scrub ammoniacal vapours from the neutralisation reactors. The separation process is based on solvent extraction using a synergistic mixture of di-2-ethyl hexyl phosphoric acid (DEHPA) with tri-n-alkyl phosphine oxide (TAPO). The effects of process parameters including concentration of DEHPA and TAPO, temperature and degree of neutralisation of acid have been investigated. Laboratory scale and pilot plant scale tests have been carried out. The extraction reaction is found to be exothermic with enthalpy effect of 30 kJ/mol. Tests on stripping of extracted uranium and recovery of uranium have been carried out and results are reported. Analysis of data indicates significant differences in the mechanism of uranium extraction from PNDA and the mechanism reported in literature for extraction of uranium from weak phosphoric acid using a similar solvent mixture.In India, a number of phosphate deposits are known, some of which are uraniferous Solidification of salts in phosphate media is a function of degree of neutralisation and temperature Indigenously produced DEHPA with diester content of >98%, monoester content of <1.5% was used The literature contains extensive references to synergistic effect of TOPO It is well known that a high degree of neutralisation leads to precipitation of solids and renders extraction difficult. Hence varying amounts of 13.5 M liquor ammonia were added to MGA to the point where precipitation occurs, generally at mole ratio of >0.75. Below this critical value, the PNDA was equilibrated with 1.5 M DEHPA+0.375 M TAPO in 1:1 phase ratio. The results, in terms of distribution ratio ( In order to study the effect of neutralisation independently of the effect of dilution, the MGA was diluted to the same SG as that of PNDA with water and the The effect of mole ratio of synergist concentration to extractant concentration was studied for WPA, MGA and PNDA. Results are plotted in At the optimum mole ratio, the extractant concentration was varied and the data obtained are plotted in The PNDA was equilibrated with solvent, containing 1.5 M DEHPA+0.37 M TAPO in diluent, at varying temperatures and the results are plotted in The isotherm for extraction of uranium from PNDA using 1.5 M DEHPA+0.375 M TAPO is shown in The extracted uranium in the DEHPA–TOPO system is known to be efficiently stripped using reducing agents either in HF-H Continuous pilot plant tests were carried out in a 10-stage battery using PNDA feed of 200 mg/l at a phase ratio A/O=3. The results given in Uranium can be recovered from partially neutralised and diluted phosphoric acid, obtained as a scrubber stream in fertiliser plants, by extracting with 1.5 M DEHPA and 0.375 M TAPO in an aliphatic diluent. The extraction efficiency increases with dilution and neutralisation. At N/P mole ratio of 0.6 and phosphate molarity of 7–8, 8–10 stages are adequate. Higher temperature adversely affects the extraction. The loaded extract can be stripped with concentrated phosphoric acid at elevated temperature to obtain a uranium solution containing 4.5 g/l of uranium. This solution is amenable to a second cycle of extraction, scrubbing and ammoniacal stripping, and leading to production of ‘yellow cake’, similar to conventional concentrates. The authors wish to thank their colleagues Shri N.S. Iyer and Shri U.Sridhar for their help in carrying out the test-work. The authors also wish to place on record the valuable suggestions and support received from Dr T.K. Mukherjee, Chairman and Managing Director, Indian Rare Earths.