A permanent magnetic yoke with a straight air gap was developed as the magnetic excitation unit, in order to improve the efficiency of magnetorheological (MR) polishing for ultra-smooth surface planarization. Finite element modelling was used to simulate the magnetic performance of the newly developed yoke, which was found to agree well with the experimental measurement. With the developed MR polishing apparatus, the effects of trough speed, work and excitation gap width, particle concentration within the MR fluid and workpiece size on the material removal rate were systematically investigated. Final tests were performed on glass specimens to examine the polishing performance. The polishing area in the developed process was much larger than that of the conventional MR finishing process with a carrier wheel and ultra-smooth surface of 1nm in R
                     a was achieved.In most of the machining processes for achieving ultra-smooth flat surfaces, polishing is required at the final stage of planarization in order to eliminate residual stress and remove surface (or subsurface) damage. Among the existing planarization techniques, lapping or polishing using loose abrasives was often used, however, it was difficult to obtain a surface that is fully free of surface (or subsurface) damage and residual stress The previous works were largely concerned with the process improvement through developing different MR fluid ribbons In the existing MR polishing processes, the working area of the stiffened MR fluid ribbon is relatively small. Thus, they would be much less efficient when dealing with ultra-smooth planarization of relatively large surfaces. In order to develop a high efficient MR polishing process for planarization of large flat surfaces, this study attempted to use a permanent magnetic (PM) yoke that uses a straight air gap as the excitation unit. The new design of the yoke considerably enlarged the instantaneous contact area for polishing. The effects of excitation gap, work gap, trough speed, particle concentration and workpiece size on the polished surface and volumetric material removal rate were systematically investigated. In conventional MR polishing, an electromagnet with arc air gap is often used as the magnetic source. As shown in To examine the polishing performance of the new PM yoke, an experimental apparatus was developed. As shown in To analyse the magnetic field, a Cartesian coordinate system was established. As shown in The first set of experiments was carried out to assess the performance of the new yoke. The volume of MR fluid used was 500 The second set of experiments was carried out to study the effect of work gap and polishing time on polishing mark. In the first part, the work gap was varied from 1 to 2.5 The third set of tests was a parametric study, which was carried out to investigate the effects of trough speed, work gap, excitation gap, CIPs concentration, CeO The fourth set of experiments aimed to evaluate the overall performance of this process. The parameters were chosen based on the results from the parametric experiments, aimed to produce the best possible performance of polishing. The polishing conditions are also summarized in K9 glass was selected as the workpiece material. The glass substrates have a thickness of 4.6 The external magnetic flux density applied was measured using a Tesla meter (Link Join LZ-630H) to evaluate the performance of the developed PM yoke. The measurement was conducted along the The magnetization of the MR fluid is affected by the concentration of CIPs and the strength of applied magnetic field. Thus, the relationship of magnetic flux density ( Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was carried out to understand the magnetic field distribution of the new PM yoke using ANSYS 12.1. The software uses a Geometry Tool for creating the geometry model and a Magnetostatic Analysis System for calculating the static magnetic field. In this study, the 3D geometric model consisted of air enclosure, a permanent magnet, a pure iron board and MR fluid. The air enclosure was assumed as cubic in the model. To obtain accurate results and save computation time, the mesh size was varied in the FEM model. Relatively small mesh size was used in the permanent magnet, pure iron board, MR fluid and interfaces between different zones. The profile of polishing marks was measured using a surface profiler (MiTeCH MMD-220B). Average surface roughness, To calculate the polishing area, the polished glass specimen was put on a grid paper, where each grid has an area of 1 To work out the material removal rate, the glass specimen was weighted prior to and after polishing using a high resolution electronic balancer. So the difference between the two weights gave the removed mass during polishing. The density of the glass is well known, therefore, the volumetric material removal rate, or    To examine the depth of polishing marks, the specimen in     In comparison to the conventional MR polishing, which produced an arc MR ribbon of 150 The material removal rate in a MR polishing process is affected by a number of parameters, particularly by trough speed, work and excitation gaps, concentrations of CIPs and abrasive particles inside the MR fluid, and workpiece size as well.  The effect of work gap on the The excitation gap affects the magnetic flux density within the MR ribbon. When the excitation gap decreases, the work gap gets closer to the PM yoke, which results in an increase in the magnetic flux density or magnetic force and makes the MR ribbon stronger. Meanwhile, a stronger magnetic force can trap more CIPs into the work gap and hence form a thicker fluid ribbon. These all help promote the material removal.  The effect of CeO  The final polishing test used the optimal parameters obtained from the parametric experiments. Two polishing periods of 30 and 60  It should be noted that as this work aimed to test the performance of the new yoke, a simple and small MRF device was developed using a permanent magnet as the excitation unit. So the flux density applied was much smaller than that in the conventional process In this work, a MR polishing process using a PM yoke with a straight air gap as excitation unit was developed. Both the experimental measurement and FEM simulation demonstrated that the new PM yoke were able to produce relatively large working area of the MR ribbon, in comparison to the conventional MRF process. This developed process clearly showed to have advantage in the polishing of relative large surfaces in terms of machining efficiency. The parametric polishing tests showed that the material removal rate of the MR polishing increases with the increase in trough speed, workpiece rotational speed, or CIPs and CeO The final MR polishing experiment demonstrated that the glass surface could be improved to a roughness value of 1 This work is sponsored by the