Alumina was leached from coal fly ash using a mixed alkali (NaOH+Ca(OH)2) through the hydrothermal method. The effects of leaching conditions on the alumina were studied, and the results showed that the alumina extraction ratio increased with increased reaction temperature, calcium–silicon ratio, and liquid–solid ratio. By optimising the leaching conditions, the alumina extraction ratio could reach 91.3%. The obtained leaching residues were analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscope (SEM)+energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), and the reaction mechanism was also discussed. Results showed that amorphous silica and mullite were first dissolved and transformed into hydro-sodalite at relatively low temperatures. Hydro-sodalite reacted with calcium hydroxide to form sodium calcium silicate (NaCaHSiO4), which was the major component of the leaching residue. Zeolite was the equilibrium product, which accounted for most of the alumina leaching loss. The addition of Ca(OH)2 effectively inhibited the silicon leaching into the solution.Coal fly ash (CFA) refers to the fine particles collected from coal-fired power plants. The fine particles and heavy metals in the CFA can cause serious environmental pollution ( The main form of alumina in CFA is mullite, and the alumina–silica ratio (mass ratio of alumina to silica) is approximately 1–1.5. With the low alumina–silica ratio and the stable mineral phase of mullite ( In this study, Ca(OH) The CFA used in this study was obtained from pulverised coal-fired boilers of thermal power plants located in Inner Mongolia, China. CFA was dried at 105 The effects of reaction temperature, C/S ratio and L/S ratio on alumina extraction from CFA were investigated according to designed experiments. The experiments were carried out in a 1-litre stirred high temperature autoclave fitted with an external heater and an internal cooling system. The autoclave is protected by a nickel vessel from corrosion when a highly concentrated alkali solution is used. An automatic proportional, integral and derivative control system managed the heating rate, agitation and temperature of the autoclave. CFA, Ca(OH) The CFA and leached residues were analysed with XRD (X'Pert Pro MPD of PANalytical Company, 40 The effects of the reaction temperature on the alumina extraction ratio (α The XRD patterns of the residues after extraction at various temperatures are shown in Calcium hydroxide was added into the reaction to react with the silicon for immobilising the silicon in solid phase, which can then help with the separation of Si from Al. As shown in   The effects of the L/S (Liquor/Solid) ratio on the alumina extraction process were investigated under a fixed NaOH solution concentration (40 XRD patterns of various L/S ratios are shown in NaCaHSiO The above experiments led to the following optimum conditions for extracting alumina from CFA:NaOH concentration of 40 Based on the discussion above, we concluded that mullite reacted with NaOH at a lower temperature (190 By adjusting the C/S ratio and L/S ratio, zeolite and NaCaHSiO The influencing factors on the extraction of alumina from CFA using NaOH and Ca(OH) Under the mixed alkaline hydrothermal method, the mechanism of the alumina extraction from high-alumina fly ash was investigated. Firstly, the mullite was reacted with NaOH, and the produced hydro-sodalite becomes part of the alumina that is extracted into the solution. With increased reaction temperature, hydro-sodalite reacts with Ca(OH) The authors acknowledge the