The mathematical model of a fractal interpolation surface on a rectangular field is proposed in this paper. The theory of a fractal interpolation surface is applied to the generation of rock fracture surfaces. The methods of the improved self-affine fractal interpolation surface are proposed. Based on the statistical fractal character of fracture surfaces, the new ideas and methods of the partition of the local field and the determination of a vertical scaling factor are given by using the principles of geostatistics and trend surface analyses, so that the local stochastic irregular roughness on the fracture surface can be simulated. Fractal interpolated surfaces based on 5.5–25.62% of information data on 12 measured rock fracture surfaces are in good agreement with the measured rock fracture surfaces, and the relationship of the information point number used in the interpolation and the interpolation precision is obtained.The earth’s crust is basically discontinuous. The faults and joints in rocks affect the deformation, strength, and conductivity of rock masses significantly. Slope slides and roof caving occur too frequently in civil engineering and mining projects. The occurrences of accidents are closely related to the influence of faults and joints in rocks. Extensive investigations have shown that surface roughness of rock fracture plays an important role in the influence of the mechanical behavior of faults and rock joints Fractal geometry established on the pioneering work of So far, many of the studies have been limited in descriptions of the rough surfaces of rock fractures. The most important aspect in rock engineering practice, however, is that fractal analysis may be applied to predict the mechanical properties and behavior of rock engineering situations, especially when faults and joints are in different strata where it is impossible to obtain the detailed data on the roughness of the fault surfaces directly. It is urgent and invaluable to setup mathematical models of fractals Let With a data set We will restrict our attention to the field Let Let For any ( Let Let Let Let According to the Based on the IFS Let  We get 10×10 data points measured on a rock fracture surface  There is no strict self-affine fracture surface in nature. What we wish to do is to model the fracture surfaces by the self-affine fractal interpolation surfaces. How to interpolate a fracture surface with high precision and to satisfy the practical demand of engineering problems under restraints of a limited amount data is an application of wide general interest. In this section, a method of improved self-affine fractal interpolation is proposed. The goal of this improved self-affine fractal interpolation is to enhance interpolation precision based on the methods of the partition of the local field and determination of the vertical scaling. According to the characteristics of local pertinence of rock fracture surfaces and the variagram theory in geostatistics The variagram is a powerful research tool both pertinence and randomness. The model of a theoretical variagram reflects both the pertinence and the randomness of regional variables. The theoretical equation of the spherical variagram model is (see  The variability of the two points is related to the distance between them if the distance is less than To obtain the theoretical variagram, we should make an experimental variagram first. The formula of the experimental variagram is We take data in On the coordinate system According the value of range From the fractal interpolation surface In the present literature of fractal interpolation, the vertical scaling is given artificially. So the interpolated results can only satisfy the demand of theoretical research; they cannot meet the demand of practical engineering. We discuss now the method of determining the vertical scaling that relates to the given interpolating data. So that we can obtain a high-precision interpolated fracture surface. It is well known that the inhomogeneity of a material dominates the roughness of fracture surfaces. The interpolating data are taken from the fracture surface, so they express the degree of roughness of the fracture surface. On the other hand, the vertical scaling in the interpolation influences the roughness of the interpolated surface directly. Therefore, the selection of the vertical scaling should be based on the interpolated data. The methods and the process of determining the vertical scaling are as follows: Based on the given data (interpolated data) Using the one order trend surface equation, calculate the trend value at each given data point: Obtain the deviation value by subtracting the trend value from the corresponding given data: Use the deviation value as the reference for the vertical scaling. The one order trend surface expresses the average variational plane. The magnitude of the deviation value reflects the extent of departure for the given data from the average plane. From the variagram principles, the data are pertinent within the area of the range The equation of one order trend surface Let Let After rearrangement, the linear equations including From these equations, the parameters The deviation value reflects the local variation characteristic. The positive expresses that the values are higher than the average variation trend and the negative expresses that the values are lower than average variation trend. The vertical scaling indicates the factor of the compression or amplification of the graph in the vertical direction when all the data are mapped into some small area. The data in the area in that the measured values are smaller should be smaller, vice versa. So, the space variation character of the data can be reflected factually by using the deviation value as the estimation of the vertical scaling. When fractal interpolation is performed in the rectangle area, the data on the regular grids can be expressed as Let In order to make comparisons conveniently, we also use the data in Combining with the partition of the local field discussed in the previous section, the local field is set in 4×4 points (see The fracture surface interpolated by using the improved self-affine fractal interpolation method is shown in Comparing It should be pointed out that sometimes the one order trend surface may include some interpolated points. That is to say, the observed value is equal to the trend value in some points. In this case the vertical scaling is zero. We can give the value less than 0.3 artificially. This work can be done easily by adding condition statements in the programming. The number of information points (the number of interpolating data) directly influences the interpolated result. In order to discuss the relationship between the amount of information points and the interpolation precision, the rock fracture surfaces of 12 samples are considered in this section. We select 6×6, 11×11, 21×21 and 41×41 data from the rock fracture surfaces to perform fractal interpolation and then compare the interpolated surfaces with the measured rock fracture surfaces. Finally, the power function of the relationship between the amount of information points and the interpolation precision is obtained. In engineering practice, the fractal dimension is an important parameter for fractal applications. In the research of roughness of rock fracture surfaces, it is also an essential index. For the interpolation theory of fractal surfaces, the fractal dimensions can be calculated from known information points and fractal interpolated surfaces. The problem is how to calculate the precision under the condition of certain known information points. The information content is defined as the ratio of the amount of given information used in the fractal interpolation to the amount of total information. In the study of fractal interpolation surface, the information content is calculated as the percentage of the ratio of numbers of interpolating points used in fractal interpolating to the actual number of the data measured on rock fracture surfaces. That is In engineering practice, the number of data used in fractal interpolation, The dimension precision indicates the relationship of different information content used in the fractal interpolation and fractal dimension of the fractal interpolation surface. The dimension precision is then defined as Using the principle of the box covering method, the fractal dimension of the fractal interpolation surface and the actual rock fracture surface are calculated here approximately. For every sectional profile, we use five different lengths (scales) to perform net divisions. The minimum scale is equal to the minimum distance of every two data points, and the following scales are equal to twice that of the former. For every net, count up the number of meshes that intersect the surface. Calculate the logarithms of the scales and the corresponding mesh numbers, and then use a straight line to fit these double-logarithm data. According to the slope of the straight line, we can obtain the fractal dimensions of sectional profiles. We take the average of these fractal dimensions plus one as the fractal dimension of the corresponding surface. By In the process of interpolation, we choose the deviations,  From  Using the power function to fit the average values in It is clear, from The dimension precision shows the interpolation precision in macrocosm, while the deviation precision indicates the interpolation precision in the local data variation feature. Let The amount of measured data on the rock fracture surface is 81×81. We select (6×6), (11×11), (21×21) and (41×41) data from each of the 12 rock fracture surfaces and interpolate them into 81×81 data, respectively. The average deviation of the interpolation is calculated by  From We can find the relationship of the information content and the deviation precision by fitting the average data in In engineering practice, if the percentage of the ratio of the number of data used in the interpolation to the total number of interpolated data is given, deviation precision of the fractal interpolation surface can be estimated from It should be pointed out, similar to the dimension precision, we actually do not know the total information amount in practical work. Then we use the total number of interpolated data as the total information amount. For example, if we have 10 given interpolating data points and the total number of the interpolated data points is 100, the information content  We have analyzed quantitatively the relationship between information amount used in interpolating and the interpolating precision.  Finally, according to the average index of 12 samples, the relationship between the interpolation point number and interpolation precision can be calculated and shown in Usually, the fracture surface in rocks appears to be statistically self-similar and/or self-affine. The fractal geometry supplies an alternative method to describe quantitatively the roughness of fracture surfaces in rocks. Extensive studies show that the morphology of fracture surfaces in rocks really affects the degree of the accidents of slope instability and roof caving in civil and mining engineering. However, for a geological fault and joint in rocks, to obtain the morphology of whole fault surface is really difficult. It is to say that, in rock engineering, only a little information about roughness of a fault can be obtained from the exposure and several drill holes. The important work is how to estimate the morphology of fracture surfaces according to a little information from the surface. Therefore, the theory and method of fractal interpolation is needed to develop a new way to estimate the morphology of an entire fault surface from a little information of the morphology. In this paper, an improved self-affine fractal interpolation method is proposed. The variagram in geostatistics is introduced into the fractal interpolation of rock fracture surfaces and the method of the local domain partition is established. By use of the principles of the trend surface analyses, the deviations on the information points are used as a vertical scaling factor. Based on all of these improvements, some new concepts such as the precision of fractal dimension and deviation precision are put forward and a mathematical model of fractal interpolation surface is developed. Some case studies presented in this paper demonstrate that the method of fractal interpolation surface is very useful tool for simulation or generation of the morphology of rock fracture surfaces. It can be used to obtain very similar surfaces to a natural fracture surface using not more than a quarter of information points.