The sorption of Fe(III), Al(III) and Pt(IV) from the individual and mixed chloride solution was investigated by using PC88A resin. With the increase of HCl concentration to 5M, the distribution coefficient of Fe decreased slowly, while that of Al decreased rapidly and the distribution coefficient of Pt was nearly zero in our experimental range. Batch experiments showed that it was possible to extract both Fe and Al simultaneously by adjusting HCl and PC88A resin concentrations. However, continuous extraction chromatographic experiments indicated that simultaneous sorption of Al as well as Fe was difficult in our experimental range. Two extraction chromatographic steps would extract most of Fe and 90% of Al from the mixed solution, while Pt was not extracted. Extraction chromatography of the mixed chloride solution with PC88A resin was found to be fast and simple.Platinum along with some other platinum group metals (PGMs) is the main active ingredient of catalysts which are extensively used in petroleum chemistry. Since catalysts have lost their activity owing to coke coverage and metallic poisoning, catalysts should be replaced periodically by fresh catalysts. The cycle time of replacement is usually short and the life time of regenerated catalysts is limited. When it is uneconomical to regenerate and reuse the spent catalysts, they are discarded ( Ion exchange and solvent extraction have been employed to obtain pure solutions of platinum group metals from the leaching solution of the spent catalysts ( In our study on the recovery of platinum group metals from a spent catalyst resulted from petroleum refining, leaching of the spent catalyst with HCl and H PC88A (2-ethylhexyl-phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester) is an acid extractant and has been used in the extraction of various metals ( Stock solutions of iron, aluminum, and platinum were prepared by dissolving the necessary amount of the metal chlorides in doubly distilled water. Reagent grades of PtCl Batch sorption experiments were carried out in a shaking incubator (HB-201SF, Hanbeak Scientific Co.) using 100 The results were expressed as the distribution coefficient ( In the continuous experiments, a certain amount of PC88A resin (3 Effect of PC88A resin concentration on the sorption of Fe(III), Al(III) and Pt(IV) from the individual solution was investigated. The acidity of each solution was kept at 1.0 In the above equation, (HR) The weight percentage of PC88A in our resin was 62.8%. PC88A concentration of 15 The effect of the HCl concentration on the sorption of the metals was also investigated at the PC88A resin concentration of 20 The effect of HCl concentration on the sorption of metals from the mixed chloride solution was investigated by varying HCl concentrations to 1  Batch sorption experiments indicate that HCl concentration has a great effect on the sorption of Al. The possibility of extracting Fe and Al simultaneously was tested from the mixed solution of 0.001  In order to test the feasibility of separating Fe and Al from the mixed solution by extraction chromatography with PC88A resin, continuous experiments were done with glass column. The compositions of the feed solution were 0.005  In order to increase the sorption of Al from the mixed chloride solution with the same acidity, another continuous experiment was done by increasing the amount of PC88A resin from 3 to 10 Batch experiment on the sorption of Al revealed that the distribution coefficient of Al increased sharply with the decrease of HCl concentration when PC88A resin concentration was constant. Therefore, continuous experiment was done with the mixed solution of 0.001 Continuous experimental results suggest that it is better to employ two steps to extract Fe and Al from the mixed solution. In the first step, iron is extracted to PC88A resin and then most of the Al in the effluent solution will be extracted to PC88A resin by the second chromatography. Continuous experiment was done with the mixed solution containing Al and Pt. HCl concentration was adjusted at 0.001 Recovery of Fe and Al from the HCl solution containing Pt was investigated by using PC88A resin. The sorption behavior of Fe, Al and Pt by PC88A resin was investigated by batch and continuous experiments from the individual and mixed solution. In our experimental ranges, iron was extracted by PC88A resin even from the 5 This research was supported by a grant from the