The flotation of smithsonite from tailing which comes from the cerussite flotation circuit was investigated using Armac C and Armac T as amine collectors. The results indicated that the dosage of sodium sulfide, collector type, and desliming are the main affecting factors on the Zn grade and recovery of smithsonite flotation concentrate. Armac T acts a little more selectively than Armac C, and enhances the Zn grade of the concentrate, while Armac C improves the recovery of Zn. At the mixture ratio of Armac C:Armac T
                     =1:6, without consumption of any gangue depressants, an optimal concentrate with 94.4% recovery, and 42.3% Zn grade is obtained. In this condition, the collectors’ consumption is decreased significantly. Desliming prior to flotation is essential for successful recovery of smithsonite.The flotation of oxidized Pb and Zn minerals, particularly Zn minerals, is much more difficult than the flotation of corresponding sulfide minerals ( In Dandy processing plant, Zanjan, Iran, the tailing of cerrusite flotation is Zn concentrate containing 20–25% Zn which is leached by sulfuric acid to extract the Zn metal. In recent years, by decreasing the Zn content of the ore, the upgrade of tailing by froth flotation before acid leaching has become considerably attractive. In this work, the effect of reagents on smithsonite flotation from the tailing of cerrusite flotation is studied using cationic collectors and their mixtures. XRF and XRD analysis indicated that the studied sample contained 21.6% Zn and the main associated minerals of smithsonite are calcite and quartz. Armac After grinding and desliming, the material with −90 The microflotation tests results showed that the optimum dosage of Na According to In the presence of SH, the optimal dosage of Armac  The mixed collector ratio of Armac The mixture of Armac  Armac The mixed collector acts better than each of them alone and decreases collector consumption significantly. The best result was obtained with a ratio of Armac SH is an effective gangue depressant in the presence of Armac The recovery of Zn in smithsonite flotation concentrate is more sensitive to the slime than Zn grade.