Mixtures of Ca(OH)2 and diatomite were hydrated at different conditions to produce reactive SO2 sorbents. Two different hydration techniques were used; namely, atmospheric and pressure hydration. The effect of the hydration temperature, time and diatomite/Ca(OH)2 weight ratio on the physical properties of the activated sorbents were investigated. In atmospheric hydration, it was found that increasing the temperature and hydration time caused an increase in the total surface area of the sorbents. However, surface area values of the sorbents prepared from mixtures which have different diatomite/Ca(OH)2 weight ratio were generally not changed significantly. In pressure hydration, the surface area of the activated sorbents was positively affected from the hydration temperature and pressure. Finally, Ca(OH)2 and two diatomite/Ca(OH)2 sorbents were sulphated at constant temperature (338
                        K) using a synthetic gaseous mixture consisting of 5% O2, 10% CO2, 5000
                        ppmSO
                        2
                      and the balance of nitrogen with a 55% relative humidity. The sulphation reaction of these sorbents were investigated and modelled. The unreacted shrinking core model was chosen to describe this non-catalytic solid/gas (hydrated sorbent/SO2) reaction mechanism. The experimental results were found to be correlated successfully by this model.Efforts to control sulphur oxides emissions from coal combustion plants have resulted in the development of several types of flue gas desulphurization processes. A general classification of flue gas desulphurization from the point of view of the phases in the sulphation medium leads to wet processes giving a wet by-product which is difficult to dispose off and dry processes giving a dry reaction product for easy disposal or reuse. Injection of a suitable sorbent directly into a flue gas duct to control SO The kinetics of the reaction between SO In this study, reactive sulphur dioxide sorbents were prepared from diatomite–Ca(OH) The chemical composition of diatomite which used as siliceous material in this study was determined according to Atmospheric hydration experiments were carried out at atmospheric pressure in a polyethylene bottle immersed in a thermostated water bath. The mixture was stirred throughout the hydration step at a rate of Pressure hydration experiments were performed in a After hydration, activated sorbents were vacuum-filtered and the filter cake was dried overnight in an atmospheric oven at Sulphation reactions of the hydrated sorbents were performed at a temperature of Diatomite was used as a source of silica for the activation of Ca(OH) The results of the hydration experiments were evaluated in two sections; namely, atmospheric and pressure hydration results.  In the statistical analysis, the regression equation developed to predict the total surface area of the activated sorbents and to optimize the process conditions using a multilinear model was of the following type: The regression equation shows that since the coefficient of hydration time is the highest among the others, the effect of this parameter on the total surface area of the diatomite/Ca(OH) The surface areas of sorbents also increased with increasing hydration temperature. As can be seen from Since the surface area values of the sorbents prepared from the mixtures which have different diatomite/Ca(OH) It may also concluded from the regression model ( In the atmospheric hydration experiments, siliceous material–Ca(OH) As can be seen from Since pressure hydration fostered the formation of a sorbent reactive to SO Ca(OH) The surface areas and the Ca(OH) Several model equations have been proposed in the literature to describe the heterogeneous non-catalytic solid–gas reaction mechanism ( Grain models, Pore models and Network models. The model used, in this study, belongs to the first group and assumes that the solid reactant particle consists of spherical grains. Sulphation of these grains proceeds according to shrinking core process. The shrinking unreacted core model was developed by If the chemical reaction is the rate-limiting step If the diffusion through the product layer is the rate-limiting step If the mass transfer through gas film is the rate limiting step As known the molar volume of reaction product In this study, the modelling of the reaction between the sorbent particles and sulphur dioxide was achieved using The effective diffusion coefficient of gaseous reactant through product layer was considered as a constant value which is equal to the effective diffusion coefficient where the conversion is maximum (Model 2) and, to be conversion dependent and calculated from experimental The conversion-time data, obtained experimentally for the sulphation reactions of sorbents, were compared with the computed values, using the above-mentioned two different model equations ( If we compare experimental and computed conversion values given in The reduction of the reaction rate can be due to the increasing coverage of the surface with a monolayer of product. While the formation of the first product layer proceeds, the formation of the consecutive product layers occur. Pore closure and a reduction in reaction surface area contribute to a further decrease of the reaction rate. Available solid reactant (Ca(OH) It was concluded that conversion-time data predicted by computation using Models 2 and 2* (  This study has shown that Ca(OH) Experimental evidence and mathematical analysis showed that hydration temperature and time had marked effects on the total surface area of the activated sorbents. Pressure hydration fosters the formation of a sorbent reactive to SO The reactivity of sorbents prepared by pressure hydration of diatomite–Ca(OH) Hydrated diatomite/Ca(OH) The reaction between activated sorbents and SO 