The utilization of artificial photosynthesis technology to achieve CO2 green conversion to solar fuels has attracted great attentions. However, the research and development of highly-efficient photocatalytic materials have been the key scientific issues. In this work, novel Bi4Ti3O12 hollow-spheres (BTO-HS) with self-assembly structured nanosheets are successfully synthesized by simple hydrothermal-treatment process for the first time, and characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS). The unique structural morphology and well-matched oxidation–reduction potentials of as-prepared BTO-HS result in the excellent optical responsiveness and effective photoinduced carriers, achieving the highly-efficient CO2 photoreduction activity with CO yield of 13.1 μmol⋅g−1⋅h−1 (8 h), more than ultramodern reported 11.7 μmol⋅g−1⋅h−1 (4 h) of ultrathin BTO nanosheets with OVs and 3.66 μmol⋅g−1⋅h−1 (4 h) of bulk BTO [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scib.2020.02.019] under simulated sunlight irradiation. More importantly, the CO yield only decreases about 3.8% after third-cycle test, indicating the outstanding active stability of BTO-HS. Our findings should provide a newfangled structural regulation strategy for constructing BTO-based photocatalysts with highly-efficient photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance.With the booming development of industries and the consumption of fossil fuels, the increasing atmospheric levels of CO Bi Herein, we for the first time synthesized Bi All the chemicals are of analytical grade without further purification. In a typical procedure, 4 mmol Bi(NO X-ray diffraction (XRD) with DX-2700 diffractometer (Model D/max 2700, Rigaku Co., Japan) was used to analyze the crystalline structures of samples in the range of 10–80°. The chemical composition surface states were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo Fisher ESCALAB 250 xi, England) using Al Kα radiation (1486.6 eV). Binding energies were calculated and measured with respect to C (1 s) at 284.8 eV and a precision of ±0.05 eV. Structural morphologies and element distributions were performed by Nanosem430 field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) using an accelerating voltage of 10 kV coupled with an Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) (JEOL model JEM-6490, Japan). UV–vis diffused reflectance spectra (DRS) were recorded on the dry-pressed film samples using UV–vis spectrophotometer with BaSO Photocatalytic CO As shown in  Furthermore, the microstructure morphology and elemental composition of BTO are investigated by SEM images, EDS spectrum and EDX images in  CO Based on the above discussion and the photocatalytic activities of samples, a feasible reaction mechanism of CO In summary, a novel Bi The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by the