Time series analysis provides a method to analyze and model the behaviour of operators of ilmenite reduction furnaces. The models are used to assess the consistency of actions carried out by operators and to review and improve the training procedures. The application of the method led to a significant reduction in product variability and operating costs of the ilmenite furnaces.The emergence of Total Quality Management and Statistical Process Control philosophies in the North American industry This paper shows that time series can be advantageously used to capture the average process understanding of plant operators and to help in reviewing training rules. The method is illustrated with data collected during normal operation of electric arc furnaces. Although the application of computer control is now well-accepted in the metallurgical and mineral processing industry, plant operators remain a key variable for the operation of a process. The operator's tasks range from routine checks to stabilization of critical output variables about specified set-points. This function of feedback control is still present in plants where processes exhibit large time lags. The action of process operators is illustrated as a block diagram in Processes under consideration in this study are The above technique was used to analyze the operators strategy for the control of electric arc furnaces that process an ilmenite (FeO·TiO Data for the analysis was obtained during 1992 and 1993 from the production records of furnaces #1 and 5 for two periods of 2 months. The series consist of about 400 data points. The cross-correlation functions estimated from the operating records are shown in The collected data was processed to model the control strategy of the operators. Two models are used for that purpose. The first model relates the adjustment made on coal dosage, The calibrated models ( Time series analysis applied to normal production records provides a way to assess the training of plant operators. The proposed analysis leads to a model of the operators control strategy from which one can revise and improve the process operation guidelines. The model can also be used to initiate the development of an automatic control strategy or the construction of an expert system for process control. The method was successfully applied to industrial electric arc furnaces and leads to a 20% reduction of the variation of one of the furnace products. The authors wish to acknowledge the Quebec Iron and Titanium for their permission to publish the paper. The project is funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, MITEC and a consortium of eight Canadian companies.