Polymers of different chemical composition are used in the mineral processing industry as flocculants, coagulants, and dispersants. The number of these polymers continues to grow and applications have expanded to include selective flocculation, anti-scaling agents and binders for dust control. All these chemicals are either organic polymers or inorganic substances. Because polymeric compounds can vary in electrical charge, molecular weight, three-dimensional structure, and hydrophobicity, the range of compositions of functional polymers is virtually limitless. Inorganic flocculants are used in applications where the source of cationic charge is required. Typical inorganic flocculants include: calcium salts; typically lime, aluminum salts; such as sulfates or soda alum and iron salts such as ferrous sulfate and ferric chloride. Organic flocculants can be divided into two main groups: natural and synthetic flocculants. Polymeric and inorganic flocculants are employed in the mineral processing industry during the treatment of sulfides, oxides, and silicates. Nowadays, they are used more and more in water treatment plants and also in waste treatment. Coagulants are chemicals that reduce the repellent charge on solids, allowing them to collide and agglomerate. In flotation of clay-containing ores, dispersants have been found to improve metallurgical results and reduce reagent consumptions.Polymers of different chemical composition are used in the mineral processing industry as flocculants, coagulants and dispersants. The number of these polymers continues to grow and applications have expanded to include selective flocculation, anti-scaling agents and binders for dust control. All these chemicals are either organic polymers or inorganic substances. Because polymeric compounds can vary in electrical charge, molecular weight, three-dimensional structure and hydrophobicity, the range of compositions of functional polymers is virtually limitless. The polymers used in the above applications can be broadly defined as large molecules made up of repeating units. In the case of long-chain synthetic polymers, a reactive monomer unit is polymerized with the same or other monomer units in a sequential fashion resulting in molecular strands. The number of linked units may vary anywhere from a few to as many as hundreds of thousands. This number reflects the molecular weight of the polymer. The polymers used in flocculation, coagulation and dispersion, are either synthetic polymers (produced from polyacrylates) or natural polymers (starches, guar gums, etc.). The chemicals used for flocculation, coagulation and dispersion can be classified into two broad groups: inorganic and organic reagents. A different classification [ Polymers with flocculating action Polymers with dispersing actions Polymers with coagulating actions. Inorganic flocculants are used in applications where the source of cationic charge is required. Typical inorganic flocculants include: Calcium salts; typically lime Aluminum salts; such as sulfates or soda alum Iron salts such as ferrous sulfate and ferric chloride. Aluminum salts have been widely used in water treatment applications as well as in those in which coagulation is required. Ferro salts are used in applications where low pH is used, namely, in hydrometallurgical processes. Organic flocculants can be divided into two main groups [ Natural flocculants are derived from natural sources and have the general formula These flocculants can be derived from guar gums, hydrolyzed starch, modified polysaccharides and others. The use of these flocculants is less common for dewatering, but they are widely used for selective flocculation during the treatment of iron ores and other oxides. Synthetic flocculants are commonly used in dewatering circuits. The number and varieties of these flocculants is very large. In principle, these flocculants can be divided into three distinct classes depending on the charge of the functional group. These polymers are exclusively derived from acrylamides by polymerization. The molecular weight of these polymers ranges from 1 to 15 million. A typical structure of a nonionic polyacrylamide is  Polyelectrolytes, depending on their charge (i.e. positive or negative) can be anionic or cationic. The representatives of the anionic flocculant group are: Co-polymers of acrylates–acrylamides: Examples are the separan-type flocculant: Separan NP10 Separan NP20 Separan NP30 Aerofloc 548 and 552 flocculants belong to this group. Examples of flocculants from this group are natural polymers produced from carboxymethylcellulose, Tylose CBR400 and methylcellulose Tylose MH200, manufactured by Clariant Chemicals (formerly Hoechst Chemicals).  The reaction products of the polyacrylamide and primary amines are: Co-polymers are a reaction product of maleic acid and other compounds described by Wadsworth Co-polymer of styrene and maleic acid: Co-polymer of acrylic acid and maleic acid Co-polymer of vinylmethyl ether and maleic acid Application of the reagents described under flocculants can be broadly categorized into three major groups. These include flocculants, coagulants and dispersants. Polymeric and inorganic flocculants are employed in the mineral processing industry during the treatment of sulfides, oxides and silicates. Nowadays, they are used more and more in water treatment plants and also in waste treatment. Coagulants are chemicals that reduce the repellent charge on solids, allowing them to collide and agglomerate. In the treatment of very fine particles, such as clay, hydrometallurgical leach residue, etc., coagulants are used together with flocculants to improve settling characteristics. Dispersants in mineral processing have found a wide range of applications. In flotation of clay-containing ores, dispersants have been found to improve metallurgical results and