A commercial drum chipper was fed alternately and piecewise with poplar stems and poplar tops, in order to determine the effect of piece size and tree part on machine performance. Chipping stems required most of the available power (231 kW) delivered by the tractor, whereas chipping tops took about half that much. However, productivity was twice as high with stems, compared to tops (i.e. 25 and 11 t h−1 of oven dry wood, respectively). As a consequence, specific fuel consumption per unit product was 15% lower with stems, compared to tops – i.e. 0.61 and 0.72 L m−3, respectively. Mean feeding speed was 0.37 m s−1 for stems and 0.41 m s−1 for tops, but the difference was not significant (p = 0.1677). Productivity and fuel consumption were strongly related to piece size, but tree part had its own additional effect, independent from size and possibly related to form. When chipping tops it is advisable to feed more pieces at a time, in order to partly compensate for the effect of piece size. Operators expecting to chip primarily small-size materials may acquire special chipper versions with wider drums and additional side rollers, for smoother mass feeding.Wood biomass is a valuable energy source, which is attracting much interest from scientists and agro-industry managers. Before energy conversion, wood biomass is generally processed into particles of variable size and shape. This treatment is called comminution, and is performed by crushers and chippers The market offers a wide assortment of mobile chippers, and new improved models have been recently designed Fuel use efficiency is one of the main issues, and requires careful examination. Efficiency depends on many factors, including feedstock type, machine design and operational scale Therefore, the goal of our study is to determine productivity, power input, fuel use efficiency and product quality achieved when chipping poplar stems and tops. The null hypothesis is that of no difference between tree parts. The mobile chipper used for the experiment was a Pezzolato PTH 700/660 ( The tests were conducted in March 2012 at the CRA ING experimental farm in Monterotondo, Rome (42°06′04.69″N, 12°37′43.65″E). For the purpose of the experiment, the machine was alternately fed with stems and tops, just harvested from a plantation established at the farm with hybrid poplar (Populus × euramericana, Guiner) eighteen years earlier. The stand was all the same clone, type “Neva”. Stems were defined as the tree portion between the base cut and the minimum top diameter of 200 mm, whereas tops were the remaining upper portion, with a diameter smaller than 200 mm. The wood was placed on the infeed conveyor with Colmar 301 self-propelled knuckle-boom loader ( The chipper was operated by the same professional operator for the whole duration of the test. The re-sizing screen remained the same throughout the experiment, and was a 60 × 60 mm square mesh type. Before starting the experiment, the operator installed a new set of blades. Each treatment (stems and tops) was repeated 30 times, for a total of 60 repetitions. Repetitions consisted in the chipping of one piece, either stem or top. Repetitions were grouped in blocks of 10 units each, all units in a block belonging to the same treatment. Blocks were fed to the chipper in random order. Thus a factorial design was adopted. The volume of each single piece was determined before chipping. Stem volume was measured by taking the diameter at both ends with a caliper, and the total length with a measure tape. Top volume was calculated by summing the individual volumes of all single branches, after measuring their butt diameter and total length. Wood density was determined after weighing the chips obtained from each 10-unit block, which had been collected in a bin trailer. Rotational speed and torque were measured with a transducer installed on the tractor PTO. This gage had a rated accuracy of 3 kNm and a scan rate of 10 Hz. The gage was completed by a PCI card for data acquisition in real time. This information was used for calculating power output. The acquisition software was configured for real-time processing of acquired data Fuel input was measured for each repetition, by refilling the tractor tank from a plastic can and weighing the can before and after refilling on a precision scale. Blank tests were conducted with the idling chipper, in order to determine base fuel consumption when idling. Effective time consumption was determined on the power graphs, rather than by timing the actual work Three 1-kg samples were collected from each block for determining particle size distribution, according to CEN/TS 15149-1. Four sieves were used to separate the five following chip length classes: >63 mm (oversize particles), 63–45 mm (large-size chips), 45–16 mm (medium-size chips), 16–3.15 mm (small-size chips), <3.15 mm (fines). Each fraction was then weighed with a precision scale. Further five samples per block were used for gravimetric water mass fraction determination, according to EN 14774-2. Each of the ten repetitions, chips were taken to a certified weighbridge to determine fresh weight. That allowed calculating wood density, as the solid volume of the chipped material had been previously determined. Dry density was calculated by discounting water mass fraction. Finally, a potentiometer was installed on the chipper infeed in order to measure the vertical displacement of the upper feed roller, thus determining the diameter of the wood piece being processed as it entered the machine. This sensor was connected to the data acquisition system and synchronized with the torque-meter, in order to relate power requirements with stem diameter. Data were analyzed with the SAS statistics software. In particular, the software was used for performing a typical analysis of variance (Anova), especially suited to the factorial experiment just described. Anova tables were drawn, in order to see how the sum of squares was divided between main effects and interactions. Analysis of variance was conducted after transformation, when the distribution of the original data did not satisfy the normality assumption. If data distribution deviated from normality despite transformation, then data were analyzed with non-parametric techniques. The relationship between productivity, piece size and tree part was estimated using multiple linear regression technique. Mean piece volume was 0.64 m Indirect diameter measurement through a potentiometer installed on the upper feed roller produced an error of −1.8% with stems, and +16% with tops. Volume calculations were systematically lower for both tree parts, although the error was much larger with tops. These differences were statistically significant ( Mean torque and power were about 2.5 times higher when chipping stems rather than tops. This ratio matched the volume ratio of stems to tops, which was also about 2.5. Variations were lower for the peak torque and power figures, which increased between 60% and 80% when chipping stems, instead of tops. Peak torque and power were about 25% higher than mean torque and power when chipping stems. In contrast, peak figures were 80% higher than mean ones when chipping tops, indicating a much wider variability in the characteristics of the raw material, whose morphology must have affected the final result. All these differences were statistically significant to the 1% level. In general, tree part explained 70%–80% of the difference between the means. Net chipping productivity was 72 and 30 solid m Mean feeding speed was 0.37 m s Tops tended to produce smaller chips than stems ( Previous studies confirm that fresh hardwood stems are often wetter than fresh hardwood tops The error incurred by indirect diameter measurement was not affected by total piece volume, but was heavily impacted by tree part. Stem volume was underestimated, possibly because of the frequent occurrence of stems with an elliptical section: once placed on the feeding table, gravity and feed rollers forced these stems to roll until the longer axis of the ellipse was horizontal, so that the upper feed roller would only rise as much as the shorter axis. In contrast, the volume overestimates recorded with tree tops could be explained by the systematic presence of branches, which would lift the upper feed roller higher than the actual top section. With tops, a positive butt diameter error returned a negative top volume error because the diameter error was not enough for compensating the inability of the automatic system to account for branch wood volume. As a consequence, the mean volume error incurred with tree tops was too high for allowing any practical use of indirect real time diameter determination, as obtained with the potentiometer. Logically, bigger pieces (stems) required more torque and power to chip, compared to smaller pieces (tops). Chipping stems took about 75% of the available power. Peak power demand neared the rated power output of the tractor engine (i.e. 224 kW vs. 231 kW). In contrast, chipping tops only demanded one third of the tractor rated power. Of course, that was true for the experiment, when the drum only engaged one tree top at a time. That also explains the dramatic productivity drop recorded when chipping tops. The dominant effect of piece size on chipper productivity is well known, and has been reported in previous studies Readers must also consider that the figures in this study refer to net chipping productivity and were calculated for chipping time only, excluding all accessory work time and all delays Fuel consumption per dry unit was substantially lower than recorded in similar studies The study did not verify the hypothesis where tops produced significantly more oversize particles compared to stems. The same has occurred in other studies as well: even when differences were visible, they were not statistically significant The productivity to piece size relationship is well known, and it affects many different production activities