A new model, an enlarged particle model, is proposed for simulating behavior of numerous tiny beads in wet beads milling using discrete element method (DEM). The enlarged particle model is assumed to be composed of several tiny beads. The behavior of enlarged particles in the stirred mill was simulated numerically using DEM. Furthermore, an experiment measuring the bead velocity in a transparent milling chamber using a high-speed camera was conducted to validate the enlarged particle model. The behaviors of 2 and 3mm beads in the stirred mill were also simulated using DEM. The velocity distributions of beads obtained from the simulation agree well with experimental ones when choosing the adequate frictional coefficient of beads. Then the virtual frictional coefficient was introduced into the enlarged particle model. The virtual frictional coefficient was determined so that the velocity distribution of the enlarged particles agrees with the distribution obtained from experiments. The adequate virtual frictional coefficient increases with an increase in the enlarged ratio, which is determined as a volume ratio of enlarged particle to bead. The correlation between the adequate virtual frictional coefficient and the enlarged ratio was apparent.Stirred media mills have come to be used increasingly to disperse fine particles such as pigments and carbon black. Especially, pigments are used as a function material in addition to colorants. However, pigments are generally agglomerated particles in which the primary particles gather. It is necessary to disperse the agglomerated particles to each primary particle to demonstrate the high function of the pigments. Recently, finer particle sizes of pigments are strongly demanded. For production of such pigments, stirred media mills have a higher potential to disperse agglomerated particles than those of tumbling ball mills and vibrating ball mills ( The bead mill is a stirred media mill that uses small beads. The beads are inserted to fill the vessel; then the slurry, which consists of the solvent, pigments and other materials, is sent to the bead mill inlet with a pump. The beads in the bead mill are stirred by the agitator's high-velocity revolution. Then the agglomerated particles are dispersed to each primary particle through collisions with the beads. Improvements of the dispersion rate and the dispersion efficiency in the bead mill have been done experimentally ( Simulation using the discrete element method (DEM) ( The number of beads becomes huge because bead milling uses very small beads. The beads in the bead mill might number several tens of millions, even for a one liter vessel. It is extremely difficult to simulate the movements of several tens of millions of beads, even with a personal computer that has good specifications. Efforts at calculating the paths of many particles using DEM have been reported by As described in this paper, a simulation model was developed for numerous bead motions and it applies for the bead mill. The model validity is investigated by comparing the bead motion obtained from the simulation with that from the experiment. To verify the reliability models, the bead behavior in the bead mill was observed. DEM was used for the simulation of bead motion under a wet condition, and the model in the DEM is presented in The mixture of the beads, liquid, and powder exists entirely within the vessel. Nevertheless, it is difficult to simulate each movement accurately. The computation time is expected to be very long, even if it is possible to simulate. Therefore, only the bead movement is simulated in this study. This model is called a direct model. The slurry was modeled for simplification of the simulation, and modeling of the slurry is described as follows. The motion of beads in the slurry is influenced by buoyant force The drag coefficient The flow rate of the slurry is necessary to calculate the drag force. The flow rate is given as Eq. In Eq. The profile of slurry velocity is modeled as shown in The bead motion was simulated using a direct model under the same conditions as those of the experiment. First, the reliability of the bead mill simulation using a direct model is discussed. The operating conditions and physical properties used in the simulation are presented in When a large bead mill is used, the number of beads might be 10 The enlarged particle model is introduced to the simulation, and the DEM simulation is basically used. Eq. The projection area in Eq. To apply the enlarged particle model to the bead mill, the energy dissipation using enlarged particle model must be the same value using the direct model. The centrifugal force acting on each particle is : The centrifugal force acting on each particle is the following. Subscript The particle velocity is assumed to be attenuated in a straight line toward the wall, Similarly, the centrifugal force of the enlarged particle (b) can be calculated. The radius of the enlarged particle becomes 2 The energy dissipation per unit time is calculable using Eq. The particle velocity is also assumed as shown below. Then, The centrifugal force of the enlarged particle (c) is calculable using the following equations. Consequently, the energy dissipation per unit time can be calculated. Then, it is necessary to compare the energy in the same volume. Therefore, When the enlarged particle velocities To take the same energy dissipation in the three cases (a)–(c), the frictional coefficient is expected to be as shown below. When the enlarged particle is applied, the frictional coefficient is expected to be a larger value than that of the direct model. The frictional coefficient of the larger enlarged particle is also larger than that of small enlarged particles. The frictional coefficients in the enlarged particles, Simulation conditions and physical properties in the enlarged particle model are the same as those shown in  The relation between the enlarged particle size and the enlarged ratio is presented in As described in this paper, the DEM simulation of bead motion using the direct model was performed, and its reliability was confirmed. To apply the DEM simulation to the use of the minute bead movement, we proposed the enlarged particle model. The following is a summary. This DEM simulation, into which the enlarged particle model is introduced, was developed for small bead behavior. The enlarged particle velocity agrees with that of beads obtained from an experiment in which an adequate virtual frictional coefficient is chosen. The value of the optimum virtual frictional coefficient can be inferred from the enlarged ratio. Numerous particles of the bead mill can be simulated using the enlarged particle model in the DEM simulation. Thereby, the computational load can be reduced.  projection area of bead (m drag coefficient (−) bead diameter (m) enlarged particle diameter (m) energy dissipation per unit time (J/s) buoyant force (N) centrifugal force (N) drag force (N) normal force (N) tangential force (N) gravity acceleration (m/s mass of the bead (kg/m radius of the vessel (m) radius of the agitator (m) radius of the vessel (m) radius of the bead (m) spring coefficient (normal) (N/m) spring coefficient (tangential) (N/m) radius of the agitator (m) Reynolds number (−) relative displacement (normal) (m) relative displacement (tangential) (m) relative velocity (m/s) velocity of slurry (m/s) volume of the bead (m volume of the enlarged particle (m bead velocity (m/s) viscosity of slurry (Pa·s) damping coefficient (normal) (N·s/m) damping coefficient (tangential) (N·s/m) frictional coefficient (−) virtual frictional coefficient (−) density of slurry (kg/m angular displacement (rad) angular velocity (rad/s)