A sensitive and cost-effective cyanide sensor has been developed based on piezoelectric quartz crystal (PQC) for determining cyanide at trace levels in water. The sensing layers were fabricated by depositing photochemically generated nano-sized silver particles on titanium dioxide film at the electrode surface of PQC. The freshly produced metallic Ag interacts strongly with cyanide, leading to improved sensor performance (3 times higher sensitivity and 12 times lower detection limit as compared to the bulk Ag-coated PQC). The linear working range was over three orders of concentration from 0.1–10μmol/L. Under the optimized conditions for photochemical deposition of nano-sized Ag with controlled TiO2 film thickness and desired silver particles in nano-sized range, factors affecting its analytical application such as background buffer, solution pH and potential interferents were investigated. Satisfactory recovery at 98.8% and good repeatability (R.S.D. for n
                     =3) at 3.19% were obtained in spiked cyanide concentration from 0.013–0.233mg/L. The procedure was shown able to provide a reliable method for quantitative determination of cyanide at more than 30 times lower than the World Health Organization (WHO) guideline value for drinking water.Cyanide has gained historical notoriety as a poison used with intent to cause fatality. The toxic effect is due to its reaction with the trivalent iron in the cytochrome oxidase to inhibit electron transport and thus preventing the cells from consuming oxygen, leading to a rapid impairment of the vital functions. The fatal oral dosage to human is only about 60–90 In order to meet the need for cyanide determination in emergency cases, a fast responding sensor capable of determining cyanide at trace levels is required. Thus, various methods have been developed to determine cyanide in water, either directly by spectrophotometry As freshly generated nano-sized silver particles are known to produce a much higher reactivity and shown to deposit by a simple and reliable procedure at electrode surface via photo-deposition on TiO All chemicals are A.R. grade unless otherwise stated. Titanium dioxide (TiO The 9M Hz At-cut quartz crystals with gold or silver coating on both sides were purchased from International Crystal Manufacturing Co. Inc., Oklahoma City, OK. A self-constructed oscillator circuit powered by a 5 After the silver-plated quartz crystal was immersed in 1 The quartz crystal coated with TiO Two procedures are used in the preparation of PQC sensor with nano-sized silver coatings. The first procedure is the preparation of TiO The effect of TiO According to the mechanism for silver photo-deposition on TiO As pH is known to exert a strong effect on the surface charge of TiO Desirable texture and morphology of the nano-silver coatings deposited on the titania surface are very important as they influence the sensitivity of the PQC electrode. To understand the difference between the Ag/TiO Elemental analysis using X-ray microprobe shows the presence of silver after irradiation on the surface of TiO Thus, more silver will be deposited at longer irradiation time. As the amount of Ag deposited is much in excess of the cyanide content to be tested in environmental water, the duration of irradiation does not affect the sensitivity of the PQC sensor, though it affects the lifetime of the sensor. For general use, the nano-sized Ag PQC can be used for more than 1 month without the need of regeneration. In summary, the procedure developed for the fabrication of nano-sized Ag PQC electrode is shown to produce a desirable surface morphology for a PQC sensor that can detect cyanide with high sensitivity (see following section) and an adequate lifetime. When the photo-generated nano-Ag-coated PQC electrode was exposed to cyanide solution, the frequency of the crystal was increased linearly with the exposure time. The response is due to the corrosion of nano-Ag particles from the PQC electrode surface by cyanide as given in the following Eq. Results showing the change in frequency during cyanide determination using three different types of PQC, that is, nano-Ag modified PQC, normal Ag-plated PQC and TiO To identify potential interferents on cyanide determination, a large variety of different chemical substances were added to testing solutions containing 5 For recovery study, seven drinking water samples were spiked with trace amount of NaCN and analyzed by the nano-Ag/TiO A procedure for photo-deposition of Ag nano-particles on TiO Good recoveries were obtained using the PQC sensor developed for the determination of cyanide in water with a mean value of 98.8% and a satisfactory precision (about 3.2% R.S.D. for In summary, the nano-Ag PQC sensor developed was shown to provide a fast, sensitive and reliable method for the determination of trace cyanide in aqueous solution that can meet the WHO requirement for cyanide determination in drinking water. We would like to acknowledge the financial supports from the Seed Fund for Basic Research of the Hong Kong University Research Grants Committee, the Competitive Research Grant (HKU 7043/03P) from the Hong Kong Research Grants Council, and the Innovation and Technology Fund (ITS/125/01) of the Hong Kong SAR Government.