Recovery of lithium from lithium-rich electrolytes has attracted worldwide attention because of issues related to the electrolytic production of aluminum and its environmental impacts. Lithium carbonate preparation from a lithium-rich electrolyte by H2SO4 leaching, followed by removal of impurities and lithium precipitation with Na2CO3 was investigated. About 98% Li leaching efficiency was achieved in 1 h using 6% H2SO4 at 80 °C while maintaining a liquid-to- solid ratio of 2:1. Li2SO4 in the resulting leach solution was sequentially purified by NaOH addition to an end pH of 11 and then addition of 3 g/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. Li2CO3 of 99.5% purity was then obtained by precipitation with addition of 290 g/L Na2CO3 at 95 °C for 50 min. This research is expected to improve understanding of requirements for the stable operation of electrolytic aluminum production and to potentially design processes for recycling of industrial lithium-rich electrolytes with high viability.Aluminum production has been carried out for >100 years using the Hall–Heroult process. Aluminum electrolysis at relatively low temperature increases current efficiency and reduces energy consumption ( Numerous researchers have recently developed processes for the dissolution of lithium using inorganic acids as leaching reagents ( In this study, a novel process for leaching Li from a lithium-rich electrolyte, removing the associated impurities, and lithium precipitation with Na Spent lithium-rich electrolyte was supplied by Luoyang Wanji Aluminum Industry Co., Ltd. (Luoyang, China). The electrolyte composition is given in The solidified lithium-rich electrolyte was first chopped coarsely and ground to <0.1 mm in diameter. The powder was placed in a 500 mL three-necked flask installed with a magnetic stirrer and Graham condenser. In this process, 100 g material was dissolved in 200 mL acid solution. After reacting for a given time, the mixture was immediately filtered using a vacuum suction filter. The effects of temperature, acid concentration, and leaching time were investigated. The leaching efficiency of Li was determined according to Eq. (1): After selective leaching, the lithium was separated with other elements (Ca, Mg, Al) and present in solution for further processing. The pH of leachate was adjusted and maintained at pH 11, by adding sodium hydroxide, to remove magnesium and aluminum ions and partially remove calcium ions. A pH meter (PHS-3C) was applied for pH measurement and control of the pH of the leaching solution during the process of preliminary purification. The resultant leach solution was further purified to remove calcium ions by addition of 3 g/L EDTA. Afterwards, the solids with impurities were removed from the solution using vacuum suction filter machine and the residue was washed with distilled water, and the solution returned to the reactor for a new step of precipitation. Precipitation experiments were carried out to determine the optimum recovery of lithium. A 290 g/L Na The concentrations of Al, Ca, Mg, and Li in the leach solutions were determined using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP–OES). As a strong inorganic acid, H  The effect of the reaction temperature on the leaching efficiency of lithium was investigated under conditions of 50 min reaction time, a sulfuric acid concentration of 6%, and liquid-to-solid ratio of 2 mL/g. The results ( The effect of the reaction time on the leaching efficiency of lithium was investigated under conditions of 80 °C reaction temperature, a sulfuric acid concentration of 6%, and liquid-to-solid ratio of 2 mL/g. As shown in The separation of Li from other impurities can be conducted by controlling the pH of the leachate. The leach liquor, at pH 0.61, was first neutralized to pH 11 using sodium hydroxide under the optimized conditions (2.95 mol/L lithium sulfate, 80 °C and 20 min). The mass concentrations of major elements before and after purification are listed in Magnesium, calcium, and aluminum were the main contaminant elements in the leachate. After NaOH purification, their extents of removal were 99.2%, 75.7%, and 99.8%, respectively. To meet the requirement of product quality, most Al and Ca could be removed using EDTA as a complexing agent ( As determined from ICP analysis, the Li After leaching, the lithium-containing solution was concentrated by evaporating and eliminating water. Lithium carbonate was precipitated by the addition of Na The concentration of lithium ions in the leachate was adjusted by evaporation or dilution. The effect of the lithium ion concentration on recovery and purity of lithium carbonate was studied under conditions of 290 g/L Na The effect of the amount of Na X-ray diffraction patterns of the precipitate are presented in A hydrometallurgical process is proposed to recover lithium from lithium-rich electrolyte by leaching, purification, and precipitation. About 81.5% recovery of Li as Li A range of factors were studied to optimize the leaching of lithium-rich electrolyte in sulfuric acid solution. Under optimized experimental conditions of 6% sulfuric acid, a reaction temperature of 80 °C, and reaction time of 60 min, 98% leaching of Li was achieved. The leach solution was sequentially purified by NaOH addition to pH 11 and then addition of 3 g/L EDTA. Na The authors acknowledge the financial support on this research from