Finely dispersed suspensions are used as intermediate or end products in many processes in the chemical, pharmaceutical, and minerals processing industries. Continuously working decanter centrifuges are often applied for the separation or purification of the resulting suspensions. In order to minimise the experimental effort for dimensioning a centrifuge, mathematical models are required which describe the process adequately. The mathematical description of the cylindrical and conical part is needed to predict the build-up of finely dispersed cake in decanter centrifuges. This article presents a physically based computational model to predict the dynamic behaviour of decanter centrifuges. The method considers settling behaviour, cake consolidation, and sediment transport by means of material functions. The used material functions describe the behaviour of the slurry within the apparatus and are measured with well-established lab-scale centrifuges. Consideration of the cylindrical and conical part in the mathematical model allows for the investigation of the influence of different parameters (e.g. cone angle, length of cone, rotational speed, differential speed, etc.) on the process behaviour of decanter centrifuges. The presented dynamic model is validated by comparison with experimental data for an industrial-scale decanter centrifuge.parameter m fit parameter - separation efficiency - gravitational acceleration m/s height m hindered settling function - proportional factor - length m position variable m mass flow rate kg/s mass kg number of compartments - differential speed rpm rotational speed rpm Richardson and Zaki exponent - fit parameter Pa,- normal stress Pa particle size distribution - particle density distribution 1/m radius m fit parameter - grade efficiency - time s velocity m/s volumetric flow rate m volume m velocity m/s width m diameter m mean diameter m position vector m screw pitch angle cone angle intersection angle transport efficiency - dynamic viscosity Pas density kg/m solids volume fraction - angular velocity 1/s helix helix compartment cake conical part cylindrical part drum gel-point control variable liquid particle solid screw sediment separation settling shear stokes weir Experiment Simulation Calcium carbonate naturally occurs as the main component of limestone in various degrees of purity A frequently used industry-scale solid-liquid separation device is the decanter centrifuge Ambler The drag force approach according to Langeloh Stickland Gleiss et al. The simulation method introduced in this article is an extension of the work of Gleiss et al. This section deals with the mathematical basis of the dynamic model. The helical screw path is unrolled and discretised into individual compartments, which differ in the physical behaviour of the suspension as described in Gleiss et al. The total length of the helix where The length of the helix in the cylindrical part with The radius of the helix in the conical part is no longer constant. It decreases towards the cake discharge, but the screw pitch stays constant. Therefore, the simplified equation Here, The limits start at zero (transition cylinder to cone) and go up to The Euclidean norm As already mentioned above, the unrolled screw channel is discretised into compartments. The length of a compartment is defined by the number of compartments The greater Here,  The various compartments are connected to each other by the mass flows of the liquid and solid phase. The local and temporal change of the total mass Here, under the assumption of a constant solid density. Here, The discretisation of both volume balances regarding time In the following sections, theoretical basics for the prediction of settling, sediment build-up, and sediment transport are discussed in more detail. The settling velocity of a particle with the diameter In this well-known equation, Within the centrifuge, the mean centrifugal acceleration The separation criterion for a particle class is obtained from the residence time of the particles. This includes geometry, process, and material parameters. For the detailed derivation, please refer to Gleiss et al. In this equation, The separation efficiency can be used to calculate the separated mass flow, which settles from the settling zone into the sediment zone. Due to the constant density of the solids, the mass flow rate can be reformulated as a volume flow rate. The separated volume flow In the case of finely dispersed calcium carbonate-water suspensions, the accumulated sediment phase is compressible, because very fine pores are formed and no undersaturation occurs. In the sediment zone the model considers compression of the finely dispersed sediment and sediment transport due to the differential speed between screw and drum. Within the sediment, a normal stress (also known as yield pressure) forms a gradient of porosity in the radial direction. The normal stress Sambuichi et al. The sediment is discretised in radial direction as shown in the following expression is obtained for the calculation of the yield pressure: If the sediment emerges from the pool, the buoyancy force is no longer applied and the density difference is replaced by the solids density For the description of sediment transport, a model modified by Gleiss et al. Here, Transport efficiency is an empirical parameter that describes the deviation of transport velocity from ideal sediment transport, which is caused by friction between screw and sediment. The screw pitch angle Hence, the volumetric flow rate The sediment build-up in turn affects the separation efficiency in the corresponding settling zone. With increasing sediment volume, the volume of a compartment in the settling zone decreases, which influences the residence time and, hence, the grade efficiency. The accuracy of process simulation depends on the reliability of material characterisation. It is therefore of great importance to determine the material properties with sufficient accuracy. For this reason, the followig section deals with material characterisation in more detail. The product used for the validation trials is a suspension of calcium carbonate particles and water. The particle size was analysed by laser diffraction (Helos/Quixel, Sympatec GmbH, Germany). The logistic function with the fit parameters Stokes Richardson and Zaki depends on the solids volume fraction It contains three fitting parameters The approach of Richardson and Zaki In the case of finely dispersed calcium carbonate-water suspensions, the accumulation of liquid-saturated sediment shows a compressible material behaviour. Green et al. In the present equation, Erk The factor  The presented modified approach represents a strong simplification of the complex processes that takes place during compression and shearing in decanter centrifuges. Actually, more information, such as the local shear gradient, should be compared. According to the state of the art, it is not yet possible to measure a shear gradient in the sediment of the decanter centrifuge or the ring shear tester in a comparable way during operation. It is assumed that the shear zone in the ring shear device is much smaller than in the decanter centrifuge. Furthermore, it is assumed that the sediment is completely shear-compacted due to its residence time in the decanter centrifuge. In order to better illustrate the applicability of the numerical model, validation is based on experiments done with an industrial-scale decanter centrifuge. The solids mass fraction (corresponding to solids volume fraction) in the centrate and cake of the decanter centrifuge are used as comparable values. These two parameters are easily accessible for sampling while the decanter is in action. The geometry of the decanter and the process parameters are listed in In As obvious from  The solids content in the centrate decreases with increasing rotational speed. As already mentioned, the settling velocity increases with growing rotational speed, which leads to a better separation result and, thus, to a clearer centrate. The solids content in the centrate is reduced at the same rotational speed for a decreasing volumetric flow rate. With identical solids mass fraction and a lower volumetric flow rate at the inlet, less solids are fed into the decanter. This means that in the stationary state, the centrifuge is filled to a lower level and more clarifying area is available, which leads to a better separation performance. This is valid as long as the centrifuge does not fill up and almost no particles are separated. The simulation results are in good agreement with the experimental results for the investigated volumetric flow rates of 2.5 m Transport efficiency is determined by experiments with a lab-scale decanter centrifuge and used to simulate the industrial-scale machine. Therefore, the influence of transport efficiency is investigated. As an example, the variation of the rotational speed is selected at a volumetric flow rate of 2.5 m Transport efficiency has a small influence on the simulation results at the cake discharge. In The influence of transport efficiency between This article presents a modelling approach to describe the dynamic behaviour of decanter centrifuges. Existing methods were not sufficient to describe the dynamic behaviour for dewatering of finely dispersed calcium carbonate-water slurries. Therefore, the dynamic model based on the work of Gleiss et al. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.