The main objective of this work was to investigate the recovery of silver from mining wastewaters using a hybrid cyanidation and high-pressure membrane process. The tested hybrid process in lab-scale experiments includes the concentration and recovery of silver by nanofiltration (NF) or reverse osmosis (RO) after the silver is taken into solution as AgCN employing re-cyanidation and subsequent sedimentation and/or pre-filtration of wastewaters. Synthetic water experiments were conducted in this work. In synthetic water experiments (in distilled and deionized water), the soluble AgCN complex was formed after cyanidation of low-soluble AgCl particles which were added to the leach tank. Two different NF membranes and one RO membrane were tested in a lab-scale flat-sheet configuration test unit. The results indicated that although a significant amount of silver was lost on the RO membrane due to irreversible sorption, RO membrane performed better than NF membranes based on higher silver rejections, thus higher mass recoveries. Therefore, RO membrane was found to be more effective in terms of precious metal recovery and production of high quality permeate that can be reused in the leaching process. The tested hybrid cyanidation (leaching) and high-pressure membrane process in this work may be an effective approach in recovering precious metals and producing reusable water from wastes or wastewaters of mining industry.Supply and demand equilibrium for precious metals is changing because of present demand. Nowadays supply can not meet the amount of demand for some metals. The Turkish State Planning Organization (DPT) is predicting a significant demand rise for silver in future projections (2001–2023) ( The cyanidation process has been the most important process in the extraction of gold and silver from ores for the past 100 years and employed extensively at mining sites around the world ( Precipitation, adsorption, bio-sorption, and ion exchange are the mainstream metal removal processes from industrial wastewaters. Although these processes are effective in terms of metal removal, they may be not as effective in metal recovery ( The main objective of this work was to investigate the recovery of silver from mining wastewaters using a hybrid cyanidation and high-pressure membrane process. The tested hybrid process included the concentration and recovery of silver by NF or reverse osmosis (RO) after the silver was taken into solution as AgCN employing cyanidation. Synthetic water experiments were conducted during the work. In synthetic water experiments (in distilled and deionized water), the soluble AgCN complex was formed after cyanidation of low-soluble AgCl particles which were added to the leach tank. After leach tests, membrane experiments were conducted employing a lab-scale flat-sheet cross-flow test unit. Synthetic water experiments were conducted during the study. The schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Leaching experiments were performed in a 30-L stainless steel tank with 25-L solution volume. The leaching period was 48 After the leaching process, membrane separation tests were performed with AgCN containing solution (silver solution). A lab-scale cross-flow flat-sheet configuration test unit (SEPA CF II, GE Osmonics) was used for all membrane separation experiments ( Batch-concentration mode was employed for membrane separation tests. For each membrane experiment a new 25-L silver solution was transferred to the feed tank of the membrane system. During the membrane separation tests, concentrate stream was returned back to the feed tank and permeate was collected in the permeate tank. Tests were continued until the final volume of the feed tank was decreased to 5–8 Samples from the feed tank and permeate were taken each hour for Ag concentration, TDS, conductivity, pH, and temperature measurements during the membrane tests. To maintain constant pH in the feed tank depending on the experimental matrix, pH was monitored and adjusted with various concentrations of HCl and/or NaOH solutions, if necessary. Flowrates of concentrate and permeate streams, membrane unit and pump outlet pressures were also recorded each hour. In an effort to calculate overall mass balance on Ag, the volumes remaining in feed and permeate tanks and tubings after the experiments, sample volumes, and the associated Ag concentrations in these volumes were measured. In other words, the mass of Ag applied to the system was compared with that of obtained from various points at the end of the experiment. Two different nanofiltration (NF) membranes and a reverse osmosis (RO) membrane were tested. Colorimetric picric acid method was employed for CN CN For the quality control of the tested membranes, MgSO At the end of each membrane test, mass balance calculations were done to check for potential silver loss on membrane surfaces. Mass balance closures were 81–89% for NF membranes. Even the volumes of all solutions containing silver (e.g. feed tank, permeate tank, all permeate samples for analysis) were accurately measured, the volume unavoidably remained in high-pressure pump (0.8–1 NF and RO membranes provided silver rejections in the range of 31–81% and 95–99%, respectively (  As discussed before, silver mass balances for NF and RO membranes were 81–89% and 56–62%, respectively. A significant amount of silver was found to adsorb onto the RO membrane. Silver rejections obtained by NF and RO membranes were 31–81% and 95–99%, respectively. In order to evaluate the overall efficiency of hybrid cyanidation and high-pressure membrane process, silver recovery was also calculated. Silver recovery (%) represents the mass of silver present in the concentrate at the end of membrane test compared to total silver mass present in the leach tank before cyanidation. In other words, it combines the efficiency of both leaching and membrane separation. Silver recoveries achieved by cyanidation and NF and RO membranes were 29–59% and 54–62%, respectively. Evaluating these data suggest two main facts: (1) Due to very high silver rejections (as high as 99%), selection of RO membranes is favorable if the aim is rejecting the silver or other metals from the mining wastewaters and reusing the treated water for leaching processes; and (2) if the aim is to recover precious metals such as silver, RO membranes are still favorable due to their higher silver recoveries although a significant amount of silver adsorbs on RO membranes. Silver recoveries achieved by hybrid cyanidation and membrane separation were 29–59% and 54–62% for NF and RO membranes, respectively. Overall the results indicated that although a significant amount of silver was lost on the RO membrane due to irreversible sorption, RO membrane performed better than NF membranes based on higher silver rejections, thus, higher mass recoveries. Therefore, RO membrane was found to be more effective in terms of precious metal recovery and production of high quality permeate that can be reused in the leaching process. On the other hand, it should be noted that NF membranes have inherent advantages in terms of lower pressure requirements, thus lower pumping energy costs. It is clear that the selection of membranes and process evaluation should be done on a project-specific basis considering project objectives and capital and operational costs. Furthermore, operational conditions (i.e., water recovery, flux), membrane feed water characteristics, membrane life, and membrane cleaning requirements are also important parameters which affect the selection of membrane type. The tested hybrid cyanidation and high-pressure membrane process in this work may be an effective approach in recovering precious metals and producing reusable water from mining wastes or wastewaters. However, further research is required to investigate the effectiveness of this process for real spent leach solutions or mining wastes, as this study was only focused on precious metal recovery from model solutions. Such further research is currently being conducted in our laboratories. The authors are grateful to Associate Prof. Dr. Ismail Koyuncu at Istanbul Technical University for his kind help with SEM analysis. We thank Associate Prof. Dr. Ata Akcil and Research Assistant Dr. Nevzat Ozgu Yigit at Suleyman Demirel University for their technical assistance.