An online xanthate monitoring system was constructed for the continuous determination of xanthate concentrations in laboratory flotation pulps. This system consists of an online filter which is immersed in the pulp in a flotation cell, a peristaltic pump to draw clear solution through the filter and pump it through a UV spectrometer set at 301 nm (where aqueous solutions of xanthate have an absorbance maximum), and a computer and screen to record and display the data as a function of time.
                  Calibration of the system showed that a straight line was obtained up to 0.25 mM (about 40 ppm) sodium ethyl xanthate. The detection limit of this system is 0.001 mM xanthate. The spectrometer does not distinguish between different xanthates (e.g., ethyl and/or amyl) but gives a total value. A check on the online analyses by analysing a solution sample by HPLC showed the amount of each xanthate present, and that the sum of the concentrations of the two xanthates present was in good agreement with the online value. Hence the online unit gives a clear indication of the total xanthate present in solution at any given time, and this can be used as a guide as to whether or not further additions of xanthate are required or desired. Only a few other reagents are known to interfere.
                  Laboratory flotation tests showed that the filter did not block in a 50 min flotation test with a pulp containing 30% w/v solids. Tests with a sulphide ore showed that the longer chain xanthates such as amyl were adsorbed on the sulphides more quickly than the shorter chain xanthates such as ethyl.Xanthates are widely used as flotation collectors for processing ores containing sulphide minerals ( An online system ( This system was used to investigate the effect on xanthate concentration in solution of changes of xanthate addition amounts and the type of xanthate added when floating a sulphide nickel ore containing pentlandite, or treating quartz in saline water to investigate possible oxidation of xanthate by air. High purity potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX), potassium butyl xanthate (KBX), and potassium amyl xanthate (KAX) were prepared following the method described by All other chemicals used in this work were of analytical grade. All solutions were prepared in deionised water (18 MQ) obtained from a Milli-Q purification system. A nickel sulphide ore from Yakabindie, WA, was used in most flotation tests. The nickel in this ore was present as pentlandite ((Fe,Ni)S), and other sulphides such as pyrite and pyrrhotite were also present. The main gangue mineral was serpentine (H A saline solution containing 20.5 g/L NaCl and 3.1 g/L MgSO Flotation tests were conducted with a modified 3 L Denver flotation cell ( The online monitoring system consisted of an online filter, a Gilson Minipuls 3 peristaltic pump, and a Linear PHD 206 UV spectrometer which was equipped with a flow-through cell. The online filter was a Millipore filter bowl fitted with a piece of stainless steel mesh on top of an 8 µm aperture Millipore membrane, and this was immersed in the pulp in the flotation cell. Filtrate solution at a flow rate of about 1.5 mL/min was pumped by the peristaltic pump through Peek 0.5 mm internal diameter tubing up to 1.5 m long through the UV monitor and returned to the flotation cell ( The UV spectrometer was set to measure absorbance at 301 nm, where xanthates in aqueous solution have an absorbance maximum, and the value was shown immediately on the computer screen and stored in the computer for subsequent retrieval. Preliminary experiments confirmed that the background absorbances of the flotation solutions in this work were mostly very low, and did not interfere. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analyses were conducted on solution samples from selected flotation tests. An Agilent (Santa Clara, CA, USA) unit was used. It consisted of a Model G1312A binary pump and a Model G1315A diode array detector (DAD). For each analysis a 10 mL sample was taken from the flotation pulp and filtered through an 8 µm Millipore syringe filter, and the clear solution analysed on the same day to minimize the effects of any possible xanthate degradation. A 50 µL sample of the filtrate was injected into the HPLC system through a Gilson 233XL auto-sampler, and separated on a Waters (Milford, MA, USA) C Twelve pulp samples were collected during each test and analysed by HPLC. An advantage of this system is that all the xanthate species and the DEDTC can be separated from each other and quantified. A disadvantage is that it is relatively time consuming and therefore not suitable for online analyses. The UV monitor used in this work is different to a conventional UV spectrometer in that there is no reference channel available inside the instrument. The instrument was therefore set to zero by pumping high purity water through it as the blank, and then successively introducing slightly alkaline standard xanthate-containing solutions and recording the signals at 301 nm. The solutions were made slightly alkaline because previous work ( The standard solutions contained 0.00, 0.05, 0.0625, 0.10, 0.125, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25 mM potassium ethyl xanthate respectively. To minimize any bias in the calibration, the standard solutions were pumped through the instrument for a 4 min period in random order, and an average of the readings over that time plotted on the calibration line shown in The wet ground nickel ore or ground quartz, in water or saline solution, were placed in the flotation cell and saline water was added to a standard height, which gave a standard cell volume. The impeller was then started, and the online sampling system was also started, and a sample taken for HPLC analysis. This was regarded as time − At − The frother used was Interfroth 50. The initial addition was 36 g/t at the start of the test and it was then added continuously at the rate of 6 g/t per minute for the rest of the test. A summary of the feed materials and reagent additions for each of the eight flotation tests conducted is given in The calibration line for the xanthate monitor is shown in For accurate spectrometric measurements the UV signal should be kept in the range of 0.1–2.0 absorbance units (AU), which is equivalent to 0.01–0.2 mM xanthate, and this was done in this work. The detection limit is 0.001 mM xanthate (three times the signal to noise ratio, S/N  The xanthate monitor does not distinguish between the different xanthates that may be present, but gives a total value for all the xanthate in solution. Hence, as noted earlier, some solutions were analysed by HPLC, which does distinguish between the different xanthates. A typical result is shown in More detailed results are shown in It is interesting to note that the saw tooth pattern of the continuous xanthate trace in these tests is similar to that observed in operating plants where staged additions of xanthate are made down a bank of flotation cells ( The online measured xanthate concentration, immediately after an addition of xanthate, was always slightly lower than the calculated value based on the amount of xanthate added and the amount of water estimated to be in the cell. There are at least seven possible explanations for this difference as noted below. The flotation pulp could easily have contained slightly more than the nominal volume of 2.3 L of water, thus giving a slightly lower concentration of xanthate by perhaps 1–2%. This is thought to be the most likely cause of the difference. The industrial grade sodium ethyl xanthate used in this test did not contain 100% xanthate; e.g., it contained a small amount of sodium carbonate to help stabilize it during storage or it had undergone a slight decomposition during storage. Dilution inside the filter had occurred, although this is extremely unlikely, and the amount possible is extremely small. Although the xanthate was added very rapidly via a syringe, the addition was not instantaneous and a short, but unknown time was required before the xanthate was distributed evenly throughout the cell and to near the online filter. The froth scraping procedure semi-continuously removed solution from the cell and this was continuously replaced with fresh xanthate-free solution by the automatic level control system. Hence this factor does not apply to the first addition of xanthate in a particular test, but only to subsequent additions. Some of the xanthate was oxidised by the air being blown into the pulp. However a specific test of this hypothesis, as discussed later, showed that this did not occur. Adsorption of the xanthate on the minerals present was extremely rapid. Similar good results are shown in The results of a test in which air was blown for 20 min into a pulp in the flotation cell which contained just quartz, a saline solution, and 6.67 mL of 0.5% KAX solution showed that there was no decrease in xanthate concentration over a 20 min period, indicating that there was very little or no oxidation of xanthate and no adsorption of xanthate by the quartz. This work has shown that a system for the online measurement of xanthate concentrations, which consists of an online filter immersed in the pulp in a laboratory flotation cell, a peristaltic pump to withdraw clear solution from the pulp and deliver it to a UV spectrometer where the xanthate concentration in solution is measured and the output shown on a computer screen, can operate successfully over a 50 min flotation period. There was no blockage of the filter over this period. Few other reagents interfere with the measurement, but these can be allowed for if necessary. The knowledge of the xanthate concentration in the pulp can be a valuable guide to whether or not a greater or lesser addition of xanthate could be used to improve the metallurgical results, and whether or not a change in the proportions of the xanthates added could be beneficial. The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of Western Mining Corporation Limited in providing the nickel sulphide ore used in this investigation. Western Mining was subsequently acquired by BHP-Billiton Limited.