Global economic development could be constrained by the availability of potash. While food demand is expected to double by 2050, many of the essential resources that support food production are becoming increasingly scarce, including potash. Since potash availability is a critical element in food security and large reserves are concentrated in only a few countries, a shortage of potash could result in a low agricultural productivity that, in many cases, may cause undernourishment and in extreme cases, famine. Based on a conceptual analysis that uses the logistic Hubbert models, the purpose of this paper is to asses the perspective of sustainability of world potash reserves and to determine the exact timing of the potash peak which is used as an early warning for policy makers to prepare society for declining future supplies. The results of the paper showed that peak potash could be imminent in 2057. The peak years and the forecasted peak productions for Canada, Belarus, Russia, Jordan and Israel were estimated at (2042, 16.0Mt), (2040, 13.5Mt), (2073, 21Mt), (2056, 3.1Mt) and (2045, 3.5Mt) respectively. Countries like Germany and USA have already passed their peak production in 1980 and 1968 respectively. Using different reserves assumptions, the maximum peak years varied from 2029 to 2095. In order to achieve potash security in the long term, it will require an integrated approach that might range from shifting diets, to developing markets for renewable potash fertilisers sourced from excreta, manure and food waste.The term potash refers to a variety of mined and manufactured salts, all of which contain the element potassium in water-soluble form. These include potassium chloride (muriate of potash), potassium sulphate, potassium–magnesium sulphate and potassium nitrate. The main uses of potash are in fertilisers, industrial water treatment, animal feed supplements, cement, fire extinguishers and textile production. As In 1949, Marion King Hubbert, presented a theory “Hubbert curve” to explain the lifecycle of any finite natural resources over time. Hubbert theory claimed that production of any resource e.g. oil, will eventually reach a maximum rate or “peak” based on the finite nature of non renewable resources, after which production will decline. Hubbert and later others contested that the important period is not when 100% of the resource is depleted, but rather when it reaches a production maximum, which occurs when 50% of the resource is still in the ground. After this point, production decreases, placing upward pressure on prices and increasing international tensions. The Hubbert peak model is a direct approach that can provide useful information about non-fuel mineral depletion. Four issues are most of a concern about potash. Firstly, when someone takes a look across modern food systems, it is already the element that is most likely to display a shortage ( This study stems its importance from Potash being considered as one of the most critical and strategic commodities in the world. More than 90% of potash produced in the world is used for fertilisers. In order to asses the perspective of sustainability of world potash reserves, the paper applies a logistic model to determine the exact timing of the peak. Since the model is based on calculating the Ultimate Recoverable Reserves (URR) which is defined as cumulative production data plus existing proven reserves, historical production trends and reserve estimates for major producers in the industry are discussed in section two. The third section discusses Hubbert peak theory and literature. The methodological framework is implemented in Section four. The results of this study are provided and discussed in Section five, and finally conclusions and policy recommendations are contained in Section six. The first potash mine and muriate of potash plant was established in 1861 in strassfurt, Germany ( Potash deposits were discovered in France in 1869 (Alsace) and experienced an accelerated development in 1903. The waterways of the Rhine were advantageous for the Alsace mines that produced ore with an average K2O grade of about 22% ( As  As Today, as The potash industry has been dominated by two informal cartels; the As As To obtain a simple number to express the degree of scarcity of minerals using reserve data, 11: Very scarce between 9 and 10: Scarce between 7 and 9: Moderately scarce < 7: Not scarce Critical minerals are metals and non-metals that are considered vital for the economic wellbeing of the world's major and emerging economies, yet whose supply may be at risk due to geological scarcity, geopolitical issues, trade policy or other factors. This supports the urgency of this research, as potash has no substitute in food production, hence securing the long-term availability and accessibility of potash is crucial to global food security. While fertiliser demand is expected to increase in the long-term, high quality reserves are becoming increasingly scarce and expensive.    The Hubbert peak model has also been used to estimate future supply and consumption of global metal resources. In the case of copper (Cu), peak production was predicted in year 2020 by The results of  The logistic equation describes growth of a quantity that initially increases exponentially. As the ultimate limit to the resource becomes an important factor in production, extraction becomes more difficult, and the rate of extraction decreases. Relevant to the current work, since there is an ultimate limit to the amount of the resources in the ground, at some point in time the rate of production will go to zero. Integration of equation In order to solve equation The multi-Hubbert model results from the sum of two cycle curves, in which ‘ The original theory believed that the resource production over time would be symmetrical to its peak time. Thus, several modifications to the symmetrical models were made, introducing the asymmetrical models. The Gompertz function is one of the most widely asymmetrical models which can be written in the form of equation We simply took US Geological reserve data for world potash reserves which was estimated at 5.8 billion tonnes in 2018, and added the former cumulative production from 1920 to 2018 (~1.6 billion tonnes) to this value (thus figuring the Ultimate Recoverable Resource [URR] which was in this case 7.4 billion tonnes), and then we fitted a logistic curve to the past annual production data applying least square technique. Based on this model, peak year, peak production and depletion time could be inferred. Based on Also, based on Hubbert curve prediction presented in These future predictions for world potash production are not easily met. The construction of a new potash mine (a greenfield mine) requires a considerable capital outlay. For example, a new Saskatchewan conventional mine would require an estimated upfront capital investment of $US 2.1 billion, excluding roads, rail lines, utilities, port facilities and other infrastructure costs outside the plant gate ( As can be seen from results in Technological success has been the main argument against treating minerals as ‘exhaustible’, because rates of mineral discovery and technological development kept pace with production and demand (Giurco. et.al, 2009). However, since potash has no substitutes and as its deposits continue to decline in ore grade, it will be uncertain whether future technological advances can continue to keep pace with potash demand. This should put a lot of pressure on policy makers in order to support research in innovative technologies that focuses on finding alternatives for potash. Potash production has already passed the peaks in Germany and USA with peak years of 1980 and 1968 respectively. Some early developed basins in Germany (e.g. Zechstein) have either ceased or have been in decline due to economic or environmental pressures, or exhaustion of ore reserves. The results in Belarus potash is expected to peak in 2040. The strategy of maximizing output threatens the long-term existence of Salihorsk, the town where Belaruskali potash company is based. The growth rate factor “ Because higher prices, wars, and new exploration and exploitation technologies can all alter the course of resource's production over time, many analysts do not consider projections based on Hubbert to be highly reliable. As for the first assumption, Introduction of a new technology, which largely drives shifts in the long-run supply curve for many mineral commodities, could play an important role in the future of the potash industry. For example, continuous modernization of Global Positioning Systems (GPS), genetically enhanced seeds—especially in large tract agriculture countries, and the emergence of ‘nutrition management plans’ could result in reducing demand for fertilisers and in the long run, it could negatively impact the production of potash ( As for the second assumption, As reported by As reserves are dynamic data that can change over time, the influence of the availability of future reserves has been analysed using the best case and the worst case scenarios. Also, using mineral resources rather than reserves has been common in recent studies ( As for the third assumption, The bell shape curve could be asymmetrical or could have multiple cycles. As the logistic model has poor accuracy when it is applied to regions with multiple production peaks, many scholars began to improve the model and multi-cycle approach has been proposed by which additional production cycles were added into the model to fit multiple historical production peaks and improve the prediction accuracy (   This paper established a conceptual analysis of ‘Peak Potash’ as a powerful tool and it used a logistic model in order to measure world potash peak year, peak production and depletion time. Our results showed that based on the logistic model, world potash is likely to peak in 2057 with a peak production of 55.3 million tonnes. The peak years and the forecasted peak productions for Canada, Belarus, Russia, Jordan and Israel were estimated at (2042, 16.0Mt), (2040, 13.5Mt), (2073, 21Mt), (2056, 3.1Mt) and (2045, 3.5Mt) respectively. Countries like Germany and USA have already passed their peak production in 1980 and 1968 respectively. This study has presented scenarios for different estimations for potash reserves, from most pessimistic to most optimistic scenarios, and based on this, the results showed that maximum production peaks varied from 2029 to 2095. Also, the results showed that based on both, Gompertz and multi-cycle models, the peak year is expected to reach its maximum in the year 2060 which is close to the peak year obtained from the logistic model result. The scientific value of the results rests on the ability to predict when potash production could reach a peak. The earlier we can predict when this peak could occur, the more time we have for preventive measures. As the results show, peak potash could be imminent in 2057. As public awareness grows in the coming years, the likely response will be a call for action. This raises the alarm to policy makers and industry stakeholders, that in the future effective application methods and management practices have to be explored, innovative technology development has to be supported, and social dialogue and decision-making have to be facilitated. Otherwise, the growing global population, the increasing demand for potash, the decreasing potash supply, and the rising fertiliser prices will threaten a massive global food security crisis. To achieve potash security in the long term, it will require an integrated approach that might range from shifting diets, to developing markets for renewable potash fertilisers sourced from excreta, manure and food waste, to efficient strategies for ‘unlocking’ soil potash that has accumulated in agricultural fields over past decades. The main limitations found in the work are related to the variability of the curves, neglecting the influence of technological and political factors in future forecasts and in URR variations. Based on these influencing factors, the accuracy of the Hubbert model prediction will be greatly improved, and so future research that could take into consideration these latent factors will be highly appreciated. Future research could also explore how models not based on bell-shaped curves could be compared with the results in this study. Future research that is invested in potash reuse and recovery can create locally available ‘renewable fertilisers’, which simultaneously could reduce dependence on imports from geopolitically risky regions, and buffer against future price spikes and supply disruptions. Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal analysis; Methodology; Resources; Software, Visualization; Roles/Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.