The terms ‘mixer’ and ‘blender’ are often interchanged. In the meat industry, a blender is usually a device that imparts more mechanical action to the product for the purpose of solubilizing and extracting the salt-soluble proteins. A mixer, on the other hand, is used to incorporate and uniformly distribute components of the processed meat formulation. When using any type of mixing and blending equipment, care must be taken to choose the correct piece of equipment for the particular product being manufactured. For example, the mixer that one would choose for a dry sausage would not be the type that one would choose in a blender/emulsion mill operation for the manufacture of an emulsion-type sausage. In production, care must be taken to ensure that the temperatures of the product are optimum for both the type of equipment and the product being produced. Paddle-type mixers are most often used where a more gentle handling of the meat materials is desired ( Paddle mixers would be the equipment of choice for processed meats such as dry and semi-dry sausages or coarse ground fresh and cooked sausages where particle distinction is critical. They are also used where the main purpose is to distribute ingredients with a minimum of mechanical action to extract the salt-soluble proteins. Ribbon blenders have a similar configuration and drive mechanisms to the twin intermeshing paddle mixers ( Both mixers and blenders can be equipped with steam or hot-water jackets to heat the meat mixture during this step in processing. The most usual configuration for converting the ribbon blender to a cooker would be to insert scraper paddles between the ribbon flights to prevent the cooked meats from sticking to the heating surface. These jackets can also be used with chilled liquids to help maintain product temperatures. More effective cooling can be obtained, however, by equipping the mixer/blender with a hood for applying carbon dioxide snow. The use of carbon dioxide as a chilling device is effective because of the large temperature differential between the product and the coolant, plus the fact that nothing is added to the finished product, as would be the case if ice were added. Mixer/blenders can also be fitted with a perforated pipe or bottom injection nozzles for the incorporation of carbon dioxide snow or liquid nitrogen as a coolant. In these cases the blender needs to be fitted with a hood and an exhaust to vent the carbon dioxide or nitrogen gas. A lid can be added to mixer/blenders to enable mixing and blending under vacuum. This process is useful in eliminating air bubbles that would otherwise be incorporated into the meat product. Some smaller mixer/blenders use a single sweep arm as the mixing device. This produces a ‘kneading’ effect on the meat product. Sometimes this single sweep arm is coupled with counterrotating paddles. Combination mixer/mincers are available. These are designed to mix the product before the final mincing step. They are most useful in operations such as hamburger mincing, where the coarse minced lean and fatter meats are being incorporated into a final blend prior to the final mincing. Mincers (or grinders) are the most widely used particle reduction equipment for meat processing. These comminute the meat by forcing it through a plate with holes of varying sizes and then cutting off the extruded particles by means of a rotating knife. The most common configuration consists of a variable-pitch screw, which serves to deliver the meat to the mincer plate. The particle diameter is controlled by the size of the holes in the mincer plate. They can vary from very large, the so-called ‘kidney plate’ (because of the shape of the holes) that produces fist-sized chunks, to 3 mm. Some mincers are designed with a double plate that consists of a double-edged knife or knife holder sandwiched between a coarse plate of, say, 13 mm and a fine plate of 3 mm. The object here is to complete a coarse mincing and a fine or final mincing in one operation. It is common to use a coarse mincing followed by a fine mincing to ensure more uniform distribution of fat and lean particles. There are also triple-plate configurations. It is critical in operating a mincer that the knives and plates are sharp and carefully matched, so that a clean cut is obtained. The knives should make close contact with the plate for the entire length of each knife. Since the knife and plate are in close contact, the mincer should never be run empty as this will result in burning of the knife and plate and loss of sharpness. It could also result in metal fragments being incorporated into the product. To obtain the proper consistency and appearance of the final product, it is important to pay attention not only to the sharpness of the knives and plates but to the temperature of the meat being minced. Each product has very specific temperature requirements. Large-capacity mincers can be equipped with screws that are designed to give optimum performance with a specific type of meat. While there are ‘general-purpose’ screws, it is best to use a screw designed for a specific purpose – frozen meat, fat, lean, etc. Bone or hard cartilage separators can be fitted to most mincers. These devices involve designing the knife and plate so that hard particles will migrate to either the centre or the outer edge of the mincer head and there be eliminated. Since some soft tissue is forced out as well, the user has to be prepared to sacrifice some yield in order to eliminate the hazards and annoyance of bone or hard cartilage pieces in the finished meat product. Regulating the discharge rate usually controls the degree of bone removal. At best, bone removal systems can only be expected to eliminate 80% of the hazard. They are most effective when used on final mincing of 3–7 mm. One of the more recent designs is the in-line or pump mincer. In these systems, the meat is delivered to the mincer head by a stuffing pump, usually a piston or vane type. A separate drive motor controls the knife rotation so that the relationship of the meat being delivered through the mincer plate to the speed of the knife can be varied infinitely. This allows for varying the particle length. In addition, these systems can operate as closed systems, reducing contamination risks. These in-line systems can also be vacuumized, a further advantage as it will help eliminate air particles in the meat mixture. In many cases these in-line mincers are connected directly to stuffing and linking devices, making for a continuous in-line, closed system. These devices have been popular for batch operations for the production of coarse-cut sausages and meat emulsions ( The bowl chopper consists of a rotating bowl with a series of rotating knives running in a vertical plane in the trough of the bowl. The knife head speed can be varied, as can the rotation speed of the bowl. Knife heads can vary from 2 to 12 knives and chopper capacity can range from a few kilograms of meat to well over 1000 kg. Each chopper will have an optimum capacity range for effective chopping. Overloading and underloading can decrease the effectiveness of the chopper. In operation, the knives must be kept sharp and uniformly balanced. The knives should be set with minimum bowl clearance to produce effective chopping. As with the mincers, all types of comminution equipment produce frictional heat. This heating effect must be considered in arriving at the optimum final batch temperature. Most larger choppers have an unloading device that scoops the finished meat batter out of the chopper as the bowl rotates. They may also be equipped with temperature-measuring devices to monitor the meat temperature during chopping and may be equipped with bowl rotation counters and timers. Monitoring the condition of the meat by number of minutes or number of revolutions of the bowl has severe drawbacks because it does not take into account variations in meat texture. Choppers can be equipped with a vacuum hood to enable the vacuumizing of an emulsion or meat batter during chopping ( Choppers can be equipped with a steam jacket to allow for cooking while chopping. This feature is useful in the manufacture of some liver sausages and patés. There are some vertical mixer/cutters that resemble large food processors. In these cases, the knife head rotates in a horizontal plane. These are usually of relatively small capacity for production use. They are quite useful, however, for preparing samples for laboratory analysis. These devices are used to convert a meat mixture to a fine batter or emulsion. While they act to disperse the fat particles in the meat and other protein matrix, they must be preceded by a blender to solubilize the myofibrillar proteins. This is the reason that we usually refer to a blender/emulsion mill system. Emulsion mills accomplish the same basic task as bowl choppers, but they are part of a continuous system. They also have the advantage of producing a uniform particle size, as opposed to a bowl chopper in which the particle size is operator-dependent. Emulsion mills can range in capacity and it is to be expected that the capacities of a continuous blender/emulsion mill system will exceed that of a bowl chopper. For this reason, most high-capacity continuous systems employ a blender/emulsion mill combination. Meats are usually preminced through a conventional mincer before being introduced into this type of system. There are two general types of emulsion mills. The most common type uses a plate and knife or multiple plates and knives, not unlike a mincer. The meat is forced through this plate/knife combination by some type of pump. Since this is a closed system, a vacuumizing device can be included in the system to vacuumize the emulsion. The frictional heat rise must be taken into account before the meat mixture is introduced into the emulsion mill. If additional heating is needed to attain the desired final temperature of the emulsion, this can be achieved by controlling the back-pressure on the finished emulsion side. The particle size is controlled by the size of the holes in the emulsion mill plates. As with the grinders, it is critical to maintain sharp knife and plate sets and the same cautions apply to running the equipment empty. Another type of emulsion mill uses an impeller to force the meat mixture against stationary blades. This design does not have metal-to-metal contact so it can be operated without meat in the system. However, it does not have provisions for vacuumizing the emulsion. This must be accomplished later with a separate piece of equipment in the system. There are various types of equipment designed to cut meat particles into very fine flakes. Such equipment is primarily used where the meat in to be reformed into a solid piece under pressure. The popularity of this technology has diminished in recent years. There are various types of frozen meat breakers that are used to reduce particle size for chunks of frozen meat. It is advisable to temper the frozen block of meat before breaking it up. This saves energy and prevents the destruction of the texture of the meat. A temperature of −7 °C is advisable. The most common types employ a guillotine-type knife that shaves off a layer of meat. Another type uses a rotating drum with knives attached that chip the meat. A third type is a specially designed mincer that forces the meat through large holes. Slicers are used in the final processing step. They can range from the small meat slicer in a retail operation to the high-speed slicers used for slicing and portioning ready-to-eat (RTE) meat. The meat is presented to a rotating circular or elliptical knife. The thickness of the slice is controlled by the distance the meat advances before it contacts the knife. Slicers can be linked to portioning devices as well as devices that shingle or stack in exact weight units. In the more sophisticated slicers, the weight of a unit coming off the slicer can regulate the thickness of slices in the next unit to achieve exact weights. The type of product being sliced as well as the configuration of the slicer determines the optimum temperature for slicing. This can range from partially frozen, in the case of bacon, to near the freezing point in the case of RTE luncheon meat. A relatively new entry into the array of slicers is used to preslice the meat on a boneless cooked and smoked ham in a spiral pattern, making it easier for the consumer to carve. Precooked meats and some fresh meats are often diced for further processing or for final use by the consumer. Dicers come in various configurations. Usually the meat is forced through a grid made up of knives or a plate with holes of various sizes. A guillotine or elliptical rotating knife then cuts off the pieces. Each particular dicer has rather specific requirements as to temperature of the material being diced and the adjustments to the machine, such as knife clearance.  For detailed information, the reader is urged to contact the machine manufacturer for descriptive material and to check the appropriate patent material. A source of information on specific equipment suppliers would be the printed or online lists of manufacturers published by various trade publications or the catalogues of industry trade shows such as the IFFA exhibition in Germany. The web site