The extraction behaviour of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) was studied with LIX84 I (2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime) in HCl medium. The distribution ratios of Pd(II) with LIX 84I are sufficiently high to extract Pd(II) from 0.1 M HCl medium. The Pd-LIX 84I complex has been identified with slope and saturation loading methods. Some thermodynamic values like ΔG, ΔH and ΔS for the Pd-LIX 84I have been determined. The extraction of Pt(IV) with LIX 84I was poor from hydrochloric solutions. However, Pt(IV) was extracted from ammoniacal solutions. The back extraction of Pd(II) was carried out using 6 M HCl and Pt(IV) using 1 M SnCl2 in ∼3 M HCl. Pd(II) and Pt(IV) were separated from common impurities like Fe(III), Al(III), Zn(II), Cu(II) and Ni(II) using LIX 84I. The recoveries of palladium and platinum were 97% and 86%, respectively.Solvent extraction is one of the methods for the separation and purification of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) from acidic solutions. One of the commercial applications was the extraction of Pd(II) using di-( The separation of Pt(IV) from Pd(II) in the presence of stannous chloride have been cited. Pd(II) was extracted from 0.75 to 2.0 M HCl–HClO The present paper describes the extraction and back extraction of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) using LIX 84I ( A stock (∼5 g/l) solution of Pd(II) in 1 M HCl was prepared by dissolving the pure metal powder (99%) in aquaregia. The solution was evaporated several times with conc. HCl and the residue was dissolved in 0.1 M HCl. A stock solution of Pt(IV) was prepared by dissolving sodium salt of hexa-chloroplatinic acid in dilute HCl to obtain a solution containing approximately 1 g metal/l. Palladium was estimated as Pd-DMG complex by gravimetry. Pt(IV) was first precipitated as ammonium chloroplatinate, ignited and estimated as metal. Feed solutions of the desired concentration were prepared from these stock solutions. Palladium and platinum (above 0.1 g/l) were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (Model-GBC Avanta, Australia). Below 0.1 g/l, platinum was determined by UV visible spectrophotometry (Model-GBC Cintra, Australia) using stannous chloride method ( For determining the distribution ratio, organic and the aqueous phases were contacted for the stipulated time. The phases were separated. The metal ion concentration in aqueous phase was determined after filtering through Whatman No. 42 to remove any traces of the organic material. Wherever, the organic phase was required to be analyzed, it was first filtered through 1PS Whatman to remove the entrained aqueous phase. The distribution ratios, For regeneration of the extractant, the used organic phase was contacted with equal volume of DM water for 15 min. The phases were separated and the pH of the aqueous phase was measured. The organic phase was given repeated contacts with fresh DM water until there was no change in pH. The organic phase was then reused. Synthetic solutions containing 0.25 g/l Pt(IV) and varying concentrations of Pd(II) were used for determining the separation factors. For the separation of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) from common impurities, a synthetic feed containing 1 g/l each Pd(II), Pt(IV), Fe(III), Al(III), Zn(II), Cu(II) and Ni(II) was prepared. 250 ml of the synthetic feed solution was taken and its pH was adjusted to 2.0. It was contacted with 250 ml of 0.15 M LIX 84I in dodecane for 2 h to extract Pd(II). The two phases were separated. The loaded organic phase was labeled as organic 1 and the aqueous phase as aqueous 1. The impurities were scrubbed from organic 1 three times with 50 ml each of 1.5 M H All distribution ratios were measured in triplicates and the mean value was taken. The agreement of the values is within ± The % extraction of Pd(II) with LIX 84I was measured at different time interval at a pH of 1.0. The data is given in The effect of feed pH on the extraction of Pd(II) with LIX 84I in dodecane was studied. LIX 84I is capable of extracting Pd(II) in pH range. The % extraction is given in It was observed that at pH 2–3, the % extraction is high. It is seen from the data that the distribution ratios are high enough to quantitatively extract Pd(II) in a single contact. The plot of Distribution ratios of Pd(II) were measured by varying the chloride concentration. It can be observed from the data that when the chloride concentration is increased, the distribution ratio decreases. The increase in the chloride concentration favours the formation of PdCl The Based on the above studies, the following extraction mechanism has been proposed: The above mechanism was compared with the results obtained for saturation loading of 0.015 M LIX 84I. As per the proposed mechanism, 0.015 M LIX 84I should load 0.0075 M of Pd(II), which corresponds to 0.795 g/l of Pd. The fully loaded organic was found to contain 0.8 g/l of palladium, which agreed with the theoretical value. This further confirmed that palladium forms a complex with the extractant in 1:2 ratio. The extraction behavior of LIX 84I with Pd(II) was studied with different diluents at a fixed feed pH of 2.0. The diluents studied were aliphatic as well as aromatic. Diluents like dodecane, benzene, toluene and xylene were used. The results are given in The values of Δ For back extraction studies, feed containing 1.9 g/l palladium (pH After back extraction of metal from the organic phase, the extractant was regenerated. As hydrochloric acid was used for back extraction, the entrained acid raises the equilibrium pH in the subsequent cycle. This decreases the % extraction in the next cycle. Before recycling the extractant, the stripped organic solvent was, therefore, washed with DM water to remove the entrained acid. It was observed that the extraction behavior of this used organic solvent for Pd is same as earlier. After studying the regeneration, the extractant was subjected to six cycles of extraction–stripping–regeneration. The % extraction was determined at the end of each cycle. The data is given in It was observed that Pt(IV) was not extracted by LIX 84I below pH 8.0 ( The back extraction of Pt(IV) from the loaded organic was attempted using HCl and H The results of the single contact experiments using mixed synthetic solutions of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) are given in Experiments were also carried out using synthetic solution to separate Pd(II) and Pt(IV) from other impurities. The synthetic feed contained 1 g/l each Pd(II), Pt(IV), Fe(III), Al(III), Zn(II), Cu(II) and Ni(II). The feed solution was equilibrated with 0.15 M LIX 84I in dodecane to extract Pd(II). The feed pH was adjusted to 2.0. As a result, the equilibrium pH stabilized at ∼1.5, which prevented the extraction of Fe(III) [extraction of Fe(III) commences beyond 1.5 pH]. However, at this pH, Cu(II) was also extracted along with Pd(II). From this loaded organic, Cu(II) was selectively scrubbed with 1.5 M H For Pt(IV) extraction, the pH of aqueous1 was adjusted to 9.0 by addition of liquor ammonia. Fe(III) and Al(III) were precipitated. The Pt(IV) in the filtrate was extracted alongwith Ni(II) and Zn(II) using LIX 84I. From the loaded organic, Ni(II) and Zn(II) were selectively back extracted with 1.5 M H LIX 84I extracts Pd(II) in the pH range of 1 to 3. It forms a Pd-LIX complex in the stoichiometric ratio of 1:2. Back extraction of Pd(II) is achieved using 6 M hydrochloric acid. Pt(IV) is extracted by LIX 84I beyond pH 7.0 and is back extracted with 3 M HCl containing stannous chloride. Pd(II) and Pt(IV) have been separated from common impurities like Fe(III), Al(III), Zn(II), Cu(II) and Ni(II) using LIX 84I. Thus, LIX 84I has been used for the separation as well as the purification of Pd(II) and Pt(IV). One of the authors is thankful to Dr. A.K. Suri, Associate Director (P), Materials Group, and Shri S.K. Tangri, Head Hydrometallurgy Section for permitting him to undertake the work.