In this paper, we report for the first time that the thermal conductivity (TC) of the heat transfer nanofluids could be enhanced by the external magnetic field. The heat transfer nanofluids contain carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and magnetic-field-sensitive nanoparticles of Fe2O3. The reasonable explanation for these interesting results is that the Fe2O3 particles form aligned chains under applied magnetic field and help to connect the nanotubes, which results in improved thermal conductivity. On longer holding in magnetic field, the particles gradually move and form large clumps of particles, causing clumping of CNTs, then decreasing the TC. We also found that the time to reach the maximum peak value of TC is increased as the applied magnetic field is reduced by increasing the gap between two magnets. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) pictures show that the nanotubes and nanoparticle are aligned well under the influence of magnetic field.The discovery of carbon nanotubes (CNT) has instigated tremendous research efforts in recent years, due to their promising thermal, electrical properties. For example, it has been reported that single wall carbon nanotubes exhibit a thermal conductivity (TC) value as high as 2000–6000 The possible explanation for this lack of sufficient TC increase through compositing with carbon nanotubes may be attributed to a lack of alignment and orientation in the fluids, as the carbon nanotubes just stay irregularly positioned in the fluids with only a random chance for them to contact each other. Therefore, only very high concentration of CNTs produce noticeable TC improvements. Therefore, there is a need to introduce nanotube–nanotube physical contacts in the fluids in order to increase the thermal (and electrical) conductivity significantly. Here, we introduced a new concept of incorporating magnetically sensitive metal or metal oxide nanoparticles in a carbon-nanotube-containing fluid. Under the relatively strong magnetic field, small magnetic particles form connected networks and also tend to get somewhat oriented toward the field direction These challenging results indicate that metal or metal oxide may detach the nanotube under the strong magnetic field or amount of metal or metal oxide attached the nanotube is too trivial. To avoid this circumstance, it might be a good idea to add relative large amount of metal or metal oxide into the nanofluids directly. In this paper, we studied the nanofluid system containing 0.01 Single wall carbon nanotubes (D-SWNT and F-SWNT) were purchased from carbon nanotechnologies incorporation (CNI, Houston, TX). D-SWNT is the SWNT that has few amount of impurity and F-SWNT is the purified fluorinated SWNT. The magnetically sensitive Fe The microstructure was taken using an Olympus VANOX-T Microscope. The magnification was 500×. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using backscattering detector with Zeiss Supra40VP variable pressure system. The pH values of the fluid containing the carbon nanotubes and magnetic particles were measured using a Denver instrument UP-10 Dispersion and stability of the particles and nanotubes were observed with the naked eyes. We put the nanofluids in the transparent glass beaker and observed if there was any precipitation at the edge and/or bottom of the glass beaker.  The thermal conductivities versus time curves for different materials systems are shown in We also investigated what happens to the TC value of nanofluids containing carbon nanotube and Fe Also, it is interesting to know how different magnetic strength would influence the maximum TC value, the time to reach maximum, the shape of the curve. The quantitative data correlating the magnetic field intensity, time to reach TC maximum and TC value at different distances between two magnets are listed in From No significant change in the thermal conductivity of the fluids after the magnetic field was removed, i.e., after ∼10 In summary, we have reported for the first time that the thermal conductivity (TC) of the heat transfer nanofluids could be enhanced by the external magnetic field using a new type of composite nanofluid. This interesting phenomenon is attributed to the Fe H. Hong would like to thank Army Research Laboratory (Cooperative agreement DAAD19-02-2-0011) for financial support. Thank to Prof. Peterson of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York for the stimulating discussion during the AIAA meeting. Also, we wish to thank Prof. Marquis's initial discussion for metal oxide encapsulated carbon nanotube, Shelley Peterson for the microstructure of the fluids and Wayne Douglas for assistance in the experiments.