Data necessary for liberation and/or exposure analysis is frequently obtained from two-dimensional (2D) polished section images of mineral particles of specified size. This data overestimates the extent of liberation and/or exposure, and in the past an empirical correction (locking) factor has been used to give a better estimate of the extent of dispersed phase liberation and/or exposure. With such 2D data, exposed grain surface area is estimated from perimeter analysis of sectioned particles. Although many researchers have reported 2D mineral liberation analysis in terms of area grade and/or perimeter based grain exposure, comparison of 2D perimeter based liberation with three-dimensional (3D) mineral liberation analysis has not been reported.
                  In this current research, perimeter based estimates of exposed grain surface areas from 2D polished section analysis of feed and products from HydroFloat (HF) flotation of a copper porphyry ore are evaluated from corresponding 3D high resolution X-ray microtomography (HRXMT) data. Results show that for mean dispersed phase grades (sulfide mineral content) greater than 10%, perimeter based polished section analysis provides a good approximation of the exposed grain surface area determined by HRXMT. For mean grades less than 10%, stereological correction of the 2D data is required for satisfactory estimation of the exposed grain surface area. The most significant stereological correction with respect to exposed grain surface area is for the 0% grade class (“liberated” gangue minerals). For example, in the case of the 417 × 212 µm size class, 2D perimeter analysis indicates that about 96% of the particles have 0% grain area exposure whereas 3D analysis shows that in reality about 77% of the particles have 0% grain area exposure.Optimization of mineral processing operations requires knowledge of the spatial distribution of valuable minerals in the multiphase ore particles. Accurate mineral liberation analysis enables us to avoid overgrinding, which reduces the cost and energy required in the comminution process. In addition, accurate mineral liberation analysis also gives assessment of mineral processing products and helps to suggest action to improve the separation efficiency. Traditionally, in order to characterize and analyze the spatial characteristics of multiphase particulate systems, such as in mineral liberation analysis, two-dimensional (2D) polished section images are obtained and analyzed to acquire useful information. SEM-based automated image analysis systems, such as quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscopy, QEMSCAN ( In the analysis of flotation separations, the exposed grain surface area distribution is the most appropriate characteristic to describe flotation response rather than the liberation spectrum ( Although many researchers have reported 2D mineral liberation analysis in terms of area grade and/or perimeter based grain exposure, comparison of 2D perimeter based liberation with 3D mineral liberation analysis has not been reported in the literature. In this research, using recently developed software and X-ray microtomography (micro-CT) scans for 3D grain liberation/exposure, 2D perimeter based grain liberation/exposure was analyzed and directly compared with 3D grain liberation/exposure. Micro-CT has emerged as a nondestructive technique for 3D characterization of multiphase particulate systems in packed particle beds. With the advantages of three-dimensional visualization of the internal structures of opaque materials, simple and fast sample preparation, and short scanning and analysis time, micro-CT has been used to analyze mineral liberation ( In this paper, high resolution X-ray microtomography (HRXMT) scans were used for acquisition of 3D image data for multiphase particles. From the 3D image data, volume grade and exposed grain surface area were determined, whereas the 2D image data were used to determine area grade and exposed grain perimeter. Two dimensional sectional slices from 3D tomographic data were used to determine two dimensional mineral liberation, in addition to data from the MLA system. The comparative analysis results indicate that 2D mineral liberation generally overestimates the extent of mineral liberation compared to 3D mineral liberation analysis. It is noted that exposed grain perimeter is much more appropriate to evaluate 2D mineral liberation compared to area grade analysis ( Now micro-CT is used frequently as a non-destructive 3D imaging and analysis technique for the investigation of internal structures. Typically in micro-CT, the sample for investigation rotates, whilst the X-ray source and detector remain stationary. The principle used to identify different materials depends on the photon’s capability to penetrate materials in varying degrees, which is mathematically formulated by Beer’s law ( Micro-CT has been widely used recently in geoscience applications, such as 3D pore characterization ( In this study, the HRXMT system (Zeiss XCT-400) with voxel resolution as low as one micron, was used for 3D exposed grain surface area analysis of packed particle beds. Polished section 2D data was acquired with an MLA system ( The copper ore particles considered in this study contain valuable minerals such as pyrite, chalcopyrite and molybdenite, with gangue minerals such as quartz, potash feldspar, biotite and talc. The main gangue minerals are quartz and feldspar. The primary flotation separation focuses on the recovery of all sulfur-bearing minerals, although the different sulfide minerals can be distinguished by HRXMT. The feed particles were separated by flotation into concentrate and tailings products using the HydroFloat (HF) separator, which shows better performance compared to conventional bench scale flotation machines for coarse particle flotation ( Generally, after acquisition of the original 3D HRXMT data, the data were preprocessed and corrected for the partial voxel effect, as discussed in the following section. From the 3D partial voxel corrected image, the valuable minerals were clearly identified. There are a total of 994 sectional slices in the 3D partial voxel corrected data. The 2D perimeter based surface exposure distribution was analyzed in each case based on all 994 sections for each sample. In this case, about 500 particles per section were analyzed. The 3D exposed grain surface area analysis was obtained from the 3D HRXMT data. Although micro-CT has been widely used in medical science, engineering, and earth science, there are some advantages and limitations for micro-CT. The best advantage of micro-CT is the nature of the non-destructive technique. It allows investigation of the interior structure of samples without mechanical stress, calculation of volume fractions of multiphase systems, geometrical properties (size, shape, sphericity, roundness…), surface texture, etc. However, quantitative analysis using micro-CT is usually not straightforward due to the nature of the X-ray source; there are always some artifacts for micro-CT data such as noise, partial voxel effects and beam hardening effects. Considering these issues, detailed image analysis procedures are needed to eliminate the artifacts for accurate quantitative analysis. Therefore, micro-CT analysis is operator dependent on the 3D quantitative image analysis from reconstructed data, the partial voxel effect, and possible imaging artifacts. The original HRXMT image data can be reconstructed in both 2D and 3D. The beam hardening effect ( Basically, the reconstructed 3D tomographic data was first denoised using a non-local means algorithm ( The quantitative analysis can then be accomplished using specific image analysis algorithms to determine particle based liberation measurements. For example, in order to analyze the mineral liberation extent by volume grade of valuable minerals after segmentation, each individual particle is classified as valuable mineral phase and gangue mineral phase based on attenuation coefficients of the tomographic images, a simple step in image processing. The volume grade can be directly determined based on the ratio of total volume of valuable mineral phase to that of the whole particle. For measurement of 3D mineral liberation by exposed grain surface area, compared to measurement of volume grade, one more step is involved to determine the mesh surfaces for valuable mineral phases and gangue mineral phases after classification in 3D based on attenuation coefficients. Basically, the mesh surface is obtained from the volumetric data using marching cube algorithms. Then, the exposed grain surface is finally determined, based on vertices matching of the surface meshes of both the valuable mineral phases and the whole particle. A detailed algorithm for determination of surfaces is thoroughly discussed in a previous publication ( As three-dimensional tomographic data contains stacks of virtual two-dimensional sections, the processed 2D sections from the 3D tomographic data can be used directly for quantitative 2D mineral liberation analysis. The image processing procedure for 2D mineral liberation analysis is similar to the procedure illustrated in  In order to evaluate how the ore texture affects the mineral liberation, Since the flotation tests were designed to recover all sulfur-bearing valuable minerals, the mineral liberation was analyzed by consideration of two mineral phases: valuable sulfide minerals (all sulfur-bearing minerals) and gangue minerals. The difference in attenuation coefficients between valuable minerals and gangue minerals was used to identify the two phases. To illustrate how the mineral liberation was analyzed in 3D and 2D, the samples with 417 × 212 µm size class were selected as an example. Each 3D tomographic image dataset has a 3D array of about 992 × 1013 × 994 voxels with a voxel resolution of 5.19 µm. The partial voxel corrected image can also be used to determine the percentage of the 2D exposed grain surface area by perimeter measurements. There are 994 total sectional slices each with a 2D size array of 927 × 927 pixels, which were cut from the original 3D array (992 × 1013 × 994). Then each slice can be used to directly analyze the 2D area grade and exposed grain surface percentage using perimeter measurements. The distribution of 2D liberation measurements by area grade and exposed grain perimeter analysis were achieved based on the 994 sectional slices. The 2D parameter analysis is based on the contour tracing algorithm ( In order to quantitatively analyze the exposed grain perimeter in 2D, Comparisons of results for the 417 × 212 µm samples (Test 1 and Test 2) are presented for feed, concentrate and tailing in sequence, followed by the results for the 212 × 150 µm tailing samples (Test 1 and Test 2). The results are presented by comparing 2D MLA data with both 2D HRXMT data and 3D HRXMT data (see The surface exposure distributions using MLA and HRXMT for feed samples (Test 1 and Test 2) with the 417 × 212 µm size class are shown in For HF feed samples, the difference between the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure to HRXMT 2D perimeter based surface exposure is small. However, the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure has a substantial proportion of the liberated gangue class (0%) greater than the results from 3D HRXMT data. The surface exposure distributions using MLA and HRXMT for concentrate samples (both Test 1 and Test 2) with the 417 × 212 µm size class are shown in For HF concentrate samples, in general, the HRXMT 2D perimeter based surface exposure of the liberated gangue class (0%) is higher than the results from the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure. In addition, the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure has a substantial proportion of the liberated gangue class (0%) greater than the results from 3D HRXMT data. For HRXMT, the image of the packed particle bed must be segmented, and in the case of MLA, such segmentation is not necessary, and the algorithms used for both cases may account for the differences. The surface exposure distributions using MLA and HRXMT for tailing samples (both Test 1 and Test 2) for the 417 × 212 µm size class are shown in For HF tailing samples, the difference between the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure and the HRXMT 2D perimeter based surface exposure is small. However, for the Test 2 sample, the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure has a substantial proportion of the liberated gangue class (0%) greater than the results from 3D HRXMT data. The surface exposure distributions using MLA and HRXMT for tailing samples (both Test 1 and Test 2) with the 212 × 150 µm size class are shown in Similar results are observed for both size classes (417 × 212 µm and 212 × 150 µm) of the HF tailing samples. Data necessary for liberation and/or exposure analysis are frequently obtained from the 2D polished section data of mineral particles of a specified size. This data overestimates the extent of liberation and/or exposure, and in the past an empirical correction (locking) factor has been used to give a better estimate of the extent of the dispersed phase liberation and/or exposure. A discussion of the treatment of polished section data is found in the literature ( From this current research on HF flotation products, it is evident that for the liberated gangue class (0%) the MLA perimeter based surface exposure distribution is not a good estimate and should be corrected. In this regard, a stereological correction factor for the MLA perimeter based surface exposure is given as a function of mean grade in order to more accurately describe the actual distribution of the exposed grain surface area. The percentage by volume of particles containing exposed valuable grains represents the limitation for metal recovery by flotation of such particles. This percentage is equal to 100% minus the liberated gangue with no grain exposure (the 0% class) as determined in 3D by HRXMT analysis. Stereological bias exists for the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure. In general, the 0% class for the 2D MLA perimeter based surface exposure (liberated gangue class) is overestimated. The percentage of particles containing exposed valuable grains is underestimated using MLA analysis for the 0% class. Consequently, a stereological correction factor can be established using the MLA 2D perimeter data, 2D perimeter data from HRXMT and the actual 3D exposed grain surface area from HRXMT. First, the mean grade of the dispersed phase (valuable grain) is calculated. Then the stereological correction factor (SCF) is determined as: From MLA and HRXMT analysis of flotation products, the SCF has been calculated, plotted with respect to the dispersed phase grade, and then fitted to the function as shown in Direct determination of mineral liberation for multiphase particles is a difficult task, particularly because the exposed grain surface area can be accurately analyzed only in three dimensions. Now, due to advances in high resolution X-ray microtomography (HRXMT), with a voxel resolution of less than 1 µm, it is possible to identify dispersed grains as small as 5 µm in multiphase particles and to quantify their volume and percent exposure in 3D. In this research, results from 3D mineral liberation analysis (HRXMT) and 2D mineral liberation analysis (MLA and HRXMT) were compared to determine the circumstances under which perimeter based 2D polished section analysis (MLA) would provide a good estimate of the exposed grain surface area. The comparisons indicate that the 2D mineral liberation measurements generally overestimate the extent of mineral liberation compared to 3D mineral liberation analysis. Further, it was shown that perimeter based grain exposure distribution is similar to the exposed grain surface area distribution, which is similar to the volume grade distribution. Results show that for mean dispersed phase grades (sulfide mineral content) above 10%, perimeter based polished section analysis provides a good approximation of the exposed grain surface area determined by HRXMT. For mean grades less than 10%, stereological correction of the 2D data is required for satisfactory estimation of the exposed grain surface area. The most significant stereological correction with respect to exposed grain surface area is for the 0% grade class (“liberated” gangue minerals). For example, in the case of Test 2 tailings size class 417x212 μm, with a mean grade of about 1% for the dispersed phase sulfide minerals, 2D perimeter analysis indicates that about 96% of the particles have 0% grain area exposure, whereas 3D analysis shows that in reality about 77% of the particles have 0% grain area exposure, corresponding to an SCF of about 6. None. Support and samples for this research were provided by Rio Tinto, UT, USA, and Eriez Manufacturing, PA, USA. Preparation of the samples by Rio Tinto is certainly appreciated. Discussions with Cory Smith, David George-Kennedy, and Mike Mankosa are gratefully acknowledged, as is Ms. Dorrie Spurlock’s assistance in the preparation of the manuscript.