A brief outline of some of the pioneering events in the development of flotation technology, which originated in Broken Hill at the start of the 1900s, is presented. The development of the original Potter–Delprat process, the introduction of oils to generate froth flotation and the achievement of selective flotation processing are described, all focussed on solving challenges with the Broken Hill Pb–Ag–Zn ores. Some recent initiatives in flotation at BHP Billiton operations are also outlined, covering coal, copper, lead–silver–zinc and diamonds. Some views are offered on the characteristics of innovation in flotation and on possible trends into the future.Broken Hill, and specifically the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. (now BHP Billiton) was a key contributor to the invention and development of flotation technology about a 100 years ago. Flotation is now a major separation process integral to many sectors of the Minerals industry, and beyond. Currently within BHP Billiton, it is applied to the sulphides of copper, lead and zinc as well as to the rejection of mineral matter from coal fines. The prospect for application to the recovery of small diamonds at our Ekati mine is also under investigation. This paper will recount a little of the history of flotation; highlight some of the recent changes in flotation at BHP Billiton operations which have had an impact on process performance; and briefly comment on the nature of innovation and possible future developments in the technology. The first successful application of flotation in the minerals industry was at the Broken Hill lead–silver–zinc mine in the far west of New South Wales in Australia in the early 1900s ( At the beginning of operations at Broken Hill in the mid 1880s, oxide ores were smelted directly on-site producing a lead–silver bullion. By the mid 1890s the oxide ore was becoming depleted and the focus had to turn to sulphide lead–silver–zinc ores. This presented a processing challenge. A means of separating out the Pb–Ag component for smelting was needed. Gravity separation was the solution. Unfortunately the zinc ore, having a specific gravity similar to the waste material, was not recovered and reported to the tailings. This situation persisted for about seven years and, although operations were profitable, there was an obvious incentive to find a way of recovering value by recovering the zinc in, what was by then, a huge accumulation of tailings (millions of tonnes). The first attempt to tackle this problem started in 1901 and utilised the principle of magnetic separation to recover the zinc from the tailings. However this relatively small scale effort (not by BHP) did not prove sustainable. The breakthrough in recovery of zinc came in 1902 with the development of flotation. The former General Manager of BHP’s Broken Hill mine, Mr. Guillaume Delprat, directed the research officer, Mr. Carmichael, to try boiling the tailings with “salt cake”—acid sulphate of soda. The idea was not directed at the then unknown process of “flotation” but rather the intention was to dissolve the zinc, in a manner similar to a process used in Spain at the time. These experiments failed in their intended outcome. Instead of achieving dissolution, a scum was consistently found to form, floating on the surface. Mr. Delprat is credited ( Patents were applied for (Australian Patent 8081/1902) but it was subsequently discovered that CV Potter had made an overlapping discovery the previous year (Australian Patent 18775/1901). Litigation and a 1904 Royal Commission followed, before resolution in 1907 with BHP settling with the Potter Company and an agreement to merge the two processes, to be known as the Potter–Delprat process thereafter. This process was applied commercially by BHP until 1923 with little change. Development of the process on a commercial scale required many attempts and variations in hardware. A successful version is reported ( In 1904 ( Several other developments were also occurring at this time ( Horwood (BHP) reports in the BHP Recreation Review of 1924 that “Although the problem of the recovery of zinc from the tailings by flotation was the most important achievement in connection with ore treatment at Broken Hill, there still remained the problem of separating the lead and zinc from the large quantity of very fine slimes stored on the various mines, resulting from crushing of the sulphides, and which, owing to their extreme fineness, were not amenable to treatment by gravity concentration for either lead or zinc recovery”. Substantial progress ( The most significant developments, however, were the series of discoveries made between 1912 and 1913 by Leslie Bradford, BHP metallurgist, for selective flotation in the use of sulphur dioxide gas and copper sulphate to achieve selective flotation via the Bradford process. It is reported ( “Though Bradford patented his main SO These discoveries set Australia on course to become one of the world’s largest producers of base metals. The flotation process is still a core technology used in minerals processing across the world. In the following sections of this paper, examples of innovation will be drawn from applications by BHP Billiton to coal flotation in Australia, copper recovery at Escondida in Chile, small diamond recovery at Ekati in Canada, and silver, lead, zinc flotation at Cannington in Australia. Australia is the world’s biggest coal exporter and coal is one of Australia’s major exports. The BHP Mitsubishi Alliance (BMA) produces over one third of Australia’s annual coal exports. Currently, BMA owns and operates seven mines in this basin (Blackwater, Goonyella, Peak Downs, Saraji, Norwich Park, Gregory and Crinum, with reserves of over 25,000 million tonnes) and also operates and markets coal from the Riverside and South Water Creek mines on behalf of their owners, BHP Mitsui Coal Pty Ltd. The Utah Development Company played a significant role in the development of the Bowen Basin between 1967 and 1984. The Bowen Basin coals had a high vitrinite content which made the coal brittle and resulted in 20–30% of the preparation plant feed being finer that 0.5 Following in-house research and successful pilot trials at Blackwater using Denver flotation cells, the first, large, froth flotation circuits were installed at the Blackwater mine in 1967. The Blackwater circuit used 75 The last four mentioned plants were the first in the world to apply the new technologies to the full 0.5 There are ongoing developments in the area of on-line monitoring and modelling of key parameters. On-line cameras and image analysis techniques (FrothCam) have been developed through research at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) and there are plans to further develop on-line measurement using electro-impedance spectroscopy. More recently modelling of flotation performance has been used to develop a deeper understanding of fundamentals and to control or optimise key parameters such as residence time, air rates, wash water rates and frother rates in the circuit. MinnovEX proprietary FLEET kinetic model software, calibrated with laboratory measurements, has been used to benchmark and to build models of flotation circuit performance at Peak Downs, Goonyella, Riverside, Blackwater and Gregory ( Current directions include fundamental research at the Ian Wark Research Institute that will model coal flotation recovery and rate constants as a function of particle size for different coal feeds, fluid velocities and turbulence. Projects with CSIRO Queensland Centre for Advanced Technologies include online measurement of froth properties, maceral flotation characterisation, regrind and retreat options for flotation tails, and saline water effects on flotation. Escondida is one of the world’s largest porphyry copper ore bodies. It is located at an altitude of 3100 Maximising net present value for the low-grade ore at Escondida drives high throughput for both milling and froth flotation circuits ( The first approach is to modify the circuit design. Plant surveys indicated that maximum recovery in rougher flotation is currently reached after 20 This project offers the opportunity to produce additional copper concentrate at a low unit cost. About 35% copper from tailings can be recovered at a recapture grade of 35% copper. This amounts to an increase of about 4–5% in overall plant recovery and increased by-product silver. The second approach is to understand how to enhance recovery of coarse particles by using novel flotation agents that can increase the hydrophobic nature of mineral particles. This work is being carried out in conjunction with Dr. Roe-Hoan Yoon at the Centre for Advanced Separation Technologies, Virginia Tech, and with ONDEO-Nalco. Novel flotation promoters are used in conjunction with conventional flotation collectors. Various proprietary reagent formulations have been tested with Escondida ores. Up to 4% increase in rougher copper recovery has been achieved, compared to results using the traditional collector SF758 alone. Up to 2% increase has been achieved compared to results using the current new collector AP3926 alone. Preliminary size-by-size analyses of selected flotation products indicates an increase in recovery throughout the sized ranges, most particularly for coarse particles. Further optimisation and tests will be required prior to pilot plant trials. The Ekati diamond mine, located 300 Initial testing at a bench scale commenced in 2000. This led to construction of a 1-ton/h flotation pilot plant in 2002, which provided scale-up information and also led to identifying process improvements. A 120 Cannington, in northwest Queensland, Australia, is the world’s largest and lowest cost producer of silver and lead. Talc, lead and zinc are floated sequentially in separate circuits. The ore body is associated with a significant abundance of fluorine, mostly as fluorite, and this needs to be minimised in concentrates for smelting. As per design, the major portion of fluorine rejection occurs in the flotation circuit. Concentrates are then transferred to a unique fluorine leaching process developed for Cannington in which the fluorine is removed as soluble aluminium fluoride species. Silver reports mainly to the lead concentrate and to a lesser extent to the zinc concentrate. Silver byproduct credits are a major revenue source for the operation. Production at Cannington began in late 1997. Although the targeted plant recoveries were being achieved, a considerable amount of valuable silver reported to the plant tailings. A means of economically increasing silver recovery was needed. A number of options for recovering additional metal values from tailings streams were identified. The possibility of leaching Ag from tailings was investigated, culminating in pilot plant trials of a leach-EW circuit on site. However, this approach proved not to be cost-effective. An alternative route was required. From Cannington’s detailed mineralogical studies, loss of silver and lead in tailings were known to be in the −5-μm fraction. As is typical in flotation, performance drops off at both fine and coarse ends of the particle size distribution. The solution for Cannington was a split flotation strategy. A pilot plant for a separate fines flotation circuit was established and evaluated on site. As a result, a split flotation circuit was implemented at full scale early in 2003 and the targeted additional recoveries of lead and silver were achieved. Flotation is a technology that is about a 100 years old. It continues to be a major method of separation applied in the Minerals industry. Mine sites continue to make many modifications in an effort to improve performance in the context of individual and changing ores plus the pressures from upstream and downstream process requirements. R&D organisations continue to put their minds and state-of-the-art techniques to improving the understanding of the fundamentals and practices of the technology.  There are some interesting parallels between the practice of innovation in flotation today and the picture of the frontier development of flotation in Broken Hill and we will indulge in some passing observations here. First, let us draw from the events of a 100 years ago. The identification of a compelling need or opportunity that forms the core of a strong business case remains a key driver for innovation (e.g. the loss of value in tailings and slimes). Mined ores are not uniform over time and technical processing solutions need to be able to adapt or change to meet the new circumstances (e.g. oxide to sulphide). Processing challenges can have multiple solutions and different solutions often run in parallel. Sometimes one solution or an amalgamation of solutions comes to dominate. Sometimes an accepted solution has a future problem or opportunity embedded (e.g. gravity separation leaving major unrecovered value in the tailings). Innovation benefits from the intersection of different minds enriched by a varied experience (e.g. it is reasonable to surmise that Mr. Delprat’s apprenticeship in engineering in construction of the Tay Bridge, his experience in working as an assistant to the famous physicist Prof. van der Waal in Amsterdam, and his experience in the mining industry in Spain, all fuelled his contribution to innovation in The Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd.). Discovery and even successful implementation of innovations do not require a complete understanding of the fundamentals of a process. However a determination to understand the fundamentals and an attention to careful investigation are the building blocks for progress well beyond the narrow confines of the initial concept (e.g. starting with coincidental in situ generation of carbon dioxide moving to froth flotation and selective flotation). There also seems to be ample indications of a heady dose of “can do” empirical trial and error, leading to a relatively short time between discovery and implementation. The ability to take unplanned outcomes (e.g. that annoying floating scum which would not dissolve according to plan) or observations which in a current context do not appear to have use (e.g. the froth formation when low oil concentrations were used in a process intended to form granules that would separate by sinking) remains a valuable talent and part of an innovator’s aspirations. Getting the IP position right was a serious matter even a 100 years ago, with sometimes challenging consequences (e.g. the lost income opportunity from not patenting the copper sulphate process outside Australia; the litigation and settlement over the Potter Delprat process is another example). An intimate understanding of the factors controlling plant and process performance relative to the orebody as well as to upstream and downstream unit processes is core to effective outcomes. Systems thinking is necessary. A willingness to engage in state-of-the-art capabilities and to collaborate effectively with sources of key expertise is a common thread (e.g. the range of key inputs in the examples given, includes: the Julius Krutschnitt Research Centre at the University of Queensland; Minnovex; the Ian Wark Research Institute at the University of South Australia; the ARC Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes at the University of Newcastle; Ondeo Nalco; and the Centre for Advanced Separation Technologies at Virginia Tech). A willingness to invest in change, sometimes spanning a long period, will often reflect the state of industry economics and the specifics of the value proposition at each unique site. Careful measurement, piloting and where appropriate, demonstration at scale are part of a stage gate risk management process designed to optimise options value. The authors acknowledge the permission of BHP Billiton, Minera Escondida Limitada, and BHP Billiton–Mitsubishi Alliance to publish this work. We thank Robert Alford and Glenn Clark from Cannington for advice and Ms. Helen Smith from BHP Billiton archives, who assisted in the preparation of the historical information and archival photographs.