In this paper, we consider the two-grid method for solving Cahn–Hilliard equation with the concentration-dependent mobility and the logarithmic Flory-Huggins bulk potential. This two-grid method consists of two steps. First step, solve the Cahn–Hilliard equation with full implicit mixed finite element method and Newton iteration method on a coarse grid. Second step, solve two linear equations on a fine grid. The stability and convergence of the proposed scheme are established. Finally, some numerical experiments are presented.The Cahn–Hilliard equation was first proposed by Cahn and Hilliard in the 1950s From the mathematical point of view, there are many advantages for the phase field model. In particular, the model is usually energy stable and well-posed due to the energy-based variational method. These advantages making it possible to carry out effective numerical analysis and perform reliable numerical simulations. The Cahn–Hilliard equation with concentration-dependent mobility can describe the physical phenomenon more accurately. To our knowledge, the Cahn–Hilliard equation with a constant mobility has been widely studied by using all kinds of numerical methods (e.g., We notice that a lot of works have devoted to study the discretization of the polynomial type potential, e.g. the double well potential such as Similar to the double well potential case, the fully-implicit or explicit discretization of the nonlinear term makes the scheme conditionally energy stable as expected, thus it is not efficient in practice. This fact was confirmed in the pioneering work of The organization of the rest of the paper is: in Consider the following Cahn–Hilliard equation with the concentration-dependent mobility For 0 < For the bulk potential, we consider the logarithmic F-H potential The model has two properties: conservation of mass and free energy law. First, for the model Eqs. (2.1)–(2.4), the total free energy can be defined as The model Eqs. (2.1)–(2.4) satisfies the following dissipative energy law: This can explain that the evolution of the phase variable is from the state of high energy to the state of low energy. It obeys the energy minimization rule. The conservation of mass can be shown easily. In fact, by taking the The mixed variational formulation of the model system (2.1)–(2.4) is as follows Let More precisely, for an integer The spatial and temporal discretization with implicit Euler scheme are considered. Given initial value In this traditional mixed finite element formulation, we remark that there is a nonlinear system is solved at every time step. In order to solve this problem and save a lot of computation work compared with standard mixed finite element method, we introduce the following two-grid method that only solve this nonlinear system on a coarse grid with a relatively large mesh size, its computation cost is neglectful.  1. Given 2. Solve the following equations on the fine grid This two-grid method consists of two steps. First step, a discretized nonlinear system is solved by Newton iteration method on the coarse grid. Second step, a linear system will be solved on the fine grid. Let For simplicity, the following common assumption is made From Poincar   Taking Summing the above inequality over  Taking To our knowledge, in the research process of Cahn–Hilliard equation with the variable concentration-dependent mobility, the convergence analysis is not presented in the logarithmic Flory-Huggins bulk potential sense so far. Therefore, this section is devoted to studying the convergence of our two-grid method For any given positive integer 0 ≤  Using Subtracting In this section, we will present some numerical experiments to verify the efficiency of our method. All experiments are implemented in Freefem++. We choose the domain [0, 1] In this experiment, we study the phase separation behavior, the so-called the spinodal decomposition phenomenon using mixed two-grid scheme. The process of the phase separation can be studied in a binary mixture, which is quenched into the unstable part of its miscibility gap. In this case, the spinodal decomposition takes place, which reflected in the natural growth of the concentration variations that makes the system from the homogeneous to the two-phase state. The simulations are carried out in the domain [0, 1] Supported by the National Nature Foundation of China (No.11872264 and No.11671340), the Provincial Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi (No.2015011001, 2014011005-4), Scientific and Technologial Innovation Programs of Higher Education Institutions in Shanxi (No.2017119).