Uranium(VI) and europium(III) transports across the supported liquid membrane ((SLM) have been studied to understand the chemical conditions that affect the selective preconcentration of U(VI) from phosphoric acid feed. The SLM was prepared by impregnating the PTFE microporous membrane with an organic phase consisting of di(2-ethyl)hexylphosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and a neutral organophosphorous oxodonor dissolved in n-dodecane. The different organophosphorous oxodonors studied for synergism were tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP), di-butyl butyl phosphonate (DBBP), tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide (TOPO), and Cyanex 923 (a mixture of four trialkyl phosphine oxides viz. R3PO, R2R′PO, RR′2PO and R′3PO where R: n-octyl and R′: n-hexyl chain). SLMs thus prepared were evaluated for U(VI) and Eu(III) transport from phosphoric acid feed having different compositions to receiver compartment containing (NH4)2CO3. In order to enhance the driving force, the U(VI) complexing reagents like NaF and EDTA were also used along with (NH4)2CO3 as the receiving phase. The phosphoric acid feed composition was also varied to examine the applicability of SLMs studied in the present work for the preconcentration of U(VI) from the analytical waste containing phosphoric acid. The experimental data obtained in the present work seems to suggest that the SLM formed by tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide with D2EHPA is best suited for U(VI) transport from phosphoric acid feed with a good selectivity over Eu(III). However, the increase in feed acidity (6 mol L−1 H3PO4) found to retard the transport rate of U(VI) across SLM.Solvent extraction processes have been reported for the industrial level extraction of U(VI) from the phosphoric acid medium by a mixture of di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and a neutral synergist reagent like tri- Emulsion liquid membranes (ELMs) have been studied for the extraction of U(VI) from wet phosphoric acid (WPA) using a mixture of D2EHPA and TOPO (  The present study deals with the transport behavior of U(VI) and Eu(III) from phosphoric acid across a SLM formed by impregnating PTFE microporous membrane with a organic phase consisting of D2EHPA and a neutral oxodonor dissolved in U(VI) transport studies were done using technical grade phosphoric acid (Prabhat Chemicals, Mumbai, India). The feed solution was prepared by spiking The SLM was prepared by soaking overnight ca. 24 h the PTFE microporous host membrane in an organic phase having desired composition of the carriers in The transport studies were carried out in a Pyrex glass cell consisting of two compartments of 24 mL capacity each. The effective geometrical area of the SLM separating two compartments joined by glass flanges was 4.94 cm The viscosities of various compositions of carrier solutions in Under the experimental conditions of the present work, the permeability ( U(VI) is extracted by organophosphorus acidic extractant (HA) in its dimeric form as UO It could be deduced from above equation that neutral oxodonors ( U(VI) transport studies were carried out using a SLM formed by the combination of 1.5 mol L The U(VI) transport experiments were done at varying TOPO concentrations (0.1–0.5 mol L The influence of U(VI) concentration in feed compartment on its permeation rate across SLM was studied using 6 mol L In diffusion controlled transport processes, permeability of the metal ions is influenced by the effective diffusion path length in the membrane phase. The U(VI) transport experiments were done by laminating a number of membranes (up to 4 no.) and using a feed solution containing 1 mol L In order to optimized the transport efficiency, the experiments were carried out to identify suitable strippant in addition to 20 (w/v) % (NH Routine analyses of aqueous samples for U(VI) estimation by the conventional methods ( Apart from U(VI), the natural sedimentary phosphates contain significant quantities of rare earth elements (REE: 0.1–0.4%). The acidulation of these phosphatic rocks with sulphuric acid, in wet phosphoric acid (WPA) process, leads to solubilisation of ~ A synergistic composition of D2EHPA with different neutral organophosphorous oxodonors viz. TBP, DBBP, TOPO, and Cyanex 923 have been studied for optimizing U(VI) transport across SLM from phosphoric acid medium. The transport of U(VI) across SLM was found to increase in the order: TBP Authors thank Dr. S.K. Misra, Fuel Reprocessing Division, BARC, Mumbai for his help in the viscosity measurements of the organic solutions.