An ideal approach for bone tissue engineering allows for osteoconductivity, osteoinductivity, and cell transplantation. In this study, we examined coprecipitation and surface adsorption schemes with respect to their abilities to control the spatial quantity and localization of a model protein, bovine serum albumin (BSA), that is incorporated into a biomimetic apatite layer nucleated onto polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) films. Protein incorporation was characterized by determining protein: presence, quantity loaded, retention, effects on mineral morphology, and localization. FT-IR confirmed the presence of protein in all coprecipitation samples with stronger peaks in the coprecipitated samples compared to the surface adsorbed samples. Coprecipitation resulted in higher loading capacities and higher protein retention versus adsorption. Protein incorporation via coprecipitation changed the mineral morphology from sharp plate-like structures to more rounded structures, whereas, surface adsorption did not change mineral structure. By using confocal microscopy to examine the incorporation of fluorescently labeled proteins, spatial control over protein localization was exhibited. By controlling the loading quantity and localization of the model protein through the mineral thickness, a desired release profile can be achieved. A desired and effective delivery system of biological agents utilizing coprecipitation for bone regeneration can therefore be designed.An ideal bone tissue engineering approach would incorporate osteoconductivity and osteoinductivity into the design of the supporting biomaterial, as well as biocompatibility, degradability, mechanical integrity, and the ability to support cell transplantation. Direct bonding between an implant and bone, the ultimate goal of osteoconductivity, may occur if a layer of bone-like mineral forms on the surface of the implant Osteoinductive properties can be integrated into a scaffold using methods to immobilize proteins to surfaces such as adsorption, cross-linking, covalent binding, and entrapment, each of which results in different loading efficiencies and levels of protein retention Coprecipitation of proteins and calcium phosphate is another method that has been used to incorporate growth factors on metal substrates, such as titanium alloy implants In this study, we examined coprecipitation and surface adsorption schemes with respect to their abilities to control the spatial quantity and localization of a model protein, bovine serum albumin (BSA), that is incorporated into a biomimetic apatite layer nucleated onto polylactic- The films (approximately 30–80 A modified simulated body fluid (mSBF, which contains 2× the concentration of Ca In order to compare coprecipitation versus adsorption and quantities of protein loaded via the different protein incorporation methods, the following groups were examined: (1) 6 days coprecipitation of apatite and BSA; (2) 3 days apatite mineralization, 3 days BSA adsorption; (3) 3 days apatite mineralization, 3 days coprecipitation of apatite and BSA; (4) 3 days apatite mineralization, 2 days BSA adsorption, 1 day apatite mineralization; (5) 3 days apatite mineralization, 2 days coprecipitation of apatite and BSA, 1 day apatite mineralization; (6) 3 days apatite mineralization, 3 days acid etched BSA adsorption (10 For mineralization, films were submerged in 40 The incorporation of BSA was determined using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (Spectrum BX FT-IR, Perkin-Elmer). The calcium phosphate coatings were scraped off each of the samples ( BSA was quantified using a Micro-Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay or BCA assay (Pierce, IL), depending on the concentration range. Samples ( To remove excess protein, samples were rinsed by gently dipping each film ( Mineral morphology with and without BSA was examined using scanning electron microscopy (Philips XL30 FEG Scanning Electron Microscope). Sample films ( High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Jeol 2010) was operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 To visualize the spatial distribution of BSA in the different sample groups, a ratio of 7:1 of BSA:FITC-labeled BSA was used. Protein incorporation groups 1, 2, 3, 5, and the control group were studied ( BCA assay results were analyzed with significance defined as The FT-IR spectra of all of the biomimetic mineral coatings show phosphate absorption bands of hydroxyapatite at ca. 1031, 600, and 561 The different protein incorporation methods resulted in significantly different amounts loaded into the films, After rinsing to remove excess protein from the surface, amide peaks were still apparent in the spectra of the coprecipitated samples ( While rinsing significantly affects protein retention in the surface adsorbed samples, there was no significant difference in retention when the coprecipitated samples were rinsed ( Incorporation of BSA via coprecipitation led to changes in the plate-like mineral morphology observed in mineralized controls, while BSA incorporation via surface adsorption did not change the plate-like mineral ( HRTEM images of the films (A) without and (B) with BSA coprecipitation displayed plate-like apatite ( For the 6 day coprecipitation sample (Group 1), fluorescence was present throughout the thickness of the mineral layer ( Side depth profiles, which were obtained by stacking the images acquired through the 100 There are various ways to immobilize proteins to surfaces, including physical adsorption, cross-linking, covalent binding, and entrapment. These methods have varying loading efficiency and varying levels of protein retention with manipulation The presence of the amide bands in the FT-IR spectra showed that BSA was incorporated into both the coprecipitated and the surface adsorbed mineral, with a slight difference in amide intensity. The presence of phosphate and carbonate groups confirmed the presence of a carbonated apatite mineral Coprecipitation incorporates significantly more protein into a biomimetic apatite layer than surface adsorption. BSA is an acidic protein that is negatively charged at a pH of 6.8, therefore electrostatic interactions are important The significant increase in protein quantity when using 3 day mineralization, 3 day coprecipitation in comparison to a 6 day coprecipitation suggests that the preliminary mineral layer that was deposited increases the affinity of the protein, thus increasing its incorporation. BSA is a negatively charged protein, and PLGA is a hydrophobic polymer. The mineral layer is both positively and negatively charged, and with the presence of this layer the protein can better interact with the biomaterial surface. In the current study, once BSA has been incorporated onto the mineral surface, it increases the affinity for additional calcium phosphate deposition through its interactions with Ca There was no significant difference in protein loaded between 6 day (Group 1) and 2 day (Group 5) coprecipitation. Thus, by premineralizing the films, fewer days of coprecipitation are needed to achieve the same amount of protein loaded. The significant decrease in protein amount between the 3 day mineralization, 2 day surface adsorption, 1 day mineralization group and the 3 day mineralization, 3 day adsorption group indicates that a polymer film that has protein adsorbed loses a majority of the protein once it is placed into solution due to weak surface interactions. Coprecipitation resulted in significantly higher retention of protein following rinsing ( By coprecipitating protein into the mineral, the morphology of the mineral changed. BSA coats the surface of the mineral and alters the plate-like structures. BSA is chemically bound into or onto calcium phosphate, as indicated by the change in morphology and composition of the crystals in this study, as well as the absence of BSA release without the dissolution of calcium phosphate The addition of BSA, especially higher concentrations, results in a decrease in the crystallinity of the calcium phosphate precipitates With coprecipitation, the localization of the protein throughout the mineral layer can be controlled by changing the coprecipitation scheme. By using a 6 day coprecipitation process, the protein is incorporated throughout the mineral layer, whereas with adsorption the protein is only on the surface of the mineral ( The control of protein localization could be manipulated to control the release kinetics of growth factors or other biomolecules. By changing the number of days of coprecipitation, or times at which protein is added to the mineralizing solution, the release kinetics of a growth factor can be varied. Multiple growth factors or plasmid DNA could also be incorporated into the bone-like mineral layer and/or the polymer substrate. Bone-like mineral will increase osteoconductivity and mechanical properties At standard temperature and pressure, coprecipitation processes were used to incorporate a model protein, BSA, into a biomimetic carbonated apatite mineral nucleated onto PLGA films. Coprecipitation of apatite and protein increased the quantity of protein incorporated into the apatite, in comparison to surface adsorption of protein following apatite deposition. This study also showed that coprecipitation allows for higher protein retention following rinsing, in comparison to adsorption. Furthermore, coprecipitation of protein along with apatite allowed for control over the localization of protein through the apatite thickness. The higher protein loading of this biomaterial system, and ability to spatially control the location of protein within the apatite, along with the provisions of osteoconductivity and osteoinductivity, by the mineral and protein, respectively, are important requirements for designing a desired protein release profile and effective delivery system of biological agents for bone regeneration. This research is supported by NIH DE 015411 (DHK), DE 13380 (DHK), and the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (LNL). The authors would like to thank the University of Michigan Electron Microbeam Analysis Laboratory for the use of their scanning electron microscope. The authors would also like to thank Sharon Segvich and Laura Darjatmoko for their aid in manuscript revision and helpful advice.