Bioprosthetic valve use has increased significantly. Considering their limited durability, there will remain an ongoing clinical need for repairing or replacing these prostheses in the future. The current standard of care for treating bioprosthetic valve degeneration involves redo open-heart surgery. However, repeat cardiac surgery may be associated with significant morbidity and mortality. With the rapid evolution of transcatheter heart valve therapies, the feasibility and safety of implanting a transcatheter heart valve within a failed tissue valve has been established. We review the historical perspective of transcatheter valve-in-valve therapy, as well as the main procedural challenges and clinical outcomes associated with this new less invasive treatment option.Approximately 85,000 heart valve prostheses are implanted in the United States each year, and a total of 275,000 worldwide The standard of care for degenerated bioprosthetic valves currently involves reoperative valve replacement. Over the last 2 decades, the mortality associated with redo aortic valve surgery has decreased significantly Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is now established as the preferred treatment option for inoperable patients and a valid alternative for high-risk individuals with severe symptomatic native aortic stenosis Characteristics of the main surgical bioprostheses are summarized in Stentless valves were developed to optimize the effective orifice area and thus facilitate left ventricular mass regression More recently, sutureless valves that avoid the placement of sutures following annulus decalcification have been introduced, with the objective of reducing cross-clamp and cardiopulmonary bypass duration, and facilitating minimally invasive surgery and complex cardiac interventions Surgical heart valve (SHV) sizing across manufacturers lacks standardization Structural dysfunction, due to progressive tissue deterioration, is the main cause of bioprosthetic valve failure. The major pathophysiological mechanism underlying this process is cusp calcification. This mineralization process may engender pure stenosis via cusp stiffening, and may also precipitate regurgitation due to secondary tears. Recent studies have suggested that bioprosthetic valve calcification is an active rather than a passive process, and is modulated by numerous mechanisms, including lipid-mediated inflammation, immune response, and dysfunctional phosphocalcific metabolism Another mechanism contributing to the limited lifespan of bioprosthetic valves is progressive collagen deterioration The mechanisms of aortic bioprosthetic dysfunction are equally distributed as predominantly stenotic, regurgitant, or mixed, with a higher rate of stenotic dysfunction among stented and smaller (≤21 mm) valves, and a predominant regurgitant mechanism among stentless valves The incidence of aortic and mitral bioprosthesis structural valve deterioration (SVD) requiring reintervention is 20% to 30% at 10 years and over 50% at 15 years Following pre-clinical studies evaluating the valve-in-valve technique, the first-in-human cases of valve-in-valve procedures for treating aortic bioprosthetic dysfunction were reported in 2007 using the CoreValve and Cribier-Edwards valve systems To date, the vast majority of valve-in-valve procedures for aortic valve dysfunction have been performed with the Edwards SAPIEN/SAPIEN XT valves (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California) and the CoreValve system (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota). Nonetheless, most transcatheter valves available for the treatment of native aortic valve stenosis have also been used for treating surgical aortic bioprosthetic dysfunction ( Data from pre-clinical studies proving the concept of mitral valve-in-valve and valve-in-ring procedures were reported in 2007 The pre-procedural work-up and periprocedural steps involved in valve-in-valve procedures are similar to those used for patients with native aortic valve stenosis considered for TAVR   In addition to those imaging modalities, the use of the    Baseline characteristics and outcomes of all published case series including more than 10 aortic valve-in-valve procedures are shown in The transcatheter valve was successfully implanted in 94.7% of patients, and the mean 30-day mortality rate was 8% ( The mean transvalvular gradient after aortic valve-in-valve procedures was 15.5 mm Hg (>10 mm Hg in most patients), which is higher than the gradients reported following TAVR within native valves (usually ≤10 mm Hg) Dvir et al. The mean rate of paravalvular leaks of at least moderate degree following valve-in-valve procedures is 4%, much lower than the ∼10% to 12% reported with first-generation transcatheter valves There are some major differential aspects between conventional TAVR and valve-in-valve procedures. Only a few valve-in-valve studies have reported 1-year survival rates Perioperative mortality and morbidity exceeds 15% in patients >75 years of age after reoperation following a first mitral valve intervention Similar to aortic valve-in-valve procedures, an accurate knowledge of the surgical mitral prosthesis or ring is essential for planning a mitral valve-in-valve or valve-in-ring procedure. The main characteristics of the SHV have already been outlined in a prior section of this review. Regarding the mitral rings, the D-shape of the annuloplasty ring may result in the occurrence of paravalvular leaks following transcatheter valve implantation. Because ring circularization is important to ensure efficient sealing, a transcatheter valve-in-ring procedure should, perhaps, be limited to deformable complete and rigid semilunar annuloplasty devices. Akin to aortic valve procedures, patients should undergo a multidisciplinary team evaluation including cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, anesthesiologists, nurses, and geriatricians. Transthoracic echocardiography and TEE should be performed to assess the severity and mode of bioprosthetic mitral valve failure, as well as left ventricular function. Concomitant coronary disease should be ruled out by a coronary angiogram before the procedure. CT is also very useful to provide information on valve dimensions and other geometric considerations. Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction is one of the potential complications of mitral transcatheter valve procedures, and the proximity between the surgical valve and LVOT, as well as LVOT dimensions should be assessed. However, the exact role of CT measurements in pre-procedural planning needs to be further evaluated (e.g., to better predict the risk of LVOT obstruction). To optimize anchoring and to limit paravalvular leakage, a minimum of 10% oversizing of the transcatheter valve compared with the true internal diameter of the surgical device is currently recommended The majority of mitral valve-in-valve cases are performed within a dedicated hybrid theater or in an operating room under general anesthesia. When the transapical approach is selected, a left mini-thoracotomy is used and purse-string sutures reinforced with pledgets are prepared. The left ventricular apex is punctured, the access sheath is inserted inside the left ventricle, and a guidewire is advanced under fluoroscopy across the failing bioprosthetic mitral valve into a pulmonary vein. The wire is then exchanged for a stiffer wire. The transcatheter valve (which is crimped in a reverse fashion when an Edwards SAPIEN is used) is then delivered through a standard delivery system. The transcatheter valve is implanted with fluoroscopic and TEE guidance, during rapid ventricular pacing. When the transseptal approach is chosen, femoral or jugular venous access is obtained. A transseptal puncture is done in a high and posterior position. After placing a sheath in the left atrium, a bolus of heparin is administered and a guidewire is positioned in the left ventricle. Afterward, a stiffer wire with a J curve at the end is gently placed at the left ventricular apex. Pre-dilation is generally avoided. Then, the valve, mounted for an antegrade implantation, is advanced across the atrial septum and then implanted using a slow balloon inflation technique, under rapid ventricular pacing. The transcatheter valve should be positioned 3 to 5 mm atrially, relative to the sewing cuff of the SHV The reported results of the case series of mitral valve-in-valve and valve-in-ring published to date The results of a retrospective collection of data from multiple centers worldwide were recently presented Predictors of suboptimal valve hemodynamic results were also evaluated. The main predictor of post-procedural elevated mitral gradients (≥10 mm Hg) was the presence of a small surgical valve size (label size ≤25 mm). Significant residual mitral regurgitation (≥moderate) was more frequent after mitral valve-in-ring than after valve-in-valve procedures (14.8% vs. 2.6%; p < 0.001) ( The late results (>3 months) of valve-in-valve and valve-in-ring procedures are limited to 7 reports, including a total of 93 patients In summary, the preliminary experience with mitral valve-in-valve and valve-in-ring procedures has outlined its feasibility, with acceptable clinical and hemodynamic 30-day and late results, despite the high-risk profile of the treated population. Most procedures were performed via a transapical approach, which is more invasive, yet more direct, and an easier approach for such procedures. However, a progressive shift towards a higher use of the transfemoral/transseptal approach is likely to be seen in the coming years. Of note, valve-in-ring procedures were associated with a much higher risk of major complications, including a higher rate of residual regurgitation and LVOT obstruction. A better understanding of the ring characteristics leading to these greater failure rates is required. Preliminary data suggests that subacute or late valve thrombosis rates may be more frequent in transcatheter valves positioned within the mitral (vs. aortic) position, further outlining that anticoagulation therapy following these procedures may be the preferred antithrombotic strategy. Finally, close clinical follow-up of these patients will be required to determine valve durability and potential late complications. The valve-in-valve proof-of-concept described by Walther et al. Whereas data on long-term (up to 5 years) THV durability following standard (for native valves) TAVR procedures is promising For mitral valve-in-valve and valve-in-ring procedures, the risk of LVOT obstruction, valve thrombosis, and unknown durability are some of the unresolved issues linked with such procedures. In addition, both the best antithrombotic regime and the specific anatomic and patient characteristics increasing the risk of a mitral transcatheter procedure are yet to be determined. Although we recognize the current limitations of valve-in-valve procedures, the growth of this technology in the near future is inevitable. It is therefore conceivable that the selection of valve type and technique during SAVR could be influenced by the convenience of a transcatheter valve-in-valve technique at a later time period. In younger individuals undergoing SAVR, the future availability of less invasive procedural options to treat structural valve failure could become an argument in favor of implanting a surgical tissue valve. Moreover, during the index surgical procedure, the benefits of annular enlargement or other techniques to obtain the largest effective orifice area possible may be considered in order to avoid PPM post-surgery. This will also enable enhanced optimization of potential future valve-in-valve procedures, should the surgical valve ultimately fail. Also, aortic SHVs which carry an increased risk for coronary obstruction post-transcatheter valve-in-valve therapy may be implanted less frequently, considering the risk of future bioprosthetic valve failure and the potential requirement for a valve-in-valve procedure. Bearing in mind preliminary data suggesting the lower mortality rate after valve-in-valve procedures when the major mode of failure of tissue valves is regurgitation, the treatment paradigm shift in SAVR may also include a greater implantation rate of SHVs with regurgitation as the predicted main mechanism of degeneration. Even if current data supports the use of valve-in-valve procedures for most patients, a thorough multidisciplinary heart team approach is strongly recommended for every patient considered for this type of transcatheter therapy. Long-term follow-up and increasing the worldwide clinical experience will be fundamental for establishing the exact role of valve-in-valve implantation for treating degenerative bioprosthetic valves, as well as for addressing the numerous knowledge gaps associated with these innovative procedures.