A new method to recover iron from high iron-bearing zinc calcine was developed. Zinc ferrite (ZnFe2O4) in zinc calcine was decomposed to zinc oxide and magnetite after roasting under a reducing atmosphere at temperatures over 700°C. A mineral dressing by magnetic separation was used to recover magnetite from the roasted products. The effects of the roasting temperature and magnetic induction intensity on the grade and recovery of iron were investigated. Ultrasonic treatment and mechanical milling played an important part in breaking the encapsulated magnetic phases before magnetic separation. The results show that iron recovery increases with roasting temperature and magnetic induction intensity, and ultrasonic treatment and mechanical milling promote the recovery of iron by 20% compared to the roasted zinc calcine subjected to magnetic separation at the same magnitude.Zinc ferrite is generated during the desulphurising roasting process of sphalerite, It is hardly soluble at mild acid conditions and could form hazardous residues ( Various hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes for zinc recovery from wastes containing zinc ferrite are currently used. High zinc recovery is achieved in hydrometallurgical processes. However, the sophisticated purification process and high environmental risk make these leaching processes unsuitable for mass production ( This paper focuses on the separation of iron from zinc calcine by a reduction roasting-magnetic separation process. In this process, a mixture of carbon monoxide (CO) and nitrogen (N The magnetite in the roasting product is recovered by magnetic separation, and the zinc oxide enters the tailing of magnetic separation and returns to the traditional zinc process as a raw material. This process has the advantages of a lower roasting temperature than the traditional process and a simple processing flow. In this study, the effect of the roasting temperature and the magnetic induction intensity on the separation of iron was investigated. Meanwhile, the effects of pre-treatment including sonication and milling prior to magnetic separation on the iron grade of concentrate were analysed. The high-iron zinc calcine sample with approximately 54.8% zinc and 12.68% iron, which was used in this study, was obtained from a zinc hydrometallurgical plant located in Inner Mongolia, China. The sample was sieved to obtain a required fraction of below 200 meshes (75 In roasting process, the samples were heated under a nitrogen-rich atmosphere to a desired reduction temperature and carbon monoxide gas was later introduced for reduction. After 2 Magnetic separation (MS) was performed on a slurry of reduced samples (10% in solid) using a Davis tube tester. A MS scheme under constant slurry flow rate and a targeted magnetic induction intensity ranging from 700 to 1700 A specified sonic processor (Shanghais, FS-300, 20 The wet milling operation was conducted in a planetary ball with a hardened chrome steel via in a mixture with a roasting product-to-water ratio of 1:20 at room temperature and a rotation speed 300 The morphology of the samples was observed by a scanning electron microscope (JEOL.LTD, JSM-6360LV). The Mössbauer spectrum (Wissel uniform accelerated Mössbauer spectrograph system) was used to characterise the iron phase’s change in the roasting process. Analysis of the particle size distribution (Hydro 2000MU-A) was carried out to determine the size reduction caused by sonication and milling. The Mössbauer spectra were determined at room temperature using  The SEM spectrums and particle size analysis of the samples after magnetic operation were carried out. The results of this study show that zinc ferrite was decomposed to form zinc oxide and magnetite in the presence of a reducing gas mixture. As observed from the results of direct MS, the recovery of iron increases with the increase of roasting temperature and magnetic induction intensity, while the grade of iron in concentrate is quite difficult to increase. The sonication pre-treatment can crush the physical inclusion of particles and promote the recovery of iron, but it can do little to increase the iron grade. The milling pre-treatment can break the self-sintering aggregation to a certain extent and promote the recovery and grade of iron in concentrate. The authors would also like to thank the National High Technology Research and Development Programme of China (2011AA061001), the National Scientific Research Project of Welfare (Environmental) Industry (2011467062), the National Science Found for Distinguished Young Scholars of China (50925417) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (50830301) for their support of this study.