The purpose of this work is to investigate whether the application of the electrochemical limiting diffusion current technique to the measurement of the mixing time in stirred vessels is possible; and if it is, then to establish a new technique for the measurement of the mixing time in the containers including liquids. For this aim, first the electrochemical limiting current conditions were determined, by observing the voltage-current change with the addition of a small amount of concentrated solution including active ions, that is, tracer, into the stirred system. Then, mixing time was determined by local and global measurements, employing both a local probe and one of the baffles as sensor, respectively. The comparison of the results with those of obtained by conductivity, which showed very good agreement, proved that electrochemical limiting current technique can be used as a means of measuring local and global mixing times as a cheap, simple, fast, straight forward and effective method.electrode area, m concentration of A species, mol/m bulk concentration of active species, mol/m surface concentration of active species, mol/m initial concentration of active species, mol/m concentration of active species after adding concentrated solution, mol/m diffusion coefficient of A within B, m rotator diameter, m Faraday constant, (=96,485 C·(e·mol) mass transfer coefficient, m/s rotating speed, rps electric current, A limiting current, A fluid density, kg/m fluid viscosity, kg/m.s concentration gradient, (mol/m electrical potential gradient, V/m bulk velocity of fluid in y direction, m/s number of transferred electron Mixing is defined as “the reduction of inhomogeneity in order to achieve a desired process result” Agitated liquid units are the most commonly encountered systems in the mixing operations with a wide range of applications. The mixing effectiveness in agitated liquids can be determined by observing and measuring some parameters such as minimum agitation speed, power consumption, circulation time, drop size distribution, breakup and coalescence, mixing time, interfacial area and phase inversion depending upon the characteristics of the system One of the indications for the degree of mixing in these units is the mixing time, which is widely employed, and most simple and widely used index for the determination of mixing degree The colorimetry has the main advantages of being a nonintrusive, simple and inexpensive technique, and the main disadvantages of being based on subjective human observation and being applicable only to transparent systems. The essential advantages of the conductivity and pH techniques are their simplicity and low costs. Their disadvantages are the fact that they are intrusive systems with probes immersed into the agitated vessel, and needs calibration and temperature compensation, and have limited spatial resolution. Although colorimetry is one of the most commonly used technique for the measurement of mixing time in agitated vessels, it normally has some disadvantages besides to its advantages; the main advantage of this technique is its being a non-intrusive method and simplicity. Despite of the simplicity in its application, it has the disadvantage that the result of the measurement depends considerably on human observation. The remaining other three techniques have some common disadvantages with the above mentioned two techniques as well some supreme features over them, such as high sensitivity, high spatial resolution, and high technology. However the main drawbacks of these techniques are their being comprised of complicated systems, sophisticated measurements and calculation procedure, and high skill requirement in their use, which makes them time consuming, expensive and unaffordable. Electrochemical limiting diffusion current technique (ELDCT) has been widely employed for the measurements of mass transfer, shear stress, fluid velocity, and turbulent fluctuations, and even for the investigation of eddy structure for about a half century. Some excellent reviews of these applications, including the principles of the technique, are presented in the literature, One of the important fundamental quantities in stirred tank system is power draw and power number which are expressed as follows, respectively The impeller Reynolds number is given by the following equation: Three stirring flow regimes are described by impeller Reynolds number and classified and into three flow regimes, namely laminar for Re ≤ 10, transitional for 10 ≤ Re ≤ 10 In these equations The parameters affecting mixing time ( The detailed information about theory of ELDCT and the assumptions in its practical applications can be found elsewhere In an electrochemical system, the transfer of the active ions from the bulk solution to the surface of the electrode through the double layer, or vice versa, occurs under the effect of the following three driving forces: (a) migration due to applied electrical potential field, (b) diffusion due to the concentration gradient, and (c) transfer due to electrolyte bulk flow. Assuming that the transfer is steady and one directional, which is in the direction perpendicular to the electrode surface ( The three terms on the right side corresponds to the contributions of ion migration due to electrical potential difference, diffusion due to concentration difference, and bulk motion due to solution flow, respectively. Because there is no bulk flow perpendicular to the electrode surface in the diffusion layer, the last term is neglected in the transfer process (except for the cases of metal deposition on the surface even though its effect is very small). The first term is made negligible by adding inert electrolyte in large excess amount into the system, increasing the conductivity of the electrolyte, and therefore the electrical potential gradient near the electrode becomes negligible. Under these assumptions and conditions, the migration and bulk motion contributions can be neglected. Moreover near the electrode surface, the turbulent eddy contribution becomes also negligible, and then only concentration difference contribution remains: The convection mass transfer between a fluid and a surface can also be expressed in a similar way to Newton’s cooling law: The current density at the electrode can be written as: Under limiting current conditions, taking into account that the surface concentration of active ion becomes zero, and then by combining Eqs. In the above written equations, So, under fixed hydrodynamic conditions for a given geometry, the limiting diffusion current becomes only a function of bulk electrolyte concentration. The basis of the application of ELDCT to mixing time measurement will be as follows: in a homogeneous electrochemical system operating at steady state under the conditions of ELDC, a small amount of solution including the active ions at higher concentration is added as a tracer into the system. Thus, it is expected the limiting current to increase according to Eq. For the ELDCT, the most commonly and widely used electrolyte couple of potassium ferricyanide (potassium hexacyanoferrate-(III)) and potassium ferrocyanide (potassium The advantages of this system are the fact that it does not give any precipitation, that is, no solid product forms, when ions reacts at the electrodes, the fact that the concentration of the active ions remains constant during the measurement due to conversion of the ions to one another at the electrodes, and that it gives a good long limiting current plateau. In the measurement the cathodic reduction of potassium ferricyanide was used due to a wider range of limiting current plateau compared that of anodic oxidation of ferrocyanide at anode. The main advantages of this technique are: Measurement system is simple and straightforward; it contains no complex units and no sophisticated data processing; since the measured quantity is directly current, measurement, recording and processing are very easy; response time is very fast; the electrochemical sensor is a simple metallic surface (nickel, platinum and gold can be used; but most commonly nickel is used due to its low price); the electrochemical sensor can be designed as probe, which can be immersed into the system at a certain orientation, or can be placed flash mounted to the desired locations in the system wall, so thus it can be used both in intrusive and non-intrusive mode; the size of the electrodes can change in a wide range from micrometre to centimetre; simultaneous measurements can be taken from multi electrodes; no transparency is needed. The disadvantage of this electrochemical system is that the photo-catalytic light dissociation of the ferri- and ferrocyanide under the effect of the light, and the complex effect of the dissolved oxygen. For this reason, the solution is deoxygenated by nitrogen before adding electrolytes and kept under nitrogen blanket, and the solution is isolated against light. In the preparation of electrolytic solution the chemicals with the purity of higher than 99.0 per cent (Merck made) were used. The concentration of the chemicals in the initial electrolytic solution were 0.0002 M for ferricyanide, 0.0008 M for ferrocyanide and 0.1 M for K The stirred vessel was designed and constructed according the standard tank size given by Geankoplis The temperature of the electrolytes was maintained constant by circulating water through the jacket with circulating thermostat of Julabo F-25 HE. All the experiments were performed at a constant temperature of 20 ± 0.5 °C. The impeller used for stirring the medium was a Rushton turbine type one, made of stainless steel, having a diameter of 60 mm and 6 blades with an angle of 0° to the impeller shaft, and the stirring was carried out by Servodyne digital controlled stirrer equipped with a 50003-00 model tachometer. It was concentrically orientated in the system at a distance of 50 mm from the vessel bottom to the tip of impeller. The electrochemical measurements were performed by GAMRY potentiostat-galvanostat (Interface 1000) with data acquisition and processing facility. The reference electrode was so placed into the system just behind the cathode baffle, downstream of the mixing direction and close to the solution surface so that it does not disturb the main flow pattern of the stirred solution. When local measurements were taken, a probe with a circular nickel cathode of 10 mm diameter was employed, as shown in Before carrying out the mixing time experiments, the measurements for the determination of limiting current conditions were performed by using the baffles as electrodes. These experiments were performed using different electrolyte solutions at different stirring speeds by measuring current-voltage behaviour of the system with linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) technique.  These figures show that the limiting current diffusion conditions start at about −0.2 V potential difference and cease between −0.7 and +1.0 V depending upon the conditions. The midpoint of plateau is around −0.35 V, and therefore this value was used in the mixing time measurements. As seen from the figures, both the effects of varying ion concentration and stirring speed, which are the solution properties and the change in the hydrodynamic conditions, respectively, are clearly distinguishable. The reason for the fact that the current values are lower for the electrolyte with 50% glycerol than those of with no glycerol is the viscosity values to be higher and diffusivity of active ion to be lower in this solution. Local mixing time measurements were taken at 60 rpm by using ELDCT technique and conductivity method for the electrolytic solutions with no added glycerol and with 30 and 50 per cent glycerol, and the recorded results were compared. After putting the initial solution into the jacketed tank and setting the stirring speed, the content of the vessel was brought to the desired temperature of 20 °C with circulating temperature bath. Then the recording of the limiting current was initiated by applying a potential difference of −0.35 V. 5.6 mL of concentrated solution (0.1 M K In the ELDCT measurements, three of the baffles were used as counter electrodes. The working electrode, that is, the sensor was a circular nickel plate with 10 mm diameter and 2 mm thickness, as shown in To find the time interval from the injection time to the second steady conditions, experimental values were converted the graphs by using a computer software, and the behaviour of the step change could be best represented by Boltzmann function and the values, therefore, were fitted to this function. The equation of Boltzmann function and corresponding The mixing times obtained in this way resemble approximately   The averaged local mixing time values at five different locations are given in In addition, further local mixing time measurements were performed by employing only ELDCT technique for the electrolytes with 30% and 50% glycerol at 140 rpm and 310 rpm. As an illustration, the graphs of the measurements at location 1 are given in To be able to see whether it is possible to get a global mixing time value by using one of the baffle as working electrode without immersing any probe into the vessel. The recordings of the experiment repeated trice at the same conditions with the solution with no glycerol are given in In addition, Present investigation has proved that ELDCT can be employed to measure mixing time in mixed vessels. From the measurements the following conclusions can be drawn The local mixing times exhibit significant differences depending on the measurement location. The comparison of ELDCT with the conductivity technique showed that the measurement of mixing time values of both technique are in quite good agreement, showing a deviation of maximum ±11.9 for local measurements, and 0.87% for the averaged values of the local measurements. The averaged values of the local mixing time measured by local sensors represent well the global mixing time value measured by one of the baffles as sensor, with a deviation of 2.63% for the solution with no glycerol though the deviation increased with increasing solution viscosity. It has been proved that ELDCT technique can be used for the measurement both the local mixing with a local sensor and the average mixing time by employing a working electrode as sensor having such geometry that it reflects the average mixing properties of the vessel content. In case of local mixing time a probe immersed into the solution was employed, while one of the baffles was used as sensor when average mixing time was measured. This work is a first step for the development of ELDCT technique to apply to new measurement area, namely mixing time. When considering the advantages of the techniques of being simple and straightforward, containing no complex units and no sophisticated data processing, giving the facility of direct measurement, recording and processing the current which is a directly measured quantity, having fast response, and requiring no transparency, it has a great potential for this kind of measurements. Moreover, the electrochemical sensor, which is a simple metallic surface, can be designed as local, immersed, or flushed with the surface of mixing vessel, or as a part of mixing system in different sizes ranging from micrometre to centimetre. After all, it is possible to measure the mixing time, local flow velocity, local flow direction and intensity of turbulence fluctuations with only one specifically designed sensor. When taking these advantages and the results of the measurements into consideration, it can be said that ELDCT technique is simple, cheap, effective, fast, easy and practical, and therefore a promising method for the measurement of mixing time investigations besides to a having a potential for developing a universal sensor for measuring more than one hydrodynamic characteristics of mixing medium. Thanks to Ataturk University for the support with the BAP Project No: 2013/343.