Rocks encountered in civil and mining engineering fields are invariably jointed and act under triaxial or polyaxial stress conditions. The Mohr–Coulomb shear strength criterion is the most widely used criterion for jointed rocks. In its present form there are two major limitations of this criterion; firstly it considers the strength response to be linear, and, secondly the effect of the intermediate principal stress on the strength behaviour is ignored. A modified non-linear form of Mohr–Coulomb strength criterion has been suggested in this study to overcome these limitations. Barton's concept of critical state for rocks has been imbibed in the linear Mohr–Coulomb criterion to deduce a semi-empirical expression for non-linear criterion. However, the shear strength parameters of the conventional Mohr–Coulomb criterion are used in the proposed criterion. The proposed criterion is a simple and rational nonlinear polyaxial strength criterion for anisotropic jointed rocks. In an earlier publication [1] the applicability of the criterion was evaluated for intact rocks. In present paper the criterion is extended to jointed rocks, which are anisotropic in nature. The applicability of the proposed criterion has been verified by applying it to extensive experimental data on triaxial and polyaxial test results on jointed rocks available from literature. Applicability of the criterion, to explain rock burst conditions for some Indian rocks, is also demonstrated.Rocks encountered in civil and mining engineering applications are, in general, jointed and anisotropic in nature. Their strength, under prevailing confining stress conditions, is needed while analysing problems related to deep tunnels, underground excavations and foundations. The strength of jointed rock, as a whole, depends on strength of the intact rock, joint geometry and surface characteristics of the joints. Depending on joint geometry and joint strength characteristics the rock blocks may undergo sliding, shearing, splitting or rotation at the time of failure. Substantial research has been carried out in past to understand the mechanical behaviour of rock joints Classification approaches The strength behaviour of the rocks is generally expressed by a strength criterion. Mohr–Coulomb strength criterion is the most widely used criterion for intact and jointed rocks as well. As discussed in earlier publication The complete derivation of the criterion for intact rocks has already been presented in The critical confining pressure will depend on the particular rock type and its lithology. However statistical analysis of more than 1100 triaxial test data in Brown Taking the idea from the above discussion, a model for strength behaviour of jointed rocks is shown in It has already been shown in The modified Mohr–Coulomb criterion for jointed rock may now be expressed as The maximum deviatoric stress at failure for jointed rock will be reached when The maximum deviatoric stress ( As discussed earlier, the strength of intact and jointed rocks will be nearly equal in critical state. Equating the maximum deviatoric stresses at failure for intact and jointed rock, the following expression is obtained: Using expression Since no method is available to obtain the critical confining pressure of jointed rocks, it was decided to fit the proposed criterion into a data-base collected from literature. The data was collected from the sources, where triaxial strength tests were conducted on intact as well as the jointed rock. The details of the data base i.e. rock type, UCS of intact rock, confining pressure for which triaxial tests were conducted on the jointed specimens are given in The following steps are used by the computer program: Let there be a number of rock-types for which triaxial test data is available. For each rock type, first data set comprises of triaxial test results for intact rock in the form of minor and major principal stresses at failure ( Consider first rock-type of the data base. Assume first trial vale of Use triaxial test results of intact rock to obtain the optimised value of Consider first set of jointed rock data. Use For the data set under consideration, compute the index termed coefficient of accordance (COA) Repeat steps (vi) and (vii) for all other triaxial data sets for this rock type. Consider next rock type and repeat steps (iii) to (viii) for all rock types to get COA for all 153 sets of all rock types. Compute the average of all the 153 values of COA. This value indicates how good the predictions are for the entire data base if the critical confining pressure is taken equal to 0.25 Now consider the next trial value of  Now taking Eqs. The above analysis indicates that the proposed critical-state-concept-based-Mohr–Coulomb criterion does have good potential of assessing triaxial strength of jointed rocks also. Eq. A designer will have more confidence in his analysis if he has an idea of the probable error in predicted strength of the rock mass. A probabilistic analysis has been done in this section to have insight into the probable error in prediction, if the present criterion is used to predict triaxial strength of the jointed rock mass. The available triaxial test data base for jointed rock with more than 730 data points has been used for this purpose. The triaxial strength of jointed rocks predicted through inputting The probabilities of occurrence of these errors were computed using the data base. The results of this analysis are shown in the form of probability distribution function ( For a realistic prediction of strength, it is essential that the criterion parameters are assessed with good accuracy. The parameter In the opinion of the authors, the most reliable results can be obtained through field testing only. It is, however, extremely difficult to load a rock mass in the field up to its failure stress. Alternatively, the rock mass in the field may be loaded only upto a pre-defined stress level and its modulus may be obtained. It is shown by Singh and Rao Amongst classification approaches, Q system is the most widely used approach for tunnelling projects in India. Based on the back analysis of case studies of 39 tunnelling projects from India and abroad, Singh et al. Barton The importance of considering the strength of rocks in polyaxial condition has been highlighted in the first part of this study On lines similar to intact rock criterion It is very difficult and time consuming to prepare models of rock mass and test them in laboratory. Though several studies have been reported on jointed rocks under uniaxial, triaxial and direct shear condition; the studies on rock masses (involving large number of intact rock blocks) are rather limited. The first author of this paper conducted an extensive study The To validate the applicability of the proposed polyaxial strength criterion to the tests results from Tiwari and Rao The anisotropic UCS of the rock mass The predictions for specimens with It is also worth mentioning that in the study by Tiwari and Rao One of the most important applications of the polyaxial criterion is in analysing rock burst conditions in deep underground openings. It has been observed in Indian conditions that squeezing occurs in tunnels under high overburden if the joint friction angle obtained from A case study of tunnel for a power project in Indian Himalayas has been discussed here to demonstrate the influence of considering effect of intermediate principal stress on the strength of the rock mass. The NJPC tunnel passes through augen gneisses having Another important application of critical state mechanics and polyaxial strength criterion may be in the field of seismology. The depth of brittle earth crust may be derived approximately as The following limitations and assumptions apply to the proposed strength criterion for jointed rocks: The suggested criterion is more suitable for those failure patterns where assumption of equivalent continuum is valid, and the equivalent properties are function of intact rock properties and joint characteristics. The joints are assumed to be tight with no infilling. If the joints are filled with gouge material, there will not be any wall-to-wall contact and the gouge material will govern the strength behaviour. Thus, in-situ direct shear tests may be conducted to obtain the strength parameters. There is no rotation of blocks during failure. In case of rotation of blocks, the geometry of the blocks becomes more important than the strength properties of the intact rock. If the joints are critically oriented and sliding occurs along these joint planes, the mass will behave more as a discontinuum than a continuum and this criterion will be of limited use. The strength reduction factor should be more than about 0.07 for the proposed polyaxial criterion to be applicable. If The proposed criterion is more suitable for deep tunnels, caverns and rock foundations within block jointed rock masses. In case of slopes with critically oriented joints, where Rock masses encountered in civil and mining engineering applications are invariably jointed. Mohr–Coulomb linear strength is the most widely used strength criterion to assess the strength behaviour of geological materials. However, in its conventional form, the criterion considers the strength behaviour to be linear and also ignores the effect of the intermediate principal stress. In present study the Mohr–Coulomb criterion has been modified to consider the non-linearity in assessing the strength behaviour. Barton's critical state concept, which was originally suggested for intact rocks, has been used to deduce the non-linear strength criterion. Back analysis of a triaxial test data base comprising of more than 730 triaxial test results for variety of rocks ( The criterion has also been extended to polyaxial stress conditions. A set of 54 polyaxial test results has been analysed to check the applicability of the criterion to polyaxial stress conditions in anisotropic jointed rocks. The criterion has been found to work well for those failure patterns where assumption of equivalent continuum is valid and the equivalent properties are function of intact rock properties and joint characteristics. For situations where wedge formed by intersecting joints is likely to slide along dominating joint planes, an appropriate criterion for rock joints should be used. As a rough guide-line it is recommended that the proposed polyaxial criterion for jointed rocks can be used with confidence for such situations having Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 