Tensile strength of rocks is an important parameter involved in the design and stability analysis of rock structures. The present paper is devoted to develop a new experimental method to investigate tensile strength, and the effect of confining pressure (P
                     c) on tensile behavior of rocks in underground rock engineering. A triaxial direct tension (noted as TDT) apparatus was developed based on the conventional triaxial compression (noted as CTC) device with the inspiration of the glue on steel cap type of method. TDT tests were carried out on the Fontainebleau quartz sandstone specimens under four different confining pressures. CTC tests under nine confining pressures were also carried out in order to compare the tension and compression behavior of the tested quartz sandstone. Tensile stress-strain curves were obtained during the CTC and TDT tests. Post-failure specimen analysis was also carried out to identify the failure mode in TDT test. The triaxial tension failed surfaces was sampled and scanned with the optical microscopy to obtain three dimensional images to show the effect of the confining stress on the failed surface roughness. The relationship between tensile and compressive strength and the strength criteria were analyzed with the experimental data. The results show the failure mechanism under TDT loading is different from that under CTC. The inter-grain cement is the dominant factor that contributes to the triaxial tensile strength of the quartz sandstone although the increase of confining pressure can induce a decrease of the triaxial direct tensile strength. It is suggested that the direct tensile strength of rocks should be tested directly for underground structures that confining pressure exists since uniaxial tensile strength can induce overestimate of the triaxial tensile strength.Tensile failure is an important issue in the mechanisms of rock blasting, rock borehole breakout, rock roof and floor failure, rock drilling and mineral extraction technology etc., particularly because rocks are very much weaker in tension than in compression. It is then imperative to study tensile failure process of rocks in depth. Among others, tensile strength of rocks is an essential parameter involved in the design and stability analysis of rock structures. In underground rock engineering, rock tensile strength limits the dimension of the roof span of underground openings Tensile strength of brittle materials has been widely investigated worldwide since the first introduction of an indirect tensile strength testing method for concrete in 1943 To improve the uncertainty in the Brazilian indirect tensile strength method, many other methods have been also introduced to determine the tensile strength of rocks. These methods include the indirect testing method, A major advantage of the indirect testing method is the implementation simplicity that is the main reason of its wide usage in spite of many uncertainties involved in the determination of the tensile strength. On the other hand, the advantage of the direct method is its accuracy if all the experimental issues can be under control. With the progress in sample fabrication and gluing technologies, the direct method has newly redrawn more and more attention due to the need in large-scale underground rock engineering. However, rocks in underground engineering are under constraints due to the in-situ stress that makes the tension failure of underground rocks far from that in the uniaxial tension test. Therefore, it is required to develop a new experimental method and device that can realize tension failure tests on rock samples under lateral stress to determine more precise the rock tensile strength and to better understand the tensile behavior of rocks under triaxial stress conditions. The present study is devoted to the development of a new triaxial direct tension (TDT) device and to the study of confining pressure ( The manuscript is organized into four parts. Section Although the TDT device has rarely been reported in the literature, there are many types of direct tension apparatus for uniaxial tensile strength testing. The method of direct tension of rocks, in principle, is similar to that employed in the test of metal materials. However, the principal difficulty in the direct tension test of rocks is the gripping of specimens and the application of a load parallel to the axis of the specimen. Specially prepared specimens are required to get uniform tensile stress distribution and for easy gripping. A grip was proposed to carry out tension test of rocks shown in To overcome these difficulties, a typical method using cylindrical specimens and epoxy based cements (of approximately 20.69–27.58 MPa tensile strength) was devised. The dog-bone shape specimens were also a type of testing for tensile strength of rocks. The above three types of direct tension apparatus are the basic ones in rock tensile strength testing although later investigator have either improved or modified the design. From the typical types of direct tension apparatus, one can conclude it is important that the specimen be mounted in the tension grips without damaging the specimen surface. Besides, there will be a tendency to cause torsion, bending, and producing abnormal stress concentrations if the centralization is not perfectly controlled. Inspired by the previous direct testing methods, we developed a TDT apparatus based on our conventional triaxial compressive testing device. The cylindrical specimen is cemented onto the surface of the supporting base at one end and to the supporting head for pulling at the other end during sample preparation process. The supporting bases have the same diameter as the tested specimen to minimize stress concentrations at the cemented surface. The cementation is very important during sample preparation. To realize good cementation, the DELO-CA cement (approximate 25 MPa tensile strength) was used and a cementing and curing device (shown in At a given confining pressure, the specimen in the triaxial cell is compressed by an isostatic stress. When pressure is increased in the tension chamber by a hydro-servo pump, the axial compressive stress applied to the specimen is reduced firstly. The axial tensile stress will arise in the specimen if the pressure in the tension chamber is increased to be higher than the confining pressure. Then, the specimen will behave in axial direct tension stress state under the given confining pressure. If no confining pressure is applied, the apparatus can realize the uniaxial tension test. In the developed TDT apparatus, we can measure pressure, stress, displacement, and strain by sensors. The confining pressure is applied by the ISCO D260 series pump with the maximal pressure value of 600 bars and precision of 0.1 bars. Pressure injection into the tension force production chamber is done by another Gilson pump that can control the inject flow rate from 0.0005 ml/min to 5 ml/min and has the maximal pressure value of 600 bars with precision of 0.1 bars. The axial displacement is measured by a pair of LVDTs that has a measurement range of 0–10 mm with precision of 0.001 mm. The radius change is measured by a circumferential ring that has a measurement range of 1.5 mm and precision of 0.001 mm. The precision of the ring is lower than the LVDT due to technical reasons in component arrangement. As an option, both the axial and radius strains can be measured by the strain gages, which however requires more time for sample preparation. Thus, we used the LVDTs and circumferential ring to measure the strains during stress loading. The pressure applied on the specimen is measured by the pressure sensors that have a measurement range of 0–200 bars and a precision of 0.01 bars. The stress is calculated from the pressure measured by the pressure sensors. The lateral (radial) stress The axial stress If The axial strain The material tested is a type of quartz sandstone drilled from the Fontainebleau town in Southeast of Paris. The fontaintebleau sandstone has been characterized in some previous work Grains are poorly attached to their neighbors in variety as shown in The cylindrical specimens used in this study with about 20 mm in diameter and 40 mm in height were drilled in the laboratory from a cubic block of 500 mm in edge. The drilled specimens were cut and polished on both ends to make the end surface flat and perpendicular to the cylindrical axis. Then, they were kept in an oven that can provide dry air of 30 °C to keep a homogeneous air-dry state in the samples before they were subjected to mechanical tests. The initial diameter and length of the specimens are given in We used the developed TDT apparatus to carry out triaxial tension tests on the Fontainebleau quartz sandstone. In order to investigate the effect of confining pressure on the tension behavior of the sandstone, triaxial tension tests under four different confining pressures (0, 2, 6, 12 MPa) were carried out (see In addition, a series of CTC tests under different confining pressures were carried out on the Fontainebleau sandstone to address the relationship between its triaxial tensile and compressive strength. The experimental program is shown in Two repeated experiments were carried out to verify the obtained tensile strength of the developed TDT apparatus under each confining pressure with two specimens. In total, nine different confining pressures (respectively 0, 2, 4, 6, 10, 16, 20, 30, 40 MPa) were tested for the quartz sandstone in the CTC tests in order to obtain its failure criterion under CTC. The CTC tests were carried out following the protocole of our previous hydro-mechanical tests Clean the surface of the specimen supporting base and head successively with distilled water, dry compressed air, pure Arcetone and compressed air, and clean the end surfaces of the sandstone sample with dry compressed air. Put a plastic sealing jacket outside the specimen and install the circumferential ring outside the sealing jacket. Daub the two end surfaces of the sandstone specimen, and the connecting surface of the specimen supporting base and head with a very thin layer of the DELO-CA cement. Cement the specimen up- and down-end surface respectively with the specimen supporting head and base in the cementation device that can apply a small compression force to allow the homogeneity of the cement at the contacting surface. The cement curing takes more than 48 h so that the cement strength can grow fully to cement the specimen together with the supporting base and head at both ends. It should be stated that the cementation device controls the centralization of the specimen axis, and the axis of the specimen supporting base and head by setting the specimen and supports on the pre-made fillister. Install the specimen together with the supporting base and head on the device base with by screwing tight the connecting screw and seal well the sealing jacket after checking the cementation manually with a gentle pulling force. Install the LVDTs and the accessories for deformation measurement, and seal the main triaxial chamber by installing the chamber wall and cap, and screwing the pull rods. Close the valve between the main triaxial chamber and autocompensated chamber while keep open the valve connecting tension force production chamber, and inject oil into the autocompensated chamber (by the tube 20 in Open the valve (in tube 22 in Inject oil into the tension force production chamber (component 16 in Throughout the testing process, the values of the pressures, the LVDTs and the circumferential ring are monitored and recorded in the data acquisition device at a given interval of 0.05s. In addition, no pore pressure is applied in the test. Thus, the tests can be thought to be the drained ones since possible small change of pore volume will exert barely effect on the pore pressure change due to the high compressibility of the air prefilled in the specimen pores. The axial stress-strain curves of the TDT tests are shown in It is indicated in The peak compressive stress however increases from about 33 MPa to 499 MPa when the confining pressure increases from 0 MPa to 40 MPa. For example, the peak tensile stress is about 1/17 of its peak compressive stress when there is no confining pressure. Thus, there is a huge difference between the values of the peak tensile stress and the peak compressive stress of the sandstone under the same confining pressure. As indicated in As shown apparently in Therefore, the axial strain at failure in TDT test is much smaller than that in CTC test, which is similar to the observation of peak axial stress of the two types of tests. However, the Fontainebleau sandstone can undergo larger strains under higher confining pressures in both CTC and tension tests. The tensile modulus ( In The calculated axial elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio are shown in Therefore, the uniaxial tensile elastic modulus of the tested quartz sandstone is about 2.0 GPa and the confining pressure appears to decrease the tensile elastic modulus. The Poisson's ratio seems also to be affected by the confining pressure in the TDT test. According to the stress-strain curves shown in The post-failure photos of the specimens in tension tests are shown in To further characterize the failure surface of the specimens after TDT test, we observed the representative sampling points on the failure surface of the specimen failed under different confining pressures by the three-dimensional optical microscopy. The representative images are shown in There are apparent peaks and troughs on the failure surfaces. The difference between the peak and the trough varies a lot in Therefore, the failure of the quartz sandstone in TDT exhibits a typical tensile mode, which is different from the compression-induced shearing failure in the CTC tests. The lateral stress can exert an extra axial extension effect to induce easier tensile failure of the quartz sandstone under TDT. We define the tensile strength The Lode's constant The tensile strength of the quartz sandstone is very low compared to its compressive strength as indicated in The compressive strength In contrast, as shown in One can see that the confining pressure plays an important role in increasing the compressive strength of the quartz sandstone from the parameter The triaxial tensile strength decrease could be partially contributed by the effect of Poisson's ratio. When a lateral stress σ It is difficult to correlate the tensile strength to the compressive strength from the equations obtained in We can thus recollect the mean stress As indicated in The slope value of the linear criteria for the CTC tests (2.4152) is much greater than that of the TDT tests (1.382). The value of the slope is a quantification of the “friction effect” contributed by the The envelope of linear criterion of the CTC test and TDT test intersects the The non-symmetricity and shape difference for tension and compression of the tested quartz sandstone are different from those of the Red Wildmoor sandstone. Therefore, the non-symmetricity of the strength envelope of the quartz sandstone indicates that estimation of its triaxial tensile strength from the CTC test can induce an important overestimation. Triaxial tensile strength of the high-frictional geomaterials such as the quartz sandstone should be determined by the TDT tests. The failure criterion for constitutive modeling of the quartz sandstone from compression to tension is suggested to be non-symmetric with respect to the mean stress axis. Based on the results presented above, the following concluding remarks can be drawn: The TDT test on rocks with the developed apparatus modified from the conventional triaxial cell is feasible with the cementing method although preparation of specimen is a little complicated. Boundary conditions are critical in the TDT test. The performance of the cementing is the main limited issue for carrying out successful tests under high confining pressures since the confining stress can exert a lateral shear force to the specimen at the cementing surface. The tensile strength of the quartz sandstone is very low compared to the compressive one. The uniaxial tensile strength is no more than 1/17 of its uniaxial compressive strength. The ratio of triaxial tensile strength to triaxial compressive strength is even smaller when the confining pressure is high. The direct tensile strength of quartz sandstone could be dominated by the cementation among its mineral particles. Confining pressure increases and dominates the triaxial compressive strength of quartz sandstone under CTC. However, it decreases its triaxial tensile strength and elastic modulus under the TDT. The confining pressure contributes to the normal stress for friction on the compression-induced shear surface in compression tests while it accelerates the axial tension of the specimen under direct tension, e.g. with the Poisson ratio effect. Tensile failure planes of the quartz sandstone under TDT tests are generally perpendicular to the axis of the specimen, i.e. parallel to the direction of tensile stress. The confining pressure has very limited effects on the failure surface inclination of the quartz sandstone under the TDT tests although the surface roughness seems to be influenced by the confining pressure. Triaxial tensile strength of the high-frictional geomaterials such as the quartz sandstone should be determined by the TDT tests since the estimation of its triaxial tensile strength from the CTC test can induce an important overestimation. The failure criterion for constitutive modeling of the quartz sandstone from compression to tension is suggested to be non-symmetric with respect to the mean stress axis. Nevertheless, the performance of the developed TDT device is limited by the cementing performance and the quality in cementation of the specimen. Artifacts in cementing specimen with the supporting base and head would induce bad centralization of the tension in test, and finally induce odd failures and experimental data. In addition, the cement and the specimen support base and head must be also well designed to be able to fit with different rocks in future work. Comparison on triaxial extension, CTC and TDT tests will be investigated in future. The authors are grateful to Mr. Jean Secq for his help in design of the TDT device. The authors also thank Dr. Nicolas Gay and Professor Fréderic Skoczylas for their help in the specimen study with the optical microscopy. Financial support to Zaobao Liu from the