A critical problem associated with poorly soluble drugs is low and variable bioavailability derived from slow dissolution and erratic absorption. The preparation of nano-formulations has been identified as an approach to enhance the rate and extent of drug absorption for compounds demonstrating limited aqueous solubility. A new technology for the production of nano-particles using high speed, high efficiency processes that can rapidly generate nano-particles with rapid dissolution rate has been developed. Size reduction of a low melting ductile model compound was achieved in periods less than 1h. Particle size reduction of ibuprofen using this methodology resulted in production of crystalline particles with average diameter of approximately 270nm. Physical stability studies showed that the nano-suspension remained homogeneous with slight increases in mean particle size, when stored at room temperature and under refrigerated storage conditions 2–8°C for up to 2 days. Powder containing crystalline drug was prepared by spray-drying ibuprofen nano-suspensions with mannitol dissolved in the aqueous phase. Dissolution studies showed similar release rates for the nano-suspension and powder which were markedly improved compared to a commercially available drug product. Ibuprofen nano-particles could be produced rapidly with smaller sizes achieved at higher suspension concentrations. Particles produced in water with stabilisers demonstrated greatest physical stability, whilst rapid dissolution was observed for the nano-particles isolated in powder form.Recent trends in the research have shown that a disproportionate number of compounds identified through combinatorial screening programs have a tendency to suffer from low aqueous solubility with consequent impact on bioavailability by the oral route. These molecules are difficult to formulate using conventional approaches and are associated with innumerable formulation-related performance issues ( Amongst the range of approaches used to address this issue, the use of nano-particles with vast surface area to volume ratio has been highlighted as a strategic platform. A nano-suspension is a sub micron colloidal dispersion of pharmaceutical active ingredients stabilized by surfactants (stabilizers) in a liquid phase ( Techniques used for drug nano-particle preparation can be classified into two principle classes. Processes which reduce the size of larger drug particles to sub-micron levels through communition are considered to be “Top–down” methods. “Bottom–up” processes on the other hand involve the controlled precipitation of nano-particulates through non-solvent addition ( This study presents a new technology for producing sub-micron crystallites of drugs with challenging mechanical properties ( The mechanical properties of some pharmacological actives can often be inadequate for efficient size reduction. Ductile materials in particular have a tendency to deform rather than fragment, especially at sizes below the brittle-ductile transition ( The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of a new comminution technology for reducing the particle size of a highly ductile active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) to sub-micron levels whilst acquiring an understanding of the factors influencing particle size stability. The intention of these studies was to reduce the size of a problematic ductile compound to sub-micron levels in order to improve the dissolution rate of the selected API. Ibuprofen USP, 2-[4-(2-methylpropyl) phenyl] propanoic acid was purchased from Albermarle Europe sprl, (Belgium). Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) was a gift from Shinetsu (Japan). Sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS) was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich, USA. Kollidon 30 (PVP K-30) was purchased from BASF (Aktiengesellschaft Ludwigshafen, Germany). Ibuprofen oral pediatric suspension ‘BP’ was purchased from Lloyd's pharmacy, UK. All other materials used were of analytical grade and purchased from established suppliers. Suspensions of ibuprofen were produced at solids loads of 2% (w/w) and 15% (w/w) in a medium comprising hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 6cPs (0.5%, w/w), polyvinylpyrrolidone K-30 (0.5%, w/w) and sodium lauryl sulphate (0.1%, w/w). A list of stabilizers and composition used in processing ibuprofen suspensions is given in The 2% (w/w) and 15% (w/w) ibuprofen suspensions were processed in water and at pH 2.0. The standard solution contained purified water where the 0.5% (w/v) PVP, 0.5% (w/v) HPMC and 0.1% (w/v) SLS were firstly dissolved with subsequent dispersion and addition of ibuprofen. The acidic solution was adjusted to pH 2 using hydrochloric acid. The stabilizers were then dissolved in this solution and the ibuprofen was dispersed thereafter. Ibuprofen suspensions were dispensed into the processing system ( 5 The particle size distribution of the ibuprofen nano-suspension was determined by PCS using the Zetasizer Nano series, Model ZEN3600 (Malvern instruments, UK). Samples were diluted with water (1:4) for the 15% (w/w) suspension for which 1 The zeta potential for the suspensions was determined using Zetasizer Nano series, Model ZEN3600 (Malvern instruments, UK). The suspensions were diluted 1:10 for 2% (w/w) suspension with the dispersion medium and for 15% (w/w) 0.2 The TEM used was an FEI Tecnai 12, (FEI Company, Netherlands) which was operated at 120 Surface morphology of ibuprofen and spray dried nano ibuprofen powder were examined using a scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta 400, Netherlands). Ibuprofen particles were fixed on an aluminium stub with a conductive double sided carbon tape. An accelerating voltage of 20 The sample suspensions were centrifuged at 14,800 X-ray powder diffraction was performed using dried residue obtained by centrifugation of the suspensions and then dried in air oven. The XRPD data were obtained using the Bruker D8 powder diffractometer (Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany). Samples were scanned using a copper Kα radiation source over the 2 The concentration in samples of ibuprofen was determined using the modified USP method. A Waters Alliance (Water Systems, UK) 2695 separations module with 2487 dual wavelength absorbance detector at 214 The particle size and the active content of the nano-suspensions after manufacture were measured at 0, 1 and 2 days for both the 2% and 15% (w/w) suspensions after storage at 2–8 Spray-drying was carried out using a Büchi 190 Mini Spray Dryer (Buchi Labortechnik AG, Flawil, Switzerland) fitted with a two-fluid nozzle and peristaltic pump. The processing parameters comprised an inlet temperature of 130 The 15% (w/w) nano-suspensions in water and pH 2.0 were spray dried using the Buchi B-190 mini spray dryer. An equivalent mass of mannitol (15%, (w/w)) was added to the ibuprofen nano-suspension and dissolved. The resultant suspension was then spray dried to produce a free flowing powder, which was analysed for active content, particle size and solid state characteristics by XRPD and DSC. The dissolution characteristics of nano-suspension, spray-dried powders and as supplied API were compared at pH 7.2 using USP II apparatus (paddle method) with paddle speed of 50 The initial size of elongated particles of ibuprofen with aspect ratios of 4–6 was approximately in the range 20–30 Ibuprofen suspensions processed for 5 Concentrated suspensions containing sub-micron particles show non-Newtonian flow behaviour including phenomena like shear thinning, shear thickening and yielding. These phenomena are closely related to particle–particle interactions. The shear stress of the processed suspensions increases with decreasing particle size and processing time ( Greater concentration of particles leads to a greater number of stress events with some self attrition leading to smaller particle size. It is clear from the trends in size reduction that comminution is most effective for the higher concentration suspensions where interactions with the grinding media are likely to occur more frequently and where some self-attrition is also likely to occur. There is no evidence of particles with sizes exceeding 1000 The results from this study can be compared favorably with those obtained using the RESS (rapid expansion of supercritical solutions) method ( The particle size and drug content (as percentage of nominal) of samples with nominal concentration of 2% (w/w) ibuprofen stored at 2–8 It was observed that the particle size increased slightly from day 0 to day 2 at both room temperature (20–25 The average particle size and active agent content (as percentage of nominal) of samples with nominal concentration of 15% (w/w) ibuprofen stored at 2–8  According to the DLVO theory, a system can be regarded as stable if electrostatic repulsion dominates the attractive Van der Waals forces ( It is also well known that increases in intensity of light radiation and temperature lead to accelerated particle growth ( Zeta potential values for the 2% (w/v) and 15% (w/v) ibuprofen suspensions in water and at pH 2.0, stored at room temperature and at 2–8 Evaluation of the spray dried powder showed particles with size in the range 5–10 DSC showed that ibuprofen had maintained its crystallinity and physical form following size reduction and spray drying respectively. The DSC thermal profile for particles isolated from suspension by centrifugation and in the spray dried form ( Previous studies have suggested that amorphization of poorly water-soluble drugs by milling has the potential to provide improvements in bioavailability ( The formulations developed in this study therefore have the potential to demonstrate greater physical stability than the dosage forms previously reported in the literature which contained drug in a predominantly amorphous form ( The dissolution rate of the spray-dried powder was similar to that of the nano-suspension (pH 2 and water), with release being almost complete after 2 Previous reports of dissolution studies for enabling formulations of ibuprofen have shown marked increases in release rates such as the amorphous solid dispersions developed by The nano-systems showed improved faster dissolution characteristics over the commercial product which also demonstrated incomplete dissolution after 60 The particle size of ibuprofen was reduced when processed at concentration of 15% (w/w) when suspended either in water or at pH 2, from a starting size of 20 We gratefully acknowledge the support given by