The main aim of this study is to prepare and characterize PCM/diatomite composites with impregnation method using unmodified and microwave modified diatomite. The effect of microwave modification of diatomite on composites was investigated. In this study, lauric acid (LA) was used as the phase change material and the prepared PCM/diatomite composites were analysed by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and laser diffraction particle size analyser. Thermal stability of composites was demonstrated by thermal resistance test. The results show that the composites prepared with microwave-modified diatomite have higher heat capacities than those prepared with unmodified diatomite. According to the DSC analysis, composites with modified diatomite have melting and freezing temperatures of 40.4 and 39.5 °C, respectively. These composites also have the latent heats of melting and freezing of 55.7 and −49.9 J/g, respectively. According to the analysis and thermal resistance test, it was seen that composites were prepared successfully. After the determination of better thermal energy storage properties of microwave-modified diatomite containing composites than unmodified diatomite containing composites, we recommend that these composites can be used for thermal energy storage applications.Thermal energy storage (TES) in phase change materials (PCMs) allows the use of energy which is stored in the time available from renewable energy sources when it is needed. During phase change, PCM absorbs and releases heat at a nearly constant temperature. In addition, the isothermal phase displacement properties of PCMs is utilized to reduce energy consumption of heating and cooling applications. In recent years, many studies have been conducted on the preparation of PCM composites to increase the efficiency of heat transfer and to prevent the leakage of PCMs from the composite during applications LA with the chemical formula C LA/diatomite composites were prepared using microwave-modified diatomite and unmodified one with impregnation method The influence of the modification of diatomite on the properties of PCM/diatomite composites was examined. During the preparation of composites containing unmodified diatomite by impregnation method, firstly LA and diatomite was heated to 60 °C together. After the PCM was completely melted, stirring were continued for 30 min at 60 °C. The prepared composites were dried in an open air oven at 40 °C for 48 h During the preparation of LA/diatomite composites containing modified diatomite, firstly diatomite samples were modified by microwave under microwave irradiation in a home-style microwave oven at 700 W for different periods from 1 min to 10 min. The above impregnation method was applied in the same manner. As shown in Morphologies of composites were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss EVO40). The thermal properties of the prepared composites were determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) technique (Perkin Elmer 4000). The analyses were carried out at 5 °C/min heating rate. The compositions of LA and the composites were determined by a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR) (Bruker-Vertex70) at room temperature (22 °C). The particle size distribution of composites was determined using a laser diffraction particle size analyser (Malvern-Mastersizer 3000). Composites were exposed to thermal resistance test in order to test the form stability and leakage resistance when the composites subject to higher temperatures. They were heated to 95 °C in a water bath for 30 min in order to evaluate their behaviour in higher temperatures. This study focuses on preparation and characterization of PCM/diatomite composites with impregnation method using microwave-modified and unmodified diatomite for thermal energy storage applications. The prepared composites have powder appearance like used grinded raw diatomite samples ( Morphologies of cPCM and mcPCM1 are presented in The increase in grain size of composites was also demonstrated by particle size distribution analysis. According to analysis, PCM/unmodified diatomite composite has a median grain size (d50) of 24.1 µm and d90 value of 63.3 µm. PCM/modified diatomite has a median size of 35.4 µm and d90 value of 115 µm. Thermal characteristics of LA and LA composites were obtained by DSC. DSC analysis results were presented in It can be seen clearly from the There is 30% LA in the composites. The theoretically expected enthalpy values of the composites was approximately 66,7 J/g (Hm = 222.2 × 30%) and a maximum of 55.7 J/g was obtained with microwave modified diatomite PCM composites. The reduction of latent heat can be explained with drag and steric effects of the nano-pores as previously reported by Han and Liu Chemical composition of LA/diatomite composites were characterized by FTIR analysis. The FTIR spectra of LA, diatomite and LA/diatomite composites with microwave-modified diatomite are presented in Thermal resistance test was applied on composites cPCM, mcPCM1, mcPCM2, mcPCM3 and mcPCM4 after preparation. LA is used to prepare PCM/diatomite composites for latent heat energy storage applications as energy storage materials. This study focuses on preparation of PCM/diatomite composites with impregnation method using unmodified and microwave-modified diatomite. The influence of the microwave treatment on the properties of PCM/diatomite composites was examined. SEM analyses showed that the morphologies of LA/diatomite composites, particularly the particle sizes are affected from microwave treatment. FTIR analyses results proved that LA/diatomite composites prepared successfully with microwave-modified diatomite. DSC analyses results demonstrated that diatomite-based phase change material composites prepared after microwave treatment offer proper phase transition temperature range, heat enthalpy, melting and freezing latent heat (55.7 J/g and 49.9 J/g) values for thermal energy storage applications like buildings. We would like to thank The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) (The Project code: TUBITAK 115M525) for financial support for this study. We also would like to thank the editorial board and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments to improve the quality of the paper. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at  