In this study, the aim is to beneficiate magnesite slimes by flotation. In order to achieve flotation for −38 μm magnesite wastes effectively, ultrasonic treatment was utilized simultaneously and as a pre-treatment technique. The results of ultrasonic treatment for magnesite flotation were compared to the results of conventional flotation. As a result, the effects of ultrasound were observed as follows: the froth dimensions became smaller, the froth stability was increased and the froth taking time became longer. Consequently, recovery values also supported the positive effect of ultrasonic treatment for magnesite slimes.Magnesite can be classified into salt type minerals in terms of its flotation response. It is floated with anionic type collectors during direct flotation, whereas impurities are floated with both anionic and cationic type collectors during indirect flotation. Regulation of pH during anionic flotation is extremely crucial and some alkali ion addition, i.e. Na In this study, magnesite ores with impurities of iron oxides and quartz at −38 μm particle size are floated with the help of ultrasonic treatment. Recent studies have shown that separate elements of the flotation process could be favourably influenced by mechanical vibrations, by the acoustic wave process or by the joint manifestation of these two physical phenomena. Most of the past studies examined the effects of ultrasound prior to flotation, i.e. removal of adsorbed layers of reagents from minerals and emulsification of flotation reagents, while other recent work has studied the effect of ultrasonic treatment during and/or after the flotation process. It was found that the effectiveness of ultrasonic vibration is generally dependent on the nature of the mineral and also the application method of the ultrasound ( In this study, the representative magnesite ore sample was provided from Kutahya, Turkey. Mineralogical analyses carried out by X-ray diffraction showed that the present sample contained magnesite as a major mineral, while some quartz, calcite and ferrous clay minerals were present in minor amounts. Chemical analyses resulted with 45.41% MgO, 3.71% SiO The aim of this study is to reveal information about floatability of magnesite slimes with or without the help of ultrasonic treatment. Flotation experiments for slimes can be grouped into three different categories. The first is conventional direct magnesite flotation, the second is direct magnesite flotation with ultrasonic pre-treatment and the last is direct magnesite flotation with simultaneous ultrasonic treatment. Conventional direct magnesite flotation is achieved under these optimal and stable conditions: Ultrasonic pre-treatment means that −10 μm material was removed by decantation with help of the ultrasound then The results of three different experiments are given in In industrial and laboratory applications, magnesite slimes cannot be handled and are regarded as waste. In this study, the aim is to beneficiate magnesite slimes by flotation. In order to achieve flotation for −38 μm magnesite wastes effectively, ultrasonic treatment was used simultaneously and as a pre-treatment technique. The results of ultrasonic treatment for flotation of magnesite slimes were compared to the results of conventional flotation. As a result of this comparison, it is observed that the effect of ultrasonic waves as follows: the froth dimensions became smaller, the froth stability was increased and the froth taking time became longer. Consequently, recovery values also supported the positive effect of ultrasonic treatment for this unique refractory material. When conventional magnesite flotation was compared to the ultrasonic flotation, the best results in terms of magnesite concentrate grade and recovery were obtained by use of ultrasonic pre-treatment. This was believed to be due to physical cleaning of the magnesite surfaces from very fine sized clayish part, i.e. −10 μm. In contrast, simultaneous ultrasonic treatment could not produce the desirable magnesite grade and recovery values during flotation. This phenomenon was probably dependent upon the help of ultrasonic waves for floatability of very fine sized magnesite with ferrous clays. As a result of this study, it is obvious that use of ultrasonic techniques certainly affects the floatability of magnesite under certain conditions, such as optimal collector dosage, the way ultrasound is applied etc. Ultrasonic treatment can be easily used at non-laboratory conditions with the help of ultrasonic inducers and horns working at low power consumption, i.e. 0.5 W. The next step of this work will certainly cover the economical implication of the application of ultrasonic at pilot scale and comparison of conventional flotation to this novel method in terms of practicality and economics.