The temporal evolution of fracture networks below hydrothermal veins (root zones) and their impact on fluid chemistry, vein mineralogy and ore formation is insufficiently understood for unconformity-related hydrothermal veins in regions of extension, such as the common epithermal sediment-, unconformity- and basement-hosted Pb–Zn deposits. As metals and other trace elements are presumably mobilized during water–rock interaction of highly saline brines with igneous and metamorphic basement rocks, the evolution of these fracture zones seems to play a major role for hydrothermal ore formation. Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICPMS) microanalysis of individual, texturally well-characterized fluid inclusions, hosted in fluorite and quartz of the Jurassic–Cretaceous Brandenberg fluorite–barite–quartz–galena–sphalerite vein near Todtnau, Schwarzwald, SW Germany, was carried out. Fluid mobile elements (Rb, Cs, Li, W, Ba, Zn, Pb, Sr), preferentially released by the alteration of primary rock-forming minerals (process tracer) were analysed as well as the Cl/Br ratio (source tracer) of fluid inclusions in genetically early fluorite and later quartz. A distinct decrease of trace elements within the fluid inclusions with time indicates successive alteration of primary minerals at the fracture wall to clay minerals with consecutive fluid pulses. A maximum concentration of trace elements in the fluid and consequent ore precipitation is associated with the initial phase of formation of a fracture root. Later fluid pulses migrate along pre-existing fractures so that the amount of fresh reactive rock material decreases with each fluid pulse. As a consequence, multiple generations of ore minerals require the formation of new fracture branches in the root zone of hydrothermal veins. Therefore, it seems that cataclastic zones below hydrothermal veins essentially control ore formation, and their tectonically induced dynamics might be one key parameter that governs the temporal interval of ore precipitation.The nature of the feeding systems of hydrothermal unconformity-related vein-type deposits and of the detailed relation between active tectonics, fluid flow and mineral precipitation are poorly constrained. Few studies have addressed feeder systems of other hydrothermal systems: Previous work on epithermal sediment- and basement-hosted unconformity-related vein deposits mainly focused on the chemical and hydrodynamic processes that cause ore precipitation in particular, the fluid mixing (e.g. In contrast to the referred contributions, this study focuses on the temporal evolution of fluid migration paths, which govern the chemical composition (focusing on trace elements) of the basement fluid involved in ore-forming processes. The conceptual model is based on the following assumptions: If the fracture system below hydrothermal veins remains physically unchanged over a specific time interval of mineral precipitation, major element chemistry should not change significantly over time, while other chemical tracers (Rb/Cs, Li, W, Pb, Zn) in the fluid should show a systematic variation with time. After initial fracture opening, fresh primary host minerals like feldspar or micas become altered to secondary minerals like e.g. illite or chlorite ( The Rb/Cs ratio is a suitable tracer for this approach, since both elements typically substitute for K in primary rock-forming minerals, but fractionate during clay mineral formation ( Epithermal, unconformity-related hydrothermal veins containing Pb–Zn, Fe–Mn, Cu or also Ag ores, occur widespread in central Europe, where the Variscan basement is exposed and was subjected to extension ( Interconnected fracture systems in the crystalline basement are the major fluid pathways (e.g. The Schwarzwald is situated in south-western Germany and is an asymmetrically exhumed basement window, dominantly composed of granites and gneisses ( Before opening of the Rhinegraben the basement rocks were covered by 1.5 Based on previous studies ( The Brandenberg vein is a NNE–SSW (355–20°), steep dipping (60–85° W) mineralized vein, which extends over approximately 300 A sample containing early fluorite I intergrown with minor amounts of galena ( Fluid inclusion thermometry was performed using a Linkam THMS-600 cooling–heating stage. Synthetic fluid inclusion standards were used for calibration. LA-ICPMS microanalysis of individual fluid inclusions was conducted with a Perkin Elmer Elan 6100DRC quadrupole ICPMS connected to an ETH-GeoLas 193 The data set consists of 215 (of which only 107 could be analysed by LA-ICPMS) analyses of single fluid inclusions hosted in fluorite and quartz, including isolated (iso) and pseudo-secondary (ps) FIAs in fluorite and exclusively primary FIAs in the quartz sample ( LA-ICPMS analyses could be performed on 107 fluid inclusions of FIAs isoFl1–4, psFl1a-1, psFl1b-1, psFl1–3, pQtz1–1 and pQtz1–2 (from old to young, see  Although the analysed fluid inclusions show a range in Cl/Br ratios from ~ The Rb/Cs ratio and the maximum values of Rb, Cs, Li, Pb When fluid migration paths are established first (fracture opening), abundant fresh reactive mineral surfaces are present along the fracture walls, reacting immediately with the percolating fluid. Therefore, first generation fracture fluids are enriched in Rb, Cs and other fluid-mobile trace elements released by feldspar (W, Pb, Ba, Zn and Sr) and mica (Li, Zn and Ba). The enrichment of these elements indicates, that the basement fluid involved in fluorite precipitation was governed by the alteration of primary host minerals to clay minerals before it ascended and mixed with a sedimentary fluid. The lower values of Rb, Cs, W, Pb, Zn, Li and Ba in the later quartz indicate that later fluid batches migrated along the same fracture networks, rather than establishing new fracture systems. With each fluid pulse, the abundance of fresh rock material decreases, and therefore causes a decrease in the absolute concentration of trace elements in the ascending fluid. Since Rb is structurally incorporated into clay minerals and Cs is only adsorbed onto surfaces of clay minerals and remaining mica ( Empirical data of granitic and sedimentary fluids ( Although both Rb and Cs concentrations decrease in stage III, Cs concentrations decrease to a lesser extent and therefore, the Rb/Cs ratio further decreases until no fresh rock is available any more (end of stage III). After all fresh rock is consumed (stage IV), four general possibilities of fracture fluid evolution can be assumed. A) The Rb/Cs of the fluid instantaneously increases to a value of 2, since fluids in equilibrium with basement rocks (a granitic fluid is here taken to be representative of the crystalline basement, since empirical data for basement rocks other than granites are lacking) flood the system. B) Rb/Cs increases slowly towards a steady state of water–rock interaction with igneous and metamorphic rocks (only data for granite available), but before the fluid reaches equilibrium values of 2, new fractures open and a new cycle begins. C) Similar to B), but the fracture fluid reaches equilibrium with crystalline basement rocks before a new cycle starts. D) An externally derived sedimentary fluid (high Rb/Cs) enters the fracture (see Combining the Rb/Cs ratio with Pb, Zn, W, Li and Ba concentration, this data allows reconstructing the temporal evolution of a fracture network below a hydrothermal vein. This evolution has a major impact on fluid chemistry and therefore ore precipitation. Again, the important role of fluid modification and metal uptake along cataclastic fractures has been shown (see also The conclusions of this contribution can only be applied to hydrothermal ore deposits, in which the metals and other trace elements are dominantly controlled by host rock alteration (in the fracture root zone). As a consequence, these conclusions can only be applied to magmatic systems if the amount of dissolved trace elements derived from water–rock interaction relative to those of magmatic origin can be quantitatively determined. We would like to thank Richard Tosdal, Kåre Kullerud and an anonymous reviewer for their constructive comments, that helped to improve the manuscript significantly and S. Kaulfuß for sample preparation. This study was supported by the