The manufacture of concrete with Electric Arc Furnace slag as aggregate is known; in this work, fiber reinforcements are added to this concrete. The properties of several mixes, reinforced with 0.6% metallic and 0.4% synthetic fibers in volume, are studied both in the fresh and in the hardened state. Mechanical characterization of the fiber-reinforced concretes showed that they had good compression, flexural and tensile splitting strength. They also showed good toughness, post-cracking behavior, impact strength and tests on their abrasion resistance yielded suitable results. The concrete mixtures were characterized with SEM, to analyze their microstructure and the adherence of fibers.Sustainability in the European Union (EU) construction sector is an important trend. Taking into account that the consumption of natural aggregates in the EU is around 3000 Electric Arc Furnace Slag (EAFS) and Ladle Furnace basic Slag (LFS) are by-products of the electric steelmaking industry, produced during the melting of scrap steel and the secondary or basic refining of steel, respectively. The former is usually presented in the market as gravel sized aggregates, and the latter in the form of a grey powder. According to Euroslag In general, steelmaking slags are potentially expansive and entail certain risks, mainly due to the presence of free lime and periclase. So, outdoor weathering of slags and some additional precautions are necessary to prevent the persistence of any expansive phenomena Nowadays, the use of EAFS as a coarse aggregate in hydraulic concrete is widely accepted. It has been demonstrated that the mechanical properties and the durability of concrete made with electric arc furnace slag (CEAFS) means it is suitable for use in construction and building works Artificial fibers, especially steel and synthetic fibers, are commonly used to strengthen the mechanical behavior of concrete, producing good results with numerous properties The aim of the research described in this paper is inspired by the use of EAF slag in the manufacture of fiber-reinforced concrete pavements and slabs that are less prone to the spread of cracking during the initial drying of the concrete. The flexural and splitting tensile strength of these concretes and their rupture energy absorption capacity and impact strength are all improved. The manufactured mixes, which show a higher density than ordinary concrete, will be used in the preparation of industrial paving slabs, without any need for steel reinforcing bars. Original aspects that may be mentioned include the use of coarse aggregate of a maximum size of 20 Accordingly, EAFS is used as both coarse and medium aggregate in the concrete mix, and the fine aggregate is prepared with 50% fine slag and 50% siliceous sand; under these conditions, the mix has approximately 75% by weight of EAFS and 25% of natural aggregate. The fine siliceous sand, with a rounded morphology, should partially counteract the effect of the surface roughness of the EAFS, slightly improving its workability and flowability throughout the concrete mass  Ordinary Portland cement (OPC), CEM I/42.5R (EN 197-1:2001 Mixing water was taken from the urban mains supply of the city of Burgos (Spain), containing a negligible amount of compounds that could affect the preparation of hydraulic mixes. The plasticizer additive, employed to improve workability, was modified polycarboxylate polymer, with a density of 1.08 Natural rounded siliceous aggregate was provided in three size fractions (EN 933–1 The crushed and weathered Electric Arc Furnace Slag (EAFS) used in this research was supplied by a slag manager in the North of Spain in three size fractions (EN 933-1 According to their main physical properties detailed in Both metallic and synthetic fiber types were separately used in the different mixes of electric arc furnace slag concrete (CEAF) with the following characteristics, as shown in Two dosages were used as reference mixes, see   Other mixes under study in this research ( The following parameters were observed in all of the test mixes: Amount of cement: 360 Water to cement ratio (w/c): 0.5 Volumetric fraction of fibers: between 0.4 and 0.6% Amount of plasticizer: 1% or 1.5% of cement for mixes with natural aggregates and with EAFS aggregates, respectively.  The mixing sequence involved blending in the aggregates and then adding cement, water, plasticizer and fibers. Firstly, the fresh properties of the mixes were evaluated; subsequently, the molds were filled and compacted by vibration. Different types of specimens were prepared: Type I: Cylindrical specimen, with a diameter of 150 Type II: Cylindrical specimen, with a diameter of 150 Type III: Prismatic specimen, with dimensions of 150 Type IV: Prismatic specimen, with dimensions of 100 The specimens were cured in a climate chamber with a moisture level of 20  In addition, the fresh density of the mixes showed an important increase in the CEAFS, due to the greater specific gravity of the EAFS with regard to the siliceous aggregate, as other authors have already stated  Additionally, all E mixes showed a quick increase in compressive strength over the first 7 No significant improvements in the initial (seven days) compressive strength of CEAFS (mixes E) were observed following the incorporation of the fibers; only in mix EM2 (68.1 The elastic modulus, measured after 60 The tensile strength of these mixes is a very important property, especially when heavy traffic on a pavement slab laid on a ballast beam is considered. Two kinds of indirect tensile tests, flexural tests and splitting tests were performed on these concrete mixes, representing the real situation of the pavements. A four-point flexural strength test was applied to the type III and the type IV prismatic concrete beams cured for 28 and 90 The results in Splitting tensile strength was evaluated on the type I cylindrical concrete specimens cured over 28 There was little difference between the splitting tensile strength values of reference concretes P (4.33 Resistance to water penetration under pressure was measured on the type I cylindrical concrete specimens cured over 28 All the mixes with EAFS had better resistance to water penetration than the conventional concrete with natural aggregates; findings that other studies have also confirmed for CEAFS The fracture toughness of the fiber-reinforced concrete has to be tested to confirm the effects of the fibers. It is well-known that one of the most important characteristics of the fibers is that they improve their resistance to cracking and “ductile” post-cracking behavior. In general, concrete toughness mainly depends on the quality of the concrete and on the type, slenderness, adherence of fibers, and the fiber volume of the concrete mass The behavior in terms of toughness and ductility of these fiber-reinforced CEAF was estimated by different methods explained below; Toughness by compression was measured on the type I cylindrical concrete specimens, in accordance with the UNE 83508 standard Flexural toughness and first-crack strength were measured on the type II prismatic beams, in accordance with the UNE 83510 standard The flexural tensile strength of the type I concrete beams in accordance with the EN 14651 The authors wish to mention the Barcelona test from UNE 83515 standard An initial approach to the evaluation of the toughness of concrete and other petrous materials consists of measuring the amount of energy that has to be applied to the material to reach a pre-specified deflection level, or to reach total failure/breakage in a compressive strength test. In this case, the compression test was performed on a 300 A second and more significant approach to the analysis of toughness is based on flexural tests that yield the tensile properties of the concrete. High importance is undoubtedly attached to the toughness test for these concrete slabs, when functioning for example as pavements on a ballast bed. The test was performed on type IV prismatic samples, with dimensions of 100 As may be seen in The toughness value of the fiber-reinforced mixes is close to 40 The third test is derived from the application of the EN-14651 standard, “Measuring the flexural tensile strength (limit of proportionality (LOP), and residual flexural strength)”. This is also a flexural test, performed on notched samples, in which the measure of CMOD (crack mouth opening displacement) is the main variable to be considered. Undoubtedly, it is a toughness test close to classical K-test of fracture mechanics applied to metals and polymers.  The results for mix E were not satisfactory, which is a logical consequence of its lack of fiber reinforcement. Mix EM2 showed better results than ES1 in terms of LOP, and mainly in terms of residual flexural strength after cracking, both shown in Another important characteristic that the fibers add to concrete, directly related with toughness, is increased concrete strength against impact, collapse, and other dynamic loading. According to the ACI-Committee-544 In view of test results shown in The evident contribution of the slag aggregates to concretes with a greater impact strength (or impact toughness) is an important and relevant test result, which should encourage the use of this kind of aggregate in structural concrete, primarily for use in industrial and heavy load-bearing pavements. Moreover, although the addition of synthetic fibers implies an outstanding improvement, the addition of metallic fibers led to a twelve-fold increase in its resistance to breakage; confirming the results found in the literature on the decisive influence of fiber-reinforcements Finally, abrasion resistance was estimated in accordance with the EN 1338 standard – Annex G The Abrasion Resistance results, after only one trial, were close for all the slag-aggregate mixes, as shown in Fragments of the samples obtained after the compression test to failure were observed using low-vacuum scanning electron microscopy (SEM), with the backscattered electrons technique. The aim of this observation is to evaluate the quality of the cementitious matrix and the adherence between the matrix and fibers. As a consequence of the compressive test, some cracks were evident in almost all the images, in the aggregate particles and in the cementitious matrix.    The conclusions of this work can be summarized as follows: A water/cement ratio of over 0.5 and the use of plasticizer additives are recommended, as is the incorporation of siliceous sand, due to the poor workability of the fiber-reinforced concretes manufactured with EAFS, in order to improve workability and partially compensate the very limited fine fraction of EAFS. The mechanical behavior of steel-slag concretes reinforced with either metallic or synthetic fibers, is fairly good. In this work, the concrete mixes that showed the best performance contained 45 The water penetration and the tensile test results (in terms of strength and ductility) are satisfactory for the use of these concretes in industrial pavements; the compressive results were close to the requirements for high-performance concretes. The fiber-reinforced mixes provided satisfactory toughness results, measured as absorption of energy until rupture, in a compression test and in a tensile test of normal and notched samples. The results in terms of first-crack strength, LOP and post-cracking behavior were better in metallic fiber-reinforced mixes than in synthetic fiber reinforced mixes. Impact strength and abrasion resistance yielded better results in mixes containing EAFS as aggregate than in mixes with natural aggregates. SEM observation revealed good adherence between aggregates, fibers and the cementitious matrix, in a compact concrete mass containing natural fine aggregates and rough slag aggregates. This observation is coherent with the high quality of the tested concrete mixes. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the Junta de Castilla y León (Regional Government), to the Spanish Ministry (MINECO) for FEDER Funds through project BIA2014-55576-C2-1-R, which contributed to financing this research work. It could not have gone ahead without the materials supplied by Hormor-Zestoa, Syka Admixtures, Bekaert and Cementos Alfa.