Nickel metal hydride batteries of hybrid vehicles contain Co and rare earth elements in the anode and cathode activating agents as well as in the main electrode component, Ni. The cathode electrodes comprise a porous Ni plate (cathode substrate) with nickel hydroxide as the cathode activating agent and the anode electrodes consist of a hydrogen storage alloy powder as the anode activating agent on a metal mesh substrate.
                  A direct smelting method has been used to recover Ni from waste batteries, but the Co and rare earth elements are difficult to extract by this conventional method. To recycle Co and rare earth elements, physical pretreatment is necessary to separate the anode and cathode compounds before smelting. This study investigated the separation of anode and cathode activating agents in the <0.075mm fraction of crushed nickel metal hydride batteries using a cyclone and the anode activating agent was concentrated in the underflow product. After crushing the waste batteries a mixture of cathode and anode activating agents is recovered as fines, and a simple and fast size distribution measurement method for each activating agent is desirable to evaluate the physical separation results and improve the separation efficiency. The results show that further size classification of the <0.075mm fraction is effective to concentrate the anode activating agent for cylindrical type batteries.Hybrid vehicles have both a gasoline engine and an electric motor and a nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH) battery is used to store the electric energy. The battery contains Ni–hydroxide and Co as the cathode activating agent and an alloy of Ni and misch metal, a rare earth element mixture consisting of La, Ce, and Nd, as the anode hydrogen adsorption component. In conventional recycling, Ni and Fe (used as case and substrate components) are recovered with a rotary electric kiln melting process and the Co and misch metal goes to the slag component (  Batteries were crushed with a double-shaft type crusher after being cooled in liquid N The The Cyclone tests (gMAX, Krebs engineering) were carried out on the To further improve the separation efficiency, information of the size distribution of anode and cathode activating agents in a mixture is important and size distribution measurements were carried out. Particle sizes of the raw material used in cylindrical battery production are 7.6 The crushed sample (<  Image analysis software (Image-Pro plus version 5.0, Media cybernetics Co., Ltd.) was used to analyze the BSE images. The analyzed images have an 8 bit gray scale with 256 gradations. Particle images were extracted by selecting the pixels with brightness values from 60 to 225 from the background (resin part) and removing particles with areas of less than 10 pixels as noise. This software discriminated anode and cathode activating agents and noise using differences in particle parameters such as average brightness, standard deviation of brightness, area value, and the ratio of the perimeter and envelope perimeter. Cathode activating agent particles were extracted by selecting particles having areas larger than 10 pixels, a standard deviation of brightness 0 to 60, and average brightness values of 150 to 205 (medium gray colored parts). The aggregate particles were cut by a watershed filter and the area and diameters (Heywood diameter) of selected cathode activating agent particles were calculated by the software. The anode activating agent is composed of bright (white) particles (a) and dappled particles with dark and bright parts (b) and the BSE images also contained aggregates of anode activating agent particles. This aggregate is generated during resin manufacture and has an uneven surface and shows low perimeter and envelope perimeter ratios (ratio of perimeter divided by envelope perimeter). The bright (white) particles, having average brightness values of 199.2 to 259.6 and areas larger than 10 pixels, with the perimeter to envelope perimeter ratio larger than 0.6, were extracted as an anode activating agent. The dappled particles composed of dark and bright parts were also extracted as ‘all particles’ minus ‘noises with areas of less than 10’ minus ‘cathode and bright anode particles’ minus ‘aggregate particles having low perimeter to envelope perimeter ratio (less than 0.6)’. The average diameters (Heywood diameter) of selected anode activating agent particles were calculated by the software. A total of about 5000 particles were analyzed.  The cylindrical type anode activating agent particles are less than 30 Separation of anode and cathode activating agents in the less than 0.075 We express gratitude to Mr. Kitamura and Mr. Ichimura of JOGMEC and Mr. Kikuta of Mitsui Mining & Smelting Co., Ltd. for help and assistance with this research.