The vertical acceleration response of a hypothetical footbridge is predicted for a sample of single pedestrians and a crowd of pedestrians using a probabilistic approach. This approach uses statistical distributions to account for the fact that pedestrian parameters are not identical for all pedestrians. Enhancement factors are proposed for predicting the response due to a crowd based on the predicted accelerations of a single pedestrian. The significant contribution of this work is the generation of response curves identifying enhancement factors for a range of crowd densities and synchronization levels.Recent developments in the design of structures, and increasing pressure on structural designers to deliver more aesthetically-pleasing structures, have led to longer and lighter footbridges. Increasingly, these structures are experiencing serviceability problems due to excessive vibration. This occurs when a natural frequency of the structure is within the range of pedestrian pacing frequencies. This can lead to discomfort for pedestrians traversing the bridge. Well known examples of footbridges that experienced vibrations due to the dynamic loading of pedestrians include the Millennium Bridge, London The main contribution of the work described in this paper is the proposal of new enhancement factors which can be used to predict the response of a typical crowd crossing a simply supported footbridge. These factors are obtained using the predicted response of a non-homogeneous sample of single pedestrians and a sample of non-homogeneous crowds. Based upon these results, crowd loading enhancement factors are proposed. In addition, different levels of synchronization between pedestrians are accounted for, as well as a range of crowd densities. This also facilitates a comparison of the proposed enhancement factors with those proposed by previous researchers which were carried out for specific bridge frequencies and crowd densities. The work offered here results in a much wider range of enhancement factors than heretofore available, within the limitations of the study with regard to the numerical models examined. A pedestrian produces a dynamic time varying force which has components in all three directions Pacing frequency is one of the most important parameters of human locomotion and corresponds to the rate of application of vertical forces. It is classified as the inverse of time from the initial contact of the left foot with the walking surface to the initial contact of the right foot immediately thereafter, or more simply as the number of footfalls per second For this work, a review of published values of pacing distributions is carried out as shown in The dynamic loading from a crowd on low-frequency footbridges has not been researched extensively Wheeler In the pedestrian crowd-bridge interaction problem there are two types of synchronization: there is pedestrian-bridge synchronization, in which the pedestrian’s (or pedestrians’) pacing frequency (frequencies) matches the natural frequency of the bridge (studied by Grundmann et al. Zivanovic et al. Matsumoto et al. Fujino et al. Grundmann et al. EC5 The need for a probabilistic approach to pedestrian loading has been acknowledged for a long time A number of researchers, in recent years, have begun using probabilistic methods rather than deterministic methods which use only mean values for the important parameters associated with pedestrian loading In this paper a probabilistic model, including normal distributions for pacing frequency, step length and pedestrian mass, for a single pedestrian is used. For varying crowd densities, and different levels of synchronization, enhancements factors relative to the response due to a characteristic pedestrian are determined. These enhancement factors are compared to enhancement factors previously reported for specific crowd densities to good effect. The significant contribution of this paper is the development of enhancement factors for crowds, with a range of levels of synchronization and a range of crowd densities up to a limit of 2.11 The work presented here is based on a moving force model, similar to those employed in the current standards The bridge considered in this work is a simply-supported 50 Damping in pedestrian bridges is typically very light. Heinemeyer et al. To reflect the possible contributions to damping of stationary (non-moving) and non-stationary (moving) crowds two different levels of damping ratios for the crowded bridge are considered. There is some evidence in the literature that the contribution made by humans to the damping of a system, is dependent on whether they are stationary or non-stationary. In tests to determine the damping ratio of the bridge with a crowd, Fanning et al. On the other hand, Zivanovic et al. Based on the above inconclusive findings in the literature, two different damping models are used in this work. Damping Model 1 (DM 1) uses a damping ratio of 0.5% for all simulations, regardless of the presence a crowd. This is consistent with other researchers in the field, including Pavic The pedestrians in this work are deemed to be healthy adults for the purposes of assigning pedestrian properties. Adult pedestrian weight is represented by a log-normal distribution with a mean of 73.85 A crowd with an initial length of 100 The proportion of pedestrians taken to be synchronized with each other (that is, walking in phase at the same frequency) ranges from 0 to 1. Seven synchronization proportions of 0, 0.135 To establish the vibration response under the crowds defined previously, a finite element model of the bridge was developed in Matlab. The beam was modelled using 10 Euler–Bernoulli beam elements, with lumped mass assumed. Transient solutions were obtained using the Newmark- While walking, the vertical force induced by both human feet is assumed to be of the same magnitude and to be periodic The number of harmonics used in the Fourier series for the vertical force varies between authors. Fanning et al. Each moving force is distributed to the adjacent nodes according to the beam element shape functions The finite element model was verified using a closed form solution for a single moving force The response of interest in this study is taken as the mid-span acceleration. The vibration response is assessed using a 5-s root-mean-square (RMS) moving average value from the acceleration history of each simulation The crowd loading enhancement factor, The response of the bridge to a single pedestrian is investigated by considering permutations of randomly distributed and deterministic parameters. When each parameter is not varied according to its distribution, it is assigned the mean value, described previously. Consistent with the literature, it is found that the bridge vibration response is most sensitive to the pacing frequency. The response function to varying pacing frequency alone, From Since there is not a single representative pedestrian, the response of the bridge for 1000 crossings of single pedestrians, with all parameters varied according to their representative statistical distributions, is determined. The distribution of responses is given in The acceleration response of the bridge to a typical crowd is given in For each of the crowd densities considered in this study (See  To relate the findings of this work to existing literature, the enhancement factors ( Bachmann and Ammann Grundmann et al. Fujino et al. The comparison of the results of the present work with those of the above authors is given is For the full range of crowd densities considered here, we further compare the enhancement factors of the previous authors considered above to the present results. The results are given in Across the range of crowd densities and synchronization proportions reported by In Current guidelines set out in EC1 The work presented here uses a moving force finite element model to determine the vertical response of a footbridge due to pedestrian excitation. Statistical distributions of pedestrian parameters determined from the literature were used to derive characteristic responses, for various synchronization proportions and crowd densities. The damping ratio of the structure is increased to account for the effect of a crowd of pedestrians. Characteristic responses to a single pedestrian and to crowd loading scenarios were obtained. Enhancement factors, defined as the ratio of characteristic crowd response to characteristic single pedestrian response were derived and presented graphically. The significant conclusion is that enhancement factors were found to be a function of both crowd density and synchronization proportion. A limitation of currently available methods for estimating enhancement factors is that they are founded on single synchronization levels and are thus not suitable for capturing the sensitivity of enhancement factors to synchronization proportion. The enhancement factors determined using the probabilistic approach derived match each of the specific cases, thereby unifying them, and also enable selection of appropriate enhancement factors for varying crowd densities and synchronization proportions. In respect of the scope of existing methods, it was found that their effectiveness is good for varying crowd densities provided they are applied only at synchronization proportions from which they were derived. The simulations which ignored increased damping due to the crowd also identified a levelling off of enhancement factors, a feature previously observed in pedestrian loading tests on two different bridges by different authors, at crowd densities lower than about 0.75 The enhancement factors derived in this work are represented by a series of curves, which represent a range of crowd densities and synchronization levels. These could prove to be very beneficial tools to designers and researchers in studying the effects of vertical crowd loading on flexible footbridges. This will in turn eliminate the uncertainty in the use of the Eurocodes for predicting the acceleration response of a crowd of people. The authors would like to acknowledge the