A predictive controller is used to assess the advantage of combining feedforward and feedback actions for the control of a simulated flotation process. Results show that the feedforward action reduces the effect of flotation feed grade and flowrate variations and improves the performance of the traditional feedback loop. Some simulation runs also demonstrate that an inadequately tuned feedback compensation can deteriorate the action of a well-tuned feedforward controller.Flotation is the most used process for the recovery of base metals following ore fragmentation. The efficiency of the flotation process mainly controls the economics of the overall mineral processing plant. Control of the flotation process to plant operating targets is therefore an important aspect of plant optimization and usually consists of a feedforward action and a feedback compensation This paper shows the application of a model-based feedforward and feedback predictive control to a flotation process. The controller is tested using a flotation bank simulator built using the population balance approach generalized to allow a direct manipulation of the frother, collector and air flowrates to the flotation bank. The paper is divided into three sections. The flotation dynamic simulator that consists of conditioning and flotation models is described elsewhere For this study the simulator is calibrated to model the flotation bank shown in The designed model-based controller assumes that the process model is represented by the scheme of The controller minimizes the following criterion with respect to the sequence of future control actions along the control horizon The effect of unmeasured disturbances The control scheme contains three predictors: one for the setpoint, one for the effect of the measured disturbances Three filters Time series ARIMA models The controller was tested with respect to disturbances, i.e., at constant setpoints. A statistical evaluation was performed over a time interval of 2000 min. Variances of deviations to setpoints, as well as variances of manipulated variables increments, are used as performance indicators. The relative performance of feedforward and feedback control strongly depends upon the relative magnitudes and statistical behaviours of the measured and unmeasured disturbances. For instance, it may happen that the feedback/feedforward controller is less efficient than the feedforward controller alone. This situation arises when unmeasured disturbances are not well predicted by the predictor-holder A predictive feedback/feedforward controller was tested using a simulated linear flotation bank. Results show the benefits of using the feedforward action to attenuate the effect of typical flotation feed disturbances. The combined feedback and feedforward actions prove in most situations to be more efficient than individual actions. However, because of the particular assumption made for the prediction of the effect of unmeasured disturbances, situations may arise where the combined feedback–feedforward strategy gives inferior results to those obtained with only a feedforward action. These situations occur when the effect of unmeasured disturbances is assumed to be non-stationary, while it is stationary. In such case it is imperative to adapt the structure of the feedback predictor to the estimated unmeasured disturbances. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Canadian National Sciences and Engineering Research Council.