One of the most important stages in complementary exploration is optimal designing the additional drilling pattern or defining the optimum number and location of additional boreholes. Quite a lot research has been carried out in this regard in which for most of the proposed algorithms, kriging variance minimization as a criterion for uncertainty assessment is defined as objective function and the problem could be solved through optimization methods. Although kriging variance implementation is known to have many advantages in objective function definition, it is not sensitive to local variability. As a result, the only factors evaluated for locating the additional boreholes are initial data configuration and variogram model parameters and the effects of local variability are omitted. In this paper, with the goal of considering the local variability in boundaries uncertainty assessment, the application of combined variance is investigated to define the objective function. Thus in order to verify the applicability of the proposed objective function, it is used to locate the additional boreholes in Esfordi phosphate mine through the implementation of metaheuristic optimization methods such as simulated annealing and particle swarm optimization. Comparison of results from the proposed objective function and conventional methods indicates that the new changes imposed on the objective function has caused the algorithm output to be sensitive to the variations of grade, domain's boundaries and the thickness of mineralization domain. The comparison between the results of different optimization algorithms proved that for the presented case the application of particle swarm optimization is more appropriate than simulated annealing.Generally exploratory boreholes are drilled to increase the information and reduce the uncertainty in the decision making phases ( The research on exploratory drilling pattern optimization has been carried out for over four decades ( Although kriging variance is widely used to define the objective function, it is not sensitive to local variability ( One of the preliminary steps of mineral reserves evaluation is geological modeling or domaining which is carried out on the basis of discrete (presence or absence of lithology events) and/or continuous (grade of elements or minerals) data for 3D delineation of ore body from the surrounding area of waste or other areas with different grade values ( Then the experimental indicator semivariogram is calculated and an appropriate model is fitted to it. Afterwards, the probability of exceeding the threshold value (or occurrence of geological feature) in the center of each block Combined variance is proposed for the first time by One of the most important stage of optimization process is objective function definition. For location of additional boreholes to be also dependent on local variability, the objective function must be defined in a form different than minimization of kriging variance. The objective function is defined in the following form in order to consider the simultaneous effect of local variance and kriging variance: Despite estimation variance, local variance is a function of grade value. Therefore updating the local variance after the additional sampling is only possible when the grade from new samples is assayed. Therefore updating the objective function value based only on the boreholes locations is not possible at each iteration of the optimization algorithm. As a result, local variance values for each block is calculated once and based on primary available information while kriging variance value is updated at an iteration taking into account the proposed boreholes location. On the other hand local variance is applied as a weighting element by which kriging variance reduction in estimates with greater local variances could have a more effective impact on the objective function reduction. Greater local variance always necessitates greater local variability which results in objective function tendency to propose new boreholes locations in places with high local variability. The increase of information in areas with high local variability is more effective in enhancing our recognition of the proposed model than the areas with low local variability. Optimization of sampling location is of great importance because the samples locations have a significant effect on estimation uncertainty reduction and the value of the information gained from the samples( It is a simple but effective metaheuristic optimization algorithm designed for complex optimization problems and like other metaheuristic optimization algorithms, it is based on the imitation and simulation of natural laws or relations. This algorithm is proposed according to the replacement of physical elements of annealing such as system condition, transform energy, temperature and condition of frigidity with optimization parameters like possible solution, cost, neighboring solution, control parameters and heuristic solution ( In this algorithm, the process starts with finding an initial solution then through an iteration it processes towards a neighboring solution and if the neighboring solution is better compared to the initial one it is chosen as the current solution, if not the algorithm accepts the solution as the current solution with the probability of accepting a worse combination is given by: It is a stochastic evolutionary computation technique that is used for optimization problems ( SA and PSO algorithms have been used for other studies and different subjects considering the objective function, the scope of the study, particular features and constraints defined for each problem and either of them has shown more appropriate properties ( In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, Esfordi phosphate deposit has been chosen that is an apatite-magnetite deposit located in the center of Iran and categorized as a kiruna-type ( Based on the proposed algorithm in The 3D geological model of Esfordi deposit is constructed according to 13 vertical cross section with the scale of 1:1000, topographic map with the same scale and data derived from samples of 59 exploratory boreholes. Thus the model converted to a block model consisting of 1565 blocks with measures of length, width and height all the same for each block and equal to 20 Trial and error ( To determine the required number of additional boreholes there should be a balance between the effects of increment of additional boreholes on the objective function and drilling costs. Then the influence from enhancing the number of additional boreholes from 0 to 30 is studied from the viewpoints of drilling length, drilling costs, objective function value and objective function reduction, and is evaluated through both algorithms. The process of taking effects from adding new boreholes is almost the same for both algorithms. As presented in Optimization process and objective function value for predetermined parameters of SA and PSO algorithms are shown in The proposed locations for initial and additional boreholes by the execution of PSO and SA algorithms for three elevations of 1670 Comparison of results has proved that PSO algorithm has had a better performance in locating additional boreholes. On the other hand the necessity to define upper and lower bound for the input data of the algorithms, has made limitations to the application of these methods for some conditions when the shape of ore body is not regular which is near to the actual conditions in the nature. In such situations, it is probable for a number of boreholes to be located in places within the predetermined bounds out of block model. This problem occurs more often when the number of variables such as additional boreholes is greater. Considering the swarm intelligence and information flow in PSO algorithm ( As illustrated in The objective function is defined based on kriging variance for most of the algorithms that have been presented for optimally locating additional boreholes. Considering the advantages of such definition, lack of sensitivity to local variability is deemed as an imperfection for this kind of algorithms. To overcome the problem a criterion must be used that has already had the advantages of kriging variance and be sensitive to local variability as well. The combined variance has the ability to consider spatial configuration and grade continuity as well as providing a perspective of the condition of grade value around the estimated block. In this paper an effort has been taken place for defining an objective function based on combined variance in order to increase the efficiency of drilling additional boreholes. The applicability of the proposed objective function for optimally locating of additional boreholes implementing PSO and SA algorithms has been validated in Esfordi phosphate mine. The results have indicated that most of the additional boreholes have been located in areas where the less dispersion of data coincide high local variability. To determine the optimum number of additional boreholes, variation process of parameters such as drilling length, drilling costs, objective function value and the value of objective function reduction affected by the change in borehole numbers ranging from 0 to 30, has been investigated. The results have shown that considering the limitations imposed by time and budget, drilling 25 boreholes is enough for the uncertainty reduction of the mineralized boundaries. A comparison of results based on the algorithms outputs for locating boreholes and combined variance reduction in the block model have indicated that PSO featuring swarm intelligence and information flow runs a more efficient performance. The results indicate that the objective function executed through PSO reaches a less value and approaches towards optimized condition faster than SA algorithm. The proposed algorithm definition according to the number of boreholes can be referred as a shortcoming. In some cases the long boreholes drilled in the central areas have a greater effect on the objective function value than the shallow boreholes drilled in marginal areas. It is suggested that the objective function is defined according to the length and/or drilling cost in further studies. The authors are indebted to Prof. A. Erhan Tercan and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on an earlier draft of this paper. This work was supported by the