Pilgered two-phase Zr-2.5 Nb was subjected to recovery (400°C) and recrystallization (700°C) annealing – broad objective was to bring out associated microstructural developments. Effects of recovery and recrystallization were indexed in terms of changes in hardness, lattice strain, stored energy of cold work and residual stress. Though recovery did not cause significant changes in grain/phase structure; visible coarsening of 2nd phase was associated with recrystallization. Such coarsening continued even after the completion of primary recrystallization, with concurrent and noticeable changes in microstructure and in crystallographic texture.Zirconium (Zr) alloys, both single and two-phase, are widely used for structural applications in the nuclear industry The typical processing of Zr-2.5 Nb pressure tube consists Annealing, both recovery and recrystallization, is a subject of considerable scientific and industrial importance. This can be easily appreciated by looking at some of the text-books Hot extruded Zr-2.5 Nb was subjected to pilgering (see Pilgered Zr-2.5 Nb, chemical composition listed in Electropolished samples, mid-thickness section of the rolling (containing rolling and transverse directions) plane, were used for XRD measurements in a Panalytical MRD system. High resolution (0.02° step size) Stored energy values, for the respective poles, were estimated using Stibitz formula The residual stresses were estimated by Reusse’s model (standard sin Fei Quanta-200HV SEM (scanning electron microscope) using a TSL-OIM EBSD package was used for the EBSD measurements. At least four scans, and a total area of 1 From the detected bands multiple solutions may exist. Each solution gets certain number of ‘votes’. For EBSD analyses, grain definition is critical. Grains were identified from continuous presence of more than 15° boundary. From such grains (of both phases), average grain size, grain average misorientation (GAM) and grain orientation spread (GOS) values were estimated. GOS represents average deviation between measurement points, in a grain, and the average grain orientation. GAM, on the other hand, provides average misorientation between neighboring measurement points in a grain.     It needs to be pointed out that peak intensity ratios is a crude measure of bulk crystallographic texture, while the peak width and position can be taken as indicators of lattice strain (or stored energy of cold work) and residual stress, respectively.  As in As shown in The pilgered sample was not amenable to EBSD measurements in a thermionic emission (W-filament) SEM. 400  The present study deals with annealing of cold worked (58% cold pilgered) two-phase Zr-2.5 Nb. Two annealing temperatures were selected. 400 Pligered microstructure contains sub-micron α grains and very fine 2nd phase β lamella The interesting observations on recovery are the patterns of recovery kinetics and possible orientation sensitivity of stored energy and residual stress. Recovery kinetics in single-phase metallic materials is reported The starting structure had differences in stored energy and in residual stress between the respective poles. With the smallest recovery period It is important to pin-point the completion of primary recrystallization. Lattice strain estimates ( Two-phase Zr shows an interesting response during cold deformation     Support from BRNS (Board of Research on Nuclear Science), DST (Department of Science and Technology) and IFCPAR/CEFIPRA (Indo-French Centre for the promotion of advance research) are acknowledged.