Devitrified amorphous alloy nanocomposites with nanoscale precipitates are regarded as new prospective structural materials with superior mechanical properties such as high strength and shear resistance. However, the strengthening mechanism of the devitrified amorphous nanocomposites has not been clearly elucidated. In order to analyse the strengthening behaviour of the partially devitrified amorphous alloys, the change in solute concentration of Zr-based alloys during the devitrification process by heat treatment was investigated. It was found that the solute concentration of the remaining amorphous matrix increases during the devitrification when the solute concentration of the initial amorphous alloy is higher than that of the precipitate, such as Zr2Cu precipitate from Zr60Cu20Ni10Pd10 alloy. On the other hand, the solute is diluted in the remaining amorphous matrix during the devitrification when the solute concentration of the initial amorphous alloy is lower than that of the precipitate, such as Zr2Cu precipitate from Zr70Cu10Ni10Pd10 alloy. Investigating this solute concentration change and the associated mechanical properties shows that it is the phase mixtures model, and not the solute concentration model, that provides an adequate description of the devitrified amorphous nanocomposites.Partially devitrified amorphous alloys, referred to as amorphous nanocomposites, are of great interest for their superior mechanical properties such as high strength and shear deformation resistance due to their very fine microstructure Several contradictory explanations for the strengthening mechanism in these nanocomposite amorphous materials have been proposed. Inoue’s group Recently, the present author Understanding the strengthening mechanism of the partially devitrified amorphous alloys is very important not only for better development of amorphous alloys but also for developing optimum devitrification processes for the amorphous nanocomposites. However, the validity of the solute concentration model and the phase mixtures model is not clear. This is because the calculated results by both the solute enrichment model and the phase mixtures model have accidentally been in reasonably good accord with the experimental data of Al–Ni–Y alloys In the present study, the author devised an experimental scheme using Zr-based alloys of solute enrichment and solute dilution systems during devitrification in order to gain a basis for assessing the validity of the strengthening mechanism of the partially devitrified amorphous alloy nanocomposites. As heat treatment proceeds, solute elements rejected from the precipitates during heat treatment are distributed in the remaining amorphous matrix leading to a change in the solute concentration there (i.e. solute enrichment or dilution), depending on the relative composition of the particles and the matrix. The composition of the amorphous matrix will change as the volume fraction of the particles increases during microstructural evolution. The composition changes of the amorphous alloy matrix in Zr  In the phase mixtures model the overall strength of the mixture Hardness variations of the partially devitrified amorphous alloys can be analyzed by using the solute concentration model ( With respect to the strength of particles in light of the above three categories, the hardness of nanoscale precipitate particles is usually higher than that of the amorphous matrix. This is because the size of the crystalline particles in nanocomposites is so small that dislocations or any defects cannot be active within a particle so that it can be regarded as a perfectly elastic material. For example, the hardness of nanocrystalline Al particle taken from the theoretical strength of a perfect crystal is about 8 GPa  In order to assess the validity of the two strengthening models, experimental hardness data against volume fraction of precipitate were compiled from literature on Zr-based amorphous alloys (see From the point of view of the verification of the model developed, more experimental evidence is needed. Indeed, the phase identification of the particle Zr In conclusion, the strengthening mechanisms, viz. the phase mixtures model and the solute concentration model, for the partially devitrified amorphous nanocomposites with fine nanoscale precipitate particles embedded in the amorphous matrix have been investigated. The phase mixtures model uses the rule of mixtures based on the volume fractions of the phases and considers the variation of solute concentration in the remaining amorphous matrix, while the solute concentration model considers the effect of solute concentration on the strength of amorphous matrix only. By investigating the devitrification phenomenon, three factors were addressed as the controlling parameters, i.e. (i) the strength of precipitate particles as compared to the amorphous matrix, (ii) the variation of strength of amorphous matrix with solute concentration and (iii) the variation of solute concentration of the remaining amorphous matrix with devitrification. A comparison of the hardness variation during the devitrification with the two competing models of strengthening leads to the conclusion that the phase mixtures model, rather than the solute concentration model, can explain the increase in hardness of the devitrified nanocomposite of the constant and diluting solute concentration systems of Zr-based amorphous alloy. This work was supported by grant number: 2001-6-301-05-2 from Joint Research Project under the Korea–Japan Basic Scientific Promotion Program of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. The author would like to acknowledge the possibility of spending his study leave at University of Oxford made possible through the Korean–Britain Government Scholarship Programme.