The increasing demand for some critical rare earth elements (REEs), which are crucial in the production of green and technologically advanced products, has sparked the development of novel processes to recover REEs from secondary resources, such as mine tailings, metallurgical slags, and phosphogypsum. These resources have low concentration of REEs, but are available in large volumes. Phosphogypsum (PG) is the main by-product of the production of phosphoric acid by sulphuric acid digestion of phosphate rock. The current study put the emphasis on the thorough characterization of phosphogypsum as well as investigation of the kinetics of the leaching process. The results show the leaching efficiency is controlled by the solubility limit of PG. Chemical modelling indicated that the systems are at the saturation level with respect to Ca. The instantaneous and saturation concentrations of Ca were used to model the dissolution kinetics. The apparent activation energy was determined to be 10.4kJ/mol. Furthermore; systematic leaching processes using three acids under various operating conditions were performed. The results indicate the optimal operation conditions are 1.5M, 80°C and solid-to-liquid ratio (S/L) of 1/8 and 20min residence time for all three acid, but the leaching efficiency using nitric and hydrochloric acids are higher than the sulfuric acid. This novel work investigates the feasibility of acid leaching of REEs from PG from both theoretical and practical standpoints.Rare earth elements (REEs) are a group of 17 elements, which include 15 lanthanides, scandium and yttrium. REEs and their compounds, with an annual demand of 136,000 One of the main REE containing residues is phosphogypsum (PG), which is the main by-product of the production of phosphoric acid (H Depending on the production process, the formed PG consists of calcium sulfate dihydrate, CaSO Despite the great interest in this topic, the proposed processes in the past investigations pose major disadvantages, including the need for high acid concentrations, large volume of acid, long residence times, and additional reagent, as well as process complexity, which always results in high cost. In addition to aqueous leaching methods, in recent years there have been a few studies that used organic solvents as leaching agents ( Despite the large body of literature on the recovery of REEs from PG, to the best of authors' knowledge, there has not been a thorough study to characterize PG using advanced spectroscopy and microscopy techniques, nor a study to investigate the kinetics of the leaching process using acids as leachant as avenues for realization of the recovery of REEs from PG at large scale. In this study, we performed a systematic study of REEs leaching from the PG produced in Agrium Fertilizer production plant in Fort Saskatchewan, Canada using three leaching agents: nitric acid, hydrochloric acid and sulfuric acid. To acquire the REEs composition and distribution in the PG sample, we performed a thorough characterization utilizing advanced techniques, including SEM-EDS, TEM/STEM-EDS, XRD, XPS, TOF-SIMS, and ICP-OES. Furthermore, we performed a kinetics investigation using the obtained data from our systematic leaching experiments. Our findings provide a fundamental understanding of PG acid leaching processes and provide insights for the further development of these processes with potential for large-scale applications. PG sample (from Kapuskasing phosphate rock) was obtained from Agrium Inc. Redwater Fertilizer plant in Alberta, Canada and was used without further processing. Hydrochloric acid (ACS Reagent grade, 36.5–38.0% assay), nitric acid (ACS Reagent grade, 68.0–70.0% assay), and sulfuric acid (Solution 3.0 To determine the concentration of REEs in the PG sample, aqua regia digestion at 220 To gain information about the nature and morphology of the solid phase and the distribution of REEs in the sample, the PG sample was characterized using SEM-EDS (SEM-JEOL 6610 LV, EDS-Oxford Instruments, SDD detector). Sample powders were mounted rigidly on a specimen holder (stub) using carbon tape. To obtain cross-section images of the particles, solid powders were embedded in a resin, and then polished. Samples were then coated with gold to become electrically conductive. To study the nature and structure of the PG sample at a higher resolution and to better identify the REEs elemental mapping in the PG particles, the PG sample was characterized using TEM and STEM/EDS. The particles were dispersed onto the holey carbon film supported on the 200-mesh Cu TEM grid. The STEM analysis was undertaken using a Hitachi HF-3300 TEM/STEM at 300 To obtain the crystal structure of the PG sample, X-ray diffraction pattern of the PG sample was collected utilizing a Philips PW1830 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation in the 2θ range of 15–55° with a step size of 0.02° and a collection time of 2.5 To determine the surface chemistry of the PG sample, XPS characterization was performed using a ThermoFisher Scientific K-Alpha system with a base pressure of 1 To further investigate the elemental composition of the surface of the as-received PG sample, TOF-SIMS characterization was performed, using an Ion TOF-SIMS IV system with a base pressure of 3.5 The average particle size distribution of the PG sample was determined using the light scattering technique with a particle size analyzer (Malvren Mastersier S). For the leaching experiments, three acids were used: HNO For the acid leaching experiments, the acid solution with the desired concentration was prepared in a 250 Solution samples were withdrawn at regular intervals using a syringe and filtered using 0.45 The composition of the as-received PG sample in terms of REEs contents was determined by ICP-OES after aqua regia digestion. Based on the values in The SEM analysis was performed to observe the overall morphology of the as-received PG sample. The cross-section of the powder particles was also analyzed to gain additional information on the distribution of REEs inside the sample particles. As expected, the EDS analysis of the cross-section images identified Ca, S, and O as the main elements within the particles. In addition, regions of REEs were identified within the particles. The TEM/STEM-EDS characterization of the as-received PG sample was performed to observe the structure and elemental mapping of its constituents, particularly REEs.  To determine whether REEs are concentrated at the surface of the PG particles (or they are evenly distributed within the PG particle), XPS analysis was performed. As expected, the survey spectra indicated that O, S, P, Ca, and C are the main elements at the surface of the sample. To further investigate the distribution of REEs, TOF-SIMS characterization (with mg/t level detection limit) of the PG sample was also performed. First, the surface of the particles was analyzed and similar to XPS results, no REEs were detected. Then ion milling by Ar For all acids, the results show that the leaching rates were very fast, with about 20 As shown in As can be seen in As can be seen in As shown in As is shown in To identify the most effective leaching agent, the leaching efficiencies of REEs from PG using HCl and HNO To investigate the effect of calcium sulfate solubility on leaching efficiency of REEs, the OLI software ( As shown in The effect of acid concentration was also investigated. As shown in The thermodynamic equilibrium constants for The solubility of gypsum is equal to the sum of the molalities of free calcium ions and associated calcium sulfate neutral species, as follows: The increase in solubility with increasing acid concentration can be explained by bisulfate formation, where H The low solubility in concentrated HCl solutions is due to the salting-out effect. Also, it can be due to the changes in the activity coefficient of the calcium and sulfate ions as well as the activity of water. This behaviour was discussed by other researchers ( As shown in The leaching results obtained from the experimental investigation in all scenarios indicated that the leaching efficiency first increases rapidly with an increase in leaching time and then slows down as it reaches its maximum ( To investigate the leaching kinetics, the rate of gypsum dissolution in the system was studied. According to the literature, the rate of dissolution of solids in a solution is proportional to the difference between the instantaneous concentration, The integration of Eq. Using experimental data for instantaneous and saturation concentrations of calcium, the values of –ln( The calculated activation energy ( Phosphogypsum, which is the by-product of phosphoric acid production from phosphate rock, can be used as a secondary resource for REEs. The present study was focused on three thrusts: 1) thorough characterization of PG, utilizing various spectroscopy and microscopy techniques; 2) performing systematic acid leaching experiments to identify the best leachant and optimal operating conditions; and 3) investigating the kinetics of the leaching process. The following conclusions were drawn based on the results obtained from this study: The total concentration of REEs in the PG sample is about 202 The leaching results indicated that the leaching efficiencies are similar for HNO The leaching results showed that 80 It was found that the leaching rate is very fast and leaching efficiencies increase rapidly with residence time during the first 20 The results of this study provide a combined fundamental and practical understanding of the PG acid leaching process. The characterization results provide an insight to the distribution and composition of REEs within the PG particles. The several leaching experiments using three acids can potentially lead to the development of enhanced leaching processes with optimal operating conditions. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (