Iron ore is without doubt one of the most essential commodities of our time. With this, the growing demand from countries, such as China and Japan for iron ore produced in countries, such as Australia and Brazil, is only increasing. Iron Ore Fines (IOF) are a product of iron ore, commonly having a particle size less than 6.3mm, which is transported around the world in bulk carriers. Since the holds of bulk carriers are not designed to carry liquid, if liquefaction of IOF or other minerals occurs, it can cause the vessel carrying the cargo to list or even capsize. Since 2006, there have been at least eight reported bulk carrier incidents possibly caused by the iron ore cargo shifting. Currently, the only available parameter used to prevent this from occurring is the Transportable Moisture Limit (TML). The TML is the maximum gross water content that certain mineral cargoes may contain, while being loaded in bulk carriers, without being at risk of liquefying during transportation. The first half of this paper presents a review of the three test methods stated in the 2013 International Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes Code (IMSBC Code) and the recently introduced Modified Proctor/Fagerberg test (MPFT). Along with the aforementioned tests, also reviewed are recent developments and advancements made in the field. The second half of this paper presents a comparison of the results of our experimental study with two of the three 2013 IMSBC Code tests along with the MPFT. This study shows that the three test methods which are currently used to determine the TML of minerals are not appropriate for testing of IOF and that the Modified Proctor/Fagerberg test produces a value higher than all the other test methods when used to determine the TML of IOF.The temporary reclassification of IOF, in 2011, by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), as a ‘Group A’ liquefiable material ( Liquefaction is the term used to describe when a soils shear stress is reduced to near zero under cyclic, static or shock loading resulting in it behaving like a liquid. The shear strength of a soil can be reduced to near zero by the momentary prevention of water drainage under cyclic loading which causes changes in the pore pressures between the particles of the soil ( Although minerals, such as coal, fluorspar, ilmenite and mineral concentrates (e.g. nickel ( The IMSBC Code, formally the Code of Safe Practice for Solid Bulk Cargoes (BC Code) ( Prior to 2011, IOF were not specifically listed in the IMSBC Code. The circular (DSC.1/Circ66) sent out by the IMO, in 2011, temporarily reclassified IOF as a ‘Group A’, liquefiable material, until a permanent individual schedule can be agreed upon and incorporated in the 2015 IMSBC Code ( Currently, the only parameter used to determine a minerals' potential to liquefy, while being transported in bulk carriers, is the TML. The 2013 IMSBC Code refers to the TML as the maximum Gross Water Content (GWC) that certain mineral cargoes may contain, while being loaded in bulk carriers, without being at risk of liquefying during transportation ( On occasion, liquefaction of minerals being transported in bulk carriers can occur when repeated loading, produced by the ocean waves and vessels engine, are transmitted to the cargo in the hold of a bulk carrier ( Since the holds of bulk carriers are not designed to carry liquid, if liquefaction of IOF or other minerals occurs, it may cause the bulk carrier, carrying the cargo, to list or even capsize. This is mainly as a result of the weight of the unconfined cargo shifting and causing a rapid change in the bulk carriers' buoyancy ( Recently, nickel ore has also shown similar liquefaction potential as IOF ( Iron ore is extracted from beneath the surface rock then crushed and mechanically divided to produce three different qualities; fines (< Solid bulk cargoes, such as IOF, are generally transported at sea using vessels referred to as bulk carriers. Bulk carriers refer to a class of large seagoing vessels specifically designed to carry large volumes of loose minerals and/or other commodities. It is assumed that the density of a cargo in the hold of a bulk carrier will depend on numerous variables, including the physical properties of the cargo and system variables under which the cargo is loaded and transported. Two important system variables, which may significantly control the density of a cargo, are the loading rate and height that the cargo is loaded into the holds. Loading rates are generally specified by the manufacturers of each individual bulk carrier ( Along with the loading techniques varying from one port to another, this will mean that the density of IOF, in the holds of bulk carriers, may vary significantly. The maximum depth of the cargo can also vary depending on the vessel subclass, the angle of repose and the loading sequence of the cargo. The density of a cargo being transported directly relates to its liquefaction potential (  In the 2013 IMSBC Code, there are three test methods used to determine the TML of ‘Group A’ cargoes, which are those that are potentially liquefiable. The three test methods are the Proctor/Fagerberg (PFT), Flow Table (FTT) and Penetration (PT) test methods ( The PFT was first published in Stockholm in 1962 by Bengt Fagerberg and Kjell Eriksson as part of a committee established by the Swedish Mining Association and several Scandinavian mining companies. The committee was given the task to develop a simple method for determining the TML of ore concentrates ( The procedure involves compaction of the material, into a standard litre compaction mould, at varying moisture contents, to produce a compaction curve with a minimum of five data points. The compaction is executed in five layers by dropping a 350 The FTT has been widely used in the cement industry to test hydraulic cement ( The FTT is performed by compacting a sample, in three layers, into a conical shaped mould in the centre of the Flow Table. Compaction is performed using a tamping rod, which is set to a predetermined pressure. For a typical sample of IOF the tamping pressure used is approximately 450 After compaction is complete, the mould is carefully removed. Immediately after the mould is removed, the Flow Table is raised and dropped 50 times through a height of 12.5 The PT was developed in Japan at the Research Institute of Marine Engineering ( The PT is performed by compacting a sample, in four layers, into a cylindrical mould. The sample is compacted with an adjustable tamper, using a tamping pressure similar to what would be used in the FTT, so that the surface of the sample is flat and levelled ( After compaction is complete the mould is attached to a vibrating table and a Penetration bit is placed on the surface of the material. The vibrating table is then operated at a frequency of 50–60 After the temporary reclassification of IOF, in 2011 ( Currently the most recognized research is being carried out by the Iron Ore Technical Working Group (TWG). The TWG was established by the IMO late 2012 to “ The early implementation of the TWG's research was introduced, in 2013, by the IMO in the circular DSC.1/Circ.71 ( The circular states that although more research is required, the draft schedules and test method will be included in amendment 03–15 of the IMSBC Code in 2015 and entered into force on January 1, 2017 ( While evaluating the MPFT, the TWG tested the samples of IOF using the three methods stated in the 2013 IMSBC Code ( Due to the varying results, research into the establishment of a new test method was required, by the IMO, which is specifically designed for IOF, to prevent confusion caused by determining the TML using the three test methods stated in the 2013 IMSBC Code. Because of this requirement the TWG produced the MPFT, which can be used on a voluntary basis until amended in the 2015 IMSBC Code ( In 2013, the MPFT was introduced, by the IMO, in the circular DSC.1/Circ.71 ( The TWG is the main driving force behind the implementation of the MPFT, which is sometimes referred to as D80. The abbreviation D80 comes from previous research carried out by Bengt Fagerberg and Arne Stavang in 1971, where compaction method D was performed using a 150 In 1971, Fagerberg and Stavang performed compactions on Magnetite to compare the void ratio and the water content by volume, as seen in To verify this procedure the TWG measured the bulk density of IOF in the holds of multiple bulk carriers, before and after transportation, through means of height measurements, laser scanning and cone penetration testing ( The TWG states that based on the research completed by In the draft individual schedule for IOF, given in the circular DSC.1/Circ.71 ( Iron ore is commonly made up of three main constituents; goethite, hematite and magnetite. The TWG performed cyclic triaxial, direct shear and centrifugal tests to determine the liquefaction resistance of IOF with varying amounts of goethite ( According to the research carried out by the TWG, the goethite content directly relates to the surface area of the particles and the volume of the pores that make up the structure of IOF. Furthermore, as the goethite content of IOF increases the material's ability to hold water also increases. The TWG demonstrated that if the goethite content of IOF is greater than 35% by mass then the material survived cyclic triaxial testing and became more resistant to liquefaction because of its increased water holding ability. This is also shown by the material's ability to prevent moisture migration during centrifugal testing. They also demonstrated that if the goethite content is less than 25% by mass then the material failed cyclic triaxial testing, produced more free water during centrifugal testing and therefore the potential for the material to liquefy increased ( In the draft individual schedule for IOF it is stated that, regardless of the particle size, if the material contains more than 35% goethite by mass then the IOF can be treated as iron ore and therefore classified as a ‘Group C’ non-liquefiable material, otherwise the material is to be treated as IOF and therefore classified as a ‘Group A’ liquefiable material ( The TWG utilized scale models where IOF could be tested under simulated seagoing conditions. The tests were completed using hexapods along with the additional use of apparatus from supporting consultancies, such as the Norwegian Marine Technology Research Institute (MARINTEK), the Maritime Research Institute Netherlands (MARIN) and Deltares, which is also located in the Netherlands. These models incorporated six degrees of motion freedom to replicate bulk carriers seagoing motions while at sea ( While simulating vessel motions using the hexapod the TWG did not observe liquefaction of Australian IOF at any moisture content, but did observe cracking at the higher moisture contents along with compaction of the sample. Goethitic IOF showed no drainage and were more stable than haematitic IOF. The TWG concluded that Australian IOF were stable, even when the cargo was unconstrained, when using the hexapod ( Using a scale model, owned and operated by MARINTEK, the TWG also tested Brazilian IOF. They concluded that at the TML, determined by the MPFT, the samples of IOF showed no signs of failure. Typical seagoing motions also caused no failures in the samples of IOF even when the moisture content was above the TML, determined by the MPFT, but under high levels of transverse accelerations with no vertical accelerations, failure can occur if the moisture content is above the TML ( The following section of this paper presents a comparison of the results of a previous experimental study with two of the three 2013 IMSBC Code test methods along with new experimental results from the newly developed MPFT. The IOF that were used during this study were obtained from various locations around Australia. A graphical representation of the particle size boundaries of 45 samples of IOF can be seen in All the physical properties in During previous research, samples of IOF were tested using the FTT and the PFT as stated in the 2013 IMSBC Code ( A graphical representation of the data from Based on the data obtained during this previous research and presented in the related publication ( The MPFT, created in 2013 by the TWG, is the only test method designed specifically for use with IOF ( A graphical representation of compactions performed on sample 011 of IOF, using the PFT and MPFT test, can be seen in During this study the particle size boundaries of 45 samples of IOF were produced using AS 1289.3.6.1 and AS 1289.3.6.3 ( If the 2013 draft schedule for IOF was used and the particle size provisions followed, as described in The first half of this paper presents a review of the three test methods stated in the 2013 International Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes Code (IMSBC Code) and the recently introduced Modified Proctor/Fagerberg test (MPFT). Along with the aforementioned tests, also reviewed are recent developments and advancements made in the field. The second half of this paper presents a comparison of the results of our experimental study with two of the three 2013 IMSBC Code tests along with the MPFT. Research by the TWG has produced draft schedules, in relating to TML testing of IOF, with the implementation of the MPFT, limitations on particle size and also goethite content, which are to be amended in the 2015 IMSBC Code. The experimental results from this study, along with the results produced by the TWG, show that the original test methods, stated in the 2013 IMSBC Code, give significantly different TML values when used on IOF. Experimental results from this study also show that typical cargoes of IOF can be transported with significantly higher moisture contents when using the MPFT to determine the TML when compared to using the three original test methods, stated in the 2013 IMSBC Code. The introduction of the MPFT and goethite content provisions, given in the circular DSC.1/Circ.71, increases the allowable moisture content that IOF can contain when being loaded into bulk carriers and reduces the required amount of TML testing to be performed on IOF. The research that was performed is important to understand the behaviour IOF exhibit while being transported in bulk carriers. The TWG has performed essential research that can be used as a foundation for future studies. TML test methods for other minerals such as bauxite, manganese ore and nickel ore, are still absent or out-dated. Further investigations on the mechanism of liquefaction of IOF and other similar materials need to be explored and further research on the causes of bulk carrier incidents involving these materials is essential to prevent future loss of human life and assets.  Note: [1] (