The granite-hosted Riviera W-Mo-REE deposit is an approximately 40 million ton low grade (∼0.2% WO3) endo-skarn resource and contains disseminated scheelite as the principle ore. Scheelite is strongly zoned and has a molybdenum-rich core and depleted rim. Separation of the high-demand low-molybdenum scheelite does not appear possible. The high density contrast between scheelite (ρ=6.1) and gangue (ρ=2.7) allows separation by gravity on tables, wet or dry spirals and heavy medium liquids. In the present laboratory study the latter method was used asa pre-concentration stage and yielded at best a ∼50% scheelite recovery of the −1mm size fraction. The generally fine grain size of the liberated grains and considerable loss to the −45µm fraction is a function of the friable nature of scheelite and possible overgrinding. The influence of this mineralogical characteristic on scheelite recovery will have to be accommodated in the beneficiation in particular the comminution stage, of the deposit in the future. Asa complimentary study MicroCT scanning was applied asa relatively new analytical tool to evaluate the beneficiation results obtained. The method studied both sinks and floats of the various size fractions and allowed quantification of scheelite grain size distribution and calculation of ore grade of the coarse fractions. MicroCT images displayed the textural relationships between the ore and gangue minerals and the degree of scheelite liberation. This analytical tool proved useful in the present study and the results indicate that it can be applied to similar ore beneficiation studies.The Riviera W-Mo-REE deposit is located in the Piketberg area of the Western Cape Province and is hosted by late stage granites of the Neoproterozoic-Cambrian Cape Granite Suite ( Scheelite is most abundant in the zones of endoskarn and the bordering skarnified granite. Together they define a favourable zone present as All the scheelite grains observed display strong zonal crystal growth, the result of variation in crystal chemistry ( The specific gravity of scheelite varies between 5.9 and 6.1 and contrasts sharply with the gangue mineralogy which consists of quartz, feldspar and hydrated alteration products (ρ The novelty of microCT demonstrated here lies in the application and interpretation of the segmentation method which has a direct influence on the accuracy of the method. The sample selected for this exercise was derived from borehole BB/CC +350 which forms part of a selection of 112 diamond drill holes completed by Anglo American Corporation in the late 1970′s early 1980′s. The entire ore zone as defined by a 0.1% WO The borehole is considered representative of the Riviera deposit as it has a thickness similar to the average thickness (31 The 35.63 The heavy medium separation was outsourced and conducted by Scientific Services of Cape Town. The following procedure was followed: Samples were sorted, dried and dried weights recorded. De-sliming was done at 45 The +45 The heavy mineral fraction is removed from the dried +45 In total three fractions are produced slimes, floats and sinks (THM) for chemical analyses. Percentage recovery per fraction is calculated as a function of WO The three fractions obtained i.e. slimes, floats and sinks (THM) were analysed by Scientific Services of Cape Town using conventional XRF (X-ray fluorescence using CRM standards and a detection limit of 5 The sinks and floats of every size fraction were also studied by means of a high resolution microCT scanner. This allowed the identification, distribution characteristics and liberation of scheelite based on density contrasts. The scans were performed with a GE Phoenix v|tome|x at 200 The basic concepts of X-ray CT are briefly described as background information. An X-ray beam is generated with voltage and current settings adjustable to allow different penetrating energies (voltage) and beam intensity (current). The beam penetrates the sample, loaded between X-ray source and 2D detector. Due to different material absorptions (path lengths and X-ray absorption co-efficients – depending on atomic mass and physical density), different brightness values are recorded in the 2D X-ray image. By rotating the sample, images are recorded from many angles. By using these images, a 3D data set can be reconstructed using filtered back-projection of the 2D images. This 3D data set comprises of voxels (volumetric pixels) with brightest pixels corresponding to most dense material and dark pixels related to low density materials. Scanning parameters depend on sample type to be analysed and the type of analysis required. Various choices are made with regards to sample size, voxel size (resolution), number of images and image acquisition time, amongst others. A set of guidelines and principles was recently set out for biological specimens and the same principles generally apply to the geosciences ( From the CT data, both the volumetric grade and the particle size distribution of the scheelite minerals were calculated. Initially, all scheelite in the samples needed to be segmented and digitally extracted using the segmentation method described by Volumetric grade determinations and grain size distributions of scheelite in both sinks and floats were calculated from the microCT data. The method did not allow the quantification of any parameters for the slimes fraction (−45 De-sliming of the four size fractions showed an exponential increase in the percentage slimes generated with decreasing grain size ( The slimes from all fractions contained a significant concentration of tungsten ranging between 0.19 and 0.25% WO The total heavy mineral concentration (THM or sinks) of each size fraction is presented in Although liberation increases linearly up to −2 The WO The recovery of WO Floats, sinks (concentrates) and slimes of all four grain size fractions were subjected to microCT scanning. Settings were selected in order to analyse a representative volume of material in each scan i.e. 20 The microCT scans also visually demonstrated the grain sizes of scheelite relative to the crushed particle size. This was shown for example in Results of the CT scans were also used to determine the WO The current results at 20 Particle size analyses of scheelite for the various fractions were conducted using the same microCT data. Results of the four size fractions for floats and sinks are shown in Histograms of the scheelite grain size distribution of the sinks (concentrates) illustrate that the grain size becomes more homogenous towards the −1 The primary aim of the study was to separate scheelite from the Riviera ore by means of TBE. The results showed that the maximum recovery of 47.9% was achieved by crushing down to −1 The quantity of slimes generated by the crushing down to −1 The second and complimentary aim of the study was to use the microCT scanner to provide images of textural features, grain size analyses and to calculate WO Particle size analyses of the various fractions showed that the bulk of the liberated and locked scheelite in the floats is fine-grained. Milling of the floats to allow beneficiation by conventional flotation will reduce scheelite grain size even further and could adversely affect recovery. Beneficiation studies by AAC and partner Union Carbide using conventional flotation during the 1970–1980′s, showed a recovery of 61–88% and testifies to the challenge ahead ( Beneficiation of scheelite from a low grade granite hosted resource by means of TBE separation proved disappointing, although the method was efficient. The poor recovery is however a function of excessive slimes generated during milling and overall finely disseminated distribution of scheelite. If WO Application of tmicroCT scanning and image analysis to support the present study proved useful and quantitatively contributed towards grade determination, grain size distribution of scheelite and visually towards identification of textural features relating to mineral liberation. The use of this method in assessing the abovementioned minerals processing parameters is promising, particularly when considering the additional information gained from this technique compared to other analytical methods. Step 1: Raw microCT data  Step 2: De-noising – adaptive Gauss filter  Step 3: Contrasted  Step 4: Air removal – using region growing tool   Step 6: Result of segmentation highlighted in pseudo-colour (red) for scheelite  Step 7: 3D image generated from segmentation, first all particles then scheelite  Step 8: Scheelite grain size distribution analysis  At 20  At improved scan resolution on a smaller sample size, the peak is much more clear (5 