The effect of sulphuric acid concentration on the kinetics of silver ion cementation on copper in the electrolyte containing 0.5 M CuSO4 was investigated using a rotating cylinder system. The morphology of the silver deposit cemented in the presence and absence of oxygen was studied at 25 °C. Additionally, the influence of H+ ion concentration on the mechanism of cementation, proposed by Khudenko et al., was verified. It was found that various concentrations of sulphuric acid neither change the kinetics of cementation nor the mechanism of process conducted in the presence or absence of oxygen in the system. The increasing concentration of H+ ion does not enhance the silver cementation on copper. The decreasing concentration of sulphuric acid in the electrolyte used in the cementation process promotes only a deposition of less-adhesive silver cement on copper. This study showed clearly that the Khudenko's mechanism of cementation is highly doubtful. Moreover, results proved that H+ ions are not involved in the mechanism of the process at all. The mechanism of silver ion cementation on copper in acidic copper sulphate solutions is strongly determined by the presence of oxygen in the system.The cementation process is already known from the ancient times of human culture but the early knowledge about the process was spread in Europe at the beginning of the Middle Ages. At that time, the process was used by alchemist mainly for the performing of the miracle of metals transmutation. From several decades, cementation is commonly used in industry for recovery of metals, removal of metal ions from dilute wastes and for purification of solutions. The silver ion cementation on copper was introduced in practice to the recovery of silver ion from industrial baths, based on sulphuric acid and copper sulphate, used for electrowinning and electroplating of copper ( In this paper, the influence of the sulphuric acid concentration on the kinetic of the silver ion cementation on copper and the morphology of silver deposit is reported. The main reason for entering into this study was published by Khudenko et al. ( All chemicals and materials used in this study were of analytical reagent grade. Solutions were prepared using water distilled four times in quartz equipment. The laboratory glassware was specially pre-treated before use and the detailed procedure was described in previous paper ( The experimental set-up and all experimental procedures have been described previously ( Before each experiment, the rotating steel cylinder was immersed in HNO The kinetics of the cementation reaction was investigated in the oxygenated and deoxygenated solutions containing 0.5 M H Typical kinetic plots of silver ion concentration against time recorded at 25 °C in baths with various concentration of sulphuric acid for deoxygenated and oxygenated solutions are presented in As can be seen from As was shown previously (  For the initial period of cementation, reduced rate constants were calculated from slopes of curves by using the first-order equation for both analytical methods used for the determination of silver ion concentration in solutions. The method of calculations of rate constants was described before ( This study proved that the mechanism of silver ion cementation is not influenced by the presence of H The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: Sulphuric acid does not influence significantly kinetics of the process at the initial stage of the reaction as well as the morphology of the Ag deposit. Decreasing concentration of sulphuric acid probably promotes deposition of less-adhesive silver cement on copper. Concentration of H