This paper is the first in a two part work examining how to predict grade-recovery curves. This first part examines some of the theoretical aspects of the method, while the second part shows how the method can be applied to industrial data. The method requires that two relationships be known; the instantaneous grade as a function of the tailings grade and the concentrate mass rate as a function of the tailings grade. The useful feature of these two relationships is that they do not depend on the feed rate or grade, but do depend on the cell operating conditions. These relationships can be used to create both batch flotation and down a bank grade-recovery curves, in the process demonstrating that the batch curve represents the best possible performance for a given operating condition and feed grade. This paper also demonstrates how these curves can be interpreted and used to improve circuit performance.Grade-recovery curves are a commonly-used method for representing the performance of both industrial flotation banks and batch flotation tests. However, they suffer from the drawback that the shape and position of the curve depend not only on the operating conditions, but also on the feed grade in batch tests, and also the feed rate into a flotation circuit. This makes like-for-like comparisons of different operating strategies based on grade-recovery curves difficult. This difficulty is illustrated using industrial results generated with different air rate profiles for the first four cells of a rougher bank ( There have been a number of approaches to represent the performance of individual flotation cells with a view to predicting and optimising flotation banks and circuits. The enhancement factor, the ratio of the flow rate of a species in the concentrate to the flow rate in the tails, has been used to optimise flotation circuits (e.g. In order to model the system, split factors are usually assumed to be a function of the mineral type and cell operating conditions only. This is a valid assumption if the system is perfectly described by rate kinetics and the froth recovery is either constant or large enough that its influence on the overall recovery can be ignored. This means that enhancement factors will not be good at describing the behaviour of gangue or slowly floating species. For example, in a flotation cell with only gangue present, no stable froth will be formed and so the enhancement factor will be zero. If the gangue concentration remained constant, but a floatable material is also added to cell, a froth will form and gangue would be entrained, resulting in a non-zero enhancement factor. This simple example demonstrates how the enhancement factor is feed grade dependent, making it unsuitable for accurately predicting and correcting grade-recovery curves. The upgrade- or enrichment ratio is the ratio of the concentrate grade to the feed grade (e.g. Technical efficiency is the ratio of the actual and maximum achievable separation ( These existing methods are generally quite good at predicting the behaviour of floatable material, while being inadequate in their descriptions of non-floatable gangue behaviour. They are therefore good at modelling and predicting recoveries from banks and circuits, but not the corresponding grades. This makes them unsuitable for the predicting and correcting of grade-recovery curves. This paper will develop a method to de-couple the effects of feed grade and rate variations from changes in operating conditions so that data sets can be compared directly. Further, it will be shown that this method allows data to be used to predict the behaviour of banks of cells under different operating conditions; which cannot be done with grade-recovery curves at present. The theoretical development will further show the relationship between batch and continuous data. The methodology developed here is based on a single assumption: the separation occurring in the froth and the rate at which solids enter the froth (the pulp zone kinetics), are uniquely defined by the conditions prevalent in the pulp. The justification is that, in most flotation cells, the feed rate has no impact on the hydrodynamics of the cell, which is predominantly a function of cell design, impeller design and speed, and air rate. This implies that the concentrate grade produced by any cell ( While the feed grade and rate certainly determine the pulp and tailings grade, they are not required to predict the concentrate grade. It can be expected that even if the cell is not perfectly mixed, there will be a relationship still between pulp- and tailings concentrations independent of feed rate and grade. To illustrate the validity of the assumption, consider again the data in Similar sets of data for other mining operations in which plotting the instantaneous grade vs tailing grade collapses the data to a single curve can be found in the second paper on this topic. Mathematically, it is convenient to express these instantaneous curves in terms of the grade of all but one of the components in the tailings, Particle components need not be only mineral types, but can be also any property that affects flotation performance, such as particle size and density. As will be shown, the grade-recovery curve for sequential cells in a bank requires not only the instantaneous grade, but also the instantaneous mass pull, or concentrate solids rate. As for the instantaneous grade curves ( While the form of the function may be different, the dependencies for Therefore for a given set of operating conditions: Industrial flotation usually has many particle types. Although it is mathematically possible to have a number of particle types, we will, for clarity, treat the flotation feed as having only two particle types, a valuable mineral and gangue. With only two particle types, the pulp is defined by the tailings grade and solids concentration. Although not necessary, it will be assumed that the solids concentration remains constant throughout the circuit. In rougher-scavenger banks this is reasonable as the concentrate rate is usually much lower than the tailing rate. Hence, for a given set of operating conditions: From the mass balance, the tailing grade, If the feed grade is much lower than the cumulative grade: Substituting relates the instantaneous concentrate grade to the feed grade: There is a certain amount of similarity between the grade-recovery curve produced by plotting the data from a bank of cells and that produced by a batch flotation cell. This section will demonstrate how a batch grade-recovery curve can be predicted using the relationship between pulp grade and instantaneous concentrate grade: The cumulative grade, The instantaneous concentrate grade in batch flotation, Substituting Combining Eqs. Expanding: If Combining Eqs. This is solved by integration after combining with Eq. As an example, using two linear fitted lines from Note the shape of the predicted batch grade-recovery curve, particularly at high recoveries where, at 100%, the initial grade is predicted. It is important to emphasise that for batch flotation, the grade-recovery curve is fully described solely from the instantaneous concentrate and tailing grade data. If the time evolution of the grade-recovery curve is desired, then the instantaneous mass pull curve is required (Eq. There are important differences between the batch flotation behaviour and that of banks of flotation cells operating at steady-state: the feed rate must be considered, and the recovery and grade do not change continuously but in steps from cell to cell. We follow the derivation for batch flotation, and using a subscript Re-stating Eq. Further, an expression relating cumulative grades and recovery to instantaneous grade can be obtained by considering the change in grade and recovery over cell This equation is implicit as the value of In batch flotation, recovery increments are differential; the grade-recovery curve is continuous and depends only on the instantaneous grades. For multiple tanks, each tank recovery increment may be different and affects the overall grade-recovery curve. The instantaneous grade alone is insufficient to specify fully the performance and the instantaneous mass recovery is also required to calculate the cumulative recovery after each cell, If One point on the methodology must be emphasised. It may appear that, since both the instantaneous grade and the instantaneous solids rate depend on the cell operating conditions, that the instantaneous grade can be made a function of the instantaneous solids rate, which will remove the need for a separate function. However, this would be incorrect, as the effects of operating variables on the two relationships are different and cannot be combined. For instance, the instantaneous solids rate can be increased by either increasing the air rate or decreasing the froth depth, but their effect on the instantaneous grade are different. This effect de-coupling is a key benefit of this approach.  In the batch system, if there are These sets of equations are interlinked; If the time evolution of the grade-recovery curve is required, it can be calculated by including the following two equations in the solution scheme: It is the generation of the The number of classes chosen must therefore represent a balance between the amount of data required to produce the model in the first place and the desired accuracy of the model output. As with the batch case, the grade and recoveries for banks of cells can also be calculated in a multi-component system. The equations are in fact identical to the equations used for single component, except that there is a set of equations for every component that must now be solved simultaneously. For the Consider again the data presented in  In addition to allowing for variation in feed grade and rate during data collection, this methodology can also be used to extrapolate performance further down a bank, and to predict performance for combinations of conditions for which experiments were not performed. In In an operating circuit there are a fixed number of cells available in which to achieve the desired performance. The mineral recovery from each cell determines the overall recovery obtained from the bank. Mass pull is therefore a major consideration, since, generally, the higher the instantaneous mass rate, the greater the recovery for a given number of cells. This is a commonly-used operating strategy; to maximise the mass pull. In relation to this work, this means that the steeper the instantaneous mass curve, the higher the recovery. The methodology here described allows independent variation of the mass pull and grade curves to evaluate their effect and the appropriate optimisation strategy. Generally in practise, an increase in instantaneous mass pull curve slope will result in a decrease in the instantaneous grade curve slope. For instance, for a given pulp grade, increasing the froth depth will usually increase concentrate grade and decrease the mass rate. It would appear intuitively that increasing the mass pull from a single flotation cell while producing the same grade would lead to an improved bank performance. This can be investigated readily using this methodology. Consider again the instantaneous grade and mass pull curves for an air rate of 6 ( The results are surprising. Even if the mass pull could be increased without any negative impact of the instantaneous grade curve, this does not improve the performance but, in fact, lowers the grade-recovery curve even though the total recovery of the bank is increased. In reality the performance is likely to be poorer, as the instantaneous grade curve slope will usually decrease when the mass pull curve slope increases. The explanation is as follows: the smaller the incremental change in recovery, the better the performance. This is because the grade from a cell is dictated by the tailings grade from that cell, which drops as cumulative recovery increases. This means that if there are two cells in series with the same cumulative recovery as a single cell (assuming that all the cells have the same relationship between instantaneous and tailings grade, as well as the same feed), the concentrate grade from the second cell in series will be approximately the same as that from the single cell, since the overall recovery is the same at this point. The grade from the first cell in the two in series, though, will have a higher grade as the tailings grade from this cell is higher than that from the second cell. This means that the cumulative grade from the two cells will be higher than that from the single cell even though their cumulative recoveries are the same. Increasing the mass pull causes bigger recovery steps from cell to cell and thus worse performance. This is similar to the effect of higher feed rates yielding improved performance. The overall conclusion is that it is not straightforward to increase the recovery from an existing flotation bank without sacrificing grade. This paper has developed a methodology for predicting grade-recovery curves based on the relationship between the cell performance and the tailings grade, as represented by the instantaneous grade and instantaneous mass rate curves. It was shown that the impact of feed rate or feed grade on the grade-recovery curve can be predicted or explained. This is useful when like-for-like comparisons are needed where the feed grade changes. It was also shown that it is possible to decouple cell performance variations from feed variation.