The filtration properties of mineral slurries depend for instance on the properties of the solid particles and on the way how these particles arrange themselves when the filter cake is formed. In cake filtration applications, the focus is often on particle size instead of the shape of particle size distribution (PSD). The aim of this experimental study is to demonstrate the influence of the width of PSD on the properties of the filter cake in the pressure filtration of Ni-Cu mine tailings. Modification of PSD is performed by using a stirred media mill at various operational conditions. The results show that not only particle size should be considered when the filtration properties are evaluated: a significant reduction of the average specific cake resistance (>60%) and increase of the average porosity (almost 30%) can be achieved by stirred media grinding at optimal conditions, in spite of reducing the median particle size. On the other hand, the selection of unfavorable grinding conditions may cause substantial increase in cake resistance. Above all, the results imply that the size of particles in the coarse end of PSD should be reduced while avoiding grinding of the finest particles. This seems to be obtainable by paying special attention to the size of the grinding medium. The main outcomes of this study will help in reducing the energy consumption of dewatering of tailings to be disposed of, and recovering valuable elements from tailings deposited in ponds, requiring the use of optimized grinding circuits and solid-liquid separation operations. However, the benefits obtained in the filtration stage should overcome the increased costs caused by the installation and energy consumption of the grinding systems. This means that the demonstrated grinding method may be profitably utilized in industrial scale only when the material is easy to grind and the filtration properties can be significantly improved, or when the filtration plant is the main bottleneck of the process.Wet grinding operations in minerals processing produce slurries where particle size distribution (PSD) of solids is optimized with respect to the quality of the final product and requirements of the subsequent unit operations, such as concentration by froth flotation and dewatering. Solid-liquid separation, performed for instance with vacuum or pressure filters, is routinely carried out before thermal drying of the product. The filter cake is basically a porous bed consisting of particles of non-uniform sizes and shapes and pores between them. The pores, i.e. voids, of the bed form a complex, randomly arranged network which is difficult to characterize with respect to size and shape ( The main objective of this paper is to investigate the effect of the reduction of particle size on pressure filtration properties. The study aims at demonstrating that the reduced width of particle size distribution can help to overcome the negative effect on filtration caused by fine particles, and lead to a significantly improved filtration performance. An industrial sample of mine tailings is used as model suspension in order to ensure the practical relevance of the study. The slurry sample was received from a nickel-copper mine. The variations in the size and shape of particles in a dried slurry sample are illustrated by an image ( The particle size distribution of the slurry solids was modified by using a vertical stirred media mill (Vollrath Salomix) described in closer detail by The slurry samples were filtered at room temperature with a Nutsche pressure filter at pressure differences of 2, 4, and 6 The Sauter mean diameter When the volume-based specific surface area The weight-based specific surface area The average specific cake resistance for constant pressure filtration is calculated with equations based on Darcy’s law ( When the volume of filtrate at each moment of time is known, it is most convenient to use the integrated equation (Eq. In the case of incompressible cakes, the average specific cake resistance can be related to the Sauter mean diameter The applicability of Kozeny-Carman equation for practical filtration studies is very limited, not least because the PSD and particle shape distributions of solids vary greatly and because the filtered materials tend to be more or less compressible ( The average porosity of the whole filter cake is calculated as The factors explaining the observed filtration behavior of the ground slurry samples were investigated with respect to various characteristic particle sizes, and the average specific cake resistances The same filtration results as above in The correlation between A very clear correlation can be observed when the average porosity The influence of the presence of different particle sizes in the suspension on cake porosity has been conventionally investigated by using binary or ternary mixtures of spherical particles. It was apparent on the basis of the average specific cake resistances and average porosities of the cakes that the improved filtration characteristics were mainly due to the width of PSD. Therefore, the widest and narrowest PSD were further evaluated together with the PSD of the original non-ground sample ( The result presented above, referring to A straightforward linear regression analysis was performed in order to evaluate the impact of the experimental variables (without interaction terms) on the specific resistance to filtration. The equation is of the form The squared Pearson correlation coefficient Two ground samples and the original sample, the particle size distributions of which were presented above in  As can be seen in the illustrations shown in In the literature, spherical particles have been reported to form a cake with low porosity ( The effect of stirred media grinding conditions on the pressure filtration characteristics of Ni-Cu mine tailings were investigated in this experimental study. The results showed that bead size had the strongest impact on filterability with regard to the average specific cake resistance. Extending the duration of grinding and increasing the stirring rate had also a positive effect on the filterability, although the particle size was reduced in all grinding experiments. The pressure filtration results were relatively poorly explained by any single characteristic particle size. However, the width of particle size distribution correlated clearly with the average specific cake resistance, and even better with the porosity of the cake. The characterization of particle morphology of the original and ground samples did not expose critical changes in the elongation and circularity of the particles. The regression analysis showed that the effect of grinding conditions on filtration performance was significantly stronger than the effect of filtration pressure within the selected range of experimental variables. Evaluation of the obtained particle size distributions implied that size reduction of the largest particles was mainly responsible for the ease of pressure filtration. The high importance of the bead diameter comes from the fact that large beads are more effective in the grinding of coarse particles, the size of which should be reduced to obtain a highly porous structure of the cake. The utilization potential of the results of this study in existing industrial processes is highly dependent on the material properties and the possibilities to modify the plant flowsheet. Therefore, the results should not be generalized to different materials and processes.