Vortex-induced vibration (VIV) of a tapered cylinder is investigated numerically at a constant Reynolds number of 500 using three-dimensional numerical simulations. The objectives of the study is to identify the difference between the response of a tapered cylinder and that of a uniform cylinder. Simulations are conducted for the lengths and the taper ratios the same as those in the published experimental studies. Two cylinders are considered: one with a length to diameter ratio of 4.3 and a mass ratio of 2.27 and another one with a length to diameter ratio of 12.3 and a mass ratio of 6.1. Detailed analysis of the vibration amplitude and frequency, the vortex shedding flow mode and the lift coefficient are performed for the longer cylinder. It was found that the frequencies of the vortex shedding and the lift coefficient synchronize with the vibration frequency in the lock-in regime, but vary along the cylinder span outside the lock-in regime. For some reduced velocities, it is found that vortex shedding is in 2P mode at the small-diameter part and 2S mode at the larger-diameter part of the cylinder, forming a hybrid flow mode. The change of the flow mode on the cylinder span corresponds to the change of the phase difference between the lift coefficient and the displacement for about 180°. The lock-in regime of a tapered cylinder is found to be wider than that of an equivalent uniform cylinder.Vortex-induced vibration (VIV) of bluff body structures are one of the classical design issues in fluid engineering as strong vibrations may lead to catastrophic structural damages. In the offshore engineering, the sea currents can similarly induce large-amplitude vibrations of offshore structures, such as platforms and underwater pipelines. Due to this reason, VIV of cylindrical structures has attracted much attention of engineers and scientists and been studied extensively in the past decades. Most of the studies are focused on the VIV of an elastically mounted rigid cylinder in a fluid flow. The detailed review of the research on VIV of an elastically mounted cylinder can be found in Sarpkaya The response of an elastically mounted rigid cylinder in a fluid flow has been the topic of many studies because this simple case provides fundamental mechanisms of VIV. When VIV of a cylinder is studied, the velocity of the fluid flow is commonly nondimensionalized as Due to its efficiency, two-dimensional (2D) simulations of VIV of a cylinder at very low Reynolds numbers in the laminar flow regime have been popularly used to investigate VIV The studies of VIV of a circular cylinder in a fluid flow have been extended to various cases that are relevant to the engineering. For example, VIV of a cylinder close to a plane boundary has been studied due to its relevance to the subsea pipelines close to the sea floor The interaction of a spanwise shear flow with a uniform cylinder or the interaction of uniform flow with a tapered cylinder have also attracted much attention recently. The flow patterns of the two cases (a uniform cylinder in a shear flow and a tapered cylinder in a uniform flow) were found to be similar to each other. When a uniform circular cylinder is placed in a spanwise shear flow, spanwise cellular wake is the typical wake flow structure and vortex shedding frequency changes at the boundary between two cells Although some experimental studies of VIV of a tapered cylinder have been conducted, they are mainly focused on the vibration amplitude and frequency of the cylinder and their dependence on the taper ratio. Little attention has been paid on the vortex shedding flow patterns of a free-vibrating tapered cylinder, which is important to understand the mechanisms of VIV. In this study, VIV of an elastically mounted tapered cylinder in a uniform flow is investigated numerically. The main objectives of this study are to identify the difference between the lock-in regimes of a tapered and a uniform cylinder and to study the wake flow patterns for VIV of a tapered cylinder in the lock-in regime. The parameters used in this study are chosen to be as close to those used by Zeinoddini et al. The vortex-induced vibrations of a tapered cylinder is considered in this study as shown in The NS equations are discretized using the Petrov-Galerkin Finite Element Method (PG-FEM), which was proposed by Brooks and Hughes A 50 The computational mesh needs to be moved after every computational time step due to the vibration of the cylinder. Because the cylinder only vibrates in the cross-flow direction ( The parameters for simulating the VIV of a tapered cylinder are chosen to be as close to those used in the laboratory experiments by Zeinoddini et al. The computational domain is divided into 8-node hexahedral tri-linear elements. The numbers of the finite elements for the cylinders with     It can be seen that for a tapered cylinder, the vibration frequency is close to the natural frequency when the reduced velocity exceeds the higher boundary of the lock-in regime ( The wake flow for the VIV of a uniform cylinder at Re  It has been found that the vortex shedding flow pattern in the wake of a uniform cylinder is dependent on the reduced velocity By conducting flow visualization, Seyed-Aghazadeh et al. The lift coefficient is defined as It has been seen in the discussion of the wake flow that the vortex shedding mode changes along the span of a tapered cylinder for some reduced velocities. Where the vortex shedding change mode can be identified by observing the correlation coefficient between the sectional lift coefficient and the displacement. Vortex-induced vibration (VIV) of tapered and uniform cylinders of nondimensional lengths of A hybrid between the 2S vortex shedding mode at one part of the cylinder and 2P vortex shedding mode at another part are found for certain reduced velocities in the lock-in regime. The spanwise vortices disconnect at the boundary between the 2S and 2P modes. The co-existence of the two vortex shedding mode mainly due to the variation of the local reduced velocity along the cylinder span. The correlation coefficient between the sectional lift coefficient and the displacement may change its sign at the position where the flow changes its mode along the cylinder span. The change of the sign of the correlation coefficient corresponding to a phase between the displacement and the sectional lift coefficient jump of about 180°. Although the vortex shedding pattern may vary along the cylinder span, the frequencies of the vortex shedding and the sectional lift coefficient synchronize with the vibration frequency of the cylinder in the lock-in regime, instead of varying along the cylinder span. Outside the lock-in regime, the flow pattern is similar to that of a single cylinder due to very small vibration amplitude. The lock-in regime of the reduced velocity for a tapered cylinder are found to be wider than that of a uniform cylinder. This is mainly because the variation of the local reduced velocity along the cylinder span increases the chance of lock-in compared with the single reduced velocity in the uniform cylinder case.