Facing the worldwide process of economical globalization and, particularly, as a member of the North American Free Trade Agreement (Mexico–Canada–United States), Mexico must respond to this change within its various industrial fields. Mexico’s Chemical Engineering and Metallurgical Engineering are in transformation process geared towards development of human resources and new processes, and enhancement of old processes to obtain environmentally safe ones that are optimized and competitive. Based on the above, The School of Chemical Engineering and Extracting Industries (ESIQIE) of the Both national and international experts in academic and industrial fields have participated in all of these events. Following the same framework of the previous ones, in the current state-of-the-art on Chemical Engineering Technology was analyzed in order to identify major challenges to be faced in both areas in the short term. For the first time, The School of Chemical Engineering and Extracting Industries of the The Thermodynamics session, organized in honor of Prof. Stanley I. Sandler, was held in Mexico City in 29–30 May 2002. During this session, invited lectures and scientific oral communications were presented and a special lunch was organized ( R. Wellek—NSF, USA D. Richon—Ecole des Mines de Paris, France K. Fischer—Univ. of Oldenburg, Germany J. Gmehling—Univ. of Oldenburg, Germany H.V. Kehiaian—Université Paris VII, CNRS, France G.N. Escobedo Alvarado—Dupont, USA T.W. de Loss—Univ. of Delft, The Netherlands G.A. Iglesias Silva—Tec. De Celaya, Mexico L.A. Galicia-Luna—SEPI-E.S.I.Q.I.E. Luis A. Galicia-Luna (Instituto Politécnico Nacional—E.S.I.Q.I.E.) Dominique Richon (Ecole des Mines de Paris) Nestor L. Dı́az Ramirez, Director of the E.S.I.Q.I.E. We are honoured to be able to promote the publication of this special issue of the Fluid Phase Equilibria Journal, dedicated to Stan I. Sandler. The guest editors thank the Authorities of the Instituto Politécnico Nacional (Cofaa); the Director of the E.S.I.Q.I.E.; Nestor L. Dı́az Ramirez; Conacyt (Grant C300424); the Deputy Director for Chemical and Transport Systems Division—NSF; Robert Wellek; and the National Science Foundation for its help and financial support.