The use of high-fired gypsum as binder for masonry and joint mortars or stuccowork in Central Europe in the Early and High Middle Ages was a regional specific as it depended on local gypsum deposits. The calcination technology possible at the time resulted in an assemblage of calcium sulphate phases dehydrated to different degrees and partly thermally damaged accessory minerals of the raw gypsum. Not hydrated clusters of firing products preserved in the binder matrix are a typical feature of such mortars. A novel Raman microspectroscopic approach, providing access to the burning history of individual anhydrite grains, was applied to samples from medieval South Tyrolean stucco decorations and sculptures. Beyond that, Raman microspectroscopy was employed for tracing and visualising pyrometamorphic reactions in natural impurities of the kiln run. In the discussed examples mineral thermometry indicates process temperatures above 800°C: the breakdown of magnesium-rich chlorite led to the formation of forsterite Mg2SiO4, while the thermal decomposition of dolomite CaMg(CO3)2 to periclase MgO and lime CaO yielded – after hydration and carbonation – magnesite MgCO3, CaCO3 polymorphs and magnesian calcite. Hydration of periclase in the mixed gypsum paste containing sulphate ions also resulted in magnesium sulphate hydrates, here identified in the form of hexahydrite MgSO4·6H2O. Lower burning temperatures left the accessory minerals in their pristine form, but can be traced by measuring the spectra of individual anhydrite crystals in grains of firing products and evaluating Raman band widths. Throughout the present study, calcination temperatures ranging from approx. 600°C to 900°C were determined.The use of high-fired gypsum as binder for masonry and joint mortars or ornamental stucco decorations and sculptures in Central Europe in the Early and High Middle Ages was a specifically regional art technological skill as it depended on local gypsum deposits. The calcination technology possible at the time resulted in an assemblage of calcium sulphate phases dehydrated to different degrees and partly thermally damaged geologically related minor constituents of the raw gypsum (e.g. calcium and magnesium carbonates, quartz, feldspar and phyllosilicates). Currently, art technological studies of medieval gypsum mortars concentrate on not hydrated grains of firing products in the binder matrix in order to understand historical production conditions, hydration mechanisms and long-lasting performance. Optical and electron microscopy of modern high-fired gypsum yielded the observation that the proportion of granular anhydrite, considered as hardly soluble, rises with increasing temperatures at the expense of fibrous anhydrite, which preferably dissolves and hydrates. Hence, the anhydrite morphology is used to estimate the conditions of phase formation or the process parameters, respectively. Blisters or holes in granular anhydrite crystals are interpreted as additional marks of high burning temperatures; a correlation with the emission of sulphur trioxide due to the decomposition of calcium sulphate to calcium oxide is proposed [ In the last decennia, Raman microspectroscopy has gained importance as an analytical method for thermometry in archaeometric and art technological research. The detection and identification of primary minerals and pyrometamorphic phases enables to define firing temperatures of ceramics and mineral binders; beyond that, shifts and broadening of Raman peaks reflect purity, disorder and degree of crystallinity of the components [ The following observations concern high-fired gypsum mortars originating from stucco decorations in the early medieval churches St. Peter above Gratsch and St. Benedikt in Mals as well as from a stucco sculpture of a pieta, dated around 1400, at the Benedictine abbey Marienberg above Burgeis in South Tyrol (Italy). The mortar samples were prepared for analysis in a specialized laboratory by embedding in epoxy resin under vacuum and manufacturing polished thin sections, which were studied under polarising light microscopes (Leica Microsystems Laborlux equipped with ProgRes SpeedXT3 and Zeiss AxioScope.A1 MAT equipped with AxioCam MRc) in transmitted polarised light. Electron-microscopic imaging was performed using a table-top environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) JCM-6000 Neoscope (Jeol, Freising, Germany) in low-vacuum mode without prior coating or other sample preparation of the thin sections. For reference measurements, 8 samples of 5 g reagent grade gypsum powder each (Carl-Roth; purity 98%) were dehydrated in corundum crucibles in a laboratory furnace (Nabertherm, Lilienthal, Germany) for 4 h at temperatures of 400 to 1100 °C ± 20 K in steps of 100 K. The resulting anhydrite II powders were tightly sealed and stored in a desiccator after cooling. Raman measurements were performed using a LabRam HR 800 instrument (Horiba Jobin Yvon, Bensheim, Germany) coupled to an upright BX41 microscope (Olympus, Hamburg, Germany) equipped with a continuous diode-pumped solid-state laser with a wavelength of 532 nm and maximum power at the sample surface of 34 mW, and a liquid-N For the polished thin-sectional medieval gypsum mortar samples, a 50× objective lens with higher numerical aperture of N.A. = 0.75 and thus, a higher lateral resolution of approx. 430 nm (corresponding to a spot diameter of approx. 710 nm) could be used (compare Supplementary Information of Ref. [ All Raman spectra are shown as collected, thus, no baseline correction or smoothing was applied, only the spectra of the burnt powder samples were baseline corrected. Raman mapping data has the four dimensions x coordinate, y coordinate, wavenumber axis and Raman intensity axis. This data was converted into colour-coded two-dimensional images by using home-made (T.S.) Labview-based software (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA). The maps show either background-corrected signal intensities of marker bands of selected minerals or band widths (full width at half maximum, FWHM) calculated from Lorentzian curves that were fitted to the most prominent anhydrite bands in each spectrum of a map. Exemplary deconvolutions of selected single spectra into two or more individual bands were performed using Origin 2015G (OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA, USA). In the frame of the mentioned previous study [ Within the present study, this small-scale (with regard to the degree of comminution of the raw material and the dimensions and the controllability of the furnace) gypsum burning experiment was reproduced and extended to a temperature range of 400°C up to 1100°C ( In this study, remnants of the unreacted binder in the form of grains of firing products or other regions of interest in thin-sectional samples of medieval gypsum mortars were localised by (polarised) light or electron microscopies. For example, Peak widths of the most prominent Raman band of anhydrite II for assessing its different crystallinities and thus, indicators for burning temperatures, are accessible by fitting with Lorentz functions. Peaks too weak to yield meaningful fit results were excluded from data analysis by defining an intensity threshold level in the software, and only a part of each anhydrite band was evaluated in order to minimise contributions from the neighbouring gypsum peak. The red dotted line in The granular anhydrite with crystal sizes of around 10 μm shown in Apart from (partially hydrated) clusters of remnant binder material, unreacted anhydrite can also be found in the form of small individual grains widely distributed throughout the mortar matrix. Discrete crystals of thermal anhydrite with sizes in the lower micrometre range are depicted in the right part of As sedimentary deposit, natural gypsum is often associated with (dolomitic) limestone, shale, marl and clay [ Dolomite fragments present in medieval gypsum mortars show variable degrees of mineral dissociation. By analogy with the calcium transport from carbonate grains into the clay matrix during the manufacture of bricks and ceramics [ The Raman maps in Beyond that, also hydrated magnesium sulphate phases may be encountered in high-fired medieval gypsum mortars, as can be seen in Fig. S6 in the Supplementary material reveals a relatively small excerpt of a high-fired medieval gypsum mortar of only 20 μm × 20 μm (mapped with 20 × 20 Raman measurements) in which pyrometamorphic and hydration reaction products of the dolomitic starting material in the form of calcite, high magnesian calcite (here, containing even approx. 20 mol% MgCO In addition to the mentioned carbonate minerals, phyllosilicates (layer silicates) like clay minerals or members of the mica- and the chlorite group occur as natural impurities in gypsum deposits [ The Raman spectra of the olivine group members are well understood and typically exhibit doublets as their most prominent spectral features, which appear in the range between approx. 800 cm The complexity of the various phyllosilicate minerals is mirrored in their Raman spectra, too. Dioctahedral and trioctahedral phyllosilicates, e.g. the dioctahedral mica muscovite and the trioctahedral mica phlogopite, differ according to the cation arrangement in octahedral sites of the layer structure and can be distinguished based on the position of the strongest peak in their Raman spectra in the 600–800 cm The colocalisation of the olivine group member forsterite with two different layer silicates in the examples shown in Raman maps of a cluster of firing products found in the same medieval gypsum mortar underline that temperatures necessary for the pyrometamorphic conversion of Mg-rich chlorite into olivine have been reached during processing of the binder. The Raman band width distribution of thermal anhydrite II shown in Fig. S8 in the Supplementary material indicates a burning temperature of approx. 800°C. The overlay of the intensities of two different anhydrite bands at 1017 cm Knowledge and awareness of the phase assemblage of high-fired medieval gypsum mortars and the historical calcination conditions are an essential basis for the development of compatible, tailored repair materials. Identification of components even if present only in small amounts permits to gain a complete picture of the mineral assemblage characterising the gypsum binder: primary accessory minerals, in part useful as tracers of the provenance of the gypsum rock, as well as phases newly formed through pyrometamorphic reactions. Because of the absence of medieval textbooks, the observation of high-temperature, low-pressure mineral transformations and the correlation of coexisting phases occurring in not hydrated binder relicts preserved in the aged gypsum matrix to the mineralogy of the feedstock and the burning conditions (temperature of firing, residence time, kiln atmosphere, etc.) constitute the only source to the historical technological know-how. Microscopically resolved measurements with high structural and chemical specificity are needed to pinpoint and analyse grains of firing products and other indicative mineral clusters within the medieval mortar samples. Raman measurements on polished thin sections in the imaging mode, complemented by scanning electron and (polarised) light microscopies, have demonstrated to fulfil these demands. Raman mapping data acquired in selected regions of interest was evaluated with respect to intensities of marker bands, band shifts, relative intensity changes and band widths, because all of these spectral features can contain significant information about the constituent phases: While local changes of the intensities of mineral-specific marker bands enable the imaging of mineral distributions and their comparison with micrographs of the same sample details, small peak shifts can be indicative for stoichiometric and sub-stoichiometric compositional variations within solid solution series, such as the members of the olivine group, and relative intensity changes of signals assigned to the same compound reveal different crystal orientations. Beyond these spectral features, we recently demonstrated the effect of firing temperatures of gypsum onto Raman band widths of the resulting anhydrite II [ The authors gratefully acknowledge PD Dr. Leo Andergassen and Ulrich Veith for providing samples from stucco fragments belonging to the churches St. Peter, Gratsch, and St. Benedikt, Mals (South Tyrol, Italy), respectively. This work was supported by The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at