Cobalt is usually recovered as a by-product of copper and nickel processing, and only a small amount of cobalt is derived from laterites although a vast majority of cobalt resources in them. The exploitation of limonitic laterite containing high content of cobalt is becoming increasingly important. The mineralogy of a limonitic laterite ore was characterized by environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) in this paper. The results show that nickel occurs in goethite mainly, while cobalt is predominantly associated with manganiferous minerals. Thiosulfate is found to be able to selectively leach cobalt from limonitic laterite in the presence of sulfuric acid, and 91% Co, 22% Ni, 10% Fe are leached from an ore containing 0.13% Co, 1.03% Ni within the first 5min at 90°C under the conditions of 10g/L sodium thiosulfate, 8% (w/w) sulfuric acid and 10:1
                     L/S ratio. The leaching kinetics of Mn and Co by acidic sodium thiosulfate solution can be characterized by the Avrami equation. In acidic solution, thiosulfate readily decomposes into sulfur and sulfur dioxide as intermediary reagents to reduce pyrolusite (MnO2) and goethite (FeOOH); therefore, nickel and cobalt associated with goethite and pyrolusite respectively are extracted due to reduction dissolution. Furthermore, cobalt is selectively leached over iron and nickel because pyrolusite is preferentially reduced by acidic thiosulfate rather than goethite. The novel process may give an alternative method to selectively recover cobalt as the primary product from limonitic laterites at atmospheric pressure.Cobalt is usually recovered as a by-product of copper and nickel processing. A vast majority of cobalt resources are reserved in laterites, from which only about 12% of cobalt is derived. Therefore, there is an increasing interest in recovering cobalt from laterites ( Pressure sulfuric acid leaching (PAL) is currently the preferred method for processing limonitic laterites ( Various strategies have been studied to improve metals extraction or selectivity of nickel and cobalt over iron to decrease acid consumption, including the addition of sulfur dioxide ( Thiosulfate in alkaline solution is known to be a suitable replacement for cyanide as complexing agent for precious metals extraction involving gold, silver etc. ( Aiming at recovering cobalt as the prime product from limonitic laterite, as well as resolving the problem of SO Sulfuric acid and sodium thiosulfate (Na The laterite ore used in this study was obtained from Indonesia. The sample is characterized as high iron and cobalt content, as well as low nickel content ( The raw ore was ground to 100% undersize 74 where The metals extractions as a function of leaching temperature in the range of 30–140 To shed a light on the effects of leaching time on metals extractions, leaching tests were performed within the time range of 0–600 The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on metals extractions is shown in Sodium thiosulfate is crucial for Mn and Co extractions than for Fe and Ni as shown in  To determine the kinetic parameters and rate-controlling step for the leaching of metals, the experimental data were usually analyzed on the basis of the shrinking core models. However, it has been found that the data of metals extractions presented in It has been reported that the semi-empirical Avrami equation (Eq. where Therefore, Avrami equation is applied to explain the leaching kinetics of Mn and Co by acidic thiosulfate solution. The ln Thiosulfate is instable in acidic solutions and readily decomposes into intermediate reagents of sulfur and sulfur dioxide (Eq. The half-cell reactions and standard electrode potentials of reduction of FeOOH, SO Thus, the leaching process can be summarized as follows: (1) goethite and pyrolusite are reductively dissolved by It is true that, from Eqs.  Surface scanning images obtained by ESEM show that a majority of Ni occurs in goethite, while Co is almost associated with manganiferous minerals. Thiosulfate is found to be able to selectively leach cobalt from limonitic laterite in the presence of sulfuric acid, and 91% Co, 80% Mn, 22% Ni, 10% Fe are leached from an ore containing 0.13% Co and 1.03% Ni within the first 5 Pyrolusite and goethite are dissociated because they are reduced by elemental sulfur and sulfur dioxide, which result from the decomposition of thiosulfate in acidic solution. Mn and Co are provided with faster leaching kinetics than Fe and Ni, owing to the higher potential difference for the reductive dissolution of MnO The authors want to express their thanks to the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (50725416) for financial support of this research.