The discrete element method (DEM) has been implemented to model abrasive wear on steel plates that interact with bulk solids, such as crushed copper ore. The Archard model was used to predict the rate and the wear pattern on a structural steel plate A37-24 ES under different types of copper ore. One of the key steps of the methodology consists of the proper characterization of the granular medium to calibrate the numerical model. The numerical results obtained are in good agreement with the values of the standard test method for measuring abrasion using the wear wheel (ASTM G65). This allows to establish that the model is able to correctly predict the phenomenon of abrasion wear. There are many processes where wear limits the life of equipment, affecting its productivity and operating costs. A numerical method such as the one developed here could be used to reduce costs in the design and operation of mining equipment, looking for configurations appropriate to the actual working conditions.The discrete element method (DEM) ( A simple way to estimate the rate of abrasive-erosive wear, using the values of the forces and velocities of the particles that are obtained by means of a DEM code, is using the Archard ( In the present work, a numerical methodology based on a DEM code is implemented to model the abrasive wear on a structural steel plate by means of a bulk solid. For this, the test conditions of the abrasive wear wheel ASTM G65 are simulated. Then, the Archard law is used to calculate the loss of material in the zone of the steel plate subjected to the wear. A finite element surface mesh, which is deformed according to the volume removed from the worn material, is used for the representation of the pattern of wear in the plate. An important step in the implementation of the methodology to calculate the wear corresponds to the correct calibration of the material. Specific tests are implemented for this, which allow obtaining the coefficients of rebound and friction between particles, as well as between particles and the steel plate. Two types of granular material are used to test the proposed methodology, fine and coarse copper ore. The numerical results obtained from the rate and the wear pattern are in good agreement with those of the experimental test of the wear wheel. As expected when using the Archard wear model, the numerical wear rate of the SAE steel specimen A37-24 is linear. In this method, the following basic properties are assumed ( The particles are discrete element that together make up the complex system of particles These elements move independently of each other In each particle, the mechanics of the rigid body is used where each discrete element is considered a rigid body in itself The main equations that allow understanding of the formulation of the discrete element method is described below. Further details on the development of these equations can be found, for example, in The forces and moments are given by the usual body forces (gravity, magnetic) and, most importantly from computational considerations, contact forces with other discrete element, objects or walls. With the additional identity: Eqs. Considering vectors the equation system in the compact form is: In the development of DEM, higher order integration methods have been implemented to improve the conservation of energy and momentum with extended periods of simulation ( Also, for each particle ( An important aspect of the implementation of DEM is the model used to represent the forces and moments in the governing Eqs. With the notation of the The spring stiffness and viscous damping coefficient in Eq. In the contact model used the tangential force Since the force Two types of particles have been used for the representation of wear in this work, one spherical and another composite or macroparticle. The possible configurations that were programmed are shown in An extra variable As in most DEM techniques, the overwhelming computational cost is due to contact search (the actual contact force calculation is insignificant). Therefore, care must be taken in the design of fast contact detection algorithms. In the present case, lists of possible contacts are built every so often. These pairs are tested at the beginning of each timestep to see if an actual contact exists. Given that this test is cheap, a compromise must be reached between the extent of possible contacts (memory, tests if contacting) and the cost of rebuilding the possible contact pairs. The larger the list of possible contacts, the less often the list needs to be rebuilt. Efficient spatial data storage and search techniques are crucial in obtaining fast-running, scalable DEM codes. In the present case, a simple bin data structure is employed for the DEM-DEM contact search, while a hierarchical bin data structure (a series of bins with increasing bin size) is used for the boundary triangulation ( To calculate the volume loss associated with wear in the ASTM G65 test, Archard's formulation ( Eq. Considering that the mesh is in motion, the central point Then the variations associated with the wear are integrated as: To obtain the total volume loss An important requirement for the representation of wear is to obtain patterns that can be compared with the results of the experimental test. In this work, the total impact on the area of the mesh element at time The methodology developed to calculate the loss of material due to abrasive wear requires the values of the tangential velocities and the normal forces between the particles and the wear surface. This is not an additional cost in the calculation time, because the values are available in each time step due to the contact model used by DEM. In To validate and calibrate the wear model using DEM code, the result from abrasive wear wheel experiment ( To perform the simulation, the surface mesh of each part is made with triangular elements using the GiD In the characterization and calibration of the bulk solid, specific tests and experiments are used, where the properties of the bulk solid are adjusted and calculated with the objective of representing the behavior of copper ore as a granular material by means of composite and spherical particles ( To approximate the shape of the copper ore, we find the configuration of the type of composite particles with the greatest similarity in the average length, width and height of a sample of 10 copper ore stones between 6 and 10 [mm] ( The following proportions were obtained from the copper ore sample: Considering the definition of the interference factor Fi of The granulometry affects fundamentally the particle flow that circulates in the wear wheel test. The granulometry of the ore is calibrated according to the sieving size. From the test, the granulometry of the mineral is known before and after being processed. To obtain a representative granulometry of the mineral in the simulation, the average of the two samples will be used. For the different configurations of composite particles, the radius of the spheres is determined so that it matches the size of the sieve. The measurement of the repose angle is a characteristic test of the DEM to calibrate properties of the bulk solid. In the literature, there are several methods proposed to measure this angle ( The repose angle depends on the following parameters of the bulk solid (  In the use of a DEM code, as in the present work, the density value of the particles is required. A common method to obtain this value is from the bulk density of the mineral ( It is proposed to use wear wheel test information to adjust properties of bulk solids that could not be obtained with specific tests. In addition, the strategy of accelerating the wear rate is validated, with the aim of minimizing the computation time and making the simulation feasible. For this, the representation of composite particles for copper ore in 6 and 12 [mm] is mainly used. The fact of using the larger ore decreases the calculation of the time required, processing a smaller number of elements. To minimize the calculation time, the simulations are only carried out for a period of seconds, enough to stabilize the experiment and be able to take data during a normal operating time. The injection of particles causes a small blow to the wear plate at the beginning of the simulation. This causes an oscillation, so a sufficient amount of material must be passed until the plate stabilizes. In In the start-up of the wear wheel experiment, it is necessary to increase the coefficient of friction by covering the surface of the steel wheel with rubber of 2 [mm] thick and a layer of adhesive tape to ensure that the particles move with the same speed as the wheel. This means that as the same instant of time that the granular material passes through the wear plate it experiences two types of contact. One with the rubber surface of the wheel and another with the steel surface of the wear plate, see In the experimental test of the wear wheel, the particle flow is strongly affected by the coefficient of friction between the rubber wall of the wheel and the mineral. This dependence was also observed in the simulation. A procedure was performed to vary the coefficient of friction between the rubber wall and the particle to see the flow response in the simulation. The results are shown in It can be seen in When the mineral moves around the wear plate and the wheel, the pressures and forces of contact with the surface are much higher than those of the test to measure the static coefficient of friction. These forces can produce comminution of the mineral and indentations on the plate. To consider these effects in the simulation, a calibration based on the pattern wear is proposed to calculate a new coefficient of friction that incorporates the effect of indentation on the wear plate. Experimentally it was discovered that the coefficient of friction between the wear plate and the mineral determines whether the particles are rolling or if they are sliding on the surface. This is reflected in the type of scratch obtained in the wear pattern. When reviewing the pattern obtained in the test (see  The rate of wear and particle flow decreases as the coefficient of friction increases. This behavior follows Archard's law. When the frictional force increases, the particles stop their sliding and begin to roll on the surface reducing the accumulated tangential slip and therefore the amount of material removed by wear. For the coefficient of friction values greater than 2.4, there is a stable flow and wear rate behavior for the four bulk solids. Therefore, a value of 2.4 will be used in the simulations. A hypothesis about this value calibrated is that in the simulation must be incorporated the force caused by indentation that is generated in conditions of high load. In the wear wheel test, 0.2 [g] of material is removed from the steel plate by approximately 250 [s]. Instead of simulating the total duration of the test, only a period necessary to take data from the particle flow and visualize the wear pattern is used. Considering the methodology developed to calculate the mass of material that is removed and their visualization, the wear patterns are compared by varying the specific wear rate of the material ( In In the present work, a numerical methodology based on the DEM was developed and implemented to model the loss of material associated with abrasive wear. This methodology includes a proposal to characterize the granular material and to calibrate the simulation from specific tests. By identifying the type of wear pattern, it was possible to determine if the mineral is rolling or sliding on the surface of the specimen. This methodology could be applied in other DEM simulations to estimate the coefficient of friction under high-pressure conditions. The use the particle flow of the experimental wear wheel test was proposed as a means to adjust the friction coefficient of the simulation in conditions in which it is not possible to be measured directly. This method can be extrapolated in DEM simulations where the flow of particles is sensitive to the friction coefficient of the mineral on the surface subject to wear. The accelerated wear concept represents an effective method to decrease the time of simulation and computation. For the present work it was possible to reduce approximately 90 times. This is achieved by defining a criterion based on the minimum information required to have a wear pattern developed and comparable to those of the actual experiment sample. The numerical model was able to correctly predict the variation of the wear rate, by changing the grain size of the same material, showing wear patterns very similar to those obtained in the test. This allowed validation the use of the Archard model to simulate the abrasive wear of the wear wheel experiment. The proposed numerical methodology is valid to estimate the rate and wear pattern and compare different granular materials to one another, but not the behavior for different steel specimens. This is because it is used a numerical specific wear rate D so that in the total simulation time of 2.8 [s] the same total wear of the experimental test with 250 [s] is obtained. As a future line of research, one should consider a methodology consisting of equating rates by calibrating and tabulating the constant D for different steels, so that the total time of the simulation is only determined by the stabilization of the flow of granular material on the wear plate. The authors are grateful for the support and funding provided by the DGIP project 25.15.55 of the