In this study, the inhibitory effect of a composite depressant consisting of sodium sulfite and sodium lignosulfonate mixed at a molar ratio of 5:1 on Cu–Pb flotation separation was analyzed. The results of the mineral flotation tests show that both chalcopyrite and galena are floatable in a pH range of 6–12 and the composite depressant has a stronger inhibitory effect on galena than that of single inhibitors. The particle-size analyses of the concentrates and tailings show that it is difficult to inhibit the floatability of fine-grained galena using a single depressant, but the composite depressant can effectively deteriorate its floatability. The results obtained from zeta potential measurements and SEM reveal that the zeta potential of galena becomes more negative after a composite depressant is added because of the greater adsorption of sulfite and lignosulfonate ions on the surface of the galena. The XPS results show that sodium sulfite chemically reacts with the surface of galena and that hydrogen bonds are the main driving force of the adsorption of sodium lignosulfonate onto the surface of galena. The use of a combination of sodium sulfite and sodium lignosulfonate increases their adsorption onto the surface of fine-grained galena.Copper and lead are common important metals widely used in various fields. Chalcopyrite and galena are well known as the main source of copper and lead. The coexistence of chalcopyrite and galena in deposits with complex mineralogical properties presents a challenge with respect to the use of copper–lead ores in industrial practice In this study, the inhibitory effect of the combination of sodium sulfite and sodium lignosulfonate (SL) on fine-grained galena was investigated. The molecular structure of sulfonated lignin was showed in The chalcopyrite and galena samples used in this study were obtained from Bijie, Guizhou Province, and Guilin, Guangxi Province, China, respectively. After manual crushing, the dry mineral samples were ground in a porcelain ball mill and screened to obtain size fractions of −0.075 and −0.015 mm. The chemical compositions of the chalcopyrite and galena samples are listed in Industrial-grade depressants sodium sulfite and SL were used in this work. The synergistic inhibition effect of a composite depressant was studied. Industrial-grade ethionine ester was used as the collector. Pure hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as pH regulators, and deionized water was used in all tests. Flotation tests were performed in an XFG-type flotation machine. During each test, 10.0 g of single or mixed (chalcopyrite–galena mixture ratio of 1:1) minerals were placed in a 150-mL flotation cell and mixed with 150-mL deionized water. The pH of the pulp was adjusted to a specified value using HCl and NaOH. Subsequently, the depressants were added and the mixture conditioned for 2 min. Industrial-grade ethionine ester was then added, and the mixture was conditioned for 1 min. Finally, the slurry was floated for 3 min. The floating particles were collected, dried, and assayed for the calculation of the recovery. All tests were repeated three times under the same conditions. The flow chart of the flotation test was showed in The measurements of the zeta potentials of galena and chalcopyrite were performed using a Zeta Plus potential meter (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS; Malvern, UK). The samples for the zeta potential measurements were prepared as follows: a 0.1-g fresh galena sample was ground to −2 μm and placed in a 100-mL beaker, and 0.01 mol electrolyte KNO The morphology of the fine-grained (−0.015 mm) galena was analyzed using a LEO440 SEM (FEI, Czech Republic). Mineral granule samples were prepared as follows: 1.0 g of fine-grained (−0.015 mm) galena was added to 50 mL of 6 × 10 The measurements were conducted using an ESCALAB 250Xi X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher-VG Scientific) equipped with an Al Kα emission source (hv = 1486.6 eV). Scans were performed using the low-energy electron neutralization method: scan area of 400 μm; vacuum below 1 × 10 For the XPS tests, a 1.0-g sample was added to 100- Using ethionine ester as the collector, the effects of collector dosage on the flotation of chalcopyrite and galena (−0.075-mm particle-size fraction) at a natural pH were studied. The results are shown in The recoveries of chalcopyrite and galena as a function of the pH value obtained using single-mineral flotation tests are shown in In the test, a combination of SL and Na The inhibitory effects of the single and composite depressants (Na The flotation recoveries at pH values ranging from 3 to 11 differed when the different depressants (concentration: 6 × 10 When the combination depressant was used to depress galena, the recovery of galena gradually decreased in the pH range of 3–7. Subsequently, the galena recovery decreased slightly with an increase in the pH. Based on the comparison of the effects of the three depressants, the inhibitory effect of the composite depressant was greater in the pH range 3–12 compared with that of the other two depressants. After the use of collector and depressant concentrations of 6 × 10  After fixing the ratio of the depressant at SL:Na (c(Na Measurements of the zeta potential of galena were performed before and after the addition of depressants. The results are shown in In the presence of SL, the zeta potential of galena gradually decreased with an increase in the pH, indicating that SL was adsorbed on the galena surface. The adsorption of SL can lower the magnitude of the zeta potential because SL is nonionic and contains a large amount of hydroxyl (−OH) and sulfonic acid (−SO When the composite depressant was added, the magnitudes of the zeta potential decreased, which means that more anions were adsorbed on the galena surface. The use of the combination of sodium sulfite and SL promoted the adsorption of the depressant on the surface of galena. The SL and sodium sulfite were synergistically adsorbed on the surface of galena and increased the hydrophilicity of the galena surface. These results are consistent with the results of the flotation test. The fine-grained galena (−0.015 mm) was analyzed using SEM before and after the treatment with a depressant. The results are shown in The results of the EDS analyses showed in The spectra of galena treated with single and composite depressants are shown in In this study, the S 2p peaks were analyzed to examine the changes of intermediate species on the mineral surface treated with different depressants. The S 2p spectra are shown in  (1) Based on the flotation tests, a single depressant has an inhibitory effect on lead ore; however, the inhibition is small. Compared with a single depressant, the composite depressant can effectively inhibit the floatability of galena. Based on the particle-size analysis of the concentrates and tailings, the composite depressant has a stronger inhibitory effect on fine-grained galena than that of single depressants. (2) The results of the zeta potential measurements indicate that the zeta potential of galena is always negative. When a composite depressant is used, the magnitudes of the zeta potentials of galena decrease. This indicates that SL and sodium sulfite are synergistically adsorbed on the surface of galena. (3) The results of the SEM-EDS measurements show that, in contrast to a single depressant, a composite depressant can increase the surface oxygen content of fine-grained galena and promote surface oxidation. (4) Based on the XPS results, sodium sulfite is chemisorbed on the surface of galena, while SL is adsorbed by hydrogen bonding. A composite depressant can increase the content of oxidized substances on the surface of fine-grained galena, thereby suppressing the floatability of fine-grained galena. Mengfei Liu: contributed significantly to analysis and manuscript preparation; Chenyang Zhang: contributed significantly to review & editing. Bo Hu: contributed to Provide test methods. Zhongmei Sun: contributed to provide funding support. Qihong Xu: contributed to provide funding support. Jian Wen: contributed to provide funding support. Jun Xiao: contributed to provide test equipment. Yanhong Dong: contributed to provide test equipment. Min Gan: performed the data analyses. Wei Sun: contributed to the conception of the study. Jianyu Zhu: helped perform the analysis with constructive discussions. Daixiong Chen: contributed to the conception of the study. Financial support from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: