This work reports the use of porous graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4, gCN) for the photocatalytic degradation of ciprofloxacion (CPX) contaminant using two laser wavelengths (285/365 nm). The simultaneous irradiation with both wavelengths promoted the total degradation of CPX dissolved in water. First, an aqueous solution of CPX + gCN was prepared and exposed to laser irradiation with single wavelengths of 285, 365, 405 or 532 nm and no degradation of CPX was observed after 3 h under of continuous irradiation. The solution of CPX + gCN was also exposed to solar irradiation using solar simulated light (Xe lamp). In this case, the maximum degradation percentage for CPX was 68% after 3 h. Afterwards, the aqueous solution of CPX + gCN was irradiated with combined wavelengths of 285/365 nm, 285/405 nm, 285/532 nm and maximum degradation percentages of 100, 62 and 27% were obtained after 3 h, respectively. The complete degradation of CPX during the simultaneous irradiation of 285/365 nm was produced by the following mechanism: the CPX was firstly protonated (charged positively as demonstrated by DFT simulations) due to its direct interaction with 285 nm. Secondly, OH− radicals are generated after photoexcitation of gCN by the two wavelengths and these radicals attacked the protonated CPX by electrostatic attraction (the presence of such radicals was demonstrated by scavenger experiments). The results presented here demonstrated that only two wavelengths are necessary to produce total degradation of CPX (avoiding the use of lamps with full solar spectrum), which could be one way to design more efficient and more compact photocatalytic systems able to degrade organic contaminants.Pharmaceutical products are currently a source of contaminantion for drinking water. These are organic compounds that include drugs, sun creams, sanitizers, antibiotics etc. [ The following chemicals employed in this work were purchased from Sigma Aldrich with a purity of 99.9% and used as received: Melamine, ciprofloxacin and deionized water. The g-C The morphology of the g-C The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the samples were recorded in the range of 500–4000 cm The photocatalytic experiments were carried out as follows: First, 200 mL of an aqueous CPX solution (20 ppm) was prepared by dispersing 20 mg of CPX powder in 1 L of deionized water (pH = 7.6). After this, 0.10 g of gCN were added to the solution and magnetically stirred for 10 min. Immediately, this solution was irradiated for 3 h by simulated solar light (Xenon Lamp, 500 W), by individual lasers with wavelengths of 285, 365, 405 or 532 nm or by two laser wavelengths (the laser emission was focused on a collimating lens to produce a beam able to illuminate the whole aqueous solution of CPX). During this time, aliquots were taken each 20, 30, 40, 60, 120 and 180 min and their absorbance measured. A decrease of the characteristic peaks of CPX (at 273 nm and at 327 nm) over the time indicated the degradation of this organic compound. The ciprofloxacin (CPX) mineralization was analyzed by the total organic carbon (TOC) technique (SHIMADZU TOC-VSCH analyzer). For this analysis, 20 mg of photocatalyst was added to an aqueous solution of CPX (200 mL with a CPX concentration of 20 mg L The scavengers’ technique was employed for the detection of OH groups with terephthalic acid (TA). First, 5 × 10  The absorbance spectrum of gCN in In the first experiment, an aqueous solution of CPX (20 ppm) without gCN photocatalyst was irradiated for 3 h with different laser wavelengths separately (288, 365, 405 and 532 nm) but no change was observed in the absorbance spectra of CPX with respect to the reference spectrum for pure CPX (compare the colored curves with the black curve for pure CPX), see According to literature, the degradation of CPX in presence of gCN and using 285/365 nm could occur as follows [ The total organic carbon (TOC) mineralization percentage was also determined to monitor de degradation of CPX. The generation of hydroxyl radicals during CPX degradation was confirmed trough fluorescence measurements and using TA as an identifying probe (scavenger method), since it reacts only with the oxidizing agent OH We report a simple method to synthesize porous g-C J. Oliva: Made the writing- reviewing and editing of the paper, C. Gomez-Solis: Made the conceptualization, proposed the Methodology and made the writing of the paper, J. Sanchez: Made the investigation and experimentation process, S. Romero Servin: Made the experimentation with laser, J A. Ruiz-Santoyo and L. Álvarez-Valtierra performed the computational study of the ciprofloxacin molecule, C.R Garcia and M. A. Vallejo: Made the photocatalyst characterization. None. We appreciate the financial support of The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at