The synergestic role of boric acid, as a crystal modifier, and screw dislocation step defects on the crystal growth and formation mechanism of nickel micro-nanocones during electrocrystallization is explained using density functional theory (DFT) and Monte Carlo (MC) calculations. Earlier atomic force microscopy (AFM) studies provided direct evidences on the effect of boric acid on morphology distribution of nickel micro-nanocones and confirmed the presence of terraces and steps due to the spiral growth of screw dislocation. In the presence of boric acid, the formation of nickel-borate complex leads to a decrease in the system’s supersaturation and in turn provides an appropriate condition for screw dislocation driven-growth. DFT and MC simulations reveal that the nickel-borate complex primarily adsorb in the step edges with the lowest adsorption energy barrier, after which the crystal growth is inhibited on these edges resulting in the formation of nanocone structures.Understanding the crystals growth mechanisms is a crucial step towards controlling the shape, size, and functionality of the complex crystalline structures in modern materials During the electrocrystallization process supersaturation of the system is the main driving force for crystal growth The step edge of screw dislocation is a prominent location, with the lowest energy barrier, for nucleate and growth of ions or complexes The materials and electrodeposition conditions as well as microstructural and chemical analysis using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and AFM are discussed in our previous work The quantum chemical calculation of the nickel-borate complex was carried out by DMol3 based on DFT in Materials Studio (V. 8.0 Accelrys Inc. software). The functional of Becke exchange plus Lee–Yang–Parr correlation (BLYP) was selected in order to calculate the quantum chemical parameters of a nickel-borate molecule. These parameters include the geometrical optimization, the total electrostatic potential, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). Additionally, partial density of states (PDOSs) were calculated by the Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid for a quick visual analysis of the electronic structure of the nickel-borate molecule. To investigate the adsorption mechanism of nickel-borate molecule different surfaces, i.e. Cu (1 0 0), Ni (1 1 1), and Ni (2 2 0) with simple and screw dislocation step edges were chosen as substrates. Monte Carlo (MC) simulation was performed using the adsorption locator module and COMPASS force field. To investigate the characteristic electronic structure of the nickel-borate complex, we calculated the PDOSs alongside the most important quantum chemical parameters such as the HOMO, LUMO, the band gap energy (ΔE = E Screw dislocation step edges are expected to play an important role during reduction of nickel ions and nickel-borate complexes, by reducing the adsorption energy barrier. The step edges provide low energy migration paths for molecular junctions of these species. To reveal the synergistic effect of screw dislocation step edges on the adsorption mechanism of nickel-borate complex during the electrocrystallization process we performed MC simulations on Cu and Ni plane surfaces with different step structures.  The topography line profiles in Density functional theory (DFT) simulation and Monte Carlo (MC) calculation were performed to explain the synergistic behavior between boric acid, as a crystal modifier, and screw dislocation step edge in the crystal growth of electrodeposited Ni films on Cu. MC calculations showed that step edges of screw dislocations on Ni surface are preferred adsorption location for nickel-borate complex, with the lowest adsorption energy barrier compared to simple step edges and flat nickel terraces. Nevertheless, after adsorption, the capping effect of boric acid results in an inhibition of the crystal growth in Ni (2 2 0) plane direction while promoting the growth along Ni (2 0 0) plane direction. Such controlled growth mechanism, driven by a low supersaturation during electrocrystallization, in turn results in formation of a micro- and nanocone-like morphology, in agreement with the experimental AFM results. None. 