Objective
                  To compare the efficacy of a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound and 1450ppm fluoride to arrest and reverse naturally occurring buccal caries lesions in children relative to a positive control dentifrice containing 1450ppm fluoride alone.
               
                  Study design
                  Participants from Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China tested three dentifrices: a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450ppm fluoride, as sodium monofluorophosphate, a positive control dentifrice containing 1450ppm fluoride, as sodium fluoride, in a silica base, and a matched negative control dentifrice without arginine and fluoride. Quantitative Light-induced Fluorescence (QLF) was used to assess buccal caries lesions at baseline and after 3 and 6 months of product use.
               
                  Results
                  438 participants (initial age 9–13 years (mean 11.1±0.78) and 48.6% female) completed the study. No adverse events attributable to the products were reported during the course of the study. The subject mean ΔQ (mm2
                     %), representing lesion volume, was 27.26 at baseline. After 6 months of product use, the ΔQ values for the arginine-containing, positive and negative control dentifrices were 13.46, 17.99 and 23.70 representing improvements from baseline of 50.6%, 34.0% and 13.1%. After 6 months product use, the differences between the pair wise comparisons for all three groups were statistically significant (p
                     <0.01). The arginine-containing dentifrice demonstrated an improvement after only 3 months that was almost identical to that achieved by the conventional 1450ppm fluoride dentifrice after 6 months.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450ppm fluoride provides statistically significantly superior efficacy in arresting and reversing buccal caries lesions to a conventional dentifrice containing 1450ppm fluoride alone.There is no doubt that the introduction of fluoride products, such as dentifrice and mouth rinses, has played a significant role in the dramatic decline in the prevalence and severity of dental caries in many geographies, particularly in developed countries. The past two decades of caries research has significantly advanced our knowledge of dental caries, and, in particular, has identified that caries is a dynamic, multi-factorial disease process involving the interface of the undisturbed plaque biofilm and the tooth surface when dietary sugars are present. Importantly, this new knowledge has led to an understanding that caries is a disease continuum. During the past decade, a new approach to the management of dental caries has been identified and validated. This new approach combines arginine and an insoluble calcium compound with fluoride to complement and enhance the effects of fluoride by targeting the first step in the caries process, i.e., the first acid attack, modulating the metabolism of the plaque biofilm, neutralizing plaque acids and, thereby, reducing the harmful effects of the plaque biofilm. The anti-caries benefits of a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 In two studies, the ability of the new arginine-containing dentifrice to re-mineralize non-cavitated primary root caries lesions was evaluated. In one study, the new dentifrice was compared to that of a positive control dentifrice containing 1450 In three studies, including the study reported in this paper, the benefits of the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 In one study, the new dentifrice was compared to two matched dentifrices, one with neither fluoride nor arginine as a negative control and the other a 1450 Finally, a 2-year conventional caries clinical study has proven that two dentifrices containing 1.5% arginine and 1450 The aim of this 6 month study was to confirm the hypothesis that the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine and 1450 This study was a randomised, controlled, double blind clinical trial of 6 month's duration which compared a new arginine-containing dentifrice to both positive and negative controls. The three products investigated in this study were Arginine-containing dentifrice: 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 Positive control: 1450 Negative control: non-fluoride dentifrice with a matched calcium base (Colgate-Palmolive Company, New York, NY). The study received ethical approval from the Institutional Review Board of Sichuan Province Committee for Oral Health. The study participants were from five primary schools in Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China, which has a water supply containing 0.3 After the baseline and 3 months examinations, two individually labelled white laminated tubes of the assigned dentifrice and a Colgate Extra Clean toothbrush (Colgate-Palmolive, New York, NY, USA) were given to each study participant. Only one type of dentifrice was assigned per family and additional tubes of dentifrice were available on request from participants. Participants were given oral hygiene instruction and advised to brush at least twice per day (morning and evening) with the toothbrush and dentifrice supplied. During school days, participants brushed in the afternoon with their allocated dentifrice for 2 Assessments were performed at baseline, and after 3 and 6 months of product use, in the school nurse's office. This room was darkened to control ambient lighting. For each subject between three and five views were taken of the upper anterior teeth so that good quality images could be captured of each lesion. Prior to image capture, the teeth were dried with compressed air for five seconds. Images were captured using a custom built, high resolution, fluorescence imaging system. This has been described previously in some detail. The camera and illuminator were mounted in a geometry stabilising unit ( The QLF software was used to calculate the area (mm The primary outcome for this study was the mean subject Δ At the baseline examinations, 27 randomly selected children were examined using the QLF system and repeat examinations were conducted 24 A total of 2983 children were consented to take part in the study and were screened. Of these 463 satisfied the inclusion and exclusion criteria and were recruited into the study. At the 3-month examination, sixteen subjects were lost from study. Of these, five transferred to another school; for eleven subjects, images could not be captured at the time of each scheduled assessment. At the 6-month examination, a further nine subjects, who transferred to another school, were lost from the study ( A total of 438 children completed the study. Of these, 144 were in the arginine-containing dentifrice, 147 in the positive control and 147 in the negative control groups. The children were aged 9–13 years (mean 11.1 For each subject, a mean of 3.35 (±1.18) lesions were imaged ( For Δ For the arginine-containing, positive and negative control dentifrices, the baseline adjusted mean Δ This study has provided further clinical evidence that a new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 In the two other studies conducted on this new dentifrice, using the QLF method, very similar results were observed, with reductions in lesion area of approximately 50% and 45% in the two groups using the dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, and insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 The results of these studies show that the new arginine-containing dentifrice provides an enhancement in efficacy in reversing early enamel lesions over dentifrices with fluoride alone that is numerically comparable to the enhancement that a 1450 Based upon the results of the three studies conducted on the new arginine-containing dentifrice, as well as of several studies validating the QLF method by distinguishing products that had previously been investigated in conventional 2–4 years caries clinical studies, it is apparent that the use of QLF in studies of early coronal caries significantly improves the ability to discriminate between anti-caries products enabling the studies to be conducted effectively in shorter time periods with fewer participants. It further appears that the ability of products designed to enhance the re-mineralization of initial carious lesions is measured accurately, prior to stages of cavitation, enabling quantification of their efficacy under conditions most appropriate to their mechanisms of action. It is known that therapeutic treatment of initial carious lesions is both possible and practical, and by employing sophisticated detection and measurement methods, such as QLF, this approach is facilitated and outcomes can be monitored so that participants receive optimum, minimally invasive treatment. Thus, the QLF method has proven to be a powerful tool in the caries clinical hierarchy providing unique insights regarding efficacy and mechanism of action of anti-caries products on early coronal caries lesions that complement and augment those generated in conventional 2-year caries studies of cavitation. It is concluded that both fluoride-containing dentifrices are significantly better at arresting and reversing buccal caries lesions than the non-fluoride dentifrice. More importantly, the new dentifrice containing 1.5% arginine, an insoluble calcium compound, and 1450 Drs Zhang, Cummins and Ellwood are employees of the Colgate-Palmolive Company. Drs Yin, Hu, Li, Fan and Pretty have no conflict of interest. Mr Mateo provided independent statistical review of the data for the Colgate-Palmolive Company on a consultancy basis. The author, Y.W. acknowledges support from the China Scholarship Council (2007102764). This study was sponsored by the