The influence of process temperature on product particle size and solubility has been studied for wet grinding of trans-stilbene in ethanol. A positive effect of lowering the process temperature with respect to minimum product particle size was observed. Remarkably, the smallest product particle sizes x
                     50,3
                     <1μm were found for the lowest process temperature (251K) at short process times (< 30min) and moderate stressing conditions. In contrast, for the same stressing conditions at room temperature (293K) particles of approximate size x
                     50,3
                     ≈8μm are obtained.
                  The product particle size is rather determined by the (temperature- and solvent-dependent) solid–liquid equilibrium, i.e. dissolution and precipitation phenomena, than by pure mechanical fracture. An increased solubility of stressed trans-stilbene with respect to the equilibrium solubility of the solid has been observed. By means of 1H NMR spectroscopy and thermodynamic considerations it is shown that the solubility increase is neither due to an isomerisation of the solid nor due to size effects. In fact, mechanical activation leads to an increase in solubility of the stressed solid which was clearly proven by means of solubility studies at different temperatures. The van’t Hoff enthalpy of dissolution of the stressed solid decreased remarkably in comparison to the enthalpy of the non-stressed solid as shown by evaluation of van’t Hoff plots.Wet grinding in stirred media mills is a well-established and frequently used top-down approach. Due to the fast and efficient micronization even at high solid content, stirred media milling is often the method of choice in product engineering of particles in the submicron and nanometer size range for a wide variety of materials. So far, the majority of studies related to stirred media milling have been done for inorganic feed materials Far less studies on the comminution of organic crystals exist, although wet grinding of organic crystals became more important in recent years. Especially wet milling of poorly water-soluble active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), which are classified as BCS (Biopharmaceutical Classification System) Class II or IV drugs, is currently of great interest in the pharmaceutical industry In stirred media milling, product particles are formed by fracture of the feed material due to collisions between grinding beads. By mechanical stress energy input the kinetic energy of grinding beads is transferred to internal stress and strain in the particles which may lead to particle fracture. The grinding process depends on a large number of process parameters which are summarized into key parameters such as stress intensity of the grinding media SI Changes of surface chemistry and solid state modifications (e.g. generation of defects in the crystal structure or increase of amorphous regions) due to mechanical stressing are related to a loss of crystallinity and may cause physical instability as well as chemical degradation. The generation of activated surfaces may lead to a higher solubility of sparingly soluble drugs and thus improve bioavailability Mechanochemical activation in stirred media milling has been rarely considered although rich phenomena such as increased solubility, radical induced grafting of molecules to stressed surfaces and phase transformations have been observed In this study the wet grinding process of the diarylethene  Wet grinding was performed in a lab-scale batch stirred media mill PE075 (Netzsch-Feinmahltechnik GmbH, Germany) equipped with a double-walled grinding chamber for temperature control. Wear resistant Yttrium-stabilized zirconium oxide beads (YTZ®, Tosho Inc., Japan) with a density Ethanolic Particle size distributions of the milled material were determined by static light scattering (SLS) using a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Malvern, UK) and dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Honeywell Ultrafine Particle Analyzer 150 (UPA, Microtrac Inc., USA). To avoid multiple scattering and effects of dissolution, the samples were appropriately diluted using a saturated In the following, the average values obtained from five single measurements are reported. The (apparent) equilibrium concentrations c of Absorbance spectra of the ethanolic  Optical microscope images were taken using a microscope system AXIO Imager.M1m including Axio Cam ICc1 (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany). Crystalline Based on preliminary findings, milling experiments of up to 120  Whereas for inorganic materials such as alumina or limestone From this discussion follows that the strong dependency of product particle size on temperature at constant stress intensity SI and constant stress number SN is rather likely due to dissolution and precipitation phenomena which are considered to take place in parallel to mechanical stressing during media milling. With increasing milling time, these processes dominate the pure mechanical particle breakage mechanisms. Therefore, the minimal particle size may be determined by the temperature-dependent solubility rather than by fracture which is considered to be weakly dependent on temperature. Consequently, no further decrease in product particle size is observed ( As discussed above, the mechanical properties of As it could be shown in the previous section, the applied process temperature during wet grinding of Saturated solutions represent a dynamic equilibrium of the solid and the solute dissolved in the surrounding solvent. The temperature dependency of the relationship between the equilibrium solubility of the solid The experimentally determined equilibrium solubility of To proof the validity of a separation-based sampling technique for concentration determination and to exclude an impact of a small particle fraction which might pass the filter, plausibility considerations were carried out. A poor separation would result in measuring artefacts and an overestimation of the concentration of the solubilised compound as pointed out by van Eerdenbrugh Scattering effects are an extremely size-dependent phenomenon. Consequently, scattering intensities are an excellent indicator for the presence of particulate matter in the filtered supernatant. According to Mie scattering for spherical homogenous particles, the scattering intensity is a function of the wavelength of the incident light beam and its scattering angle, the real parts of the refractive indices of both, the particle and the continuous medium, the absorbance of the particle and its size. In particular, the scattering intensity of small particles in the Rayleigh regime scales with the square of particle volume Due to the fact that Particle size effects on solubility only play a minor role in the  In order to exclude that the increase of the solubility levels observed are due to an isomerisation reaction from the The diarylethene The To validate the hypothesis of a surface near transformation of the solid, powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and Raman spectroscopy measurements were carried out to investigate the influence of wet milling on the solid state of The diarylethene It is illustrated that mechanical activation of the solid state during wet grinding leads to the observed increase in solubility of the stressed solid. The evaluation of both, the van’t Hoff plot of the stressed and non-stressed solid has shown a significant difference of around one-third for the vańt Hoff enthalpy of dissolution Δ Financial support of Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 