Open pit mine planning and determination of mining orientation are a critically important part of a mine opening to its closure. However, an optimal extraction sequences (OES) is identified when an NPV cumulative trend becomes steady. This is controlled manually, typically from a nested pit shell methodology based on the experience which can lead to suboptimal results. Given this problem, a mathematical method to provide an analytical practice, which intends to prevent manual identification of an OES seems to be inevitable. The aim of this study is to propose Present Value-Volume (PV-V) and NPV-Cumulative Total Ore (NPV-CTO) fractal models to identify an accurate excavation orientation as well as an OES with respect to economic principals and ore grades. This has been conducted to achieve an earlier pay-back period and highest cumulative NPV in Kahang Cu-Mo porphyry deposit, central Iran. Results derived via the PV-V fractal modelling indicate an accurate mining orientation with an N-S trend. Thus, pit sequence No. 92 was selected as the closure of the open pit mining for the Kahang deposit. Consequently, the NPV-CTO fractal model provides an analytical tool which can be used for determination of an OES for an open pit mine.The definition of optimal pit limits and profit is a fundamental part of prefeasibility and feasibility studies in open pit mines ( The project value is a linear function with respect to commodity price (e.g., Excavation by open pit mining method requires huge investment which will inevitably rise over the life of a mine due to increases in the amount of cumulative waste materials and mining costs ( Euclidian geometry identifies geometrical shapes with an integer dimension say 1D, 2D and 3D. However, there are many other shapes amongst spatial variables such as ore grades and economical parameters (e.g., PV and NPV), whose dimensions cannot be mathematically described with integers but by real numbers or fractions ( Although the existing open pit optimisation algorithms consider the spatial distribution of elemental concentrations as well as economic parameters, they do not consider spatial variability. The main attraction of fractal/multifractal theory is its capability to quantify irregular and complex phenomena or processes that exhibit similarity over a wide range of scales ( Initially, a database was generated by Excel software based on Cu and Mo block model including Cu and Mo concentrations’ values as well as each voxel coordination. For each voxel, a corresponding density was allocated. Secondly, a database following information on prices and mining costs for the Kahang optimisation study was used to calculate each voxel PV. Subsequently, this database was entered into the RockWorks™ 15 software package to build a 3D PV block model. In addition, log–log plots in fractal/multifractal models are proper tools for separation of different populations based on desired attributes (e.g., PV and NPV in this scenario). Consequently, a PV log–log plot as a useful tool for separating PV populations was generated via Excel software. PV classification was obtained via threshold values (breakpoints) in the PV log-log plot. The PV-V and NPV-CTO fractal models were obtained by the Concentration-Volume (C-V) fractal model proposed by Based on the Cu-Mo block model of the Kahang deposit obtained by the means of C-V fractal model ( Generally, nested pits which have the greatest cash flow are considered as the mine's ultimate pit limit. In addition, the excavation orientation (pushback) was defined based on the results obtained from the fractal modelling. In addition, a NPV-CTO fractal model, in line with mining sequences (Nested pits), was proposed in order to validate an OES. The fractal model is expressed in the following form: The Kahang deposit is located about 73 According to the 3D PV block model, a PV-V fractal model has been created which, from log-log plot, shows that there are four populations corresponding to $501, $1995, $19,054 and $31,623 ( Most of the voxels with high and extreme PV values are situated in the deeper parts of the mine, as depicted in The application of optimisation software will not be limited to determination of a pit's optimised limit, but after completion of this phase, a general scenario for exploitation of this pit and so-called exploitation sequences (Nested pits) will be discussed and optimised in the form of some smaller pits ( The phase conducted for a supplied final pit is utilised as the basis for generation of a nested pit, which is a block by block extraction sequence, and consequent OES. However, each phase has been constructed to present the highest undiscounted cash flow based on economic principles. Accordingly, specifying the optimised number which ensures the project's profitability and does not impose restrictions executively is generally considered to be the most important fundamental of designing open pit mines ( Nested pits are a collection of optimised pits which are calculated based on the Lerch & Grossman algorithm ( Identification of an OES is significant for the selection of alternative optimal pits in order to generate the best mining sequences ( The criteria used to determine an OES is subjective in the sense that the chosen sequence is the one that has the NPV nearest to the highest NPV calculated via NPV Scheduler. The proposed NPV-CTO fractal model is a reward of developing a new method to reduce the number of required mining sequences and practical time to obtain an optimal solution to determine an OES, especially in an absence of computer-based optimisation software (i.e., NPV Scheduler). In addition, this model reduces the number of analyses and data transfer processes that are often necessary in standard computer-based practice for open pit optimisation. This is necessary to overcome probable mining risks due to uncertainty resulting from any sudden economic changes or a decrease in the commodity metal price especially if this happens at the end of mine life ( A proposed model should be rigorously tested against those already available, and the possible errors discussed. Therefore, results of the proposed fractal model were compared with the results of the OES, generated from NPV Scheduler. The NPV-CTO log-log plot indicates a mono-fractal nature meaning that there is only one threshold value which corresponds to $2754,229 and 3288,516 The PV-V and NPV-CTO fractal models have been proposed to delineate economic parameters. The voxels’ values were classified according to the PV-V fractal model in the deposit which reveal that the open pit limit can be deeper if grid drilling can be developed. Results obtained by this study show that fractal modelling based on the PV and CTO are effective for mining strategic selection. From the PV-V log–log plot from Kahang, there is a multifractal PV distribution within the deposit. In addition, there are five threshold values meaning four PV populations for the deposit. The threshold value of $1995 is the commencement of the moderate population which occurs in the majority of voxels within the deposit. The high PV values are present in the NE and central parts of the deposit. The extreme values are situated at the depth and NW parts. The PV-V fractal model can be used as an indicator for determination of the excavation orientation. The 3D models for PV distribution show that the profitability increases from the north to south of the deposit proposing an open pit excavation orientation to achieve an earlier pay-back. Open pit mine design and determination of mining orientation are a critically important part of a mining venture from mine development to mine closure and have a profound effect on the economic value of the mine. The most established and frequently employed practice to mine closure based on the Lerch and Grossman theory to determine the best mining sequence by which the mining operation will be terminated. The NPV-Cumulative Total Ore (NPV-CTO) fractal model was proposed in order to find an OES. The NPV-CTO log–log plot from the Kahang deposit shows that there is a mono-fractal model which has a threshold value for cumulative NPV and enclosing ore equal to $2754,229 and 3288,516 The authors are grateful to the National Iranian Copper Industries Co. (NICICO) for their permission to have access to the Kahang deposit dataset. Additionally, the authors would like to thank Mr. Reza Esfahani Pour (manager of Kahang mine) for his support. The authors also are hugely thankful to the Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining (IOM3) and Iran's National Elites Foundation (INEF) for their financial support in order to conduct this research.