The amount of literature on applications of pyridine and benzopyridine derivatives is particularly vast. This necessarily abbreviated presentation is written not as a definitive text, but as an overview in an attempt to convey to the reader the importance and variety of pyridine derivatives in the industrial sphere. The pyridine alkaloids anabasine ( Another important group of structurally inter-related natural products is the B The quinoline, isoquinoline and phenanthridine ring structures are important in medicinal plant alkaloids Alkaloids containing the acridine moiety, such as the tricyclic ( A number of excellent reviews on pyridine derivatives have been written with industrial bias A major proportion of the pyridine manufactured is used in the production of the well-known weedkillers diquat ( Chloropyridines feature strongly in the herbicide field and a variety of commercial products exist. For example, Picloram®, 4-amino-3,5,6-trichloropicolinic acid ( Development of a new method of synthesis of 2,3′-bipyridine Chemicals are used widely as agricultural fungicides for control of bacteria in a variety of crops including apples, potatoes, bananas and grapes. In addition, fungicides are used to protect plastics, paints, wood and textiles and in paper production Perhaps the most significant benzopyridine fungicides are the normal metal chelate compounds derived from 8-hydroxyquinoline ( Pyridinium or diisoquinolinium salts, such as ( Paints are attacked in both the liquid and dry state by various microorganisms, particularly under damp and humid conditions. Fungicides such as Dowicil S-13® ( A number of pyridine and quinoline derivatives have featured significantly in the growth of the poultry industry since the 1940s The discovery of the beneficial effects of niacin, pyridine-3-carboxylic acid ( 2-Vinylpyridine ( The pyridine ring features strongly in two important areas of insecticidal chemistry, Cholinesterase inhibition, the mechanism whereby a number of insecticides and nerve gases function, may be reversed by acid salts of pyridine-2-carbaldehyde oxime ( The commercial availability of basic pyridine derivatives has encouraged a tremendous amount of research into pharmaceutically active compounds. Two reviews in particular list a large number of medicinal compounds Malaria in man is caused by several species of protozoan parasites known as plasmodia. The oldest effective drug for the treatment of this disease is indisputably quinine ( A series of acridine antimalarial compounds was developed almost simultaneously with the quinolines. For example, quinacrine ( A number of relatively simple aminopyridine and benzopyridine derivatives demonstrate medicinal activity. Thus acriflavine, a mixture of 3,6-diamino-10-methylacridinium chloride and 3,6-diaminoacridine, is well established as an anti-infective. In addition, amquinsin, 4-amino-6,7-dimethoxyquinoline ( The treatment of hypertension involves much more than the simple lowering of the blood pressure by drugs which relax bronchial smooth muscle. Ideally a balanced reduction in blood pressure, without undue disturbance of the cardiovascular system generally, is required. Some pyridocyanoguanidines offer promise in this respect. For example, ( Although many antibiotics are effective to some extent in arresting the progress of tuberculosis, none is uniformly successful. One of the most effective is isonicotinic hydrazide ( The substantial interest in the pharmacological properties of nonsteroidal antiinflammatories prompted the development of a number of pyridine derivatives with analgesic activity. Thus, treatment of the The related Cetylpyridinium chloride ( Betahistine ( Application of part of the classical Hantzsch pyridine synthesis leads to nifedipine ( Nuclei for tricyclic antidepressants and tranquilizers, for example clomacran ( An important group of antihistamines, the pheniramines ( 4-Hydroxypyridine, available from pyridylpyridinium chloride hydrochloride, is the substrate for diodone ( The synthesis of 2-hydroxycarbostyrils has recently been described 〈81S729〉. Patent literature also details their preparation, for example that of ( Two very significant derivatives manufactured in Europe and the USA are 2-vinyl-pyridine (2VP) ( Some relatively simple pyridines have been used as hair dyes. Thus ( A final illustration of the diverse applications of pyridines is given by 4-alkyl-2-mercaptopyridines ( The basic building blocks pyridine and alkylpyridines and indeed, quinoline, isoquinoline and simple alkyl derivatives, have traditionally been obtained primarily from pyrolysis or carbonization of coal. Thus, fractional distillation of coal-tar with or without thermal cracking yields a range of individual tar-base components 〈B-74MI20901〉. Low-temperature carbonization (<900 The general principle usually involves contact of an aldehyde or mixtures of aldehydes with ammonia at high temperature in the presence of an acidic catalyst. Aluminosilicate catalysts have been used Variations on this theme include the use of acrolein/ammonia 2-Methyl-5-ethylpyridine (MEP) is manufactured on a significant scale by a high-temperature liquid-phase pressure reaction of paraldehyde with ammonia. The presence of ammonium acetate catalyzes the reaction and MEP is separated from the pyridinic by-products by fractional distillation Commercial development of a range of cycloalkene–cobalt homogeneous catalysts has prompted their application in the synthesis of pyridine and 2-substituted pyridines. Thus, bis(cyclopentadienyl)cobalt catalyzes the reaction of acetylene with hydrogen cyanide, acetonitrile or acrylonitrile to yield pyridine, 2-methylpyridine and 2-vinylpyridine respectively (