Reliable models predicting soil organic carbon (SOC) evolution are required to better manage cropping systems with the objectives of mitigating climate change and improving soil quality. In this study, data from 60 selected long-term field trials conducted in arable systems in France were used to evaluate a revised version of AMG model integrating a new mineralization submodel. The drivers of SOC evolution identified using Random Forest analysis were consistent with those considered in AMG. The model with its default parameterization simulated accurately the changes in SOC stocks over time, the relative model error (RRMSE = 5.3%) being comparable to the measurement error (CV = 4.3%). Model performance was little affected by the choice of plant C input estimation method, but was improved by a site specific optimization of SOC pool partitioning. AMG shows a good potential for predicting SOC evolution in scenarios varying in climate, soil properties and crop management.Soils are fundamental to many provisioning and regulating ecosystem services, the prediction of which requires improving our understanding of soil processes and their modeling ( SOC dynamics in arable systems is mainly driven by i) C inputs into soils from crop residues and organic amendments generating newly-formed SOM ( Numerous and various soil biogeochemical models featuring different levels of complexity have been designed to simulate SOC dynamics ( The aim of this study was to enhance the reliability of AMG, a simple model simulating soil C at annual time steps ( In a first step, we compiled all the available LTEs carried out in arable cropping systems in France by research teams or extension services since 1970, in which SOC had been measured at several dates. They represented 455 treatments spread over 53 sites. We then selected the most reliable experiments by applying the following criteria: number of replicates ≥3; number of measurement dates ≥3; experiment duration ≥8 years; mean coefficient of variation of SOC measurements ≤10%; rock fragment content nil or measured. The selection leads to a reduced dataset of 60 treatments located in 20 sites ( The field experiments were carried out between 1970 and 2015, lasting between 8 and 41 years (median value of 22 years) ( Cropping systems encountered in the 60 treatments were cereal-based rotations with legumes and/or oilseed crops (32% of the cropping systems), grain maize/winter wheat rotations (27%), rotations with silage maize (23%, including 3 out of 14 treatments in monoculture), grain maize monocultures (10%), cereals/sugarbeet rotations with legumes and/or rapeseed (7%) and 1 treatment was a bare fallow soil. Winter cover crops were occasionally grown in 10 treatments (17%) on 3 different sites. Straw residues were regularly exported in 38% of the treatments and returned to soil in 62% of them. Exogenous organic matters (EOM) were applied as manure or slurry in 11 treatments (18%) from 5 different sites. Crops were grown with conventional N rate applications providing a positive N balance in most situations. Seven sites included variations in P or K fertilization rate but they did not reveal major effects on yield or aboveground plant biomass production. Conventional tillage with full inversion ploughing was conducted in all treatments except 6 treatments from the BOIG-site where soils were maintained under no-till. Past land use of the investigated sites was cropland except the 5 treatments from the KERB-site which were previously under sown grassland. Details on cropping systems can be found in For each field trial, top soil layers were sampled in 3–4 replicates on several occasions to determine soil physicochemical characteristics and SOC stocks. The sampling depth varied between 20 and 30 cm (median 28 cm), and was equal or greater than the greatest ploughing depth recorded during the study. For each soil characterization, several soil cores were collected and mixed together to obtain a representative composite sample. Particle-size distribution was determined on non-decarbonated soil samples using the pipette method according to NF ISO 11277. Soil CaCO The SOC stock ( For each experimental site, mean annual air temperature (°C) and annual cumulative precipitation (mm) and potential evapotranspiration (PET in mm, AMG is a model designed to simulate soil C dynamics at an annual time step ( AMG can be described by this set of equations: In the default parameterization, the initial proportion of the stable pool ( In AMGv1, the mineralization rate In AMGv2, we implemented the model of SOM mineralization recently developed for the prediction of N mineralization in arable soils ( We adapted to French experimental data the approach described in Aboveground C inputs ( For BG input estimates, two C pools were calculated: 1) plant C in roots ( Extra-root C inputs were calculated following the assumption made by In order to estimate BG inputs, we used the asymptotic equation of Calculated BG inputs, expressed in t C ha Humification coefficients of AG crop residues were calculated as in the STICS model ( We assumed that root derived C contributed more to stored SOC than the same amount of C derived from AG crop residues ( Humification coefficients of diverse EOMs were determined by soil incubations and inverse modeling in AMG simulations performed on field-experiments. They were used for the parameterization of EOMs applied into soils of this study. Humification coefficients used were 0.52 and 0.53 for bovine and pig manure respectively, and 0.50 and 0.15 for bovine and pig slurry, respectively ( Prior to simulations of SOC stock evolutions with AMG model, we first used Random Forest (RF) regression analysis as a mean to identify relevant variables ( Using AMGv2, we evaluated the effects of alternative methods for estimating plant C inputs. Recent studies suggested that belowground inputs (C Using AMGv2, we compared three methods (M1-M3) of parameterization of the initial stable pool fraction ( In method M2, we tested the hypothesis that In method M3, Statistical measurements of agreement between observed SOC stock change rates and predictions made by the RF and AMG models were performed by calculating the mean difference ( The predictive quality of AMGv1 and AMGv2 models was assessed by calculating the root mean squared error of prediction ( The coefficient of variation ( We adapted the method conducted by For the 60 treatments, measured SOC stock changes ranged from −24.0 to +7.1 t C ha The Random Forest (RF) analysis revealed that the initial C stock was the most important variable in predicting SOC stock change rate ( Measured rates of SOC stock change were compared with predicted rates either by the RF model ( An example of SOC stock evolution and simulation performed by AMGv2 on one experiment at the Boigneville site is illustrated in The ability of AMGv1 and AMGv2 to predict SOC stock evolution was evaluated in the 60 field treatments ( AMGv2 was also tested on the database reported by The sensitivity analysis of AMGv2 was conducted on steady state situations. The reference scenario simulating the 60 treatments over a 100-year period predicted that the proportion of active pool C would reach an asymptotic value close to the initial value (35% of total C) for situations either with no export of straw biomass or with straw removal but receiving EOM applications ( The final SOC stocks simulated for this reference scenario were compared with those obtained in alternative scenarios in which one variable related to C input or SOM mineralization (depending on climate and soil properties) was increased. The mean SOC difference at steady state between the alternative and reference scenarios ranged from −4.1 to +2.7 t C ha We evaluated the effect of alternative methods for estimating AG and BG plant C inputs on SOC modeling with AMGv2, compared to the reference R ( Three alternative methods (M1-M3) were assessed using AMGv2 for setting the size of the initial stable SOC pool ( In method M2, we tested the hypothesis that In method M3, the size of the stable C pool was supposed to be site specific. The optimized mineralization rates The dataset considered in this study covers a period ranging from 1970 to 2015, the average being a 24-year period (1980–2003). It covers the diversity of arable cropping systems practiced in France during these years, with regard to crop rotations, tillage practices, crop residue management, N fertilization and crop yields. During the more recent years, an evolution towards a higher frequency of catch crop cultivation and a slight reduction in tillage operations and intensity was observed. Our results showed on average a slight decrease in SOC stocks (mean rate of change = −0.20 t C ha The main drivers of SOC dynamics identified by RF were the soil characteristics (initial SOC stock, texture, …), the agricultural practices (residue management, cover crops, EOM) and the climate (precipitation, temperature). The initial SOC stock was a main factor as shown by the RF analysis and the negative correlation between SOC change rates and the initial SOC stock. Such a strong negative relationship was already pointed out by Residue management (straw removal The impact of climatic factors was more surprising: the temperature effect was consistent between RF analysis and AMG model, but not precipitation, which was an influent factor in RF but not in AMG. This apparent contradiction is due to the fact that precipitation was strongly correlated with initial SOC content (r = 0.59, p < 0.001). In fact, running the RF analysis without this variable explained as much variance than with it. The small sensitivity of AMG model reflects the moderate range of water balance (P-PET varied from −290 to 595 mm yr Finally, two other soil characteristics were identified as being influent on SOC evolution: the C/N ratio and soil pH. Both were identified in this study by the Random Forest analysis and previously as drivers of organic N mineralization (for more discussion see The model could simulate the LTEs without considering nitrogen (N) availability as a possible driver of SOC evolution, as suggested by the C:N stoichiometry observed in SOM composition ( The new AMG version was found to better predict SOC stock change rates than RF and AMGv1. The general evolution of SOC was found to be more or less linear over time. However, on the contrary to AMG, RF is a statistical model which cannot capture subtle changes in SOC through time since RF, as used in this study, cannot take into account annual variations of climate and C inputs. In AMGv2, the implementation of two additional variables (soil pH and C/N ratio), previously identified as drivers of SOM mineralization ( Datasets including C input estimates in our study are close to those obtained in comparable climatic conditions, reported by Concerning the BG inputs, our results show that model performance (including the prediction of C The sensitivity analysis indicated that the initial setting of the inert SOC pool had a large impact on model outputs, confirming previous studies ( During the calibration phase, the optimization of the size of the recalcitrant C pool (either inert or having a residence time greater than 1000 years) is highly dependent on the value of the potential rate constant of the active C pool, because both are correlated. The strong correlation between the two parameters may even result in equifinality, Chemical methods have been proposed to characterize the more stable SOC fractions with a limited success ( The modified version of AMG model including the new function of SOM mineralization was found to improve the prediction of SOC evolution compared to the previous version. The model could simulate SOC stock dynamics in LTEs conducted in French conventional arable systems with a mean relative model error of 5.3%. The results strengthen the importance of SOC pool partitioning and therefore the need of methods that would allow to measure functional C fractions to better initialize soil C model simulations. The model performance appeared to be little sensitive to the method of plant C input estimation. Considering root C inputs independent of aerial biomass production as shown by recent studies was found to perform as well as allometric relationships, suggesting that using a fixed amount of root biomass depending on crop species should be preferred in the model. AMG demonstrates a good potential for predicting SOC evolution in scenarios varying in climate, soil properties and management for conventional arable cropping systems. The next objective will be to improve the ability of AMG for modeling other systems such as low input or organic systems, cropping systems including perennial species or permanent grasslands in order to extend the validity domain of the model to simulate contrasting agricultural systems. We are very grateful to G. Briffaux, B. Decoopman, C. Dominiarczyk, I. Felix, A. Gavaland, J. Grall, D. Hanocq, C. Herre, J. Labreuche, P. Maugrion, Y. Messmer, C. Montagnier, C. Morel, J.P. Prevot and E. Venet for their contribution to field experiments and soil analyses. We thank M. Levert, B. Blin, F. Ganteuil, F. Desheulles, D. Jousseaume and C. Mametz for their contribution to the database development, S. Cadoux and A.S. Perrin for providing data on oleaginous and proteaginous crops, F. Ferchaud for helpful comments on the manuscript. This work was performed in partnership with the SAS PIVERT ( The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at AMG is a model designed to simulate soil C dynamics at an annual time step ( AMG can be described by this set of equations: The model allows simulating separately the C originating from C The partitioning of C originating from C In AMGv1 and AMGv2, the mineralization rate In both AMG versions,  Function In AMGv2, the additional functions