The use of information available in the organizations to understand what good performance looks like has been proposed for improving the decreased productivity in mine sector. Detailed monitoring has been performed at the heap bioleaching process in Minera Escondida since the start of the industrial operation in 2006. The huge industrial data recorded represents an opportunity to raise knowledge about complex bioleaching processes for improving the technology. A systematic approach using machine learning tools for the analysis of High Dimensional Feature Space is now being developed to deliver experience-based learning with the aim to serve as the foundation for optimal production planning and operational decision making, in the presence of inherent process variations. The construction of a Decision Support System (DSS) is reported, which considers a Real Time PCR array, a database for data logging and storage, the application of suitable statistical and computational tools for knowledge acquiring and finally the creation of a system of knowledge translation to transform it into action by applying recommendations that come to terms with operational limitations. The user can accurately retrieve data and design similar matches to the historic operation to get, for instance the expected metallurgical performance (such as copper recovery, acid consumption and bacterial activity) and recommendations. The process followed to construct the base of knowledge of the DSS is discussed.The application scenario of copper bioleaching is changing; this is due to the variable copper price, the new competitive technologies, the more complex raw materials and the corresponding process requirements (low grade, run of mine, size of the heap, water/solution quality, among others) ( In addition, a steady decline in the mining sector productivity during the past decade has been reported ( The bioleaching process at Escondida Mine has been in operation since 2000 at pilot scale and since 2006 at commercial scale, and is a good example of the observed trends. Escondida Mine is located 170 km South-East of Antofagasta at 3100 m above sea level. The bioleaching heap was built using run-of-mine (ROM) ore and air is supplied through blowers. The ore was initially (year 2006) characterized as low-grade containing approximately 0.60% ( Some key solutions have been proposed to face the productivity challenges in the mining sector. Among them are the development of new technologies and the use of information and data available in the organization to understand what good performance looks like. The greatest copper heap bioleaching processes are operating in Chile and there is a big opportunity of obtaining insights from the industrial data ( Decision Support System (DSS), which consists of a database, model base and knowledge base, is visualized as an integrated approach to bring this understanding from the industrial data for improving the efficiency of mining processes. ( Mathematical models have been developed to determine the impact of key parameters to facilitate the heap design and control ( There is intense research in knowledge discovery defined as the non-trivial extraction of implicit, previously unknown, and potentially useful information from data ( Information is the raw material for building mathematical models based on IE techniques. Usually data is described by the volume, the veracity, the variety and the velocity. In bioleaching operations there is an important volume of data obtained directly from the mining plant. The data describe the different processes involved in the Cu extraction. Depending on each process, the information is acquired at different frequency and stored for several years. Then, the available data are characterized because of their high dimensionality (the curse of dimensionality) what have a negative impact on the model learning ( Data mining methods have been already applied to get knowledge from the industrial data produced in Escondida Mine ( The construction of the knowledge base of a dynamic DSS by the application of IE tools and the gathered expert knowledge of bioleaching is reported. A summary of the bioleaching process at Escondida Mine is shown in Daily measurements of physico-chemical parameters (pH, Eh, temperature), of solution chemistry (Cu, Fe, acidity, sulfate, ammonium, among others), of operational parameters (solution flow, volume in ponds and reservoirs of solutions like PLS and raffinate, addition of acid and activity of blowers, among others) were recorded. The information about the initial mineralogy of the resources loaded in each strip of the heap (91 strips) was provided by chemical and SEM-based quantitative mineralogical analysis (QEMSCAN). The data gathered included percentages of total Cu (TCu), total Fe (TFe) and soluble Cu (SC), percentages of Cu bearing ore content, chalcocite (CSP-Cs), covellite (CSP The architecture defined for the DSS consists of three layers ( Human-Computer Interface. This layer is responsible for interacting with administrators, users and analysts (experts) of the system through a graphical interface on a Web server. The selected server was WildFly 11.0.0   The DSS is composed of five reasoning modules: 1) Impact of mineralogy/mineralization in the metallurgical performance, 2) Microbial activity and copper recovery, 3) Estimated temperature inside the heap, 4) Marker genes for critical issues and 5) Inoculation/reinoculation requirements ( Here, the construction of two of the reasoning modules of the DSS will be described. Researchers, IT enterprises, experts and engineers involved in the decision making process have participated in this development. For constructing the rules and the knowledge base, expert knowledge and knowledge discovered in industrial databases were applied. CRISP-DM was the methodology, among the ones availables, (CRISP-DM ( The main conclusion of the phase of In the phase of   Data mining and machine learning techniques were applied in the The rules for each module were constructed, tested and validated based on the obtained knowledge about the factors that best explain the variability. The recommendations to tune up those factors come to terms with operational possibilities at industrial level. In order to get insights from the industrial data, the following strategy was designed: i) clustering of the strips based on the mineralogical and chemical composition (chalcocite, covellite, chalcopyrite, pyrite, soluble copper, copper oxide, Fe content, mineralization types); ii) exploring the coincidences between the mineralogical groups and the profiles of the metallurgical performance of the strips allocated in each cluster (copper recovery, acid consumption, flow rate, PLS temperature, Eh, total Fe in the PLS); iii) once the groups were improved and validated by the occurrence of those relationships from the point of view of the experts, the rules for strip classification were constructed; iv) the logic of this module was developed to be able to execute the rules once the user inputs the case. Non-hierarchical clustering classified the leaching strips into five groups (G1-G5) considering the mineralogical/mineralization characteristics of the material stacked. The main variables selected by the clustering tool to form the groups were SC, CSP-ox and M2 content ( Non-hierarchical clustering classified the leaching strips into five groups (G1-G5) considering the mineralogical/mineralization characteristics of the material stacked. The main variables selected by the clustering tool to form the groups were SC, CSP-ox and M2 content (  The highest copper recovery was obtained in G1 and G2, and the recovery increased at upper lifts. The lowest copper recovery was observed in G3 the one with the highest content of SC ( The lowest acid consumption was observed in strips from the G4 with the highest M1 (≥25%) content. The M2 strips consume more acid (Net acid consumption = Total acid consumption – acid recovered in solvent extraction process, SX) when those were stacked in the second lift where the acid strength in the irrigation was higher ( The lowest acid consumption was observed in strips from the G4 with the highest M1 (≥25%) content. The M2 strips consume more acid (Net acid consumption = Total acid consumption – acid recovered in solvent extraction process, SX) when those were stacked in the second lift where the acid strength in the irrigation was higher (Supplementary Fig. 2), resembling the observed for silicate gangue minerals ( From the microbiological point of view the comparison of the bacterial activity in the obtained groups also shows differences. An interesting relation between Cu recovery ( Rules for strip classification. The clustering analysis, the assessment of the metallurgical performance and the expert knowledge allowed defining the rules to be set in the knowledge base of the DSS ( Boundaries. In addition, the boundaries were allowed to be determined by the information gathered in the industrial process. Some of the provided variables are:     Recommendations. Based on the classification rules and the boundary definitions, recommendations for the decision making process were constructed, like: The oxide (CSP-ox) ore content suitable to be stacked in the heap is less that 0.2%. Material with higher CSP-ox must not be stacked in the heap or should be mixed in a proper proportion with materials of lower CSP-ox content. The acid concentration in the irrigation solution (raffinate) for the heap should have a strength lower than 7.5 g The strips labeled as the best to supply iron (Py ≥ The strips labeled as the best to supply iron (Py ≥ Operations. The user can, for example, manually input the mineralogical parameters selected of a strip under irrigation to obtain the group in which it is associated and to be able to compare the physicochemical parameters, the metallurgical performance and the bacterial activity of the present strip with other strips of the same group. In addition, the user can also input the mineralogical parameters of future strips, regarding mine exploitation schedule, and the DSS chooses the appropriate model to predict its behavior. The computing results can be stored in a database, which can serve as a historical decision making scheme. A knowledge base management system provides storage, query, modification, adding, deleting and other operations for the knowledge. The expert judges how reasonable the computing results are for the different cases and the updating necessity. Differences in microbial oxidation activity were found among strips of mineralogical groups ( The highest number of fast oxidation tests, together with the highest copper recovery (75%) was observed in group 1. Group 2 showed the second highest copper recovery and included the highest percentage of normal oxidation tests. Group 5 also contained a high percentage of fast oxidation tests and its recovery profile was similar to groups 1 and 2 during most of the operation time (400 days). In spite of the similar proportion of fast oxidation type tests in strips classified into mineralogical groups 1 and 5, a different distribution of this type tests was observed in those groups during the progress of the process. In group 1, most of the fast type oxidation tests occurred during the first stage before operation day 100, ( In order to extract new knowledge regarding oxidation type test recorded at 25 °C for mineralogical groups 1 and 5, CRT algorithm was used. The main parameters influencing the oxidation test type in group 1 (highest copper recovery) were copper recovery and the concentrations of total mesophiles and In order to extract new knowledge regarding oxidation type test recorded at 25 °C for mineralogical groups 1 and 5, CRT algorithm was used. The main parameters influencing the oxidation test type in group 1 (highest copper recovery) were copper recovery and the concentrations of total mesophiles and  In group 5, acid concentration, total Fe in irrigation solution and the cells concentration of L. In group 5, acid concentration, total Fe in irrigation solution and the cells concentration of Therefore The rules were inferred from CRT Analyses in order to predict the microbial oxidation activity in strips classified in mineralogical groups 1 and 5 (with elevated copper recovery), and the main factors to determine the occurrence of fast oxidation tests in groups 1 and 5 are cell concentrations of In addition, the boundaries were allowed to be determined by the information gathered in the industrial process. Some of the provided variables are: Atf lower boundary for fast oxidation activity in G1. Lf lower boundary for fast oxidation activity in G5. The recommended The recommended Obtaining insights from the industrial data had given the opportunity to better address the research to improve the technology. In this work, machine learning techniques are shown as important supporting tools to explain the raw data obtained directly from complex industrial processes. The results showed that it is possible to obtain rules from the data and that they can be used by experts for the construction of a knowledge base. Also a novel method is defined for improving the efficiency in the generation of rules using unsupervised learning techniques (mineralogical groups), supervised learning (decision trees) and selection of variables to reduce the complexity of the models generated. The development of a decision making support system offers the frame to transfer the obtained knowledge and transform it into recommendations to assist the plant metallurgist and leaching operator with the control of the heap to maintain it at optimum bioleaching conditions and therefore maximizing leaching kinetics and copper recovery. The DSS developed with its operational recommendations is actually under assessment at industrial level in the bioheap process at Escondida mine. Because of the evolution of the bioleaching process, the DSS must be continuously updated and improved. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the