The collection zone recovery of a flotation column was modeled using a rectangular distribution function for the kinetic rate constant and a tank in series model with different vessel sizes for the residence time distribution. It was demonstrated that an analytical expression can be obtained and that data from large industrial columns fits well, keeping the parsimony principle by using a simple and practical solution. An example for the estimation of the maximum kinetic rate constant, useful for scale-up purposes, is shown using data from industrial flotation columns.A model is required to predict the metallurgical performance of a flotation column. It should be able to link the main operating conditions with mineral recovery, to help engineers in design, control and scale-up of flotation devices. The sub-processes involved in flotation are complex and are generally not understood well enough to propose a mathematical model from theory which can be easily applied to the process. Therefore, most of the mathematical models proposed are empirical and can be classified as kinetic or non-kinetic models ( Flotation kinetics brings together the influence of all the factors that take place during a flotation process ( During the early years of flotation, Many authors have proposed different models to describe the mineral recovery of a continuous flotation process ( The column flotation modelling distinguishes the collection and froth zones in order to calculate the overall recovery The flotation model for the collection zone will be derived from Eq. In flotation processes, it is common to observe minerals with different characteristics and sizes floating at different rates. Thus, several models including normal, gamma or rectangular distributions have been used to make the description of the flotation phenomena more flexible. In this study the rectangular distribution was used for the kinetic constant distribution It is well known that the flow condition in a laboratory flotation column approaches plug flow, while in large size industrial columns the flow regime is between plug flow and perfect mixed ( Another shortcoming for the use of this model is that under axial dispersion conditions the dimensionless vessel dispersion number must be lower than 0.2 ( On the other hand, with the help of radioactive tracer technology, it was shown that large size flotation columns perform closer to a perfect mixer. Plus a model consisting of two small reactors (residence time The conceptual diagram of the mixing model for the collection zone in large size industrial columns is presented in Replacing the rate constant distribution Eq. If The froth zone recovery The actual or effective mean residence time in an industrial column can be calculated from Eq. Also, the experimental data from an industrial column of 2 The operating conditions for the sampling points of a flotation column at El Salvador, with a total column volume of 156 During these tests, the mineral quality was unstable and the global recovery was low, 40–50%, while the typical recoveries were 60–70%. Difficulties were also observed to keep the final concentrate grade near the target value, 30% copper, for a typical chalcopyrite ore. Thus, from The collection zone recovery of a flotation column was modeled using a rectangular distribution function for the rate constant and a tank in series model, consisting of one large and two small size units, to account for the residence time distribution. Thus, an analytical expression relating to the dimensionless recovery The column recovery can now be calculated in a more flexible way considering the use of a rectangular rate constant distribution while respecting the parsimony principle, or the use of a minimum number of parameters. The model was applied to evaluate the kinetic rate constant of an industrial column, and a range of The authors are grateful to El Salvador Division of Codelco-Chile, for permission to present this work. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by Conicyt, Project Fondecyt 1040100, and Santa Maria University, project 270322.