Micro- and nano-sized hot-pressed silicon carbide pins have been characterized by room-temperature unlubricated disk-on-pin tribological tests on hot-pressed silicon carbide and silicon nitride discs. The mean grain size was shown not to influence the steady state friction coefficient. The mean grain size clearly affected the disc wear rate: the finer was the grain size the lower was the disc wear rate. No impact of the grain size was observed on the pin wear rate. The basic wear mechanisms were grain fracture and fine abrasion. By depth-sensing indentation, it was shown that a possible explanation of the different wear behaviour between micro- and nano-sized silicon carbide are the values of mechanical properties, especially hardness, when they are measured on volumes scaling with the material microstructure.When the microstructural scale of a material, such as the grain size, is reduced unexpected mechanical behaviour can be observed as, for example, the so-called inverse Hall-Petch relation In this paper, the unlubricated sliding wear behaviour of nano-sized silicon carbide pins mated to micro-sized silicon carbide and silicon nitride discs will be presented. Moreover, since the stressed volumes during contact of hard materials are very small, depth-sensing indentation (DSI) tests were carried out on the SiC materials to investigate the mechanical behaviour at microstructural level. The micro-sized SiC samples were obtained using a commercial sub-micrometer powder (Starck BF12) while a laser-synthesized powder was used for the nano-sized SiC samples. All the SiC samples were sintered to almost fully density by hot-pressing in vacuum at 1870 The unlubricated sliding wear tests were carried out on a tribometer (Wazau, Berlin, Germany) using a disk-on-pin configuration. Hemispherical-tipped pins were cut and machined with diamond tools from the n-SiC and μ-SiC samples. The height, diameter and tip radius of the pins were 16 DSI tests were performed on specimens cut and polished from both SiC samples. The instrument (Nano Indenter XP™, MTS Systems Corporation, Oak Ridge, TN, USA) had a diamond Berkovich tip as indenter. Six peak loads were used to investigate the indentation hardness and Young's modulus as a function of penetration depth: 5, 10, 50, 100, 200 and 400 All the couplings showed an initial running in, followed by a more or less stationary period. In the majority of the cases, the friction coefficient was almost constant during this stationary period. In the remaining cases, it showed either a monotonous increasing trend or an erratic behaviour. Example of the recorded friction coefficient for the various couplings are shown in The range of the friction mean values were not much different from that already reported for these type of couplings The disc and pin specific wear rates are shown in Analyzing the disc wear scars by SEM, it was observed that they were always covered, more or less uniformly, by a debris layer. Some examples are shown in As can be seen in Unlubricated disk-on-pin wear tests were used to characterize the wear behaviour of micro- and nano-sized silicon carbide pins against silicon carbide and silicon nitride discs. The steady state friction coefficient was not influenced by the mean grain size of the coupled materials. The lower friction was obtained when different ceramics were coupled. The disc wear rates were significantly improved by decreasing the mean grain size of the SiC pins. The maximum disc wear rate was measured with a self-mated micro-sized silicon carbide and the minimum disc wear rate when the Si