Fibrous plant-based materials are characterized by inhomogeneous structure and composition, which further evolve during wet grinding processes and affect the surface functionality of micronized particles. Therefore, the performance of aqueous microgrinding operations in stirred media mills can be optimized by investigating the interaction between process conditions and material properties of heterogeneous fibrous plant materials.
                  In this experimental study it is shown how particle size reduction, tendency of re-agglomeration and stability of the suspension of micronized particles are driven by the specific energy input, residence time, temperature and presence of surfactants during the milling process. A structured experimental approach is described to optimize the achievable particle size reduction, expressed by the top cut diameter d90,3. It was found that the applied wet milling process determines the stability of particle suspensions throughout further downstream processing, making the grinding process the core unit operation with respect to the performance and formulation of food products containing micronized particles.Milling is a fundamental mechanical process in various industries such as mining (ores, salts), construction (sand, cement), chemistry (pigments, catalysts), paper, pharmaceuticals and food to reduce the size of particles with the aim to increase reactivity, to access inner structures, to improve the homogeneity of mixing and to enhance mass transfer. Common applications in food technology are milling of grains Obtaining small particles in the range between 1 and 100 µm, referred to as micronization in food applications Beyond direct physical implications linked to an increased specific surface area, fine grinding is also known to influence the functionality of food particles in their respective applications. Micronized particles can modulate the perception of texture in food products, which is linked to the physiology of the human tongue Micronization of salt and sugar can intensify their delivery and taste perception, if the ingredients are inhomogeneously dispersed over the surface of dry solid food products such as bread, potato snacks, cookies or cereal bars, resulting in more effective stimulation of taste receptors Some food particles contain surface active compounds that preferably move to oil/water or air/water interfaces due to their amphiphilic molecular structure. If they are soluble, micronization enhances their release into the surrounding medium. Insoluble surfactants located on the particle surface will favour the orientation of the entire particle towards the interface, if the mobility is sufficient. Those species are called Pickering stabilizers or particle stabilized emulsions and foams. Several plant particles such as cocoa or coffee are known to contain surface-active compounds that qualify them as candidates for Pickering stabilizers, if they are ground to sufficiently small size While the mechanical properties of crystalline materials such as sodium chloride or sucrose are well described in the literature, organic materials often consist of complex multi-component structures. Plant-based materials are built of porous cellular networks and often consist of anisotropic fibrous structures. Their complex mechanical characteristics so far limit the ability to predict the breakage and comminution behaviour of plant-based particles. The objective of this work is to improve the understanding of microgrinding processes of fibrous plant materials, such as roast and ground coffee. Building on the energetic description of the grinding process in a stirred media bead mill, operational parameters are varied in a systematical experimental study to optimize the effective size reduction of coffee particles suspended in water. As breakage and re-aggregation phenomena occur simultaneously, the stability and primary particle size of the obtained suspension is dependent on residence time, specific energy input and stress number. Considering the perception of particles in food and beverage applications, it was found that mouthfeel defects, in particular gritty or sandy texture perception can be avoided by micronization. It was reported for confectionery applications that particles smaller than 30 µm are not perceived in mouth, which can be linked to the distance between texture receptors on the human tongue The objective function is to minimize the top cut particle diameter x The general operating principle of stirred media mills is based on grinding media collisions. Mechanical power is supplied via a stirrer into the grinding chamber in which the media is moved intensively. Finally, the energy has to be transferred to the product particles in order to induce particle fragmentation. The efficiency of particle size reduction is strongly dependent on process variables of stirred media milling. Key operating parameters are the stirrer tip speed and grinding media properties, such as size, material and filling ratio. The variables can be summarized by a stress model in order to describe the impact of parameter changes on the grinding result Overall, the energy transfer determines the efficiency of grinding, because only a small part of the energy which is introduced into the grinding chamber is transferred to the product particles and used for particle stressing Dissipation by shear into the fluid Friction of grinding media at the mill chamber lining Displacement of suspension by approaching grinding media Grinding media contacts without stressing product particles Energy dissipation due to grinding media wear and deformation Most of the energy introduced into the grinding chamber is dissipated into heat due to friction. Only a small amount is used for particle stressing which finally is also transferred into heat. A key measure is the specific energy which is transferred to the product, According to Kwade this can be estimated from the energy transfer coefficient Another important measure to describe the impact of operating parameters is given by the stress energy of grinding media, Low or moderate suspension viscosity The grinding media has a much higher Younǵs modulus compared to the product particles Constant mill size and geometry If milling is linked to a significant increase of the suspension viscosity, the reduction of stress energy has to be taken into account by an energy transfer coefficient It has to be noted that the stress energy inside stirred media mills is a distributed variable which is influenced by geometric aspects of the grinding chamber and the flow properties of the product suspension According to Eq. On the one hand the breakage result is determined by the stress intensity and on the other hand by the number of stress events acting on the product particles. Therefore, another important measure is given by the stress number of product particles Overall the relation between In this chapter, the process chain from the educts consisting of fibrous organic plant material to a final reconstituted beverage is presented. Each process step and its parameters are explained. The term “fibrous” is used in this work referring to materials primarily consisting of dietary fibers, such as cellulose. It does not necessarily imply an elongated particle shape. Premilled roasted coffee particles (RC) were used as feed material for micronization, their initial particle size distribution is given in RC particles were processed in aqueous suspension at different solids mass concentrations in the range of 0.05–0.2. The key step is the microgrinding process in order to obtain micronized roasted coffee particles (MRC). This was performed with a stirred media mill (PM1, Draiswerke), equipped with a Centex disc stirrer process unit (Bühler). The mill was operated in passage mode operation. Six ideal fillings of the grinding chamber were discarded before the samples were taken for analysis or further processing. Representative MRC particles obtained through this process are shown in During the grinding process, different parameters were varied in order to optimize the micronization. Thus, the material of the grinding media was varied between zirconium oxide, zirconium mixed oxide and zircon silicate, while grinding media of different mean diameters, d The standard temperature for grinding was set to 30 ± 2 °C. A series of grinding experiments was performed under temperature variation from about 20–60 °C. In a second set of experiments with optimized grinding parameters, the addition of small quantities of additives (soluble coffee, SC and chlorogenic acid, CA) was evaluated. Particle size distributions were measured by laser diffraction using a HELOS device (Sympatec). Measurements were performed with a cuvette system and product suspensions were diluted with deionized water according to the detector signal. The standard measurement procedure was based on 10 s ultrasound sample treatment before measurement in order to disperse agglomerates. Qicpic image analysis was applied additionally to evaluate particle size and shape. Since the investigated MRC particles are mostly compact, no significant shape effect on the particle size distribution was observed. Rheological properties of ground suspensions were characterized by a shear rate controlled test using a coaxial cylinder system at 20 °C. The shear rate was varied in a logarithmic scale ranging from 10 to 1000 s Infra-red (IR) spectroscopy (FTIR-ATM) for the detection of oil in the aqueous samples was conducted in a Vertex 70 (Bruker). For this, the suspension was placed directly onto the sampling surface of the device. Transmission at a wavenumber of 1162 1/cm was evaluated because this wavenumber was found to be characteristic to coffee oil. Due to the possible alteration of the spectrum due to the release of other constituents of coffee, the method is considered to be qualitative rather than a quantitative estimation of the oil concentration. After the grinding step the suspension of MRC particles in water was mixed with soluble coffee powder and spray dried in order to obtain a dry powder containing soluble coffee powder and MRC particles. To avoid re-agglomeration of MRC particles after grinding and before drying, the spray dryer feed was treated with a high shear mixer (T50 digital ULTRA-TURRAX with S50N-G45 F dispersing tool, IKA). The shearing step of 4 kg suspension was applied for 2 min at 7000 rpm. Afterwards, the feed was directly transported to the spray dryer. The drying step was performed in a pilot scale spray dryer (Niro Minor, GEA) where the drying parameter were kept constant for all experiments. A summary of all parameters is provided in Nitrogen was used as drying gas and the experiment was operated in a closed cycle. The main parts of the spray dryer plant are the drying chamber, the electrical heater, the cyclone, the filter unit and the condenser. Both the drying gas and the feed entered the drying chamber from the top and, thus, the drying process occurred in co-current operation mode. For atomization of the feed, a two-fluid nozzle with a liquid orifice diameter of 0.89 mm was used (liquid nozzle: PF35100-SS and gas cap: PA120-SS, Spraying Systems). The product was mainly collected at the bottom of the spray dryer (coarse fraction), since almost no powder was recovered after the cyclone (fine fraction) due to the nozzle settings. For analysis of the stability of the MRC particles after the drying step, the produced coffee powders were reconstituted in water. Therefore, 2 g of powder were dispersed in 200 mL of hot water (90 °C) and constantly stirred for 2 min. Afterwards, either the stirring continued for further 6 min or the stirring was stopped and a sedimentation time of 6 min followed. The particle size distribution was determined after 2 min of stirring (directly after reconstitution), after 8 min of stirring and after 2 min of stirring and 6 min without stirring by means of a laser diffraction particle size analyser (LS13320 MW, Beckman Coulter) in order to identify re-agglomeration and sedimentation. The reduction of the top cut particle size x  It can be seen that suspension viscosity increases strongly with increasing stirrer tip speed. The calculation of energy dissipation according to Eq. The following experiments were performed at two passage mode operation in order to narrow the residence time distribution and to ensure a sufficient high specific energy input at relatively short process times by applying zirconia grinding media with a nominal diameter of 1200 µm and a stirrer tip speed of 10 m s    Moreover, the temperature was identified to have a significant impact on the product quality: The increase of power input leads to an increase of the process temperature which has a negative effect on the grinding result, increasing particle sizes were observed with increasing process temperature.  The lipophilic colorant Nile red was used as fluorescence marker to visualize the lipid phase. RC particles were ground in the presence of Nile red and a fluorescence microscope was used to image the distribution of the oil phase. Further Insight on this effect was gained by varying the residence time of the product in the grinding chamber by adjusting the product flow rate. In Hence, it can be concluded that especially the liberation of lipids leads to agglomeration and the increases of viscosity when RC particles are micronized. This process seems to be strongly dependent on operating parameters. In the following it should be evaluated if the agglomeration can be countered by natural surface-active coffee ingredients in order to stabilize MRC particles against agglomeration. The reproducibility of the grinding experiments was tested in both circular and passage operation mode. In Soluble coffee (SC) and chlorogenic acid (CA) were evaluated as additives for particle surface stabilization. Both were chosen due to their amphiphilic properties in order to modify interfacial properties of MRC particles. SC and CA are known as surface-active, preliminary studies on the impact on the surface tension of water have shown a significant decrease of the surface tension at low concentrations. A representative chemical composition of soluble coffee is reported in The experimental procedure was the same as the one giving the results presented in In this chapter, the effect of further processing steps and the final reconstitution on the behaviour of the MRC particles was investigated. Therefore, the coffee suspensions after grinding containing micronized particles were mixed with soluble coffee powder and water, processed with the high shear mixer and dried by means of the spray dryer as described under material and methods. The measured x Furthermore, it was analysed if the additives show an impact on the micronized particles in the reconstituted beverage in the cup. The last three pairs of bars in As the stability towards re-aggregation and sedimentation of the MRC particles also has to be ensured during longer times in a cup, two further x From the reconstitution experiments, it can be followed that the additives CA and SC increase the size of MRC particles directly after reconstitution and do not show any effect during the observation of further 6 min. This study investigated the optimization of wet milling processes of aqueous suspensions of fibrous plant-based food particles, taking the example of roast and ground coffee particles. The objectives were to minimize the top-cut particle size x This is a joint publication between Nestlé Research, which funded the study, and the universities TUHH and TUBS. As authors from Nestlé Research, we cannot acknoledge ourselves. It is Nestlé's intention to actively contribute to the scientific progress in Food Science and Technology through publications. Rather than acknowleding for funding, we express the active and collaborative spirit of this scientific project as joint authors.