In this study, the changes in surface area, morphology and leachability of antimony and arsenic from tetrahedrite, jamesonite and enargite mechanically activated by a high-energy planetary mill were investigated. It appears that the leaching of antimony from tetrahedrite and jamesonite and arsenic from enargite in alkaline solution of sodium sulphide is temperature-sensitive reaction. The temperature dependencies of all reactions were investigated in the interval 313–363 K. Resulting experimental activation energies were E
                     a
                     =111–182 kJ mol−1 for mechanically activated minerals. The values of E
                     a are characteristic for processes controlled by surface chemical reactions.The crystal structures of tetrahedrite (Cu Examined complex sulfides, tetrahedrite, jamesonite and enargite, are categorizes as sulfosalts with enargite and tetrahedrite being economically attractive because of the content of copper for extracting. However, the content of antimony and arsenic in these minerals is undesirable as pyrometallurgical smelter feed because they effect the conductivity and ductility of refined copper and also form a scum on electrolytic cells allowing impurities to carry over to the cathodes ( In this regard, alkaline leaching of the minerals in sodium sulfide medium offers a hydrometallurgical approach to solving this problem because it provides selective transfer of antimony and arsenic into leach solutions ( There are several methods to enhance leachability of minerals including mechanical activation. The primary effect of mechanical activation is the comminution of solids into ultrafine dimensions. Nanosized particles lead to changes in a great number of physico-chemical properties of particular systems ( The aim of this work is to assess the influence of optimally activated minerals, specifically tetrahedrite, jamesonite and enargite, in order to selectively extract Sb and As by alkaline leaching at various temperatures. The investigation was carried out with sulfide minerals: enargite, Cu Mechanical activation of minerals (particle size The specific surface area ( Leaching was investigated in a 500 ml glass reactor with mechanical stirrer into which 400 ml of leaching solution (100 gl Scanning electron micrographs were obtained on a BS 300 scanning electron microscope (Tesla, Czech Republic). The phase compositions of samples under study were determined using a diffractometer DRON 2.0 with goniometer GUR-5 (Techsnabexport, Russia) with Fe K  The kinetics of new surface area formation is a very complex phenomenon—especially if milling is accompanied by physico-chemical changes which also effect the mechanism of particle interaction. Generally, in mechanically activated systems, the first stage of milling occurs with rapid increase of new surface and the second step commences with aggregation ( One can speculate which of physico-chemical properties is responsible for described phenomena. Hardness of minerals–defined as the resistance of the crystal to mechanical activation–belongs to the major properties influencing the behaviour of crystals. Hardness itself is related to the lattice energy, bonding and the structural type of the mineral ( The kinetics of tetrahedrite, enargite and jamesonite alkaline leaching in sodium sulfide medium according to reactions From This mineral behaves similar as tetrahedrite. For non-activated sample, the recovery of Sb is only 8%; however, for mechanically activated sample, 40 min yields Sb recovery of 63% after 10 min of leaching ( Considerable effect of mechanical activation on the recovery of arsenic from enargite is illustrated in The determination of temperature sensitivity of leaching is a contribution to elucidation of the mechanism of the solid–liquid processes which makes it possible to determine an experimental activation energy. Its value defines the slowest step of the reaction that is also the rate controlling step. To elucidate the sensitivity of alkaline leaching to temperature, samples of tetrahedrite, jamesonite and enargite with very well developed surface areas were leached at 313–363 K. Plots of temperature dependence of Sb and As recovery on leaching time are shown in Generally, temperature accelerates the extraction of metals from sulfides into the leach liquor and follows two steps. In the beginning, the extraction is very fast, typically in a minute and with linear kinetics, where an occurrence of solid reaction products on the reaction surface is very small. Afterwards, the second step occurs with slower nonlinear kinetics due to formation of solid products which show diffusion in of aqueous reactants and diffusion out of aqueous products. The values of the experimental activation energy calculated from Arrhenius plots are given in Specific surface areas of tetrahedrite (Cu The alkaline leaching of the minerals shows the increase of antimony and arsenic extraction which is enhanced by the effect of mechanical activation. All minerals under study show temperature sensitivity of alkaline leaching studied in interval We would like to thank Dr. J. Briančin for performing the scanning electron micrographs. The research activities were kindly supported by Slovak Grant Agency VEGA (project 2/5151/5) and Center of Excellence of Slovak Academy of Sciences NANOSMART.