Present report delt with the studies on complexation of rare earth metals (REMs) present in chloride leach liquor of monazite with phosphoric extractant, di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA). Further, the co-ordination chemistry was studied by determining the complex formation, its structure and validation with standard mathematical model equation. The systematic solvent extraction complexation studies were carried out using 5% D2EHPA diluted in kerosene and mixed with 1% isodecanol (modifier) to form organometallic complex during extraction. After optimizing various process parameters, it was observed that a good separation factors of 17.73 for Nd/La at pH 2 and 12.69 for Pr/La at pH 1.7 were obtained. The value for log D and slope analysis were found 3 as per the expected complex formation (M3+ + 3HA = MA3 + 3H+). Mc-Cabe Thiele plots indicated the requirement of mostly ∼3 for REMs extraction. The result will be helpful to set multi stage mixer settler unit (MSU) for the recovery of pure solution of individual/mixed rare earth solution. Based on the results of basic scientific studies, the complex formation and number of stage required for the mixer settler units (MSU) in continuous operation in commercial plant can be determined and accordingly designed.Modern technological innovations resulted in multiple applications using rare earth metals (REMs) such as in wind turbines, phosphors, batteries, catalysts, alloys, etc. For the processing of monazite related to REMs recovery, the pre-treatment is necessary. Generally, roasting or chemical baking of monazite has been carried out to remove its phosphate content and make the metal leaching process easier. The treated monazite are further leached followed by SX/ion-exchange (IX) and precipitation to obtain REMs in their pure form. But having similar chemical properties these REMs result difficulties in their separation and product purity. Therefore, selective oxidation/reduction, fractional precipitation, crystallization, IX and SX processes are used based on difference in individual metal basicity. Among all, SX is accepted to be the most suitable method to separate REMs on commercial scale as it can handle large volumes of leach liquors. In general, based on material/media, various researchers used SX process for the extraction of REMs from the leach solution of monazite using different organophosphorous extractants Above review indicates that most of the work presented were with synthetic solutions. Therefore, studies were carried out to investigate the extraction behavior of La, Nd, Ce and Pr from the chloride medium using D2EHPA mixed with modifier isodecanol and diluted in kerosene varying different process parameters systematically. To validate the experimental results, formation of organo-metallic phases were determined using log D vs pH, slope analysis and Mc-cabe Thiele plot. As La, Nd, Ce and Pr are in majority, the main focus of the studies was made on these four elements. The result and data will be helpful to simulate the process in continuous mode by using multi stages mixer settler units (MSU) for the recovery of pure solution of individual rare earth/pure rare earth solution of mixed REMs. Monazite mineral received from Korea Institute of Geosciences and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), Republic of Korea was initially pre-treated with an alkaline reagent for complete phosphate removal so as to leach out REMs efficiently. 6 M hydrochloric acid (HCl) was used at 80 °C for 2 hrs and pulp density 30 g/L to leach out maximum amount of REMs present in the sample. The detailed description of the whole process is reported by our group and are represented via Eqs. After the leaching experiments, all the chloride leach liquor was collected, mixed properly and the concentration of liquor was made halved by diluting the solution. This diluted chloride liquor was used to carry out further experiments. Di-(2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid) supplied by Fluka, AG, Buchs was used as extractant without any further purification. Two times diluted chloride leach solution containing 1.2 g/L La, 1.19 g/L Ce, 0.51 g/L Nd, 0.36 g/L Pr along with other REMs in traces ( The chloride leach liquor containing REMs along with non-ferrous impurities were subjected to SX studies and different process parameters viz. equilibrium pH, time, O/A ratio, loading capacity, cross current extraction and stripping studies were optimized to see the extraction behavior of La, Nd, Ce and Pr. For this, equal volume (50 mL each) of aqueous and organic phases were mixed using magnetic stirrer for 5 min to achieve the equilibrium condition at room temperature i.e. 25 °C. Organic and aqueous phases were separated using separating funnel. After phase separation, the metal concentrations in the aqueous phase were analyzed by ICP-OES. During the SX experiments the metal concentrations in the various organic phases were determined by mass balance. The distribution ratio (D) and extraction percentage (E) were calculated as follows: Where, C Development of easier process to separate individual REM from various samples (solid/liquid) has the great challenge due to the similarity in physical and chemical properties. In this connection, the separation processes based on the solvent extraction techniques, have been developed to produce high purity single rare earth solutions or compounds. Solvent extraction is generally accepted as the most appropriate commercial technology for separating REMs from larger volumes of dilute leach liquor. Various kinds of acidic organophosphorous extractants have been used in rare-earth separation processes, with D2EHPA (di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid) being the main solvent widely used. The structure of D2EHPA is presented in Initially, the studies were made to observe the effect of mixing time on extraction of REMs and to determine the optimum time required to get equilibrium condition. The chloride leach liquor was mixed with 5% D2EHPA + 1% isodecanol diluted in kerosene maintaining O/A ratio 1:1 at room temperature. The retention of mixing time was varied from 1 to 7 min. It was found that the percentage extraction of metals was found to increase with the increase in mixing time. About 58.6% La, 79.9% Ce, 86.1% Nd and 90.2% Pr were extracted in 5 min at eq. pH 1.2 as shown in D2EHPA used in the present investigation is cationic in nature and extracts REMs by exchange of hydrogen ion by metal ion. It is hydrophilic in nature and more reactive ion at the interface of organic and aqueous In present investigation, the cationic extractant D2EHPA extracts the metal by the exchange of hydrogen ion. D2EHPA makes dimers using hydrogen bonding and represented by (HA) Replacing {[M(HA Taking logarithm of Eq. From Eq. To determine the number of stages required for the SX of REMs from the chloride leach liquor of monazite containing 1.2 g/L La, 1.19 g/L Ce, 0.51 g/L Nd, 0.36 g/L Pr, experiments were carried out varying O/A ratio from 1:5 to 5:1. The extraction of REMs found to be increased with increase in the volume of organic ( Based on obtained data Mc-Cabe Thiele plot was drawn to see the requirement of stages for each REMs, when the process will be simulated in continuous mode. The results presented in The role of separation factor (β) is important to compare the separation ability of adjacent REMs. Separation factor must always be greater than one for effective separation REMs. Separation between two metals is not possible if their separation factor is equal to unity Further, loading capacity of 5% D2EHPA diluted in kerosene and modified with 1% isodecanol was also studied. The measure of maximum amount of metal ions extracted from the aqueous phase into the organic phase at a constant pH and temperature is the loading capacity of the organic extractant. The maximum loading capacity of D2EHPA for La, Ce, Nd and Pr was found to be 1.46 g/L, 2.59 g/L, 2.05 g/L and 1.59 g/L respectively, in six cumulative contacts in a mixing time of 5 min maintaining O/A ratio 1:1 ( The studies were made in cross current mode to see the behavior of multi metals present in the leach liquor. It was found in seven cross contacts with fresh organic mode. Experiments were also carried out to determine the number of stages required for complete extraction of REMs from leach liquor in continuous mode. The same leach liquor was mixed with fresh organic at different eq. pH in cross current mode. It was observed that total seven stages were required for complete extraction of REMs from the leach liquor ( Loaded organic containing REMs were stripped using H Based on the obtained results for the SX of REMs from monazite leach liquor following conclusion can be drawn: From the chloride leach liquor of monazite 58.6% La, 79.9% Ce, 86.1% Nd and 90.2% Pr can be extracted using 5% D2EHPA + 1% isodecanol diluted in kerosene maintaining eq. pH 1.2, O/A ratio 1:1, at room temperature in 5 min mixing time. At elevated eq. pH 1.7, the extraction of La, Ce, Nd and Pr can be obtained ∼98.60%, 99.51%, 99.92% and 99.40%, respectively. The value for log D and slope analysis was according to the expected complex formation. Mc-cabe Thiele plot indicates the requirement of 5, 3, 3 and 3 stages for the separation/extraction of La, Ce, Nd and Pr respectively, in mixer settler unit (MSU) and separation factor 17.73 for Nd/La and 12.69 for Pr/La at ∼pH 2 were obtained. About 99.95% La, 99.99% Ce, 99.99% Nd and 99.90% Pr was extracted from the leach liquor in seven stages and 77.31% La, 74.32% Ce, 71.72% Nd and 56.77% Pr were stripped in single contact using 10% H This experimental paper is based on the research work related to REMs extraction carried out at CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-NML), Jamshedpur, India. Authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-NML for giving permission to publish the paper. One of the authors Ms. Archana Kumari is thankful to