Low weight and long life-time are necessary requirements for automobiles to significantly reduce CO2 emission and environmental burdens in their use. Aluminum alloys are one of the most promising materials selections for automotive power-train parts and electrical components to reduce their weight and to increase their specific strength. Reliable protective layers for these aluminum parts are indispensable to improve the wear resistance and to reduce the friction coefficient. Among several methods, the precipitate-accommodated plasma nitriding is proposed as a new surface treatment of aluminum alloy parts to significantly increase the aluminum nitride formation rate and to control the nitrided layer thickness. Microstructure characterization and hardness profile measurement are carried out to describe the formation of uniform nitrided layer. Pin-on-disc method is used for dry wearing test to prove that wear volumes as well as friction coefficients are reduced by this AlN protective layer. Low flash temperature and low specific wear volume prove that the present nitriding process is one of the most promising surface treatments for aluminum alloy parts in dry wearing conditions.Light metals have been utilized for automotive parts to reduce the weight of automobiles, aiming at the significant reduction of CO Aluminum nitride (AlN) is attractive as a protective coating film for automotive and electrical aluminum alloy parts. Authors have developed the plasma nitriding for surface treatment of aluminum powder compacts and aluminum cast parts Aluminum with the purity of 99.9% is used as a common sample for normal nitriding. Aluminum–copper–magnesium alloy samples were prepared for a new plasma nitriding by casting the aluminum, copper and magnesium blocks with the purity of 99.9% for each. Plasma nitriding chamber was evacuated by rotary and mechanical booster pumps until the gas pressure reaches to 0.013 Formation of aluminum nitride is identified by XRD (X-ray diffraction) method. Microstructure of nitrided samples is analyzed by optical microscope and SEM (scanning electron microscope). Chemical composition and structure of nitrided layer are also analyzed by XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) and EDS (energy dispersive spectroscopy). Micro-Vicker's hardness testing was used to measure the surface hardness and its profile in the cross-section of specimen with the load of 10 The pin-on-disc method was employed as a dry wear test, using Takachiho model-III (T2000-500NS). Surface-treated and nitrided testpieces were used as a pin specimen with the length of 20 Two types of plasma nitriding are compared with respect to the formation behavior of aluminum nitride (AlN) layer: normal plasma nitriding   On the other hand, the growth of AlN layer is not governed by the nitrogen diffusion in AlN in the case of precipitate-accommodated nitriding for Al–Cu–Mg alloys. In this nitriding, the precipitate of Al  Hardness profiles in the direction of depth as well as the surface hardness are important to make protective hard coating design in practice. In the gas nitriding, the hardness gradually decreases in the depth direction from the surface hardness. In the normal plasma nitriding, the hardness keeps high plateau in the same level as the surface hardness in the depth direction and drops to the matrix hardness across the nitriding front end. The hardness in the nitrided layer ranges from 1000 to 1200 Dry wear tests were performed by using the pin-on-disc method with alumina disc as a counter material to investigate the dry wear response of nitrided Al–Cu–Mg alloys. Aluminum A356 alloy or Al–7 In the case of nitrided Al–Cu–Mg alloys, the friction coefficient is reduced to 0.13 in average as shown in In the case of nitrided Al–Cu–Mg alloys, Dry wearing mode of plasma-nitrided aluminum alloys is described by the flash temperatures on the interface between nitrided surface and counter materials. In addition, the specific wear volume is used to evaluate the wear resistance of nitrided specimens with comparison to other surface-treated samples. Severity of dry wear is governed by the surface oxidation process. When the local temperature inside the wear track, or, the flash temperature (  The onset temperature ( Feasibility design of wear between two solids in dry is often based on the evaluation of specific wear volume or New type of plasma nitriding is proposed as one of the most promising surface treatments for improvement of the wear resistance of aluminum alloy parts. Surface hardness profile as well as the nitrided layer thickness is controllable in this precipitate-accommodated plasma nitriding. In the dry pin-on-disc testing, low friction coefficient and low specific wear volume are attained in practice: Authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. H. Kuwahara, Research Institute for Applied Sciences, for his help in experiments. This study is financially supported in part by the national project on the barrier-free processing and the environmentally benign manufacturing from MEXT.