In the last decades, increasing industrial development has led to huge consumption of plastic materials, due to their versatility and low cost. Therefore, the implementation of efficient and environmentally friendly recycling technologies is of great importance. This study proposes an alternative separation process for recycling mixtures of plastic wastes, using a tribo-electrostatic separation process. The methodology adopted in this work was firstly characterization of the polymeric wastes, followed by preparation of the wastes using different unit operation processes (washing, drying, and comminution), tribo-charging, and electrostatic separation of different combinations of plastics (HDPE/PP, LDPE/PP, and PET/PVC). Various parameters were evaluated in the tribo-charging process and the electrostatic deflection. Separation of a mixture of HDPE and PP achieved PP recovery of 92.8% (purity of 95.7%) and HDPE recovery of 95.9% (purity of 93.1%). Recovery and purity values higher than 90.2% and 95.9% were obtained for PP/LDPE and PET/PVC mixtures, respectively. These results demonstrated that tribo-electrostatic separation is a promising and efficient method for use in the recycling of plastic wastes. The process studied enabled significant recoveries of the components at high levels of purity.The quality of life of individuals has improved due to continuous industrial development. Plastics are directly related to this development, due to their reliability, low cost, durability, and lower weight compared to competing materials, besides their great versatility and adaptability in terms of the technical specifications required ( There are several plastics used in everyday life. The demand is mainly dominated by thermoplastic types such as polypropylene (PP) (19.1%), low-density and linear low-density polyethylene (LDPE and LLDPE) (17.3%), high-density polyethylene, (HDPE) (12.1%), polyvinyl chloride (PVC) (10.1%), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) (7.1%) ( A major challenge for producing recycled resins from plastic wastes is that most different plastic types are not compatible with each other, due to their inherent immiscibility at the molecular level and differences in processing requirements at a macro-scale. Rigid containers composed of a single polymer are simpler and more economical to recycle than multi-layer and multi-component packages ( Mechanical recycling is the most widely used method, but can only be used with products containing only one type of resin (PP, HDPE, or PET, etc.). The more mixed and contaminated is the plastic waste, the harder it is to perform the mechanical recycling process. According to Different techniques have been developed for plastics separation, including optical separation ( In an industrial chain, considering the main thermoplastic types, after density separation with water there are still some fractions to be separated, such as PET/PVC and PE/PP (including both HDPE and LDPE). A problem is that PVC cannot be separated from PET in this manner, because their density ranges overlap ( A highly promising technique that can be employed in plastic waste processing is electrostatic separation. When used in conjunction with a tribo-charging process, this is termed tribo-electrostatic separation. The technique can be applied in the separation of non-conducting materials, such as in polymer recycling ( The rates of recovery and purity found in the literature indicate that tribo-electrostatic separation is an effective method for the separation of polymeric residues. However, in most studies, the process has been applied to virgin plastics, rather than to post-consumer materials from municipal solid waste (MSW) ( The choice of the tribo-charging mechanism is very important, since it will determine the efficiency of particle separation in the next steps. The literature cites two mechanisms for obtaining electric charge on the particles: solid single phase (vibration, rotary drum, rotary blades, etc.) and gas–solid two-phase (fluidized bed, cyclone, propeller-type tribo-charger, etc.) ( After the particles have acquired an electric charge, they are subjected to an electrostatic deflection process. Different types of electrostatic separators can be used in this step, including the free-fall, roll, plate, and fluidized bed types ( This work concerns the application of the tribo-electrostatic technique in the separation of different plastic mixtures from MSW. Gas–solid two-phase tribo-charging was applied using a fluidized bed. Electrostatic deflection was performed with a roll type electrostatic separator, which has previously only been applied a few times in tribo-electrostatic separation. Firstly, the main tribo-charging and electrostatic deflection parameters were evaluated for the separation of HDPE/PP. The best conditions identified in the HDPE/PP separation were then applied to different plastics mixtures (LDPE/PP and PET/PVC) in order to evaluate the separation efficiency.  Five types of polymers were selected: PP, HDPE, LDPE, PET, and PVC. These represent the majority of plastic materials found in the selective waste collection in Santa Maria (Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. The plastics were characterized by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC–60 Plus, Shimadzu). All the analyses were performed in triplicate. The plastics were washed with tap water and soap to remove the adhered impurities, followed by drying at room temperature (25 Studies have shown that particle size has a direct effect in tribo-electrostatic separation ( According to During the comminution and sieving processes, the plastic particles can acquire surface charges. This affects the charging efficiency and influences the purity and recovery of the products resulting from the overall process ( The plastics mixture used in the initial study of tribo-electrostatic separation consisted of PP and HDPE. These were chosen because of the difficulty involved in separating them. PP has a density of 0.9–0.91 A mixture of 10 After selection of the tribo-charging mechanism, other parameters were studied. The influence of relative humidity (42, 52, 60, and 77%) on the tribo-charging of the particles was tested. The humidity was measured using a digital hygrometer. Evaluation was also made of the influence of time (2.5, 5, 10, 15, and 20 For all the tribo-charging tests, the electrostatic separator (ES) parameters were as follows: tension (U) The roll-type electrostatic separator shown in The electrostatic separator parameters studied are shown in The plastic particles from each collector were separated manually using tweezers and spatulas. This separation was possible because of the different colors of each type of plastic and resulted in two groups of particles (plastic 1 and plastic 2) for each collector. The particles of each material were weighed on an analytical balance. The recovery and purity of each material were determined using Eqs. After determination of the best operational conditions for the tribo-electrostatic separation, these parameters were applied in triplicate in order to evaluate the reproducibility of the process. The best conditions were also applied in tribo-electrostatic separation of other plastics mixtures (PP/LDPE and PET/PVC). The DSC analyses were performed for each type of plastic. The HDPE showed a characteristic melting peak at 131 The PET and PVC particles were also characterized by DSC ( A batch of plastics that had been previously washed and dried was comminuted and subjected to a granulometric separation process. The particles with mean size of −2.8/+2.0 Tribo-charging performed in a fluidized bed (gas–solid, two-phase) resulted in the highest process efficiency ( Tribo-charging performed using the fluidized bed provided more efficient charging, due to greater collision among the particles. The vibration system was simpler, but resulted in poorer separation of PP and HDPE. Therefore, all the tests carried out in the next steps were performed with tribo-charging using a fluidized bed of PP. The relative humidity (RH) of the air directly affects the tribo-charging process, with the recovery and purity of the plastics being greatly reduced with increasing RH. The best results were obtained at RH of 42% (  The residence time of the particles inside the tribo-charger is a very important variable in the tribo-charging process. A time of 2.5  The parameters evaluated in this study were the angle of the deflector (Â), the distance of the electrostatic electrode (D), the electrode tension (U), and the roll speed (n). The first parameter studied was the angle of the deflector (Â). The other parameters were maintained constant, with electrostatic electrode distance (D) of 3 The deflector angle (Â) has a major influence, since it depends on the trajectory of the particles attracted by the electrostatic electrode. This trajectory determines whether the particles will fall into collector 2 or 3. The best result was achieved with an angle of 2.5° ( The separation of plastic materials in a roll-type electrostatic separator has been very little discussed in the literature. Evaluation was made of the effect of the distance (D) between the roll surface and the electrostatic electrode ( At a distance of 2 The results obtained in this step were in agreement with the work of The tension applied to the electrodes (U) is the most important parameter in tribo-electrostatic separation. It is the most studied variable in tribo-electrostatic separation of plastic particles, especially using free-fall type separators ( The voltage required for the separation of plastic particles is directly related to the charge density that the particles acquire in the tribo-charging process. According to The last parameter studied was the influence of the roll speed (n). A speed of 5  The best conditions for the tribo-electrostatic separation of the HDPE and PP particles are shown in Tests in triplicate were performed using the conditions shown in New tests were performed using the previously defined conditions, with the objective of evaluating the efficiency of the process for the separation of other plastics mixtures. The tribo-electrostatic separation of PP and LDPE followed the same separation principle as PP and HDPE, since the polyethylenes are adjacent in most tribo-electric series ( In the separation of the PET and PVC mixture, the PET particles acquired a negative charge and adhered to the roll. The PVC particles acquired a positive charge and were attracted to the electrostatic electrode. Thus, the tribo-electric series obtained in this study was as follows: (+) PVC – PP – PET (−). This difference can be explained by the fact that most of the tribo-electric series presented in Recycling is one strategy for the end-of-life waste management of plastic products. In this work, characterization of the different plastics using DSC analyses confirmed the compositions of HDPE, LDPE, PP, PET, and PVC. The best mechanism of tribo-charging for the separation was a fluidized bed, rather than the vibration method. The relative humidity strongly affected the tribo-charging process and needed to be kept at low levels. The best conditions for the tribo-charging and electrostatic separation process were successfully defined. Satisfactory separations of the plastics mixtures were achieved, with recovery and purity values exceeding 90.2% for all the separations studied, demonstrating the effectiveness of the tribo-electrostatic process in separating a mixture of polymers. The results showed that was possible to obtain fractions with high purity, in addition to high recovery. Therefore, the tribo-electrostatic separation process is fully feasible for the recovery of plastics from selective waste collection. This process offers a good alternative to mechanical segregation and recycling of plastics from MSW. This study was supported by the following Brazilian agencies: Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul (FAPERGS); Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq); Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES); and Secretaria do Desenvolvimento Econômico, Ciência e Tecnologia do Estado do Rio Grande do Sul (SDECT).