Background
                  Incisional hernia formation is one of the most frequent complications of midline laparotomies requiring reoperation. The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of prophylactically placing a biodegradable mesh within the incision site at closure in a rat model.
               
                  Methods
                  A 4-cm full-thick midline laparotomy was made in Sprague–Dawley rats along the linea alba and closed by inserting a commercially available web of synthetic polymers (polyglycolic acid–trimethylene carbonate) that are slowly degraded by the body. Host tissue reaction was evaluated ex vivo and compared with that obtained in suture-only–treated rats. Specimens were harvested at 1, 3, and 6mo after surgery and divided for histologic and zymographic analyses and uniaxial material testing. A group of intact nonoperated animals were included to serve as a reference.
               
                  Results
                  The excised tissue explants revealed that the performance of the synthetic device was good and resulted in enhanced fibroproliferation, gelatinolytic activity, and angiogenesis within the repair site as compared with the suture-only procedure. Lastly, tensile strength augmented over the suture-only condition.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The preventive introduction of an absorbable mesh stimulates new tissue ingrowth and performance relative to suture repair without prosthesis, probably contributing to eventually reinforce the tension line. These results have a clinical potential in abdominal wall closure, especially in patients with multiple risk factors such as those treated for aortic reconstructive surgery, without the short- and long-term complications related to permanent grafts. However, data are preliminary and should be confirmed with longer follow-ups.The abdominal wall is a continuously moving musculoaponeurotic structure where the Sixty-five 8-mo-old male (250 Anesthesia was induced with 5% isoflurane or O Specimens were fixed in 10% formaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, cut into 4-μm thick sections, and treated with hematoxylin–eosin and Masson trichromic stains as per routine clinical practice. A clinical pathologist (P.H.) was blinded to the identity of the samples analyzed a minimum of three sections (10 randomly chosen, noncontiguous, and nonoverlapping high-power fields) per rat to assess the effect of the copolymer on the abdominal wall tissue. Preparations were evaluated semiquantitatively for cell infiltration and Masson trichromic staining intensity. Vessels were counted in hematoxylin- and eosin-stained sections using a Meiji Techno reticle cross-line (Tokyo, Japan) and expressed as vessels per square millimeter. Metalloproteases (MMPs) with gelatinase activity were identified by zymography, as described previously Uniaxial tension tests specifically devised to find the mechanical or material properties of the samples were carried out as described previously Data were quantified as the mean All animals survived the surgical procedure and postoperative period without complications. In the suture-only–treated group, filmy adhesions (Zühlke classification 1) were observed in 13% of the animals, especially at 6 The sections processed with hematoxylin and trichromic stain of the explanted tissue interfaces are shown in Wound healing and scar tissue formation encompass enhanced fibroblast-mediated synthesis and remodeling of diverse extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Our focus was to assess the overall gelatinolytic activity within the incision site. Representative zymograms of explanted tissue extracts are provided in Taken as a whole (all months pooled), rupture incidence within the incision site was higher in suture-only–treated samples ( This study was meant to be an experimental pilot study to see whether the effects of placing a synthetic absorbable mesh within the incision site at closure are efficacious and safe. To this aim, a commercially available copolymer device, intended for soft tissue reinforcement in nonload bearing applications Recently, several studies have reported the advantages of reinforcing primary closure with permanent meshes. However, to our knowledge, the use of absorbable prosthesis placed within the incision site has not been previously tested in a preclinical setting. Here, we sought whether the polymer device was able to provide a temporary scaffold that stimulates appropriate cellular and extracellular events that eventually improve wound healing. Overall, our results are compatible with a foreign body reaction to slowly degradable polymeric implants Finally, material testing demonstrated a steady increase in tensile strength within the polymer-treated tissue. The tensile strength reflects local tissue formation and remodeling at the ECM level. The ECM microenvironment is a dynamic hydrated protein- and proteoglycan-based gel network comprising soluble and physically bound signals and cells The fundamental mechanism of fascia wound failure leading to incisional hernia is only partially characterized In summary, the prophylactic placement of an absorbable mesh within the incision site at closure seems to be safe and effective. The temporal evaluation of the structural and functional remodeling events supports the concept that the slow disappearance of the device after We thank M. Rebull for technical assistance. The study was supported in part by a grant from the