Recent field-based studies documented deformation bands in porous carbonates; these structures accommodate volumetric and/or shear strain by means of pore collapse, grain rotation and/or sliding. Microstructural observations of natural deformation bands in carbonates showed that, at advanced stages of deformation, pressure solution helps to reduce the grain size, enhancing comminuted flow and forming narrow cataclastic zones within the bands. In contrast, laboratory studies on the mechanics of deformation bands in limestones identified grain crushing, pore collapse and mechanical twinning as the micromechanisms leading to strain localization.
                  Here, we present a multidisciplinary field and laboratory study performed on a Cretaceous carbonate grainstone to investigate the microprocesses associated to deformation banding in this rock. A quantitative microstructural analysis, carried out on natural deformation bands aimed at defining the spatial distribution of pressure solutions, was accompanied by a force chain orientation study. Two sets of triaxial experiments were performed under wet conditions on selected host rock samples. The deformed samples often displayed a shear-enhanced compaction behavior and strain hardening, associated with various patterns of strain localization.
                  We constrained the pressure conditions at which natural deformation bands developed by reproducing in laboratory both low and high angle to the major principal stress axis deformation bands. The comparison among natural and laboratory-formed structures, allowed us to gain new insights into the role, and the relative predominance, of different microprocesses (i.e. microcracking, twinning and pressure solution) in nature and laboratory.The inelastic deformation of porous rocks is a widely studied problem among the scientific community. The specific failure modes, faulting processes and overall strain rates are all aspects that are currently investigated by both field and laboratory studies with the purpose of better assessing the control exerted by deformation on the petrophysical properties of porous rocks in geotechnical engineering and reservoir management applications (see In the laboratory, the mechanical behavior of carbonate rocks of a wide range of porosities has been documented by many studies ( While previous studies have shown that natural and laboratory deformation bands have comparable characteristics (i.e. pore and grain sizes reduction), many discrepancies among the mechanisms responsible for their development have been found. The comparison between field and laboratory failure processes remains to date limited by the fact that most experimental studies on carbonates have been performed on dry rocks whereas the natural deformation (i.e. compaction, pressure solution) likely happens in presence of fluids. In this paper we present the results of a multidisciplinary work, which integrates field and laboratory studies on the porous carbonate grainstones belonging to the Orfento Formation ( The Majella Mountain is an East-vergent, thrust-related anticline located in the external zone of the central Apennines, in central Italy ( This study focuses on natural and laboratory deformation bands of the Upper Campanian to Maastrichtian Orfento Fm. ( Our detailed stratigraphic/sedimentological loggings ( The studied carbonate grainstones are arranged into normal graded, planar beds gently dipping toward NE with dip angle of about 18° showing erosional bases, lateral extensions up to 10 s of meters and thickness of tens of decimeters ( According to the facies model proposed by Both bioclastic carbonate grainstones, which range in size from fine sand to silt, and intraformational carbonate breccias are constituted by predominant rudist fragments and intraclasts ( In thin section, the studied lithofacies are characterized by both intergranular and minor intragranular porosity ( A negligible amount of vuggy porosity (<1%) is also present within both fine-grained carbonate grainstones and intraformational carbonate breccias, this last lithofacies is not the object of the present study. In thin section the very fine sand (S18 Low.) and silt-grained carbonate grainstones (S18 Upp. and S19), as well as the calcilutites ( In The quantitative textural and microstuctural analyses, presented in this section, extend the observations previously carried out by The inner portions of the single deformation bands ( The aforementioned results are in agreement with The grain-to-matrix ratio measured of the CSBs overprinted by intergranular PSs and discontinuous pockets of cataclasis is almost half of the ratio that characterizes the surrounding host rock ( The grain-to-matrix ratio, measured within the CSBs overprinted intragranular PSs and cataclastic material ( Within the CSB overprinted intragranular PSs and cataclastic material, the process of cataclasis ( For each of the analyzed DBs, pressure solution density analysis was performed with the aim of characterizing their spatial distributions. A squared grid of 1 mm The parameter Ω Finally, we determined the degree of microtextural ordering inside and outside the CSB and the CB, by studying the preferred orientation and trace of chains composed of grains, which are in concave-convex contact. These chains were obtained by connecting a minimum of three adjacent grains with concave-convex contacts. The chain trajectories were drawn perpendicular to the grain contacts, we refer to these trajectories as force chains ( For the experimental part of the research we followed to two parallel strategies. Each strategy was performed in an individual laboratory. First a systematic investigation of the brittle–ductile transition of S18 Upper (“Majella grainstone” in Cylindrical samples (20-mm of diameter and 40-mm of length) were cored from same block of Orfento Formation (“Majella grainstone”) used by Seven cylindrical samples (25-mm of diameter and 55-mm of length) were cored from 3 blocks of Orfento Formation (see In the following section, we consider the compressive stresses and compactive strains (i.e. shortening and porosity decrease) as positive. The maximum and minimum (compressive) principal stress axes are denoted by σ  Mechanical data relative to selected experiments ( The experiments performed at 5 MPa of P In wet conditions, the mechanical behavior of these Orfento samples was always compactant, as previously observed in dry conditions ( The mechanical data relative to seven experiments are shown in For these experiments we used three different blocks of the Orfento formation ( All the experiments carried out at 5 MPa of In Selected samples deformed at different level of axial strain were unloaded and retrieved from the pressure vessels. The deformed samples were carefully removed from the jacket (neoprene or butyle) then macroscopically analyzed in order to identify some possible strain localization zones. As examples of the work done, we present three pictures of deformed samples from the HPT-lab experiments ( We vacuum impregnated the samples with epoxy resin and sawed them along a plane parallel to the axial direction to prepare petrographic thin sections. The thin sections were subsequently polished for using FESEM and optical polarizing microscope (Nikon Eclipse E600 Pol microscope). The analyses of the textural parameters, as well as the micromechanical characterization of the laboratory DBs, were carried out following a procedure similar to that one described for natural DBs. In addition, for laboratory DBs, we calculated the crack surface area per unit volume ( The mechanical data of the deformed carbonate grainstones (Section The pore and grain sizes distribution curves relative to the CSB Ma#34 ( The spatial distribution of cracks was investigated within three different structures (Ma#34, T1 and T10). The measured values, listed in The microstructural analysis we performed allows us to define grain crushing as the dominant deformation microprocess within the laboratory DBs. As shown in In the deformation of these carbonates, another important role is played by intergranular pores size reduction, which can be either due to the infilling of fine-grained material or to their cataclastic collapse. At low confining pressures, within the CSBs, the intergranular pores are obliterated by shear surfaces and/or filled by fine-grained material product by grain crushing and sliding ( We integrated field and laboratory observations carried out on natural and laboratory deformation bands formed in the grainstones of the Orfento formation. In order to constrain the pressure conditions at which natural deformation bands nucleate and to investigate the micromechanisms responsible of their formation, we carried out two sets of triaxial compression experiments. The experiments were performed at room temperature under wet conditions and at effective confining pressures ranging from 5 to 30 MPa. At 5 MPa of P Importantly both low- and high-angle to σ Both natural and laboratory structures are lighter-colored and more compact with respect to the parent rock ( Previous field-based studies evidences that Orfento Fm. suffered a maximum overburden ranging between 0.7 and 1.3 km (e.g. The laboratory CBSs (nucleated at In agreement with Based upon the aforementioned data, we infer that the studied carbonates deformed in an open system (at least at an outcrop scale). Fluids may trigger chemical process such as pressure solution, the kinetics of this process depends on grain size and applied stress (e.g. The PS and Hertzian cracking processes were a consequence of grain rotation and sliding and, hence, pore collapse ( In laboratory CSBs, randomly distributed grain crushing starts from Hertzian cracks ( The result of our crack counting on laboratory CSBs (Ma#34 and T1) showed higher amount of damage in both the bands with respect to the host rocks (see The laboratory DB, nucleated at The crack counting on the laboratory CB (T10) showed higher damage in the band with respect to the host rock (see The effective pressures at which we formed the two high-angle (to σ In the set of experiments (T7; T11 and T14) performed on the sample S19 at The present study compares natural and laboratory deformation bands formed in the Upper Cretaceous carbonate grainstones of the Orfento formation. The aim was to constrain the pressure conditions at which natural deformation bands nucleate, and detail the micromechanisms responsible of their formation and development. The microstructural analysis of natural structures allowed us to define the spatial distribution of PSs within the DBs, to quantify the evolution of their spatial anisotropy factor and compute both grain size and pore size distributions. We also found tiny Hertzian cracks at the grain contacts within the natural CSB, which is consistent with these structures enhancing pressure solution processes by locally decreasing the grain size. On the surface of some grains, we also observed dissolution channels developed for the leaching of fluids along pre-existing cracks, which is a further evidence that natural deformation bands formed under wet conditions. Two sets of triaxial compression experiments were carried out. Most of the deformed samples displayed a shear-enhanced compaction behavior and often showed strain hardening at the higher confining pressures. Only one of the deformed samples showed dilation at low strain rates. The comparison between wet (this study) and dry ( The petrophysical properties of the laboratory deformation bands have been studied by means of detailed microstructural analyses. We documented Hertzian cracks starting from the grain contacts, which determined the infilling of intergranular pores with fine material and enhanced particulate flow. The comminuted material promoted shear localization and discrete slip surfaces with wing cracks at their tips developed. Other cracks originated from the stiffer intraganular pores, the frequency of calcite mechanical twinning showed a positive correlation with the increasing of the confining pressure. By comparing natural and laboratory DBs we were able to constrain the pressure conditions at which natural CSBs formed (<10 MPa). It was also possible to understand the geological reasons that allowed natural CBs in Madonna della Mazza quarry to develop before CSBs. In summary, CSBs formation presents important differences among natural and laboratory conditions: i) Particulate flow, in nature, takes place without significant grain crushing; ii) grain contacts in nature have a more ductile response with respect to the laboratory experiments. Indeed By means of this study we gained new insights into the mechanisms occurring in nature and laboratory and key results to better assess the role of intergranular PSs at shallow depths. This work has been supported by the