A major obstacle to the hydrometallurgical treatment of ferromanganese slags is the way in which silica polymerisation is controlled during sulphuric acid digestion and water leaching. In an acidic medium, silica enters in solution and forms silicic acid, which polymerises into silica gel and makes solid-liquid separation difficult.
                  This article will show that the quick leach model, also called the water-starved system, limits silica solubilisation and its subsequent polymerisation during manganese extraction from ferromanganese slags by rejecting most of the ferromanganese slag silica content in the leach residue. It will further illustrate that the silica content in the residue is dependent on the acid concentration used during acid digestion. It will also show that dissolved silica in the pregnant leach solution is high when an unrestricted quantity of water is used and low when the water quantity is restricted during water leaching. Furthermore, a method for silica gel recovery from ferromanganese slag will be presented, as well as the silica gel analysis, in order to confirm the theory presented in this article.
                  Manganese extraction of up to 90% is obtained and the leach residue presents good latent hydraulic properties, which can be used as an addition to Portland cement or a gypsum replacement. More than 95% of the initial silica content of the slag is rejected in the leach residue, and a residue silica content of more than 27% is obtained. Thus, silica solubilisation and polymerisation are controlled and solid-liquid separation is accelerated.Ferromanganese slags contain silicate phases. The covalent bond between silicon and oxygen in silicates is a strong bond that cannot be easily broken by aqueous solutions ( Silicate minerals attacked with acid either gelatinise or separate into insoluble silica. Those which gelatinise are ( Those containing silicate radicals of small molecular weight, and possibly silicates containing ring structures of three silicon atoms (such as orthosilicates, pyrosilicates); Those containing large continuous silicon-oxygen networks (disilicates containing appreciable ferric iron in the silicon-oxygen sheets, and minerals of the silica type with three-dimensional networks that contain aluminium in a ratio of at least two aluminium atoms to three silicon atoms); and Those which separate into insoluble silica are characterised by silicon-oxygen structures of large dimensions that do not disintegrate into small units under acid attack, such as SiO In order to solubilise valuable silicates for metal recovery, a thermal treatment is usually required before leaching ( Silica polymerisation is a major problem during ferromanganese slag acid leaching as it makes filtration difficult afterward. This article presents techniques on how to deal with silica polymerisation, and uses the quick leach or water-starved model described by In the available literature, little is reported in terms of work focused on the leaching of ferromanganese slags in sulphuric acid in order to recover manganese values and to limit silica polymerisation. Past investigations are described elsewhere ( Silica has different degrees of crystallisation, exhibiting different solubilities in aqueous solutions. The highest degree of solubility is exhibited by amorphous silica ( Thermodynamically, in acidic solution, soluble silica is present as the monomer silicic acid Si(OH) Silica gelling is caused by the rapid polymerisation of silicic acid to form open networks. It causes dramatic increases in both plastic viscosity and yield stress that cannot be reversed by dilution. In brief, silica gel forms when silicic acid aggregates in a manner that incorporates most, if not all, of the water. The chemistry of silica gel formation can be simply represented by: The isoelectric point of colloidal silica is pH The chemistry of the quick leach is based on a water-starved system and effectively rejects silica from various silicate materials. In the case of a divalent metal silicate, such as M If water is restricted, the reaction will then be: The partially hydrated metal sulphate then further reacts with silicic acid as follows: Thus, the overall reaction is: It is said that in a water-deficient system, the sulphate produced in the reaction indicated by Eq. Manganese ferroalloys are produced by a carbothermic reduction process. This involves the reduction of manganese ores by solid carbon reductants to produce an alloy, slag and off-gas. From a slag chemistry perspective, the slag utilised in this investigation is a discard slag from high carbon ferromanganese production (HCFeMn) ( The following instruments were used for analysis: Thermo ARL9400XP spectrometer: X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis PANalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer; X-ray diffractometry (XRD) with X'celerator detector and Highscore Plus software Spectro Arcos model inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) Thermo Scientific ICE 3000 AA spectrometer Bruker QUANTAX EDS for scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The ferromanganese slags were collected from a South African ferromanganese producer's slag heap. These were obtained in a coarse form, equivalent to 3 to 5 Except when stated otherwise, the leaching method below was applied in the majority of the experiments and is the standard leaching method of this work. A 100 After ageing, the cake was broken and subjected to agitation leaching in 400 The pregnant leach solution and the insoluble leach residue were separated by filtration through the use of a pressure filter. The insoluble leach residue was washed four times on the pressure filter cloth with equal additional 400  In Based on the XRD analysis example in  The manganese content in the pregnant leach solution is high at 60 It was observed experimentally that the silica content of the leach residue, is dependent on the concentration of sulphuric acid solution used during digestion ( The extent to which silica dissolved in the pregnant leach solution was proportional to the quantity of water used during cake water leaching. In the case of a small quantity of water being used, it was found that the level of dissolved silica was also low. If an unlimited quantity of water was used, it was found that the level of dissolved silica was high, and the probability of silica polymerisation was also high. This is shown in  However, it has been observed that 70 to 80% of the silica that goes in solution does so during water leaching. Only 20 to 30% of the solubilised silica goes in solution during washing. After the fourth wash, the silica in solution is approximately zero. If low sulphuric acid solution concentrations are used during ferromanganese slag digestion, a gel is produced during cake maturation. During water leaching, if an excessive quantity of water is also used, a gel is obtained in solution after a few hours. It was also observed that leaching freshly tapped slag produces a gel more easily than slag obtained from a slag heap. The different gels obtained during the test work campaign were mixed in a beaker. The sample selected for analysis was dried at 100 The residue obtained from this test work mostly contained amorphous microsilica and calcium sulphate species. Moreover, it has already been demonstrated elsewhere ( These residues were obtained using the standard experimental conditions of this study.  The structural damage produced by sulphuric acid digestion followed by water leaching of the ferromanganese slag was also studied by SEM. As  This article shows that it is possible, using hydrometallurgical methods, to limit silica solubilisation and subsequent polymerisation during ferromanganese slag leaching, and to also produce an insoluble residue rich in silica and calcium sulphate species. It further demonstrates the way in which the silica content of the pregnant leach solution (PLS) can be minimised using the quick leach or water-starved theory by rejecting most of silica to the residue. Additionally, it confirms that, by using the reverse of the quick leach theory, silica gel can be produced from ferromanganese slags. The economic viability of the process still needs to be ascertained, in addition to the compilation of a conceptual process flow sheet, which will be addressed in future publications. We would like to acknowledge the initial financial assistance of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at