Double refractory gold ores, such as Barrick’s Goldstrike ore, contain both pyrite and carbonaceous matter and the latter results in the loss of gold from solution during cyanide leaching. One possible remedy is to roast the ore and thus oxidize the pyrite and remove the organic carbon. In this research, microwave roasting of a double refractory gold ore was investigated as an alternative method and the results were compared to those obtained by conventional roasting.
                  The compositional changes of the ore during roasting were determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Also, both the real and the imaginary permittivities, which determine the amount of energy absorbed by the ore and the heating rate of the ore respectively, were evaluated. In addition, the microwave heating behaviour was studied. Conventional and both direct and indirect microwave roasting tests were performed and in all the cases, the pyrite was readily converted into hematite. Direct microwave roasting could not remove the organic carbon. Indirect microwave roasting was conducted using magnetite as a susceptor and preg-robbing was eliminated when about 94% of the organic carbon was removed. For both conventional and indirect microwave roasting, gold recoveries of over about 98% were achieved after cyanide leaching. For microwave roasting, both the total carbon removal rates and the heating rates were higher and the specific energy consumptions were lower than the corresponding values for conventional roasting.The primary and secondary gold bearing materials can be divided into fifteen groups, based on their mineralogical characteristics ( The carbonaceous matter in the refractory gold ores may occur as hydrocarbons, humic acid and/or activated elemental carbon ( Microwaves could potentially be utilized as an alternative energy source for processing minerals. Some possible advantages of microwave heating include: rapid and in some cases, selective heating; heat is transferred and not energy; internal heating is possible, the energy source is clean; and microwave processing is compatible with continuous processing. In this paper, a brief description of the fundamental aspects of microwaves is given and this is followed by an experimental study of the microwave roasting of a double refractory gold ore. The degree of interaction of microwaves with a material depends on both the dielectric and the magnetic properties of the medium and these are described in terms of the complex permittivity ( The power absorbed by a material per unit volume ( The permittivities of most materials are a function of several variables such as; the moisture content of the material, the frequency of the applied electric field, the temperature and the density and the structure of the materials. In hygroscopic materials, the amount of water is generally a dominant factor. In relatively dry granular particulate materials, the bulk density is the most important factor. The permittivities of materials are also highly dependent on their chemical composition and particularly on the permanent dipole moments associated with any molecules in the materials. Materials can be classified based on their heating rates into four groups; hyperactive, active, difficult to heat and inactive ( A large number of studies have been performed on the interaction of microwaves with minerals and compounds ( A low-grade sample of a double refractory gold ore was obtained from Barrick Gold Strike. Two kilograms of the ore was mixed with 850 The chemical composition of the as-received ore is given in Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were performed both on the as-received ore and also after roasting for selected samples. In addition, the permittivities were measured before, during and after roasting. Also the microwave absorption characteristics of the ore were determined. A brief description of each technique is given below. The samples were attached to an aluminum stub using double-sided adhesive tape. The samples were made electrically conductive by coating with gold and then examined in a JEOL 840 SEM. TGA of the gold ore was performed on a Netzsch STA-409 up to 1000 The samples were scanned with a Philips X’Pert Pro MPD diffractometer fitted with an X’Celerator high speed strip detector. The analytical parameters were: Co Kα radiation (Fe filtered), 2 The real and imaginary permittivities of the gold ore were determined by the cavity perturbation technique ( These tests were performed in the experimental set-up described by A resistance furnace (120 The total carbon removal rate was determined by performing a series of tests at about 700 The internal dimensions of the microwave oven (Sylvania Model, SM80701) were 29 The direct microwave heating tests were performed on 50–100 Treating the 100 All the direct microwave treatments failed to eliminate preg-robbing and therefore indirect microwave processing was tested. In these roasting tests, the ore was placed in four separate small fireclay crucibles (about 20 Preg-robbing tests were performed according to the method developed by Barrick Gold Strike. For these tests, a 15 Selected 4 Examination of the as-received ore in the SEM showed that it consisted of a significant amount of relatively fine agglomerated nodular particles and some of these were on the surface of the larger material. The fine particles were irregular and had a high surface area. XRD analysis of the ore showed that the major components were quartz, dolomite, pyrite and muscovite. The TGA analysis and the calculated derivative TGA (DTGA) results are shown in From the ore analysis, the amount of organic carbon in the ore is about 1.6% and the peak from about 530 to 630 The humic acid in the ore may be decomposed over the temperature range of about 100–600 The effect of processing time on the absorbed power for various sample masses is shown in The real and the imaginary permittivities of the as-received ore as a function of temperature are shown in The humic acid in the as-received ore contains numerous functional groups such as hydroxyl ions. When the rate of decomposition of the humic acid is high, the flux of migrating hydroxyl units and other free radicals will be high and this will result in an increase in the permittivities. After the maximum flux of free radicals, which corresponds to the maximum rate of humic acid decomposition, the permittivities will decrease. Subsequently, the residual organic carbon is oxidized out of the sample and the permittivities continue to decrease until this carbon is removed. Finally, at higher temperatures, the permittivities begin to increase rapidly as the electrical conductivity increases. After roasting, the real and imaginary permittivities at 912 The typical roasting behaviour in the conventional oven at about 580  For the sample roasted at about 710   The direct application of microwaves for a 100 The changes in the total carbon and sulphur and contents of the directly microwaved samples in the ceramic crucible, for the same conditions, are shown in With direct microwave heating it was not possible to achieve the minimum temperature required for complete roasting and because of the large sample masses and thus low surface area to volume ratio, the organic carbon was not oxidized. Therefore, small amounts of the ore were treated using indirect microwave heating.  In the case of the as-received ore, the gold recovery was zero since the pyrite and the carbonaceous matter were not removed and this resulted in total preg-robbing. In all the roasting tests, the pyrite could be easily and rapidly converted into hematite and therefore the refractory problem due to the sulphidic nature was eliminated. Consequently, the preg-robbing was due only to the presence of the organic carbon.  The calculated heating rates in the direct and indirect microwaved and conventional roasting processes required to achieve a sample temperature of 500 The microwave roasting of a double refractory gold ore was investigated. The TGA results showed that the three major reactions involved in the roasting process were; oxidation of pyrite, oxidation of the carbonaceous matter and the decomposition of carbonates. Both the real and the imaginary permittivities of the ore were relatively low but, in general, increased with increasing temperature. After roasting, the room temperature permittivities decreased to extremely low values and this was attributed to the removal of water, the carbonaceous matter and the conversion of pyrite to hematite. With direct microwave heating, the temperature of the ore increased with mass, time and energy input. However, because of the poor microwave absorption, large sample masses are required and this reduces the surface area to volume ratio and thus oxidation of the organic carbon was not possible. Therefore, direct microwave roasting was not feasible. Using magnetite as a susceptor, indirect microwave roasting was tested, preg-robbing was eliminated and gold recoveries were over about 98%. In conventional roasting, the organic carbon could be eliminated at temperatures below that at which the carbonate carbon was removed. However, in the indirect microwave system, in contrast to conventional heating, the heating was not uniform and thus it was necessary to remove some carbon from the dolomite in order to eliminate all of the organic carbon. For microwave roasting, both the total carbon removal rate and the heating rate were higher and the specific energy consumptions were lower than the corresponding values for conventional roasting. For all the roasting processes, the sulphide sulphur was readily eliminated. The authors greatly acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for providing the financial support. Barrick Gold Strike is thanked for providing the samples and in-kind support for this project.