The influence of storage and production on the reactivity, i.e. the slaking rate of lime in water, has been investigated. It was found that hard burning of the lime during calcinations dramatically decreases its reactivity, as does storing under humid conditions. It also seemed that air rehydration during storage precedes recarbonation and there is evidence to show that the former process catalyses the latter one.Lime is one of the most widely used and cheapest alkalising agents employed worldwide. It is often applied in chemical processes in a slaked or calcium hydroxide slurry form. Limestone is calcined to produce unslaked lime, which is then slaked by the reaction with water to produce the calcium hydroxide slurry. The calcium hydroxide species is the desired final product and its production is closely linked to the process of limestone calcination and subsequent storage. It can therefore not be viewed in isolation as only the reaction of calcium oxide with water. During calcinations of limestone to produce lime, carbon dioxide is released from the material. This caused the calcined lime to have a porous structure. The aim of the production process is to produce such a soft burnt lime with a porous microstructure that will react easily with water and possess a high reactivity. If, however, the calcining temperature is too high or residence time in the kiln is too long, the calcium oxide particles can become partially sintered together and result in a less porous structure. This material will allow less access to water that it comes into contact with and consequently it will not slake as well as the soft burnt material. The lime is then classified as hard burnt or dead burnt. Conversely, if the calcining temperature is too low or the residence time in the kiln is too short, the calcinations process will be incomplete and this will also produce a low reactivity lime. The lime produced during the calcinations process is a thermodynamically unstable product. It therefore reacts with any vapour present in the atmosphere to partly or completely form a thin layer of calcium hydroxide on the outside of the lime particles. It also has a tendency to reconvert back into limestone via reaction with carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Both these reactions occur after production and mostly during the storage period before the lime is used and this will consequently also influence the slaking behaviour of the lime ( The slaking process can be studied in various ways. The experimental procedure used has been described in detail in an earlier communication ( The effect of hard burning was simulated by heating the lime after the initial calcining period of 1 h at 950 °C for additional times as indicated in The data in It is often observed that lime undergoes air-slaking and recarbonation after calcining, especially during periods of prolonged storage and in particular under humid atmospheric conditions. It is conceivable that during these processes a thin “skin” of calcium hydrate and/or calcium carbonate that can impair the slaking of the lime forms on the surface of the lime particles. Calcium carbonate can potentially also be present in the final product if the residence time in the kiln was too short to ensure complete calcinations. To simulate this, calcium carbonate, calcium hydroxide and combinations of both were added to lime samples before their slaking was evaluated. The results obtained are graphically represented in From the data shown in the graph, it can be deduced that the occurrence of both air-slaking and recarbonation reduces the slaking rate of lime, with the former having a more pronounced effect than the latter. When these processes occur simultaneously and result in the presence of both calcium carbonate and calcium hydroxide compounds in the lime, the combined effect is somewhere between the two individual contributions. The same phenomenon was investigated under real life conditions by exposing unslaked lime to ambient atmospheric conditions for varying time intervals during the summer time (rainy season). The observed drop in the rate of slaking observed during this period of 10 days is shown in The curve in the graph above seems to consist of two nearly linear portions. The first linear portion probably corresponds to the formation of Ca(OH) The effect of storage time on the change of the available lime content before and after slaking is summarised in The numbers presented in The slaking rate of lime is influenced significantly by production and storage conditions. Both hard burning as well as air-slaking and recarbonation significantly decrease the slakeability of the lime. Air-slaking has a more dramatic effect than recarbonation on the slaking rate of lime and the former seems to precede and catalyse the latter. Regardless of the rate at which the lime slakes, it seems that the amount that eventually slakes stays approximately the same.