The research work presented in this paper determined the conditions at which nickel and cobalt can be recovered, as easily filterable precipitates, from leach liquors, which are produced by sulphuric acid leaching of nickel oxide ores, at atmospheric pressure. More specifically, nickel and cobalt were precipitated as hydroxides at pH=9, using MgO pulp as a neutralizing agent, by 99.9% and 99.0%, respectively. At this pH value, manganese, which was contained in the leach liquor, was precipitated having a concentration of about 3% in the final mixed precipitate. Statistical design and analysis of experiments were used in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the precipitation factors, which were the pH at equilibrium and the addition of seed material. The characterization of the produced mixed precipitate was carried out by X-ray diffraction, TG–DTA, scanning electron and optical microscopy and particle size distribution analyzer. The main mineralogical phases in the precipitate were theophrastite (Ni(OH)2) and brucite (Mg(OH)2). The microscopic observation revealed that the presence of brucite was, mainly, due to the un-reacted MgO pulp, during the precipitation process. This brucite content acted as seed material for nickel precipitation.A novel integrated hydrometallurgical method has been developed and patented in order to treat low-grade nickel oxide ores efficiently and economically. It involves heap leaching of the ore by dilute sulphuric acid at ambient temperature, purification of the leach liquors and recovery of nickel and cobalt by solvent extraction and electrowinning ( A typical composition of the pregnant solution produced from heap leaching of Greek low-grade nickeliferous laterites with sulphuric acid is the following: Ni An alternative process for the nickel and cobalt recovery comprises their precipitation as hydroxides. These precipitates can be either further treated in refineries or fed into converters of nickel pyrometallurgical plants. The present paper presents the results of a research study involving the recovery of nickel and cobalt from purified heap leach liquors by hydrolytic precipitation, using MgO pulp as a neutralizing agent. Currently, hydrometallurgical processing of laterite ores consists of high-pressure acid leach (HPAL) where the ore is leached in H Precipitation is a physical–chemical process, in which soluble metals and inorganics are converted to relatively insoluble metal and inorganic salts (precipitates) by the addition of a precipitating agent. Most often, an alkaline reagent is used to raise the solution pH to lower the solubility of the metallic constituent, and, thus, bring about precipitation. For example, using lime as the precipitating agent to lower the amount of soluble nickel, by forming nickel hydroxide precipitate (“s” denotes solid precipitate) creates the following reaction ( Precipitates, which are small or colloidal, are then coagulated, flocculated, settled, clarified, or filtered out of solution, leaving a lower concentration of metals and inorganics in the effluent. Chemical precipitation depends on several variables, including: Maintenance of a proper pH range throughout the precipitation reaction and subsequent settling time. Addition of a sufficient excess of treatment ions (precipitating agent) to drive the precipitation reaction to completion. Effective removal of precipitated solids. The precipitation of nickel and cobalt hydroxide by alkali addition is not very selective or without processing difficulties. Therefore, conditions must be optimized to reduce impurity uptake and improve settling characteristics. A number of studies have been performed to determine the conditions of Ni(OH) The hydroxides of Ni(II) and Co(II) are known to crystallize in two polymorphic modifications known as α and β ( According to One of the most important factors affecting the precipitation process is the nature of the neutralizing agent. Lime, magnesium hydroxide, caustic, or a blend of these alkaline compounds can be used as a source of hydroxide ions for precipitation of metal hydroxides. Advantages and disadvantages of each of these reagents should be considered in the selection of a system for a particular application. For example, caustic is more expensive than lime, but the cost of chemical feed systems for lime slurry can be substantially more expensive than for caustic. Lime and magnesium hydroxide tend to reduce sludge leachability and break metal complexes that may be present in the wastewater stream ( The nickel and cobalt precipitation reaction involves the creation of a solid precipitate surface from a homogeneous solution, and the initiation of such reactions can be kinetically slow. The presence of nickel/cobalt seed would be expected to eliminate the induction period and to promote the rate of nickel/cobalt precipitation. Consequently, the presence of adequate amounts of the above seed is expected to accelerate the precipitation reaction, produce coarser, more filterable precipitates and suppress undesirable side reactions. The present research work aimed at the recovery of nickel and cobalt by chemical precipitation, from purified heap leach liquors, using MgO as a neutralizing agent. Factorial design of experiments and statistical analysis of the data were used to determine the main effects and interactions of the chosen factors and select the optimum conditions. The factors studied were equilibrium pH and seed addition. The resulting mixed precipitate was investigated by particle size distribution analyzer, X-ray diffraction, TG–DTA, scanning electron microscopy and optical microscopy. The initial aqueous phase was a pregnant solution, produced from heap leaching of Greek nickel oxide ores with dilute sulphuric acid. The iron, aluminium and chromium content were practically eliminated from the solutions by chemical precipitation at elevated temperature and atmospheric pressure. The solution contained 0.16 The precipitation of nickel and cobalt was conducted in 1 The pH of the solution was measured using a METTLER 465-50-T-S7 combined pH electrode, specially designed for semi-solid solutions. The pH was slowly raised to a pre-determined equilibrium value, by adding the neutralizing agent. It should be emphasized that, during the precipitation process, the pH increase rate was kept low in order to control supersaturation of nickel and cobalt and avoid the production of an amorphous precipitate. At the end of the runs, the content of the reactor was filtered under vacuum. The resulting precipitates were washed with water by re-pulping, dried overnight at 110 The precipitate obtained as described above was analyzed chemically as well as mineralogically by X-ray diffraction (XRD), using a Siemens D5000 diffractometer with nickel-filtered Cu Kα TG/DTA analysis was conducted with a Setaram–Labsys thermal analyzer. Type S-thermocouple is used for temperature measurements in this instrument. The sample was placed in a ceramic crucible and heated from room temperature to 700 The morphology of the precipitate was also examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Jeol 6100 scanning electron microscope. Experimental conditions involved 10 Optical microscopy was performed in thin sections. Thin sections were produced by vacuum impregnation, of the selected sample, with epoxy resin, followed by cutting, grinding, and polishing, until a final thickness of 20 Finally, the particle size distribution of the produced precipitate was measured by a Cilas-Model 1064 laser scattering particle size distribution analyzer. An amount of 0.1 Preliminary runs were conducted, using a synthetic solution, to draw the precipitation curves of nickel and cobalt as a function of pH, by the addition of MgO pulp (20%) as neutralizing agent. The solution contained 4.5 Factorial design and analysis of experiments were used in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the precipitation factors ( stirring speed initial cobalt concentration initial nickel concentration initial manganese concentration initial magnesium concentration temperature neutralizing agent The main responses under investigation were the percentages of cobalt and nickel precipitation. The precipitation percentages of cobalt, nickel and manganese, as well as the reaction times are given in As can be seen in To study the main effects and interactions of the factors on the nickel and cobalt precipitation, a Yates’ analysis and an analysis of variance were carried out on the percentages of Ni Regarding nickel precipitation, the main effects Regarding cobalt precipitation ( Based on the statistical analysis of the results, the optimum conditions determined for the simultaneous nickel and cobalt precipitation from sulphate solution are: equilibrium pH The particle size distribution of the produced precipitate is given in The X-ray diffraction data of the produced precipitate, using MgO pulp as neutralizing agent, shown in From the study of The results of the mineralogical analysis by X-ray diffraction were also confirmed by electron microscopic observations. Nickel hydroxides were detected with the form of fine aggregates, where as magnesium hydroxide with the form of large crystals. As shown in The present experimental work has shown that nickel and cobalt can be quantitatively precipitated, at ambient temperature, as an easily filterable material. The precipitation of nickel and cobalt by 99.9% and 99%, correspondingly, was accomplished by gradually raising the initial pH of the leach liquor to a value of 9.0, at such a rate as to keep supersaturation of nickel and cobalt as low as possible, within a practical period of time. At those conditions, manganese precipitation reached 80%. The addition of seed material had a positive effect on the efficiency of precipitation. The composition of the mixed precipitate at the optimum conditions of precipitation was 25% Ni, 1.5% Co, 3% Mn and 26% Mg. The main mineralogical phases of the mixed precipitate were Ni(OH)