Softwood bark is an important souce of biomass, extractive compounds and value-added products. The comminution of larch (Larix decidua Mill.), Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) and spruce (Picea abies) bark planks is examined in this study, to give an overview of how to apply this knowledge for upcycled products made of bark, especially for bark-based composites. At the moment there is no specific industrial technology for size reduction of tree bark for advanced use in various compounds. Four crushing systems commonly used for other materials (e.g. mineral ores, plastic, wood, biomass) were scrutinized: crusher with sound waves, friction plate mill, 4-shaft shredder and drum chipper. Performance of equipment, sound and dust generation during operation, aspect, grain size and possible applications of the bark particles were analysed. The end product and the processes were assessed on a 1–10 scale. All three bark species fractionated well and with relative similar fraction yield profile. The yield of fine-grained particles was low and the major fractions were larger particles, i.e. from 1% to 20% of grains under 0.5 mm and from 17% to 100% of particles >4 mm. The 4-shaft shredder was the most appropriate tool for crushing the bark planks at industrial capacity. The ground particles cover a broad area of applications, from mulch to insulation or decorative panels.Comminution is a technique applied in various industries, included also in daily human household activities ( Engineered wood particles are manufactured using various machines. In the case of wood particles or chips, the hogs, chippers and attrition mills are employed for reducing larger pieces. Smaller particles or fine grained can be produced with hammer mills, attrition mills and ring mills. Flakes or strands production involves the use of knife ring flakers, disc flakers and drum flakers. For wood wool products are used excelsior discs or reciprocating machines ( Tree bark, a by-product of the wood industry, which covers stem, branches and roots, defends the cambium and impedes the loss of water. After debarking, it yields a large amount of bark, considered as ligno-cellulosic waste ( Around 3.6 × 10 For more than four decades, various wood bark products were used for: wadding for particleboards (  To obtain the aimed particle size of bark for these distinctive panels or products it was necessary to identify the best grinding method on laboratory scale for bark planks but also with implementation on industrial scale. Analysing the state-of-the-art on tree bark composites, only one comminution type is used for each research study. Some of the technologies are developed mostly for the breakdown of wood or fertilizer materials. Hammer mill was used for the size reduction of bark for the manufacture of particleboards with bark mixtures ( This paper presents the assessment of four comminution processes for larch bark ( The pine and spruce bark were supplied by the Zwickl Holz GmbH in Schrems (Lower Austria) and the larch bark by Zwickl Sawmill in Jemnice (Czech Republic). Preliminary tests ( The content of moisture was calculated using a formula as follows:Where m.c. (%) is the moisture content, m Four grinding technologies at semi-industrial scale were tested to find out the best method to obtain, with minimal costs (production equipment, process), the best granulation of the tree bark for the planned research. Similar sizes of feed particles were used for each type of crushing system ( After crushing of bark, according to The comminution with EcoPulser machines from Krause Maschinenbau company (Oberrainer Feld, Ostermünchen, Germany) is made with two interlocking turbines and shovel-like wheels, which are run recirpocatingly and generate sound waves, which overlap and produce positive and negative pressure ( This technique is used for energy-efficient fine grinding of mineral ores. In the case of organic materials, fibers are separated from each other to a certain extent, but are preserved largely in their length ( The friction plate mill RPM 150 from Rematec company (Furth, Dietersburg, Germany) is designed to grind wet woodchips and ensures a new efficient way of particle reduction ( The working principle of friction grinding is based on the result of kinetic crush of ductile supported hammers and abrasion at customized produced plates on the housing. The ground material is homogenous, with a low level of dust, that leads to an easier drying process ( The engine power of this friction plate mill runs at 30 kW, with an output of 5–45 m³/h ( To break down the material, the stator is provided with friction plates, that slow down the material by means of grooves. The material is transported with a screw conveyor and passes radially towards the inner lower part of the machine. The processing time is carefully measured, with a positive effect on service life and energy consumption of the friction plate mill ( The 4-shaft RS40 shredder from Untha company (Kuchl, Austria) has a broad application range, from metal shavings, plastic containers, textiles, car bumpers, production waste to packaging materials (also wood) ( The increased productivity of shredding is given by the high torque, combined with a large punctured separating surface. When foreign objects are forced in, the RS40 automatically shuts down, to avoid the destruction of the cutting unit. Pre-shredding and the post-shredding occur in one step due to the special geometry of the cutting shafts ( Another crushing system tested was FKTH 200–500, produced by the Fleissner-Karré company (Spittal an der Drau, Austria). This drum chipper is used for a broad range of materials. The case is very sturdy and designed for maximum stress. The flow-through rotor is energy-saving and has a high throughput ( In this section are presented detailed observations about the comminution processes and analysis of particle size distribution for larch, pine and spruce bark, with tabulated results based on the assessment scale and performance of the end product and the grinding techniques. Preliminary size reduction (<60 mm) with drum chipper FKTH 250–500 was carried out before the bark (larch, pine and spruce) was ground with sound waves. The larch bark breaks down flakily, due to its thickness ( The process was rated with 9 points and the material with 7 points ( 8 kg of pine bark (grain size 25–60 mm) with a moisture content of 71% was crushed using a sound waves system, resulting in granular particles with fibous content. During the process the noise was noticeable and only a little amount of dust was generated. 49% of the comminuted particles are >4 mm and 24% between 2 and 4 mm ( By breaking down 10 kg spruce bark (20–50 mm) with 131% moisture content there was no dust produced. During this procedure the level of noise was low. The spruce grains are coarse, fibrous and lumpy. 54.5% are >4 mm and 15.5% between 2 and 4 mm ( Prior to breaking down, the grain size of larch bark was 10–100 mm and its moisture content 56%. The bark planks (23 kg) were reduced to particles. The noise level was very low, as well as the vibrations. The dust amount increased and, as a consequence, the results had a high variability. This dust was not sucked off and was delivered together with the crushed material. The grain amount between 2 and 4 mm was 26% and between 1 and 2 mm 24.5% ( The pine bark wedges weighing 21 kg, with a grain size from 10 to 100 mm and a moisture content of 89% entered the friction plate mill. The silent process, low in vibration, rated with 8 points, returned lumpy and fibrous material, so the product was appraised with 9 points. 39% of the ground particles are >4 mm and 27% between 2 and 4 mm ( No noise or dust generation occurred during the breaking down of 20 kg spruce bark, with a grain size from 10 to 100 mm, due to the high moisture content (132%). The process was rated at 8 points. The end product of the spruce bark comminution with friction plate mill achieved the same number of 8 points, due to the fibrous and lumpy aspect. The percentage of fine-grained particles (<0.5 mm) was 44% and 24% for the grain size 2–4 mm ( For this trial, an RS40 four-shaft shredder was employed, with a 15 mm perforated screen. The amount of larch bark was about 15 kg, grain size was approximately 100 mm and its moisture content 68%. The larch bark was crushed directly after debarking, which made the pre-shredding unnecessary. The noise level was hardly detectable. Due to the high moisture content of the bark, there was almost no dust. The shredded larch bark from Untha Co. is one of the best materials that is suitable for upcycling applications in bark-based composites. The pine bark (12 kg) with 74% moisture content and a grain size up to 100 mm was crushed directly after debarking with no preliminary size reduction. The process was silent, not dust was generated, but it took longer compared with crushing with sound waves or friction plate mill. The grain size >4 mm was in a proportion of 52.5% from the total amount and the fraction between 1 and 2 mm was 11% ( Reduced noise level and no dust generation of 20 kg spruce bark with a grain size of 100 mm with 132% moisture content were observed during processing with 4-shaft shredder RS 40 (Untha). The granular and fibrous material was up to 15 mm. Due to the relative uniform particle size distribution, easy and straightforward process, 9 points were assigned for the operation, while the product was rated with 10 points, with no dust contained in the fine fraction. The material was shredded directly after debarking. 29.8% of the particles were >4 mm, 21.5% between 2 and 4 mm and 20% < 0.5 mm ( In this experiment the fractionation of particles was not necessary because the drum has a mesh width of 4 mm. The larch bark entered the drum chipper FKTH 200–500 (Fleissner-Karré) with a grain size of 40 mm size and a moisture content of 100%. The weight was about 20 kg. The experiment was very quiet with a minimum level of vibration. No dust was generated. For this experiment, the process was rated with 8 points, the material with 9 points ( 10 kg of pine bark with a moisture content of 100% and 50 mm particle size were ground. The process was silent and no dust was observed. The very quick process was rated with 8 points and the material with 9 points, due to the uniformity of the granules. In case of spruce, 20 kg with 132% moisture content and with a 50 mm granulation were chipped during a quiet and dust-free operation. The simple process was appraised with 8 points, due to the high knife wear caused by the contaminated bark (high degree of dirt). The product was assessed with 10 points; the bark contained a low amount of fine grained particles (<0.5 mm). A short overview of the particle size distribution depending on shredding system is shown in The amount of fine grained particles (<0.5 mm) ranged from 1% to 20%. The lowest quantity was recorded for the particle size 0.5–1 mm (1–17%). A percentage of 5–27.5% of grains was measured for the interval 1–2 mm. The sizes 2–4 mm were included in the interval from 5.5 to 27% of the spectrum and the coarse-grained particles varied from 17% to 100%.  In the present work, particle size reduction of larch, pine and spruce bark was analysed. Impulse flaker, friction plate mill, 4-shaft shredder and drum chipper were employed to break down the biomass material. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first attempt to investigate the performance of comminution technologies for tree bark with devices designed to crush other materials. . Particles, of sizes 0.0–0.5 mm, 0.5–1.0 mm, 1.0–2.0 mm, 2.0–4.0 mm and >4.0 mm, were investigated. Different upcycled goods can be obtained by superior capitalization of bark biomass. The lumpy structure of shredded material is of great importance for most of the added-value applications of the bark. The scale from 0.0 to 0.5 mm is designated for the bark dust, that can be mixed with wood particles to improve the quality of internal bonding and thickness swelling of particleboards or for the determination of the bark extracts. The bark particles of sizes 0.5–5.0 mm are suitable for the wear layers of floorings and in mixtures for core and face layers for particleboards. The same particle size of bark can be used as an adsorbent and remover of toxic ions from wastewater. The particle size from 6 to 10 mm is suitable for insulating panels and ligno-cellulosic composites: For loose bark insulation is recommended the fraction 8–30 mm. In the case of pallet blocks the appropriate particle size ranges between 15 and 35 mm. All these bark particle sizes can be produced with the systems described in this study. With an impulse flaker, the bark can be used as mulch or decorative boards. Preliminary size reduction was necessary. In the case of friction plate mill, the larch grains can be recommended as biomass for energy generation. The pine particles constitute raw material for added value products. The drum chipper generates homogenous material for decorative and insulation boards. Mulch is also a feasible end product. The end-size of the grains is predictable when using a 4-shaft shredder, so this is the most appropriate technology to produce a broad spectrum of upgraded products made of bark. Removing the impurities from raw materials that are crushed should be considered, otherwise these impurities can mix with the chipped bark and could affect the ability to use the product and may cause more rapid wear of tools. As for future development, bark fibres generating will be considered.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by Krause Maschinenbau, Tuntenhausen, Germany; Rematec GmbH, Dietersburg, Germany; Untha shredding technology GmbH, Kuchl, Austria and Fleiβner & Karré GmbH, Spittal an der Drau, Austria and Zwickl Holz GmbH, Raabs, Austria, Sägewerk Zwickl, Schrems, Austria and dr. Vincent Abbott, MSc, United Kingdom.