The design and the motion behaviour of the filling of a new centrifugal tube mill are introduced. In contrast to the usual range of application for centrifugal tube mills, once developed to substitute ball mills, it is shown that centrifugal tube mills are particularly suited for pulverizing if the grinding media filling is reduced to max. 35%. This measure also reduced the connected load by up to 50%. Based on a developed mechanical model, it is possible to calculate the energy consumption in advance. The throughput, energy demand and maximum solid volume fraction regarding the particle size distribution are determined with the help of crushing tests on limestone and quartz. The resulting energy density of approx. 0.2 kW/l places the machine in the category of slow stirred media mills. The main advantage of the centrifugal tube mill is seen in the renunciation of agitators, trouble-free suspension discharge as well as the renunciation of cooling devices. Mentioned examples for a successful application of the centrifugal tube mill, available in an industrial scale size, are the milling of asbestos waste, anthracites, organic pigments and silicon carbides and nitrides.In principal, two kinds of mill designs are used for milling in a centrifugal field. One principle is that of the planetary mill, the other one that of the centrifugal tube mill. In case of planetary mills, several grinding drums (2, 3, or 4) arranged like planets rotate around their own axis as well as around a common axis. The radius of the planetary system is larger than that of the grinding drums. The machine is therefore also called a centrifugal mill with long swivels. The centrifugal tube mill is characterized by a grinding drum and a short swivel. It rotates around a fixed axis of rotation, where the distance of the drum axis from the rotation axis is smaller than the radius D/2 of the grinding drum. Since there is no additional rotation of the mill itself, the angular frequency of the grinding tube is equal to the inverse angular frequency of the drive; the feasible accelerations are therefore below 20 g. This publication features a modified centrifugal tube mill, designed and operated at the Institute for Processing and Disposal Technology of the Clausthal University of Technology. If based on the classification of the criteria of the external kinematics, the centrifugal tube mill falls into the category of vibratory tube mills: in both cases, the grinding tube describes a circular path. Nonetheless, the internal kinematics and kinetics of the mentioned mills are very different ( In the middle of the 1980s, The Lurgi centrifugal mill developed in 1980/1981 uses a degree of grinding media filling of Our investigations have shown that, contrary to previous knowledge, pulverization with the centrifugal tube mill is possible, if the degree of filling with grinding media is limited to approx. 35% ( Based on the cinematographic investigations of the centrifugal tube mill ( If one looks at the moving system ( In Eq. The first term of Eq. Two years ago, we carried out investigations on the use of the centrifugal tube mill for wet pulverizing for particle size ranges of The centrifugal tube mill is a single-tube mill with a grinding tube length of 2200 mm and a diameter of 350 mm, which describes a defined oscillatory circuit of 150 mm at a frequency of 350 min The test has shown that at continuous operation, the suspension is best discharged radially via a discharge chamber. The central discharge via a hinge shaft ( The material to be ground is fed to the mill by means of a pump via a conditioning tank, where grinding aids may be added, if necessary. Between the discharge chamber and the grinding chamber is a split washer, adapted in size to the corresponding grinding media, which holds them back. In order to guarantee a continuous discharge of the suspension, a forced suction section via a second pump intended, requiring ventilation of the grinding tube. Due to the extreme fineness of the products, a subsequent compartment-type filter press for dewatering showed to be useful during the test run. The test mill was used for grinding tests with throughputs between 100 and 400 kg/h. At a grinding chamber volume of only 220 l, the average residence time of the suspension at 35% grinding media filling and a volume flow rate of 270 l/h was approximately 5 min. To cover a hardness range between 3 and 7, the following test materials were used: Limestone <200 μm (Omya) Quartz <200 μm (Quarzwerke Frechen) The variables were: Throughput [kg/h] Solid volume fraction [%] Grinding media size and type [mm, zirconium silicate, steel] Revolutions and dispersion agent additive [min To evaluate the results of the grinding, the particle size distribution, the energy input and the fluidity of the grinding products were measured. All results shown were achieved at continuous operation and a single pass. Samples were taken at regular intervals. A stable state was generally achieved after 45 min of testing. The following charts show the results after a grinding time of 60 min. Exemplary the grinding results of limestone will be presented in the following. The tests with limestone are of special interest, because of the extensive knowledge about this raw material regarding the grinding behaviour in agitator ball mills ( The pulverizing of limestone requires the use of grinding aids, since due to the high viscosity at high solid contents and increasing fineness, fluidity can no longer be guaranteed. The concentration of grinding aids was between 0.1% and 0.6%.  The systematic connection between the specific energy input and the possible   Therefore, the introduced mechanical model for the internal kinematics and kinetics cannot only be used to estimate the specific energy demand but it can also be used for a rough energy balancing of the centrifugal tube mill. The technical meaning of the centrifugal tube mill for practical application is in the field of production of raw and chemical materials with high added value. The following grinding results of a Dioxazine pigment (Violet 23) will serve as an example ( Suspensions of the Violet 23 were treated in the centrifugal mill in several pulverizing cycles. The grinding results were checked by determining the X-ray index. The subject of evaluation is the decrease in the X-ray intensity at one lattice plane (2 The specific energy demand was determined to be 2750 kW h/t; the achieved X-ray index is 2.8. Another test method applied is transmission electron microscopy (TEM). In A comparison of the data from ongoing processing with stirred ball mills shows that the use of centrifugal tube mill can decrease the energy demand by 30% at equal grinding results. In addition, the wear of the grinding media can be reduced by approx. 25% when using steel balls (0.2–0.4 mm). This last effect is to be expected due to the lack of mountings inside the centrifugal mill and due to the lower degree of filling with grinding media. The presented grinding tests allow the derivation of a general energy density of ca. 0.2 kW/l for the centrifugal tube mill. A comparison with the energy density of agitator ball mills, Attritors and ball mills ( The following arguments result in favour of the centrifugal tube mill: robust design, indirect energy input into the grinding media filling, no fixed installations inside the grinding chamber, flawless discharge of the ground suspension over the entire mill diameter, substitution of water cooling with air cooling. Apart from the described grinding tests with limestone and quartz, there are also experiences with the centrifugal milling of asbestos-containing waste ( The above-mentioned investigations clearly show that the centrifugal tube mills can claim the same grinding range as the agitator ball mill. This approach of using the centrifugal tube mill for special tasks in the field of pulverization offers much better perspectives than the approach by Lurgi, since machine sizes are much easier to handle. The current investigations are based on concrete industrial applications in the ceramic and chemical industries.