Electrospraying is renowned for its simplicity and versatility, and which can effectively produce particles with well-controlled size, size distribution, particle shape, morphology and microstructure at the nano/microscale. In this study, coaxial electrospraying was used to investigate its feasibility for preparing nanoparticles made up of nanocrystals encapsulated within a polymer shell. Firstly, aqueous nanosuspensions of darunavir were prepared by wet media milling. Then the nanosuspension and solutions of an enteric polymer, Eudragit L100, were used as the inner/core liquid and outer/shell liquid in a coaxial electrospraying setup, respectively. As long as a sufficiently high voltage was applied, a stable Taylor cone-jet mode was obtained to produce very fine core-shell structure nanoparticles with high darunavir encapsulation efficiency of approximately 90%. The influence of the starting nanosuspension and the flow rates on the characteristics of the final electrosprayed particles was also evaluated. Using an optimized nanosuspension with reasonable size, size distribution and flow rates, the enteric coating layer reduced the percentage of DRV release in acidic medium in the in vitro dissolution test to ca. 20%. This study indicates that coaxial electrospraying is a potential and unique technique for encapsulating drug nanocrystals within a polymeric shell.Due to advanced technologies in high throughput screening, combinatorial chemistry and computer-aided drug design, a great number of new chemical entities with promising efficacy are being generated. However, a large proportion of these potential active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) are poorly water soluble However, nanosuspensions have their own drawback regarding long-term physical stability. The nanoscale size is responsible for a higher surface energy of the system. Spontaneous agglomeration and Ostwald ripening are characteristic for such nanosystems, hence adequate surface stabilization is required and can be accomplished by using formulation ingredients that favor electrostatic repulsion between charged surfaces or induce steric hindrance A possible solution to overcome the problems posed by the large and highly energetic surface area of the nanoparticles is an effective encapsulation. This is also in particular interesting for drinkable solid dosage forms of nanosuspensions that are far more preferable, especially for children and elderly patients compared to common parenteral dosage forms which are intended for intravenous, subcutaneous or intramuscular administration. The dried encapsulated nanocrystals can be reconstituted into a drinkable nanosuspension once they are exposed to drinks like fruit juice, water or even to yoghurt. Depending on the properties of the encapsulating shell, nanocrystals will not dissolve in the drink, but in the stomach or at a specific site in the gastrointestinal tract for optimized drug absorption and consequently, better bioavailability. A possible encapsulation route is the use of electrospraying that is renowned for its versatility and easy build-up/installation with low investment, which can effectively produce particles with well-controlled size, size distribution, particle shape, morphology and microstructure at the nano/microscale The poorly soluble drug model used in this study was darunavir (DRV), a second-generation protease inhibitor (PI) for treatment of infections with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). DRV nanocrystals are first prepared by wet media milling and subsequently encapsulated within Eudragit L100, an enteric polymer, using a coaxial electrospraying setup. The encapsulated DRV nanocrystal particles are one part of an ‘advanced’ fixed dose combination with ritonavir (RTV). The rationale to develop an ‘advanced’ fixed dose combination is to overcome concurrent release of both drugs from the same dosage form since both compounds influence each other’s solubility and supersaturation behavior Darunavir, in the form of darunavir ethanolate was obtained from Cilag AG (Zug, Switzerland). Poloxamer 338 and poloxamer 188 were generous gifts from Janssen Pharmaceutica (Beerse, Belgium). Tween 20 and Tween 80 were purchased from Fagron (Waregem, Belgium). Eudragit L100 was obtained from Degussa Rohm GmbH (Darmstadt, Germany). Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 2910 5 An aqueous nanosuspension of DRV was prepared by wet media milling. Several types of stabilizers such as Tween 20, Tween 80, HPMC, poloxamer 338 or 188, vitamin E TPGS 1000 or 400, and SLS were chosen for screening. The preparation of nanosuspensions involved two steps. Firstly, stabilizer solutions were prepared by dissolving the required amount of stabilizer in purified water to obtain the desired concentration (2.5% w/v). An exact amount of 1 The core-shell nano/microparticles of DRV nanocrystals were prepared by electrospraying using a two-concentric stainless steel nozzle (COAX_2DISP, Linari Engineering, Italy). The coaxial electrospray setup is illustrated in The encapsulation efficiency (EE), the ratio of the mass of DRV effectively entrapped in the core of the particles to the total mass of drug available, was determined as follows: 1 An accurately weighed amount of the electrosprayed particles (30–40 DRV nanocrystals (in the aqueous nanosuspension) and the nano/microparticles of encapsulated DRV nanocrystals (after electrospraying) in initial formulations (particles in collected suspension as such), after lyophilization as well as after dissolution testing in acidic medium were analyzed with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Phillips XL30 SEM-FEG (Eindhoven, The Netherlands) equipped with an Schottky field-emission electron gun) to evaluate the influence of the processes on morphology changes. SEM pictures were recorded using a beam of 15 DLS was used to investigate the average particle size as well as the particle size distribution (the polydispersity index) of the samples. Light scattering measurements were performed at a fixed angle of 90° on a CGS-3 spectrometer (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK), equipped with a goniometer, a uniphase 22 The nanosuspensions or electrosprayed samples (after lyophilization) were placed between two Kapton® polyimide films (Chemplex® Industries Inc., Florida, USA) mounted to a sample holder plate. Measurements were performed on an automated X’pert PRO diffractometer (PANalytical, Almelo, the Netherlands) with a Cu X-ray radiation source (K DSC measurements were performed on a Q2000 DSC (TA Instruments, Leatherhead, U.K.), equipped with the refrigerated cooling system (RCS90) accessory under a dry nitrogen purge at a flow rate of 50 Successful electrospraying is possible if a stable Taylor cone-jet mode is obtained because this is the best reproducible and easily controllable electrospraying operating mode with highly efficient production of monodispersed micro- or nanoparticles A solid content of drug was fixed to 10% (w/v) as higher concentrations resulted in jamming of the suspension particles when pumped through the small aperture of the used nozzle during electrospraying. Also a fixed ratio of drug to stabilizer (4–1 As the objective of the study was to investigate the feasibility of encapsulating nanocrystals within a carrier/polymer by coaxial electrospraying, a solution of Eudragit L100 (3% w/v) was pumped through the outer channel of the coaxial nozzle, whereas the nanosuspensions of DRV (10% w/v) using Tween 20 or Tween 80 as stabilizers were pumped through the inner channel of the coaxial nozzle. Based on our previous study The morphological changes of ‘as-received’ DRV after milling and electrospraying evaluated by SEM are presented in Since the electrosprayed particles were collected in a bath of 0.1% SLS solution (pH Another investigation at this stage was to use mannitol, a commonly used crystalline bulking agent, to obtain an aesthetically elegant cake structure with good mechanical properties after lyophilization As the drug release during the dissolution test in acidic medium was ca. 30%, which does not satisfy the required specifications for an enteric coating formulation, a more complete encapsulation of DRV nanocrystals within Eudragit L100 by electrospraying is essential. Based on the first results, it seems that the quality of the nanosuspension (particle size or size distribution) used for electrospraying is an important input for successful drug encapsulation during electrospraying. Moreover, the ratio of flow rates of the core/shell fluids obviously has a significant influence on the microstructure of the core-shell particles (e.g. the thickness of the polymeric shell). Therefore, two approaches with regard to optimization of nanosuspension formulation and the electrospraying process were applied to improve the acidic resistance of the electrosprayed particles. In the first series of experiments, the influence of several milling parameters was investigated to obtain an optimized nanosuspension formulation. Two different ZrO Two different core flow rates (0.2 or 0.3 All the electrosprayed samples showed a relatively high encapsulation efficiency of ca. 90%. The percentage of DRV release in acidic medium after 2 The amorphicity/crystallinity of DRV in the nanosuspensions and the electrosprayed samples was characterized by MDSC and XRPD. For electrosprayed DRV samples, the main endothermic signals are positioned at a higher temperature of ca. 90 The crystalline phases of DRV nanocrystals or electrosprayed samples were also investigated by XRPD. The X-ray diffraction patterns of the original DRV (ethanolate form), DRV nanocrystals and electrosprayed samples are presented in The possibility of using electrospraying as an approach for the preparation of encapsulated DRV nanocrystals within an enteric polymer was successfully demonstrated for the first time in the present study. As long as a fine nanosuspension with suitable properties (viscosity, solid content, particle size and uniform size distribution) is selected as the core fluid in a coaxial electrospraying setup, a Taylor cone-jet mode can be controlled and obtained easily, which produces small core-shell structured nanoparticles with a narrow particle size distribution. Moreover, for effective encapsulation, not only the quality of the input nanosuspension, especially size and size distribution, but also the electrospraying process will determine the final properties of the resulting electrosprayed samples. In this study, DRV nanocrystals were effectively encapsulated within Eudragit L100 as a high encapsulation efficiency of 90% and a reduced DRV release of approximately 20% in acidic medium were obtained. Apparently, the electrospraying process also showed to have an influence on the crystal structure of the encapsulated DRV nanocrystals, since a possibly new crystalline phase of DRV was observed. The results suggest that coaxial electrospraying is a potential and unique technique for encapsulating drug nanocrystals within a polymeric shell, which can be considered as an innovation and breakthrough for novel biomedical applications in the near future. By coaxial electrospraying, encapsulated nanocrystals can be prepared for multiple purposes: from stabilizing and protecting the nanoparticles from adverse conditions during storage or administration to delivering nanodrugs to specific targets with controllable and sustainable release profiles for an optimized clinical efficiency.