Background
                  Fractures of the posterior process of the talus are rare and frequently overlooked, possibly leading to pseudo-arthrosis and chronic pain. To gain more insight into the diagnosis, treatment and outcome of fractures of the posterior process of the talus (PPTF), a systematic review of the current literature was performed to provide recommendations for the management of PPTF.
               
                  Methods
                  A literature search in the electronic databases of PubMed, EMbase, Google Scholar and Cochrane library was performed in January 2020 to identify all clinical studies on PPTF with more than three patients. Amongst other variables, the type of study, number of patients, mechanism of injury, type of fracture (anatomy), imaging modality, treatment, postoperative protocol, outcomes, complications and duration of follow-up were noted for systematic analysis of the available evidence, adherent to the PRISMA guidelines.
               
                  Results
                  Seven original studies were included with a total of 66 patients. More than one third of patients presented with a (sub)talar joint dislocation (n = 25, 37.9%) and 51.5% sustained associated ipsilateral lower extremity fractures (n = 34). Delayed diagnosis occurred in 36.4% of patients (n = 24). Out of 48 patients with outcome data available, 41.7% (n = 20) reported impaired function. In the non-operative group, 64.7% (n = 11) had impaired functional outcome, compared to 33.3% (n = 6) in the ORIF group, and 30.8% (n = 4) in the fragment excision group (p < 0.001). One third of the patients developed one or more complications (n = 25, 37.9%), mostly found in the non-operatively treated group (73.7%, n = 14) compared to ORIF (25.0%, n = 8, p < 0.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Early recognition and timely treatment is warranted in order to achieve pre-injury functional outcome and reduce morbidity. Given the significantly higher complication rate and lower return to the previous level of functionality reported after non-operative treatment, ORIF is recommended if there is (even minimal) displacement, articular involvement or if the fracture extends into the talus body.Talar fractures constitute 0.32% of all fractures and usually involve the talar head and neck All clinical studies concerning PPTF with full text availability were included in the review. Publications from predator or chiropractic journals were excluded The electronic databases of PubMed, EMbase, Google Scholar and Cochrane library were searched in January 2020 to identify all studies including case series ( The year of publication, type of study, number of patients, gender, age, mechanism of injury, type of fracture (anatomy), imaging modality, treatment, postoperative protocol, primary outcomes, complications and duration of follow-up were noted for systematic analysis of the available evidence. Complications were defined as wound infection, chronic pain, impaired range of motion (ROM), non-union as described by the authors, post-traumatic osteoarthritis and secondary arthrodesis or other surgical intervention. Qualitative synthesis, e.g. systematic review of included articles, was performed Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version 24 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY). Numeric data are expressed as means or median. Categorical data are shown as numbers with percentages. The Z-score test and Fisher exact test (using a 3 × 2 contingency table) with a significance level of 0.05 were used to compare percentages. Following systematic literature search and selection, seven original research articles were included for analysis ( The majority of publications included fractures of the posteromedial part of the talus (Cedell fractures, The mechanisms of injury included: fall from height ( Except for the first and oldest publication by Cedell With respect to management, most patients were treated operatively with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) ( ORIF was performed in three studies. Ebraheim et al. used K-wire or screw fixation without providing further details The mean period of follow-up of the included studies was 32.6 months (median 27, range 10 to 72 months). The most recent study by Wijers et al. was the only study in which validated outcome scores were reported for 21 patients Out of the 48 patients, 20 reported impaired function (41.7%) of which 70% were patients with a delay in diagnosis ( Complications were analysed for the total number of 66 patients. One third of the patients developed one or more complications ( Most complications were found in the non-operatively (both delayed and timely) treated group with a rate of 73.7% ( PPTF was found to be associated with (sub)talar joint dislocation and/or other concomitant lower extremity fractures. Standard imaging workup included CT, yet timely diagnosis may still be challenging given the high rate of delayed diagnosis found in the literature. Most patients who were diagnosed immediately were treated operatively with ORIF through a posteromedial approach and more than two thirds of patients returned to their daily activities and sports without complaints. In case of delayed or missed diagnosis and persistent ankle pain, fragment excision was found to be the most common treatment strategy with the best results. In total, one third of patients developed one or more complications. A significantly higher rate of impaired function and complications were found in the non-operative (both delayed and timely treated) group. Review of the literature demonstrates that PPTF rarely involves the entire posterior process Timely diagnosis is crucial for the functional outcome, given the high rate of complications and impaired function in patients in whom PPTF was missed during initial trauma assessment. Next to the three routine trauma views, conventional radiographic workup may include additional oblique views (30-degree, 45-degree and 70-degree external rotation). Giuffrida et al. argued that a delayed diagnosis was due to misdiagnosis of the fracture fragment as os trigonum. They referred to the radiographic aspect of a posteromedial process fracture as the “pseudo os trigonum sign” Information regarding the indication for surgery (fragment excision or fixation) was not always provided. Nevertheless, the authors of publications including patients treated with ORIF, stated that in general, non-displaced or minimally displaced fractures were treated non-operatively, whereas patients with displaced fractures and soft-tissue conditions fit for surgery were managed with ORIF Based on the literature, non-operative treatment is not recommended due to poor functional outcome and persistent pain. There is some consensus in the literature that ORIF is the treatment of choice for posterior process fractures with dislocation and/or intra-articular gaps or step-offs (>3 mm) Based on our analysis, patients with PPTF are at serious risk of developing impaired function, especially in case of a delayed diagnosis. Only one third of non-operatively managed patients returned to their normal daily activities, job or sports. The operatively managed group did significantly better, with a return to daily activities and sports in two thirds of patients in both the ORIF and fragment excision group. Nyska et al. described four initially missed cases of fractures of the posterior process of the talus that were treated non-operatively with either prolonged cast immobilization or early weightbearing and mobilization One third of patients developed one or more complications including chronic pain, post-traumatic osteoarthritis or secondary arthrodesis. A significantly higher number of complications were found in the non-operatively (both delayed and timely) treated group compared to patients treated with ORIF. One quarter of non-operatively managed patients underwent secondary arthrodesis, which should be taken into account and discussed with the patient. There is no evidence that Cedell fracture fragment characteristics such as size and articular involvement are related to clinical presentation and joint stability The study size in the majority of papers was very low and substantial methodological and clinical heterogeneity between studies was observed, such as missed versus recent trauma, type of injury, treatment and outcome measures. Meta-analysis of disparate data could therefore not be performed. Another drawback of the available evidence is the lack of studies that used patient reported outcome measures. In clinical practice, the treatment strategy may also be influenced by the patient's age and related degree of activity and required foot function. Due to small patient numbers in different age groups, no evidence-based conclusions could be drawn. Another important limitation is that many patients sustained concomitant injuries that were likely to bias functional outcome yet could not be further assessed due to the lack of information provided. Early diagnosis and timely treatment are warranted in order to achieve pre-injury functional outcome and reduce morbidity. A low threshold for CT-imaging is mandatory in acute foot trauma or in case of persistent complaints. Given the significantly higher complication rate and lower return to the previous activity level reported after non-operative treatment, ORIF is recommended in case of (even minimal, >3 mm) displacement, articular involvement or if the fracture extends into the body of the talus None. None. None.