This paper examines the kinetics of Fast Flotation of very fine, hydrophobic particles using a rectangular-sectioned downcomer in the Reflux Flotation Cell (RFC). Three separate downcomers of equal height and breadth, but different channel widths of 2, 4.5, and 9 mm, were used to investigate the recovery of particles ranging from 1 to 100 µm in diameter. The RFC utilises parallel inclined channels to enhance the segregation rate of rising bubbles in liquid, a phenomenon known as the Boycott Effect. This work was focused on the contribution of the downcomer kinetics to the Fast Flotation. Feed fluxes over the range of 0.9–8.6 cm/s were examined, with residence times in the downcomer of less than 1 s. Recovery due to entrainment was made consistent by fixing the portion of liquid reporting to the overflow to 10% of the feed volumetric rate, independent of the gas flux employed. Kinetic rate constants for the particle recoveries were analysed by varying flotation parameters such as particle size, gas flux and feed flux, obtaining downcomer kinetic constants of up to 419 min−1. Distinct kinetic behaviour was found for the 1–10 µm and 10–100 µm coarser particles, with the kinetics of finer particles being more dependent on the particle size. The kinetics using the narrower downcomer widths (4.5 mm and 2 mm) relied more on the gas flux than the feed flux, while the kinetics using the wider downcomer width showed more dependence on the feed flux. Scaling laws for the kinetic rate constant were derived empirically based on the downcomer channel width, particle size, gas flux and feed flux. These scaling laws provided insight into the underlying mechanisms and a basis for exploring the potential flotation performance over a wide range of system operational conditions. The narrower downcomers exhibited better performance at the feed fluxes <10 cm/s. Above this feed flux, the wider downcomer of 9 mm performed better, especially for coarser particles above 10 µm. A basis for downcomer system design is provided based on the kinetic scaling laws.The first-order kinetic model is commonly used to describe the flotation process ( In conventional flotation columns and mechanical cells, particle collection is accomplished in a large volume vessel where the bubble-particle attachment is dependent on either the localised turbulence within the vicinity of an impeller, or the random collision between rising bubbles and descending particles. These mechanisms of collision define relatively low flotation kinetics, and result in a longer flotation time in order to maintain the flotation performance. The typical residence time of a mechanical cell circuit is about 6–20 min for roughers and up to 30 min for scavengers, while for a single flotation column the residence time is around 18–23 min ( A major advance in flotation kinetics was achieved through the invention of the Jameson Cell. A cylindrical downcomer was used to achieve the bubble-particle collision and attachment, while the main vessel was primarily responsible for the disengagement of particle-loaded bubbles, i.e. froth, from the pulp phase. Gas holdup in the Jameson downcomer reaches up to 60% ( In the present study, the flotation kinetics within three rectangular-sectioned downcomers of differing widths was investigated using the Reflux Flotation Cell (RFC). The configuration of the RFC, including a representation of the downcomer, is shown in What is especially significant here is that the benefits of high kinetic rates of the downcomer can be realised through the design of the RFC. The cell can be fed at elevated feed fluxes, defined relative to the vessel area, because of the enhanced segregation capacity of the bubbles from the tailings flow in the lower part of the main vessel. This enhanced segregation is achieved by incorporating a set of parallel inclined channels below the vertical chamber, i.e. the Boycott effect ( The Reflux Flotation Cell has been shown to achieve Fast Flotation ( One-dimensional drift flux theory ( A drift velocity is defined as the difference between the linear velocity (velocity relative to the downcomer) and the total flux, The gas drift flux is the product of gas drift velocity and bubble volume fraction, Defining the slip velocity, The The exponent Combining Eqs. The normalised drift flux curve can be plotted as a function of the bubble volume fraction using the right side of Eq.   In many instances, the flow through a downcomer may be treated as analogous to a plug flow reactor, where infinitely thin dispersions in the axial direction of the downcomer are considered perfectly mixed across the radial direction ( Coal particles of low ash percent and of relatively narrow size range were used in the experiments to create a model feed at an extremely low solids pulp density of ∼0.33 wt% solids. Given the downcomer flow velocities greatly exceeded any differential settling of the fine particles, it was assumed that the solid particles had negligible impact on the mean downcomer residence time, and all the particles had the same residence time in the downcomer for a given liquid rate and gas rate. It is also assumed the gas phase is incompressible. The kinetic rate constant in the downcomer can be obtained by Eq. A laboratory scale RFC ( A low ash, hydrophobic coal obtained from a two-stage RFC flotation process ( The feed was diluted in a 500 L mixing tank to produce a slurry pulp density of ∼0.33 wt% solids. No extra collector was used as these particles had already been well conditioned with 2 kg/t of diesel during the two-stage flotation. To ensure the integrity of the flotation performance over the time period from which the model feed was collected and then used in these new experiments, an experiment with an additional 1 kg/t diesel collector added, i.e. 3 kg/t in total, was performed to confirm the “complete” hydrophobicity of the particles. Methyl-isobutyl-carbinol (MIBC) was used as the frother at a relatively high concentration of 40 ppm in order to ensure the kinetics was not limited by the reagent availability in the experiments, and to minimise coalescence and maintain the bubble size. Vastly lower concentrations are normally used in the RFC. After complete mixing, the feed slurry was pumped into the RFC through the feed inlet located above the downcomer. A pressure gauge connected to the head tank was monitored to avoid over-pressuring the system during the experiments. A gauge pressure greater than 100 kPa was reached using a very narrow downcomer channel. All the experiments were undertaken under so-called flooding conditions, resulting in an “interface” between the bubbly zone and the tailings being established within the inclined channels. While it was possible to observe the movement of the particles and bubbles during an experiment, more detailed observation was extremely difficult given the relatively opaque, black, colour of the ultrafine coal suspension. This made the measurement of the bubble size by digital photography difficult to achieve. Detailed measurement of the bubble size was made in an earlier study using a clearer gas-liquid system, in the absence of particles ( Once the RFC system reached steady state, timed samples of the product and tailings were collected over 1–3 min into 20 L buckets. The volumetric overflow and underflow rates were obtained by weighing the timed sample buckets. The overflow liquid split, representing the percentage of liquid in the feed reporting to overflow, was then calculated. An underflow valve was used to adjust the overflow and underflow rates to produce a fixed overflow liquid split of approximately 10% for all the experiments. In this way, a relatively low and relatively constant entrainment of particles to the product overflow was ensured for all the experiments. To verify that the targeted overflow split of 10% was obtained and the system was at steady state, three replicated samples of the overflow and underflow were collected over time for each run. Samples of the overflow, underflow and feed were collected into 500 mL containers for laser particle size analysis. The particle size distribution data obtained from laser particle sizing were used to produce partition curves to represent the separation achieved. Partition curves describe the probability of a particle of a given diameter exiting to the overflow. Often with mineral processing equipment, such as a cyclone, the partition curve produced for the underflow tends to approach a constant value with decreasing particle size, instead of approaching zero. This occurs as the finer particles of low inertia become entrained to the underflow with the liquid flow, resulting in particle recovery to the underflow being equivalent to the fraction of feed water reporting to the underflow ( The experimental method, sample collection, and the data analysis in this study proved reliable. As shown in The operating parameters including the downcomer channel gap, feed flux (and corresponding downcomer feed flux), and gas flux (and corresponding downcomer gas flux) are summarised in  For the widest downcomer channel gap of 9 mm ( The effect of varying the feed flux on the particle recovery is shown in There was no significant change in particle recovery with the feed flux for the 9 mm channel gap, as shown in  Two distinct trends are observed in the data. A steeper increase in the kinetic constant was obtained for the particle sizes between 1 and 10 µm compared with those between 10 and 100 µm. The gas holdup in a confined downcomer is typically far higher than that of a conventional flotation vessel, for instance, reaching up to 60% in the Jameson Cell downcomer ( Considering the two trends observed in The results in In comparison, scaling laws of  Note that according to our previous study ( It is evident that similar scaling exponents were obtained for the channel gaps of 4.5 and 2 mm, applicable over the particle size range of 1–100 µm ( The average exponents for each channel gap are shown in  Clearly, no obvious variation in the kinetic constants with downcomer feed flux is seen for particle sizes above 10 µm using the 4.5 and 2 mm channel gap. The exponents over this particle size range were mostly below 0.1, as shown in As shown in and for the 9 mm channelled downcomer as: Given the distinct behaviour in the particle size ranges of 1–10 µm and 10–100 µm, separate plots are provided in In principle, the volume capacity within the RFC downcomer could be maintained by varying the number of channels in the downcomer for different sized channel gaps. For instance, one 9 mm channel can be divided into two channels, with each channel 4.5 mm in width, or 4 channels with each channel 2.25 mm in width. Recovery ratios for the 4.5 and 2 mm channel option to the 9 mm channel option,  For particles larger than 10 µm, there was little variation due to particle size and gas flux as shown in Kinetic constants for a mechanical flotation cell have been reported to be below 0.01 s In the RFC, much higher feed and gas fluxes can be deployed due to the enhanced segregation achieved in the inclined channels that prevents bubble entrainment to tailings, and due to control of the portion of liquid sent to the product ( This study examined the flotation kinetics of the Reflux Flotation Cell using three rectangular-sectioned downcomers of differing channel spacing. Drift flux theory demonstrated that by increasing the gas flux or by decreasing the liquid flux, the bubble volume fraction increased in a co-current downward flow. The experimental results showed that the particle recovery decreased with increasing feed flux and decreasing gas flux using the narrower downcomer channel gaps of 4.5 and 2 mm, consistent with the theoretical prediction. Higher recoveries were obtained using the narrower channel gaps than for the wider gap of 9 mm at similar operating conditions. Scaling laws describing the correlations between the kinetic constant and the hydrodynamic parameters (particle size, gas flux, and feed flux) were developed for these downcomer dimensions. The two narrower channel gaps of 4.5 and 2 mm had similar scaling laws: Flotation performances of different downcomer channel gaps can be compared and estimated based on the kinetic scaling laws, providing a basis for the system design. The narrower downcomer channel gaps (4.5 mm and 2 mm) overall exhibited better performance at the feed fluxes <10 cm/s. Above this feed flux, the wider channel gap of 9 mm performed better, especially for coarser particles above 10 µm. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the