The flotation of molybdenite fines as hydrophobic agglomerates has been studied through micro-flotation and microscopy observations in this work. The hydrophobic agglomeration was achieved with a strong mechanical conditioning and a small amount of kerosene addition. The experimental results showed that floc-flotation is much more effective than conventional flotation for the beneficiation of molybdenite fines. At the same flotation time, floc-flotation reached the flotability of 90%, while conventional flotation only did 35%. The most important parameters in the floc-flotation were mechanical conditioning strength and kerosene addition. A good floc-flotation could be achieved by applying a high-speed stirring for a short time. The kerosene enhancement of the floc-flotation closely correlated with droplet size of kerosene emulsion. The smaller were the droplets, the better the floc-flotation was.Molybdenite (MoS It is accepted that floc-flotation, in which mineral fines are floated as hydrophobic agglomerates, is an effective process to improve the beneficiation of valuable minerals in fine particle size The centerpiece of the floc-flotation process is the hydrophobic agglomeration of fine mineral particles in aqueous solutions, which arises as a result of hydrophobic interaction between particles It is easy to realized hydrophobic agglomeration and floc-flotation to fine particles of naturally hydrophobic minerals, such as graphite, talc, molybdenite and coal. Up to date, there are numerous reports on floc-flotation of coal fines in order to prepare ultra-clean coal and to eliminate pyritic sulfur from coals The molybdenite sample used in this work was originally collected from the molybdenum concentrate in the Nacozari concentration plant, located in Sonora State, Mexico. The concentrate was first washed by CS The XRD (X-ray diffraction) pattern of the samples is shown in In this work, the hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide from the J.T. Barker with analyzed purity were used for adjusting suspension pH. The Kerosene (50 The water used in this work was distilled first, and then treated by passing resin beds and a 0.2 Kerosene was added into molybdenite suspensions in the form of oil emulsion. The emulsion was prepared by mixing kerosene with water in the concentration of 1% wt, followed by ultrasonic treatment for 5 The hydrophobic agglomeration of molybdenite fines in aqueous suspensions was performed in a mixing tank of 10 The micro-flotation of molybdenite fines was performed by using a Hollimond flotation tube with nitrogen as bubble source. A molybdenite suspension from the pH adjustment or from the hydrophobic agglomeration was first transferred into the tube, and then diluted to 130 A Leica DMLP optical microscope equipped with digital camera was used to observe hydrophobic agglomerates in aqueous suspensions and oil droplets in emulsions. The samples were prepared by dropping molybdenite suspension or kerosene emulsion on a glass plate, followed by putting a thin glass slide on the drop to fix the suspension or emulsion. During the observation, some of agglomerates or oil droplets were photographed. The molybdenite agglomerates were also observed by using a Philips MICROSPEC WDX electronic scanning microscope (SEM). The sample was prepared by dropping molybdenite suspension on a T-shape sample carrier, followed by drying naturally and then gold coating. The SEM images of the agglomerates were taken during the observation. The hydrophobic agglomerates of molybdenite fines, which were prepared in the mixing tank with the stirring speed of 1000 The SEM image of molybdenite agglomerates formed in the absence of kerosene is given in The comparison of conventional flotation and floc-flotation of molybdenite fines with 25  The kinetic energy input in the hydrophobic agglomeration was realized through mechanical agitation in the mixing tank. The strength of the shear field or kinetic energy input closely correlated with the stirring speed and the stirring time. Accordingly, the effect of kinetic energy input on the floc-flotation of molybdenite fines was investigated through varying the stirring speed and time in this work. The results are illustrated in The effect of kerosene addition on the floc-flotation of molybdenite fines has been studied. In this study, two kinds of kerosene emulsions that were prepared by using ultrasonic homogenizer and cleaner were used in order to understand the roles of size distribution of oil droplets in the floc-flotation.  From the viewpoint of fundamental aspect, kerosene improvement of the floc-flotation might be due to its increasing the size and density of agglomerates and thus strengthening adhesion of agglomerates to air bubbles, as well as increasing particle surface hydrophobicity. This improvement might be realized through kerosene droplets spreading on the hydrophobic surfaces and then forming oil bridges between the particles in hydrophobic agglomerates, which considerably increased adhesion forces between the particles, leading the agglomerate to withstand strong agglomerate-rupture force from turbulent flows  The flotation of molybdenite fines could be greatly improved through the formation of hydrophobic agglomerates with a strong mechanical conditioning and a small amount of kerosene addition. This improvement included the considerable increases of flotability and flotation rate. The floc-flotation of molybdenite fines closely correlated with the strength of mechanical conditioning in hydrophobic agglomeration. A high flotability could be achieved by applying a high-speed stirring with a short time. Kerosene played an important role in the floc-flotation of molybdenite fines. The positive effect depended on droplet size of the used kerosene emulsion. The smaller were the kerosene droplets, the better the floc-flotation was. The financial supports for this work from the