In this paper, the effect of strain rates on the material and substructural behaviour of high carbon (1% C) steel (HCS) is experimentally investigated at ambient and elevated temperatures. Compression tests at different strain rates (2.56 × 10-4 - 2.56 × 10-1/s) as well as temperatures (25-175 °C) were performed and the corresponding structure-property correlations were established. The material exhibited transformation of austenite to martensite at ambient condition whereas formations of ferrite/tempered martensite (TM) and carbide precipitates were evidenced at higher temperatures. At the high-temperature regime, with increasing the temperature from 100 to 175 °C, a noticeable increase in yield strength is evidenced. Such an increase in yield strength is due to the increase in the volume fraction of carbides precipitation and dislocation strengthening associated with the phase transformation. An overall increase in the kernel average misorientation (KAM) values were found with an increase in the strain-rate whereas, in terms of increasing temperature, the lowest KAM values were exhibited when the material was deformed at 100 °C. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies revealed decreasing dislocation cell size with increase in the temperature and strain rate that further indicates an increase in the dislocation density of the material. The width of the plate martensite displayed a declining trend with a rise in the strain rate irrespective of the deformation temperature.Multi-phase HCS has been widely used as an engineering material in milling and grinding process due to their capability of withstanding higher rates of deformation [ Stability of RA plays a major role in the flow behaviour and uniform elongation of any metallic material. There is a disagreement in the literature regarding the effect of DIFT and DIMT on the flow properties of dual-phase (DP) steels. Few researchers have reported an increase in the ductile as well as strain (or work) hardening behaviour of austenitic-martensitic DP steel [ This paper is aimed at (a) understanding the rate as well as temperature-dependent deformation behaviour of multiphase HCS; (b) evaluating the significance of phase transformation (ferrite and martensite) on the strain and corresponding microstructural evolution of HCS and (c) correlating the structure-mechanical properties relationship with respect to different regimes of temperature and strain rates. In our previous investigation, we have reported the phase transformation phenomenon as well as strain hardening behaviour of HCS and have further correlated the mechanical properties with the (a) fracture surface evolution as well its quantification and (b) identifying the precipitation of second phases [ In this paper, a 1.0 C- 1.0 Mn-0.6 Cr – 0.23 Si- rest Fe (in wt. %) high carbon steel was analysed. Cylindrical specimens with a diameter and length of 13 mm and 38 mm respectively were prepared from the as-received material using electric discharge machining. Rate dependent mechanical tests under compressive loading were performed in-between ~10 XRD was performed in a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer using Co- The optical microscope (OM) image of the as-received material ( The load-displacement plots of failed samples at different conditions are shown in To further examine the effect of temperature and strain rates on the flow properties of the HCS, the yield strength values were calculated and are presented in To address this abnormal trend in the yield strength variation and to quantify the damage occurred; XRD, EBSD and TEM investigations were carried out on the deformed samples just beneath the fracture surface. Similarly, to the results reported in It is fully understood that during the tempering of ferrous martensite, thermal-induced austenite to ferrite transformation occurs at around 200 °C–350 °C [ To examine the relationship between the yield strength and the subsequent evolution in the microstructures at different conditions, the theoretical yield strength was calculated. The yield strength ( The strengthening due to solid solution is determined by an equation [ Grain boundaries play a significant role in contributing to the yield strength of the material as described by the Hall-Petch equation. However, in this investigation, strengthening due to grain boundaries ( The strengthening due to dislocation movement can be obtained by using the Taylor equation which is considered among the initial few expressions for correlating the flow stress of the material with the dislocation density [ The dislocation density showed an increasing trend with an increase in the strain rate and temperature. It is well known that in metals, the dislocation density increases with an increase in the strain rate. On the other hand, at elevated temperatures, since the migration and annihilation process of dislocations are enhanced, it is expected that the dislocation density will decrease with increasing temperature. However, contrary to this established fact, an increase in the dislocation density was noticed with increasing temperature. It has to be appreciated that in this investigation, we have reported the precipitation of carbide particles at elevated temperature. Furthermore, the volume fraction of carbide precipitates displayed an upsurge (almost twice) with increase in the temperature from 100 °C to 175 °C. This precipitation of carbide particles leads to the pinning of dislocations and thus results in an increase in the yield strength of the material with an increase in the elevated temperature regime (i.e. from 100 °C to 175 °C). The increase in the material's strength due to carbide precipitates is given by Orowan mechanism [ The calculated yield strength values of the deformed specimens from this approach are presented in For investigating the local misorientation of the microstructure at different test conditions, Kernel average misorientation (KAM) values were calculated. The KAM maps and the average KAM values for the specimens deformed during extreme low (~ 10 For investigating the change in the micromechanism and microstructures resulting in the deformation of HCS at different test conditions, TEM investigations on thin coupon foils were carried out on the specimens deformed at 2.56 × 10 The microstructure of the specimen deformed at 100 °C is shown in When subjected to the highest temperature of 175 °C, the strain rate effect on the material was recorded to be similar and presence of dislocation cells, as well as martensites, were observed as shown in The reduction in the width of plate type martensites with increasing strain rates at different temperatures can be understood from the viewpoint of the rate of loading. At lower strain rates, due to the lower deformation velocity and subsequently larger experimental time, sufficient period is available for the growth of plate martensites. In contradiction to this, less time is available for the growth of the plates at higher strain rates due to higher deformation velocity as well as smaller test time. This reason can be logically correlated with the above finding that indicates the decrease in the width of plate type martensites with the increase in strain rate. It is expected that the findings reported in this paper on the micromechanisms as well as the concomitant substructural evolution in the microstructures along with the previously published articles [ The rate as well as temperature-dependent mechanical and structural behaviour of high carbon steel have been experimentally investigated to address the structure-property correlation of the material. The main findings are: The load-displacement curve of HCS demonstrated smooth elastic to plastic transition during the deformation process which was later followed by continuous yielding. The presence of internal stresses arising from phase transformation and strain mismatch between the constituent phases was recognized as the main cause for continuous yielding. The yield strength of the material showed an increasing trend as a function of strain rate irrespective of the deformation temperature. The lowest and highest yield strength values of 1338 MPa and 1510 MPa were recorded when deformed at 2.56 × 10 Increase in the content of the martensite from ~74% to ~78% was observed with increasing strain-rate for RT deformed specimens. On another note, the transformation of martensite as well as retained austenite into ferrite and carbide precipitates was noticed when the specimens were subjected to deformation at high temperatures. The austenite to ferrite transformation was majorly found to be deformation-induced rather than thermal-induced. Precipitation of carbides and dislocation strengthening were found to be the major reason for overall growth in the yield strength from 100 °C to 175 °C. In addition, the lowest KAM values were noticed when the material was deformed at 100 °C. This was followed by an increase when deformed at 175 °C and 25 °C. Dislocation cells were found at all the deformed conditions however, the cell size exhibited an overall decrease with increasing strain-rate. The maximum and the minimum cell size was measured around 73 and 20 nm for the specimens deformed at 2.56 × 10 TEM investigation exhibited the presence of plate as well as twin martensites at different temperature and strain rates. Moreover, the average width of the martensitic plates was found to decrease with increasing strain rate irrespective of the temperature. This phenomenon was explained on the basis of deformation velocity and the applied rate of loading. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings will be made available on request. A. Banerjee conducted the mechanical tests, characterisation of the specimens, analysing the data and writing the manuscript. B.G. Prusty designed the experiments, critically analysed the data and corrected the manuscript. Saroj Bhattacharyya helped in performing the X-Ray Diffraction scans and analysing the obtained data. Qiang Zhu fabricated the TEM specimens and helped in TEM analyses of this study. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors duly acknowledge the support from the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at