The consolidation behavior of nanocrystalline Al–5 at.% Ti powders was investigated using an ultra-high-pressure hot pressing method. Nanocrystalline Al–5 at.% Ti compacts with full density were successfully synthesized by hot pressing for 250 s at 120°C under 4.8 GPa and the grain size was less than 50 nm. It is considered that each grain in the as-compacted materials maintained a random orientation with respect to neighboring grains. The consolidation temperature, 120°C, is about 300–400°C lower than the conventional temperature. Abnormal grain growth was observed in specimens prepared at temperatures over 300°C, which is more than one-half the absolute melting temperature of Al. Some grains grew more than 500 nm in these specimens. Rockwell hardness and Vickers micro-hardness values of specimens prepared using the appropriate conditions were 105.2 HRB and 243.7 HV, respectively. This hardness value is one of the highest ever obtained in Al–5 at.% Ti alloys.Much effort has been devoted to improvement of the low ductility of Al–Ti alloys at room temperature by alloying additions, grain refinement and heat treatment Among the many available techniques, including the gas condensation method, which was most widely used before and through the 1990s, mechanical alloying (MA) has attracted attention as a versatile method of producing nanocrystalline materials with a broad range of chemical composition and atomic structure Most synthesis methods produce nanocrystalline materials in powder form. Consolidation of the powder is required, which is achieved by various techniques such as hot pressing, hot extrusion, and hot isostatic pressing (HIP). However, grain growth occurs readily during the high temperature consolidation of nanocrystalline materials The application of pressure during sintering is known to achieve full densification of some nanocrystalline powders with minimal grain growth This report presents results for the consolidation behavior and evolution of the microstructure of nanocrystalline Al–Ti alloy powder prepared by reactive ball milling in H RBM of elemental powders of Al (−325 mesh, 99.5% pure) and Ti (−325 mesh, 99.9% pure) was performed to yield an Al–5 at.% Ti composition in a large high energy ball mill (attritor) with a capacity of 7.8 l and under flowing H As-milled powders sieved through a −200 mesh were hot degassed for 20 min at 500°C in a vacuum furnace to remove hydrogen and for the formation of titanium trialuminide prior to consolidation. Since the reaction of hydrogen with titanium during RBM in H The degassed RBM powders were subsequently consolidated in vacuum (10 We studied RBM in H As thermally metastable materials, nanocrystalline materials lose their unique characteristic of grain boundary by grain growth during heat treatment. It is thought that grain growth of nanocrystalline materials must occur by subgrain coalescence as proposed by Clark et al.  Crystalline materials densify during sintering by mass flow processes of grain boundary diffusion, volume diffusion and plastic flow. Densification occurs because the vacancies are annihilated at the interparticle grain boundaries, dislocations, phase boundaries or other microstructural grain boundaries In this study, eight specimens were prepared using various pressing conditions. The conditions and some properties of the as-pressed specimens are presented in  Because of the very fast consolidation at low temperature, specimen 6 maintained a grain size of 50 nm. This size is one of the smallest ever obtained in the Al–Ti system using various consolidation methods, thus its hardness values were very high compared with nanocrystalline Al–Ti compacts prepared by other methods such as hot extrusion and the PAS process In this study, abnormal grain growth was observed in specimens undergoing the application of high pressure above 300°C. Thus, it is considered that a specific hydraulic force inducing high pressure is another important factor causing abnormal grain growth during consolidation. Abnormal grain growth was not found in the hot extruded specimens, although they underwent a long term process consisting of hot degassing and pre-heat treatment at 500°C without applying pressure; however, under an applied pressure of 1.5 GPa, the heating time is only 10 min during the hot extrusion process  More detailed microstructures were investigated by HREM in hot pressed specimens.   Nanocrystalline Al–5 at.% Ti alloy was successfully synthesized by RBM in H Abnormal grain growth was observed in specimens prepared at temperature above 300°C, which is higher than half of the absolute melting temperature of Al. Some grains grew to over 500 nm in this specimen. The hardness and micro-hardness values of the specimen prepared using the correct conditions were 105.2 HR The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (98-0300-03-01-5). This work was also supported by the Brain Korea 21 project.