We investigate the role of pressure solution in deformation of upper- to mid-crustal rocks using aggregates of halite as a room temperature analog for fluid-assisted deformation processes in the Earth's crust. Experiments evaluate the effects of initial grain size distribution on macroscopic pressure solution rate of the aggregate and compare the results to theoretical models for pressure solution. We find that the grain size exponent deviates significantly from the theoretical value of 3 for diffusion-controlled pressure solution. Models typically assume mono-dispersed spherical particles in pseudo-regular packing. We infer that the discrepancy between experimentally determined grain size exponents and the theoretical values are a result of deviation of experimental (and natural) samples from regular packs of mono-dispersed spherical particles. Moreover, we find that compaction rates can vary by up to one order of magnitude as a function of the width of the grain size distribution for a given mean grain size. Wider size distributions allow for higher initial compaction rates, increasing the macroscopic compaction rate with respect to more narrow grain size distributions. Grain sizes in rocks, fault gouges, and hydrocarbon reservoirs are typically log-normal or power law distributed and therefore pressure solution rates may significantly exceed theoretical predictions. Spatiotemporal variations in pressure solution rates due to variations in grain size may cause the formation of low porosity zones, which could potentially focus deformation in these zones and produce pockets of high pore pressures, promoting nucleation of frictional instability and earthquake rupture.Fluids are ubiquitous in the Earth's crust and play an important role in the evolution of fluid reservoirs, the development and migration of oil, gas and ore deposits and in the seismic cycle (i.e. fault healing, sealing, pore pressure evolution). Pressure solution is the serial process of dissolution of material at stressed grain contacts, diffusion of this material out of the grain contact and subsequent transport via the pore fluid or precipitation on the pore walls. Much experimental and modeling work has been done to investigate the process of pressure solution (e.g. It has been well established that pressure solution compaction in salt aggregates is extremely rapid at room temperature conditions. This is due to the high solubility of salt in water and the rapid kinetics of the dissolution and precipitation reactions. Therefore, salt is a suitable analogue for the study of pressure solution in common rock-forming minerals (e.g. quartz) under upper- to mid-crustal hydrothermal conditions. The purpose of this paper is to present results from laboratory experiments in which we evaluate the effect of grain size distribution on the macroscopic compaction rate of a granular aggregate. We do not review existing models for pressure solution, but instead propose that one of the explanations for the discrepancy between models and experiments could be found in the presence of a distributed grain size. From our experiments, we conclude that the presence of small grains in a wide grain size distribution increase pressure solution rates by up to one order of magnitude compared to theory. Moreover, the derived grain size exponent deviates significantly from the theoretical value of 3 for diffusion-controlled pressure solution. Because grain sizes are usually distributed in natural rocks, locally higher pressure solution rates could have significant implications for fluid flow and localized deformation in fault zones and other settings where spatial variations in sorting exist. Pressure solution is a serial set of processes and therefore the slowest process limits the overall reaction rate. The driving force of pressure solution is a stress gradient along the contact junction, which produces a gradient in chemical potential of components within the solid. The difference between the chemical potential at the grain contact and that at the pore wall can be written: Here, Here, The compaction rate (i.e. volumetric strain rate) for a porous aggregate depends on aggregate geometry and packing and particle shape ( Here, We conducted room temperature experiments on crushed rock salt, which was sieved into 5 different size ranges ( All samples were compacted room-dry at 5 MPa for 15 min. Normal stress was applied to the sample via servo-control by driving the horizontal ram under load-feedback control ( In In Our microstructural evidence shows that pressure solution is the dominant compaction mechanism, although a minor contribution of stress corrosion cracking and/or dislocation creep at the grain boundary cannot be excluded. Especially on the scale of highly stressed point contacts inside the grain boundary, it is likely that some dislocation creep or micro-cracking facilitated the dissolution of material. However, the macroscopic rate of porosity reduction is most likely controlled by pressure solution. In Finally, the theoretical models are based on aggregates of mono-sized particles. The presence of a distributed grain size will have a significant effect on the local stress field and thus on the compaction rate. Also, since smaller grains are more prone to compaction by pressure solution, the dependence of strain rate on average contact area and hence volumetric strain will be different when a larger number of smaller grains are present and should not be log-linearly related. Theoretical models for pressure solution predict a grain size dependence The grain size exponents thus determined deviate from the theoretical value of 3, which is consistent with previous studies that analyze grain size dependence ( The data of In Clearly, the width of the grain size distribution has a major effect on the overall compaction of the aggregate. The presence of small grains leads to high initial compaction rates due to the cubic dependence of pressure solution rates on grain size. This leads to a distribution of compaction rates similar to the grain size distribution and the overall macroscopic (measured) compaction rates is some average value of this distribution. With ongoing compaction, the smallest grains will stop compacting, either because they are completely dissolved or because the contact area is too large, effectively decreasing the macroscopic compaction rate. Grain size distributions for natural rocks and fault gouges follow a power-law or fractal size distribution ( We thank two anonymous reviewers for their suggestions and comments which helped improve this paper. This work was supported by NSF grants EAR-0510182 and ANT-0538195 and by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (N.W.O.) grant 825.06.003. This support is gratefully acknowledged.