The CO2-blown integrated coal gasification combined cycle (IGCC) is a promising electric power generation technology that will reduce CO2 emission, due to its high efficiency. Recent studies have found that base metals improve the coal char gasification in cases when they can interact with the char matrix at an atomic level. In this paper, we clarified the effect of heavy medium separation, which is one of the most popular coal cleaning technologies, on the CO2 char gasification. Before sink and float test and thermogravimetric analysis, Datong Coal from China was ground to below 20 mesh, which is a size usually used for a coal cleaning process. The float and sink test revealed that the highest separation efficiency would be obtained at a specific gravity of 1.45. The ash content would be reduced dramatically from 10.2% to ca. 4% and about 85% of combustibles would be recovered. The chars derived from different specific gravity fractions showed different gasification reactivity; the char from heavier fraction has gasification reactivity higher than the lighter fraction-derived char. This tendency agrees with the ash content; the heavier fraction has a higher ash content. Removal of ash from well-ordered holes in Fusinite and Semi-fusinite in Inertinite might increase the gasification reactivity.Global coal consumption strongly grew in all regions in 2010, generating the fastest growth since 2003. The known reserves of coal are estimated to last 118 Datong Coal from China sized into less than 20 mesh was used in these experiments. The weight percentages and ash contents of the fractions vary widely after float-and-sink test (   The chars of −1.3 and +1.5 fractions were washed with 1 The float and sink test revealed that the highest separation efficiency would be obtained at a specific gravity of 1.45. Seventy percent of ash would be removed, 85% of combustibles would be recovered, the float yield would be 77% and the float ash content would be 4%. The chars derived from different specific gravity fractions showed different gasification reactivity; the char from heavier fraction has gasification reactivity higher than the lighter fraction-derived char. This tendency agrees with the ash content; the heavier fraction has a higher ash content. Removal of ash by acid washing made the gasification ability of −1.3 and +1.5 fractions more reactive. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), Grants-in-Aid for