Hydrodynamic cavitation enhanced ultra-fine particles flotation could be mainly due to the generation of nanobubbles in the process of cavitation, and their role in bridging particles to form aggregates. In this paper, the aggregation behavior of ultra-fine scheelite particles induced by hydrodynamic cavitation was investigated. Investigation was carried out through flotation tests, zeta potential measurements, turbidity determination and microscopic imaging. The results of flotation tests confirm that hydrodynamic cavitation can enhance the ultra-fine scheelite particles aggregation and their flotation. Nanobubbles generated by cavitation make the solid particles less negatively charged, thereby reducing the repulsive force between particles. With a low sodium oleate (NaOl) concentration, particle aggregates start to form in the slurry treated by hydrodynamic cavitation, while few aggregates are generated in the slurry without cavitation treatment. As NaOl concentration increases in the slurry pre-treated by cavitation, the formation of a network structure consisting of hydrophobized mineral particles, conventional bubbles and nanobubbles enhances the flotation recovery of ultra-fine scheelite particles.Forth flotation has been considered as one of the most widely used separation techniques in the field of mineral processing. It is the most efficient and cost effective for particles within a narrow size range, generally from 10 to 100 Generally, cavitation can be defined as the formation of tiny bubbles filled with vapor/gas or their mixture and the subsequent activities such as growth, collapse and rebound in liquids ( Much progress has been seen in the last decade for the research, development and application of hydrodynamic cavitation to academic research and commercial operation of mineral flotation. Besides successful stories in the research and application of hydrodynamic cavitation in flotation of coal, phosphate, oil sands and other non-metallic minerals ( The scheelite used for all experiments was obtained from Yuanling, Hunan Province, China. Chemical and XRD analysis showed that the content of WO Sodium oleate (NaOl, AR) purchased from Beijing Dingguo Biotechnology Co. Ltd., was used as the collector. Both hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were chemically pure and used as pH modifier. Deionized and double distilled water with a resistivity 5  As shown in By using ZetaSizer Nano ZS instrument (Malvern Co., UK) ( Turbidity tests and microscope tests were taken to reveal the particles dispersion/aggregation state in the presence and absence of cavitation pre-treatment. 0.5 For turbidity tests, the well-conditioned mineral suspension was first diluted 10 times before settling for 3 The microscope tests were taken by two different instruments. First, the particle image analyzer (Occhio Flowcell FC200s) was used to detect the morphology of bubbles adsorbed on particles. Then, a transmitted-light microscope (Leica DM) was employed to examine the particles aggregation visually with an objective magnification of 100  The zeta potentials of scheelite particles as a function of pH are shown in The aggregation behavior of mineral particles in pulp was characterized by the turbidity of the suspension in this paper. A higher turbidity value suggests the solids are better dispersed, and a smaller turbidity value means more aggregates formed in the suspension. In this study, particle aggregation is influenced by the particle hydrophobicity, number of generated nanobubbles and hydrodynamic forces resulting from hydrodynamic cavitation.  As NaOl concentration increases, the turbidity values for both cases (i.e., with/without cavitation treatment) further decrease, indicating that the solids become more hydrophobic at a higher NaOl concentration, thereby facilitating solid aggregation by hydrophobic interaction. However, it can be noted from On the other hand, both laboratory and commercial operation results show that applying hydrodynamic cavitation during flotation could save flotation reagent (e.g., collector and frother, etc.) consumption up to 50% or higher, while obtaining similar or even better flotation performance ( To verify and confirm the different aggregation behaviors of the ultra-fine scheelite particles at different NaOl concentrations with cavitation treatment, solid settling tests were run, and the results are shown in It should be noted that the reduced turbidity after hydrodynamic cavitation pre-treatment at high NaOl concentrations could be attributed to reduced density and increased buoyancy of solid-nanobubble aggregates. Heinrich Schubert ( To verify the hypothesis, the aggregation/dispersion of hydrophobized scheelite particles was detected using the microscope ( The following conclusions can be drawn based on the results. The flotation recovery of ultra-fine scheelite can be improved by hydrodynamic cavitation due to the generation of nanobubbles in the process of cavitation. When NaOl concentration is low in the slurry, nanobubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation promote the aggregation of hydrophobized scheelite particles, and improve the flotation performance. When the concentration of NaOl is relatively high, a kind of networking structure comprising hydrophobized scheelite particles, conventional bubbles and tiny nanobubbles will form, in the slurry treated by cavitation. The authors acknowledge the support of the