The start-up of a full-scale synthesis gas-fed gas-lift reactor treating metal and sulfate-rich wastewater was investigated. Sludge from a pilot-scale reactor was used to seed the full-scale reactor. The main difference in design between the pilot- and full-scale reactor was that metal precipitation and sulfate reduction occurred in the same reactor. After 7 weeks the full-scale reactor achieved the sulfate conversion design rate of 15kg/m3
                     day. Zinc sulfide precipitation inside the reactor did not interfere with obtaining a high rate of sulfate reduction. 16S rRNA gene analysis demonstrated that the bacterial communities in both reactors were dominated by the sulfate-reducing genus Desulfomicrobium. Archaeal communities of both reactors were dominated by the methanogenic genus Methanobacterium. Most Probable Number (MPN) counts confirmed that heterotrophic Sulfate-Reducing Bacteria (SRB) were dominant (1011–1012
                     cells/g VSS) compared to homoacetogens (105–106
                     cells/g VSS) and methanogens (108–109
                     cells/g VSS). Methanogenesis was not suppressed during start-up of the full scale-reactor, despite the predominance of SRB, which have a lower hydrogen threshold. Due to the short sludge retention time (4–7 days) competition for hydrogen is determined by Monod kinetics, not hydrogen thresholds. As the kinetic parameters for SRB and methanogens are similar, methanogenesis may persist which results in a loss of hydrogen.Sulfate and metal-rich wastewaters that are low in organic carbon are produced by several industrial processes, such as metal smelting, flue gas scrubbing and mining. Sulfate reducing bioreactors have been previously shown to be suitable systems to treat these types of wastewater ( Paques B.V. (Balk, Netherlands) has developed a sulfidogenic THIOPAQ Reports on the application of synthesis gas-fed systems have so far have been limited to lab-scale ( The main objective of this study was to monitor the start-up process of the full-scale Budel reactor. To do this the performance of the full-scale reactor was monitored for a period of 20 weeks after start-up. Secondly, because the operation of the Budel reactor differed from the Kennecott reactor with regards to metal precipitation, and the lack of knowledge on the microbial composition in these systems, we wanted to identify the predominant microorganisms in both sludges. To identify the predominant microorganisms we have used both cultivation dependent and independent approaches. Most Probable Number (MPN) estimates were used to determine the abundance of different hydrogenotrophic groups of microorganisms. The abundant species in the Kennecott seed sludge and Budel sludge were assessed using restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), and identified by 16S rRNA sequence analysis. Anaerobic sludge was obtained from the gas lift reactors of two THIOPAQ The second reactor was a full-scale reactor treating sulfate and heavy metal-rich wastewater from a zinc smelter in Budel, the Netherlands. This reactor was seeded with sludge originating from the aforementioned Kennecott pilot scale reactor. Before seeding, the Kennecott sludge was pre-grown in a 5-m The main pollutants in the Budel reactor feed were sulfate (5–10 The different groups of hydrogenotrophic bacteria were enumerated in selective media using the MPN technique ( For the MPN estimates acetate and sulfate were analyzed by HPLC, and hydrogen and methane by gas chromatography (GC) as described previously ( For the Budel reactor acetate and sulfate concentrations were measured using a Dionex DX 100 ion chromatograph equipped with an AG 14 guard column and an AS 14 separator column. The eluent contained 3.5 Sludge for nucleic acid isolation was taken from the Budel reactor 14 weeks after start-up. Samples (6 A pre-treatment was necessary in order to isolate nucleic acids from the fixed Budel sample. The method was based on a low speed centrifugation step in a sodium pyrophosphate buffer in order to separate cells from the zinc sulfide precipitate. The fixed sample was centrifuged for 10 Total DNA was extracted as previously described by The sulfate conversion rate of the Budel full-scale reactor was monitored for 20 weeks ( Zinc sulfide precipitation inside the Budel reactor did not interfere with obtaining high rates of sulfate reduction. This is contrary to the findings of During the first 6 weeks after start-up of the Budel reactor acetate formation of up to 4 The MPN estimates showed that heterotrophic SRB dominated Budel sludge 19 weeks after start-up ( Partial 16S rRNA gene libraries for Bacteria and Archaea were constructed from both Budel (week 14) and Kennecott sludge in order to identify the predominant microorganisms. The sequence analysis results are summarized in The hydrogen thresholds of the methanogens detected within the sludge, After 7 weeks the sulfate conversion rate of the full-scale reactor reached the design rate of 15 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis showed that the bacterial community 14 weeks after start-up of the full-scale reactors was mainly related to the sulfate-reducing genus This research was supported by a grant from the EET program of the Dutch ministries of Economic Affairs, Education, Culture and Sciences and Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment (EETK98028). We would like to thank C. Copini and W. Vermeulen from Zinifex Budel Zink for valuable discussion and J.E. Edwards for critically reviewing the manuscript.