Enamel, the hardest tissue in the human body, has excellent mechanical properties, mainly due to its highly ordered spatial structure. Fabricating enamel-like structure is still a challenge today. In this work, a simple and highly efficient method was introduced, using the silk fibroin as a template to regulate calcium- and phosphate- supersaturated solution to regenerate enamel-like hydroxyapatite crystals on various substrates (enamel, dentin, titanium, and polyethylene) under rotary evaporation. The enamel-like zinc oxide nanorod array structure was also successfully synthesized using the aforementioned method. This strategy provides a new approach to design and fabricate mineral crystals with particular orientation coatings for materials.Enamel, the outermost layer of tooth and the direct undertaker of chewing activities, has excellent mechanical properties [ The bioinspired construction of an enamel-like structure has attracted attention in material science and dentistry due to its particular structure that endows the enamel with excellent mechanical properties. Various methods have been developed to regenerate enamel-like HA crystals in recent years, such as organic templates (amelogenin and its analogs [ Biomineralization is a process of organic matrix template controlling the inorganic crystal growth and assembly to form organic and inorganic hybrid materials [ Calcium chloride dihydrate (CaCl The normal premolars were obtained from the Hospital of Stomatology in Anhui Medical University, China. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Anhui Medical University (Permit number: LLSC20190118). The teeth were embedded in acrylic resin and cut into enamel slices using a band saw coated with diamond under running water. The enamel slices were polished with 500, 1000, 1500, and 2000 grit silicon carbide paper, respectively. Then, they were ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, ethyl alcohol, and deionized water (DIW) for 5 min and stored in thymol solution (0.2 wt%) at 4 °C before use. The dentin slices were prepared following the same method. The Ti sheets were polished with 500, 1000, 1500, and 2000 grit silicon carbide paper under running water, respectively. After ultrasonically cleaned with acetone, ethyl alcohol, and DIW for 5 min, they were immersed in 10 M sodium hydroxide solution at 60 °C for 24 h. Afterward, the sheets were immersed in 2 mg mL The Two kinds of remineralizing solution were prepared. One was composed of NaCl (7.9 mg), NaF (4.9 mg), K The enamel slices were etched with 37% phosphoric acid for 30 s and fixed on the inner surface of the 250 mL rotating flask with 100 mL remineralizing solution. The rotating flask was immersed into a 70 °C water bath and mounted onto a rotary evaporator with 20 rpm (RE-52AA, Yarong, Shanghai, China). The remineralizing solution was replaced every 12 h. After 20 min, 1 h, 12 h, 24 h, and 48 h, the tooth slices were taken out, rinsed with DIW and vacuum dried for further characterization. In this experiment, the growth of enamel-like HA structure on tooth slices in the remineralizing solution with and without SF under rotary evaporation, in the remineralizing solution with SF under rotary evaporation or not, and in the remineralizing solution with SF under evaporation with or without rotation were evaluated. In addition, dentin slices, Ti sheets, and PE sheets were used to observe the crystal growth on their surface using this rotary evaporation methods. The morphology of the remineralized samples was investigated using FE-SEM (Gemini 500, Germany) and FE-TEM (Jeol-2010, Japan) equipped with HRTEM (Jeol-2010 Japan). The crystal structures of the remineralized samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD, MXPAHF, Japan) at a scanning range from 3° to 60°. The interaction between SF and HA was characterized by FTIR (NicoletiS50, USA) from 4000 cm Nanoindentation measurement (TI900 Nanomechanical Test Instrument, Hysitron Inc.) was achieved with loading and unloading times for 15 s, respectively, and holding time for 10 s under the maximum applied force of 40 mN. Five sites were tested for each sample. The elastic modulus and nanohardness were calculated from the force–displacement curves by using the Triboscan Quasi software. The native tooth slices were used as the control group. Two-way ANOVA was performed using the SPSS 25.0 software (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY) with significance set at The crystals grown on the enamel surface were scraped for XRD analysis to evaluate the inorganic phase structure. The crystals regenerated with SF regulation were marked as SF-HA. In the XRD spectra ( Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) were performed to characterize the SF-HA crystal structures. The TEM image in SF and the grown crystals scraped from the enamel surface were collected for Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) analysis to understand the interaction between SF and HA. The crystals regenerated without SF regulation were marked as non-SF-HA. For the SF spectrum (  The interface between the enamel substrate and the regenerated SF-HA layer showed good continuity without any residual space ( Prolonging the remineralization time gradually increased the thickness of the regenerated SF-HA layer, such as 3 μm for 1 h, 11 μm for 12 h, 50 μm for 24 h, and 70 μm for 48 h ( The SF-HA grown on the enamel surface was scraped for TGA to verify its inorganic components. As can be seen in The mechanical property of the regenerated SF-HA layer was evaluated using nanoindentation. Measurements were performed on the SF-HA and non-SF-HA grown on the enamel surface, natural enamel, etched enamel, and natural dentin ( Based on the abovementioned results and discussion, enamel-like HA crystals can be generated on enamel surface under rotary evaporation. The microstructure of enamel-like HA crystals were similar to that of natural enamel, in terms of crystal size, morphology, and assembly. Furthermore, the mechanical property of the crystals was almost similar to that of natural enamel but should be improved in the future. The remineralizing solution without SF was used as control to determine the role of SF in HA crystal growth. The SEM results showed that similar HA architecture was regenerated on the enamel surface in the remineralizing solution without SF ( Mineralization without rotation was performed in the control groups to determine the role of rotation in the growth of SF-HA crystals. In this situation, the remineralizing solution was relatively unstable, as evidenced by precipitation and cloudiness, which made mineralization difficult to control. Therefore, the SEM results showed that the disordered HA crystals precipitated on the enamel surface (Note S2 and Fig. S4). To determine the role of rotary evaporation in the SF-HA crystals growing, we performed the mineralizing process without rotary evaporation. The mineralizing process was easy to control as the experimental group. The SEM results showed that the regenerated SF-HA crystals without rotary evaporation had a similar structure to the experimental group. However, the SF-HA crystals grew slowly at a thickness of 1–2 μm/day compared with the experimental group (50 μm/day) (Note S3 and Fig. S5). The natural enamel was replaced with dentin slice, Ti sheet, and PE sheet to evaluate the universal application of the method to regenerate enamel-like microstructure on a general substrate surface. The dentin's structure and composites were different from that of enamel although dentin was also a primary part of tooth tissues. Histologically, the calcified collagen matrix comprises the basic microstructure of dentin, containing approximately 70 wt% inorganic mineral, 20 wt% organic matrix, and 10 wt% water [ The Ti and PE surfaces were activated and coated with a layer of polydopamine to induce an enamel-like structure. The polydopamine surface may assist HA formation and remineralization [ Yeom et al. have reported that using the layer-by-layer method develops abiotic tooth enamel with hexagonal ZnO crystal assembly [ The secondary structure of SF primarily consisted of random coil, α-helix, β-sheet, and β-turn [ Given the several active sites on the surface, [ HA growth was controlled by the organic template and affected by the character of the substrate surface. In this study, the natural enamel was the best substrate surface, especially where the enamel prisms perpendicular to the enamel surface (natural enamel HA crystal perpendicular to the enamel surface, Crystal nucleation and growth were controlled by thermodynamics and kinetics. Although the homogeneous and the heterogeneous nucleation existed simultaneously, the heterogeneous nucleation was the primary form in this system due to the role of SF [ The evaporation of the mineralization method was reported to control mineral growth. [ In the method, the enamel slices and other substrates were fixed to the flask wall first, and the substrates were in and out of the remineralized solution repeatedly during the rotation process. When the substrates were in the solution, the remineralizing solution was adsorbed on the substrate surface. In addition, when the substrates rotated out of the remineralizing solution, the local concentration of the adsorbed remineralizing solution on the substrate surfaces was sharply increased due to evaporation [ In addition, the solution rotation exerted a certain fluid shear force on the substrate surfaces [ Based on the abovementioned results, a simple and highly efficient method of rotary evaporation was introduced using SF as template to regulate Ca- and P- supersaturated solution to regenerate enamel-like HA crystals or other mineral crystals on various substrates. In clinic dentistry, ceramic materials and its composite, such as porcelain fused to metal crown, are widely used. However, all the synthesized materials are different from the tooth tissue. The hardness of ceramic is higher than that of enamel, which often causes the opposite tooth heavily wearing. This rotary evaporation method may be performed to fabricate a novel enamel-like HA crown in the future for clinical use. An organic solvent-soluble polymer, e.g., PE, may be used as substrate to regenerate the enamel-like HA crystals, and PE may be dissolved in acetone. Then, an independent bulk enamel-like material is obtained ( Finally, it must be pointed out that the architecture of the regenerated SF-HA is only oriented nano-rod HA crystal densely packed along their In this study, a layer of enamel-like architecture was successfully grown on the surfaces of natural enamel and dentin tooth tissue, Ti sheet, and PE sheet under rotatory evaporation condition by using the supersaturation solution containing Ca, P, F ions, and SF. The corresponding crystal size, morphology, arrangement, and mechanical properties of the SF-HA layer were highly similar to those of natural tooth enamel. Moreover, the crystal can grow fast with controllable thickness, which can be applied as surface coatings onto different materials. This method opened a new approach to design and fabricate mineral crystals with particular orientation, such as enamel-like ZnO array.  hydroxyapatite silk fibroin polyethylene Shengrui Wang: Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft. Le Zhang: Investigation, Data curation. Wendy Chen: Investigation, Formal analysis. Huimin Jin: Investigation, Formal analysis. Ya Zhang: Investigation, Formal analysis. Leping Wu: Investigation, Formal analysis. Hui Shao: Investigation, Formal analysis. Zehui Fang: Investigation, Formal analysis. Xiaoxue He: Investigation, Formal analysis. Shunli Zheng: Investigation, Formal analysis. Chris Ying Cao: Investigation, Formal analysis. Hai Ming Wong: Supervision，and Writing - review & editing. Quan-Li Li: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Methodology, Writing - review & editing. This work was supported by The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at