Increased and intensified pig production has raised the needs for proper management systems of pig manure in order to reduce negative environmental impacts. The objectives of this study were to identify the most significant environmental impacts from pig manure management considering a wide range of impact categories and to determine which integrated technology system at which handling stage can achieve the highest impact reduction. Twelve scenarios applying various treatment, storage and land application systems were developed and compared. Life cycle assessment (LCA) with the aim of capturing the actual consequences of the considered scenarios was selected as the tool for impact quantification. The most important impact categories in this investigation are global warming (GWP), aquatic eutrophication (AEP), respiratory inorganics (RIP), and terrestrial eutrophication (TEP). The two latter impacts, caused by ammonia emissions, have not been widely considered in most of previous LCA studies on pig manure management. The main keys for the effective impact reduction are the integration of treatment technology systems aiming at energy recovery with high nutrient recovery and control of greenhouse gas, ammonia, and nitrate emissions at every handling stage. For GWP and AEP, the anaerobic digestion-based scenario with natural crust storage achieves the highest impact reduction because of high efficiencies in energy and nutrient recovery with restricted emissions of GHG and nitrate. For RIP and TEP, the incineration and thermal gasification based scenarios and the scenario without a treatment system applying the deep injection method yield the highest impact minimisation due to the lowest ammonia emissions. This study further indicates the need to consider all significant impacts to decide the best management options taking into consideration local conditions.Livestock production has increased and intensified as a result of higher food demand, due to the rapidly increasing world population, with limited farming land ( However, recently studies have indicated that ammonia emissions can potentially contribute to other types of impacts, which have not been included before ( To reduce the environmental impacts, many technologies have been developed and applied to decrease the emissions of greenhouse gases and ammonia, and to recover energy and nutrients. Different treatment technologies (e.g. anaerobic digestion) applied to pig manure management can reduce and save greenhouse gas emissions from reduced methane (CH Despite the existing research into technological improvements, the focus has been relatively narrow and only encompassed one or a few handling stages such as treatment and land application stages ( In order to reduce the environmental impacts effectively, the objectives of this study are 1) to identify the most significant environmental impacts arising from pig manure management taking into consideration of a wide span of different impact categories and 2) to determine which technology system at which handling stage can significantly minimise the impacts. With respect to facilitating future improvements, it is important to be site specific and this study is based on European practices. Specifically, Danish conditions for electricity and heat systems are considered. To take the wide range of environmental impacts into consideration, life cycle assessment (LCA) is applied as a tool for the impact quantification. The functional unit applied in this assessment is the treatment and disposal of 1 The general framework for LCA is described in the ISO 14040 and 14044 standards which are basically followed in this study ( The included life cycle stages are treatment, storage, transportation and land application as presented in The modelled changes consider the treatment, storage and land application stages ( At the treatment stage, the four systems (TRE1 to 4) are selected from the most promising and traditional integrated treatment scenarios according to Consequential modelling, applied in this study, is characterised by including the affected suppliers (sometimes referred to as marginal suppliers) and by avoiding co-product allocation by system expansion ( Twelve scenarios are considered on the basis of European practices and illustrated in The data of pig manure composition are selected from a European database and Danish full-scale biogas plants ( For N flows, the total N content in manure is categorised into the emissions of NH For P balance, the total P input in pig manure is balanced to the available and unavailable P outputs for cultivated plant uptake compared with artificial fertiliser. Based on ( For C balance, the main emission considered is only CH Other inventories for energy and material consumptions and transport are based on the existing database in SimaPro, such as Ecoinvent data v2.0 ( LCIA is performed using the STEPWISE2006 method ( In order to identify significant impact categories, the baseline scenario (S1) is assessed with three LCIA methods (STEPWISE2006, IMPACT2002+ including biogenic methane, and EDIP2003). The comparison is based on the percentage of single scores for each impact. On average, the most significant impact categories for the methods are global warming, respiratory inorganics and terrestrial eutrophication. In fact, aquatic eutrophication using the EDIP2003 method represents a large percentage of the single score but the sum of the positive value from the N emissions (88%) and the negative value from the avoided P emissions (−80%) results in low contribution in In the later assessment, the results will be presented in the four most important categories – global warming, respiratory inorganics, terrestrial eutrophication and aquatic eutrophication. The characterised results of the changes at the treatment stage (S1, 7, 9, and 11) are presented in For global warming potentials (GWP), the anaerobic digestion-based scenario (S7) performs the highest reduction of greenhouse gas emissions compared with the reference scenario/S1 (147 For respiratory inorganics potentials (RIP), the incineration-based scenario (S9) has the lowest impact (0.043 For terrestrial eutrophication potentials (TEP), S9 and S11 have the lowest impacts (64 For aquatic eutrophication potentials (AEP), S9 and S11 have the lowest impacts (0.6 In order to determine which stage most influences the environmental impacts, impact assessment results for S1, S7, S9 and S11 are separated into the four handling stages ( For GWP, the most important stage for the scenarios with energy recovery is the treatment due to avoided heat and electricity production, whereas, for the no treatment scenario (S1), it is the storage due to methane emissions. Nevertheless, for anaerobic digestion-based scenario (S7), the land application stage is also important for GWP reduction due to the avoided N and P fertiliser. For RIP and TEP, the most significant stage is the land application followed by the storage due to the high amount of ammonia emissions during both stages for all scenarios. For AEP, the most significant stages are the storage and land application stages due to nitrate and avoided phosphate emissions, respectively. In addition, at the transport stage, the different transport distances do not significantly affect the considered impacts. The LCIA results of the eight integrated scenarios at the storage stage (S1 and S6 to S12) are shown in The midpoint results of the five integrated scenarios at the land application stage (S1 to S5) are shown in The twelve scenarios representing all the considered changes are compared with the reference scenario (S1) with respect to each significant impact category ( The findings imply that the main key for impact reduction is the effective treatment systems aiming at energy recovery with high available nutrients (N and P), and the control of ammonia, nitrate and GHG emissions at every handling stage. The sensitivity analyses are carried out to determine the robustness of the results by considering how sensible parameters influence the LCIA results. Four major influencing parameters and their effects are analysed and described below.  Due to the fact that the emission factors of different storage and spreading systems depend on many factors such as weather conditions, soil conditions and manure characteristics, the uncertainties of ammonia emissions – the main influencing factor for RIP and TEP – are included in the life cycle impact assessment and presented as ranges of intervals in In some European countries, storage and land application systems which are most commonly applied are a storage tank with natural crust cover and band spreading systems (  Although the sensitivity factors affect the degrees of the impacts, they do not change the main keys for impact reduction, which are the effective energy recovery systems (anaerobic digestion, incineration and thermal gasification) and the control of GHG, ammonia and nitrate emissions at every handling stage. This LCA study presents and compares twelve integrated technological changes at the treatment, storage and land application stages, and also considers new significant impact categories in pig manure management. On the basis of the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) results, it appears that the most important impact categories arising from pig manure management are global warming (GWP), aquatic eutrophication (AEP), respiratory inorganics (RIP, respiratory effects on human health from inorganic substances), and terrestrial eutrophication (TEP). The latter two are caused by ammonia emissions and have generally not been considered in LCA studies on pig manure management before. The importance of RIP and TEP suggest that there is a need for ammonia emission controls to reduce the overall environmental burdens from the piggery waste. The main keys for the effective impact minimisation from pig manure management are 1) integration of treatment technology systems aiming at energy recovery in combination with high nutrient recovery for GWP saving and 2) control of greenhouse gas, ammonia, and nitrate emission at every handling stage for GWP, RIP, TEP and AEP reduction. For GWP, the anaerobic digestion-based scenarios achieve the highest reduction values from the reference scenario (144–147 With respect to the integration of effective technologies and the newly considered environmental impacts, arising when the LCIA methods are applied, this study is useful for engineers, researchers and also decision makers to plan or research how to improve pig manure management systems at both national and global levels. In addition, it enables us to consider proper pig manure management as an abatement method for the particulate matter reduction. However, the results are based on emission factors published in selected literature and they significantly depend on many factors such as weather conditions, soil conditions and manure characteristics. To apply this research effectively, it requires local data collection (e.g. marginal suppliers for by-products), inclusion of phosphorus as a non-renewable resource, and considerations of investment costs and capacities to implement the technologies in practice.