Pelleted feeds (PF) are popular in horse nutrition because of high palatability and improved feeding hygiene, but ingestion is faster for PF than for cereals or muesli feed. The aim of the study was to evaluate whether variable amounts of two PFs produced with different physical properties from the same batch of feed can affect feed intake patterns in horses. Chewing patterns were measured in six warmblood mares (519 ± 36.3 kg) on two PFs (small-sized PF1: ø 5 mm, length 21.9 ± 4.97 mm, large-sized PF2: edge length 15.6 ± 0.14 × 15.6 ± 0.08 mm, length 54.4 ± 9.59 mm) in three different amounts (1.0, 1.5, 2.0 kg) once per day additional to hay. PF 2 was ingested faster than PF1 for the meal size 1.0 kg, but PF 1 was ingested more rapidly with a reduced chewing intensity if the offered meal size increased. The ingestion of PF 2 tendentially elevated the chewing intensity at higher meal sizes. An additional, but inverted meal size effect compared to 1.0 kg, was observed for 1.5 kg, where PF 1 was ingested at a higher speed combined with a lower chewing intensity compared to PF 2. Independent from the offered amount, PF 2 induced a markedly increased saliva production combined with a higher daily water intake. Larger-sized pellets seem to intensify the chewing process and decelerate the ingestion time if the meal size becomes larger.Chewing patterns in horses vary between feedstuffs (concentrate or roughage, Two PF's were produced from the same batch of feed ( Six warmblood mares (mean ± sd age 8.5 ± 3.1 years, body weight 519 ± 36.3 kg, body condition score 5.2 ± 0.42/9) housed in boxes with straw as bedding were fed with meadow hay and concentrates and had daily access to a sand paddock for 2 h. Separate water meters per box facilitated measuring the individual water intake per horse and day. The horses received the two PF's in three different quantities (1.0, 1.5, 2.0 kg) once per day (8 am) according to a blocked cross over design with a period length of 8 days each. To perform the measurement, pellets were provided within a box positioned on the floor (length × width × height: 0.8 × 0.48 × 0.3 m). The bigger boxes were selected to ensure that all provided meal sizes have an equal distribution on the bottom of the box to prevent a superposing of the PF's at the bigger meal sizes. The hay was fed in two equal meals per day (1.5 kg hay/100 kg body weight and day; fed at 7 am and 4 pm) and was always eaten completely. According to the recommended feeding practice, hay was provided before PF's, at the test days in a quantity of 1 kg 60 min before the respective PF was given. Intake (feed intake time, FIT [min kg dm- SAS® was used to perform a mixed model with “pellet characteristics” (pellet) and “meal size” (size) as major factors including their interaction. In addition, the period effect was considered as fixed effect and, as there were repeated observations for the horses, the horse effect was considered as a random effect in the model. Finally, the following statistical mixed model was used within the SAS® procedure mixed: Based on a multiple paired The contents of the proximate nutrients matched between the both PF's, even though there were slight differences within the crude fiber and the neutral detergent fiber. The starch content differed between PF 1 and PF 2 (29.7% vs. 36.6%) and also the SEM-pictures ( The body weight (529 ± 39.5 kg) and the BCS (5.3 ± 0.38/9) of the horses did not change during the study ( The body weight (529 ± 39.5 kg) and the BCS (5.3 ± 0.38/9) of the horses did not change during the study ( There were no differences regarding the water holding capacity between PF 1 and 2 ( The F-test revealed a significant or tendential significant interaction for the feed intake time ( Regarding the feed intake time [min kg dm The present study shows that physical characteristics and the offered meals size of pelleted compound feeds can affect feed intake parameters in horses. The nearly 6-fold higher breaking force for PF 2 seems to intensify the chewing process caused by a higher force during mastication or e.g. the comminution of the larger pellets with the front teeth. Previous studies in rabbits revealed that there is most direct evidence for a relation between chewing force and parotid flow ( Morphological alterations observed particularly in the smaller sized pellets produced with higher temperatures during production process could either been interpreted as indicative for gelatinization ( Feed intake parameters differed between PF 1 and 2 if the meal size increased from 1.0 to 1.5 kg. For the meal size 1.0 kg it seems as if PF 1 provide more benefits, because it was ingested at a lower rate with more chews per ingested unit of dm than PF 2, but this observation was inverted for increasing meals sizes. Maybe the small meal size and the smaller diameter of PF 1 increased the time for searching and licking (lips movements) on the bottom of the trough which increased the feed intake time per se. Quantities above 1.0 kg from PF 1 were ingested more rapidly at a lower chewing intensity. A possible explanation is that the ingested amount per bout (e.g. feed intake amount in g dm min Previous studies revealed that feeding commercial pelleted compound feeds (ø 5 and 8 mm) in comparison to hay resulted in a reduction of the chewing movement in all 3 dimensions ( To illustrate possible long term effects in future studies (water balance/saliva production, glycemic and insulinemic response) this study can give a first idea on changes in feed intake behaviour of horses fed diets supplemented by pelleted concentrates. The results of the present study suggest that chewing patterns in horses fed pelleted diets are affected by both i) the physical characteristics, where the breaking force seems to be a predictor for saliva production and a tendentially intensified chewing process, but also ii) the offered meal size, meaning that e.g. clearly >1.0 kg/meal of larger-sized pellets can intensify the chewing process and decelerate feed intake referring to each ingested kg of dm. Commercial pelleted concentrates with a diameter of 5 mm can convince at smaller meal sizes, whereas the time for searching and licking increases the feed intake time only apparently. Nevertheless, the observed interactions between pellet's physical properties and meal size can be used as decision support especially if bigger meal sizes (considering the limited starch amount of 1 g starch kg bwt meal The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at None of the authors of this paper has a financial or personal relationship with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence or bias the content of the paper. Preliminary results were presented as an abstract at the 71st Conference of the Society of Nutrition Physiology in Göttingen from 14th–16th in 2017 and also as an abstract at the ESVCN Congress from 13th–16th September in 2017 in Cirencester, UK.