Fault-related microstructures and fault orientations in siliceous mudstone were studied at the Horonobe Underground Research Laboratory site in Japan. Thin dark bands define a weak foliation that exhibits compactional cataclastic fabrics in thin section. These fabrics were observed both along the faults and beyond the fault tips, in outcrop and in drill core. Most of the bands are so thin that it was not possible to measure their thickness in thin section. However, scanning electron microscope images of fault surfaces revealed evidence of chemical compaction within the bands. Millimeter-scale displacements occur along similar dark bands in diatomaceous mudstone, which overlies the siliceous mudstone. In all boreholes, the dominant orientation of unfolded faults is WNW–ESE strike and a near-vertical dip. These observations suggest that the faults formed along compactional shear bands that in turn nucleated under ductile or brittle–ductile conditions. The development of compactional shear bands preceded fault formation, occurring just prior to folding, in response to E–W compression related to the eastward migration of the Amurian plate.The low permeability and high sorption capacity of mudstone makes it an important natural barrier in radioactive-waste-disposal facilities ( Natural deformation structures observed in the field may record previous episodes of brittle or ductile deformation behavior, which can lead to an understanding of the relationship between brittleness and deformation behavior in a rock. When defined on the basis of specific rheological behavior (e.g., Detailed observations of fault microstructures will reveal the mechanism of fault nucleation; i.e., brittle or ductile deformation. In particular, where faults nucleate from ductile deformation processes, detailed microstructural characterization of the fault reveals evidence of strain hardening (compactional deformation) during fault nucleation. For example, the development of faults in sandstones is well understood, as is their detailed textural evolution, where numerous faults originate as compactional shear bands with porosity-reducing structures (e.g., Abundant faults occur in siliceous mudstone at the Horonobe Underground Research Laboratory (URL) site in Japan; their origin has not previously been identified. This study draws upon field descriptions, analyses of thin section, SEM observations of fault microstructures, and fault orientations in boreholes to determine the origin of faults developed in siliceous mudstone. The Horonobe URL site is located on the eastern margin of a Neogene to Quaternary sedimentary basin on the western side of northern Hokkaido, in a Quaternary, active foreland fold-and-thrust belt near the boundary between the Okhotsk and Amurian plates (e.g., The Wakkanai Formation, a Neogene siliceous mudstone, is poorly exposed at the Horonobe URL site. The siliceous mudstone, for the most part, is a single, massive, homogeneous lithofacies ( Burial and subsidence of the Wakkanai, Koetoi and Yuchi formations occurred during the Neogene–Quaternary. The siliceous mudstone was buried to a depth of more than 1 km at the time of maximum burial ( In the folded siliceous mudstone, abundant predominantly strike-slip faults crosscut bedding planes at a high angle, and bedding-parallel faults are observed in outcrop and in drill core ( This study focuses on the faults that crosscut bedding planes at a high angle, which are simply called “the faults” or “faults” herein. A “fault” is defined as a slip surface with slickensides, associated with fault rocks, slickenlines, and/or slickensteps. Dark bands are closely associated with the faults in siliceous mudstone outcrops. The dark bands are observable at and beyond fault tips near faults with fault breccias ( In thin section, a weak foliation oriented sub-parallel to dark bands in siliceous mudstone is defined by the preferred orientation of tabular crystals (e.g., feldspar), very fine-grained minerals (possibly clay minerals such as illite), and small, black, fine-grained cataclasite bands ( High-resolution SEM observations of fault surfaces show that very thin dark bands along faults have compactional textures. Silica-dominant gelatinous films occur across fault surfaces ( The orientations of faults in boreholes were determined by making detailed correlations of drill core data with acoustic imagery data obtained with the borehole televiewer survey (BHTV) in HDB-6, HDB-9, HDB-10, HDB-11, and PB-V01, or the resistivity image data obtained with electrical micro-imaging (EMI) in HDB-5. Bedding plane orientations were determined by EMI, though the orientations in PB-V01, where EMI was not conducted, are taken to be the same as those in the neighboring borehole HDB-6 (  Bedding plane orientations in HDB-6, HDB-9, HDB-11, and PB-V01, which are located along the western limb of folds ‘F The major fault orientations in HDB-6, HDB-9, HDB-11, and PB-V01 are similar, and have lower dip angles than those in HDB-5 (  Thin dark bands were observed along and near faults. Observations of thin sections revealed weak foliations with compactional/cataclastic fabrics. Most of the bands along faults are too thin to determine their thicknesses, even in thin section. SEM observations of fault surfaces revealed a surface-parallel alignment of platy particles, and the existence of silica films with fused silica textures in bands along faults. Although opal-CT lepispheres were not found on fault surfaces, they were observed in adjacent matrices, although partly comminuted. Similar dark bands occur in diatomaceous mudstone, where millimeter-scale displacements were observed along bands. These observations indicate that the dark bands are compactional shear bands resulting from physical and chemical compaction, including the preferential alignment of platy particles, the cataclasis and comminution of relatively fragile opal-CT lepispheres, and the fusing-together of highly soluble opal-CT crystallites ( The dark bands were also observed at and beyond fault tips, indicating that fault formation followed the formation of compactional shear bands. This is coherent in a rheological sense. Usually, in terms of rheology, fault formation and compactional shear band formation correspond to strain softening and strain hardening, respectively ( The transition from compactional shear band formation to fault formation likely proceeded as follows (referring to the model of Thus, the faults analyzed in this study are considered to have formed along compactional shear bands that nucleated under ductile conditions by a deformation process involving the formation of compactional shear bands prior to the development of faults. However, the band thicknesses are very thin, indicated that strain hardening may not have been significant. In turn, this may suggest that the faults nucleated in the brittle–ductile transitional regime rather than within the ductile regime. Deformation bands are known to develop in sandstone (e.g., The nucleation age of a fault is generally closely related to its orientation. For example, vertical fractures, regardless of bedding plane attitude in folded sedimentary rocks, likely formed after folding ( In the present study, major fault orientations (in their unfolded state) in all boreholes are concentrated around a WNW–ESE strike, with nearly vertical dips ( In addition, the concentration of fault orientations ( Deformation behavior is closely related to the history of burial and uplift of the host rocks ( The thinness of compactional shear bands along faults suggests that the faults nucleated in the brittle–ductile transitional regime rather than in the ductile regime, as mentioned above. However, the faults probably formed at or near the maximum burial depths, and the sedimentary rocks are estimated to have consolidated normally, in a ductile regime. On the other hand, the siliceous mudstone was indurated by burial silica diagenesis ( The growth history of the faults is summarized as follows ( Thin dark bands characterized by weak foliations and micro-scale compactional and cataclastic fabrics were observed in siliceous mudstone along faults and beyond fault tips in outcrop and in drill core. Most of the bands along faults are too thin to measure band thicknesses, even in thin section. SEM observations of fault surfaces revealed evidence of chemical compaction within bands along faults. Similar dark bands in diatomaceous mudstone (overlying the siliceous mudstone) show millimeter-scale displacements along bands. The major faults, in their unfolded state, are predominantly oriented around a WNW–ESE strike and are nearly vertical in all boreholes. These observations suggest that faults formed along compactional shear bands that nucleated in the ductile or brittle–ductile transitional regime. The formation of compactional shear bands preceded fault formation, just before the initiation of folding, in response to E–W compression due to the eastward migration of the Amurian plate. This type of information on the origin of faults is fundamental in understanding the relationship between brittleness and the deformation behavior of rock ( The British Geological Survey provided the SEM images in Fig. 5. A. E. Milodowski is thanked for providing the SEM observations. I would also like to extend my gratitude to T. Blenkinsop and B. Dehandschutter for their critical reviews of the manuscript, and to A. Stallard for editing the English and providing helpful suggestions.