In this study, a new experimental technique, particle image shadowgraphy, is used to measure the settling velocities of spherical particles (0.5mm–2.0mm) in Power-law fluids of variable viscosity and density. Different concentrations of CMC-water mixtures (0.14–0.28wt%) are used as test fluids for the experiments. A new empirical equation, which is an improved version of the Shah et al. (2007) model, for predicting the settling velocity of a spherical particle in Power-law fluid is proposed. The new empirical model is found to give an average error of 10% in predicting the settling velocity.Particle settling velocity is a key variable affecting sedimentation and transportation processes involved in many industrial operations such as settling of drilled cuttings and proppants in drilling and fracturing fluids, design of separators and settling tanks, and hydraulic and pneumatic transportation of solid particles in mining and agriculture industry applications. Factors affecting the settling velocity of sediment particles through fluids are well known (i.e., particle size, shape and density; fluid density, shear viscosity, yield strength, gel strength, elasticity). However, the functional relationship between the particle settling velocity and controlling factors is not well defined. Traditionally, prediction of settling velocities have either been made by analytically solving the governing equations derived for some simplified conditions or using empirical equations based on experimental curves. Drag coefficient correlations developed in various studies ( Since the average error involved in the case of Power-law fluid is large, the incorporation of settling velocity of spherical particles for calculating pumping energy, critical lift velocity, and other design parameters can potentially lead to significant errors. The failure of correlations and of the Newtonian drag curve motivated a seminal study by Taking into account the high error in the predicted settling velocity values and the discrepancies in the measured experimental values of the literature, a detailed and accurate study is required. Little research has been conducted in recent years to carefully explain and investigate the accuracy of Shah's hypothesis. The relatively low values for regression in Shah's model may have occurred due to experimental errors in the measured values in the various studies which Shah drew upon. In other words, there is an issue of variability in the results from one author to another, which was noted in the study by This work aims at developing a more accurate empirical correlation for predicting a sphere's settling velocity in Power-law fluid. The effects of fluid rheological properties, Power-law index, The particle image shadowgraphy (PIS) technique used for visualizing movement of particles in fluid media is based on high resolution imaging with pulsed backlight illumination. It operates on the general principle that a shadow is cast whenever there exists a significant difference in the density of the mediums through which light passes. Using this technique, a series of shadow images of the particle falling in the fluid and in the focal plane of the camera are captured using the double-frame camera with pulsed illumination system. The illumination source is comprised of a 50 One of the important advantages of using PIS is that it is independent of the shape and physical properties (e.g., density, size, and transparency) of the particles. It also permits investigating the particle's size down to 5 A carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) mixture in water is used as the fluid medium, and different concentrations (0.14–0.28 The procedure for obtaining empirical data is divided into two components: the physical setup of the experiment and the processing of data. In the physical setup the double-frame camera, pulsed illumination system, and laser are connected. Experiments begin with the calibration of the camera, which is carried out using a rectangular plate with 0.8 The recorded images are processed using DaVis 8.0 software ( Experiments are conducted using three different Power-law fluids and four different sizes of glass spheres. The properties of the glass beads used in this study are given in Three different concentrations of CMC-water mixtures are used as test fluid media in the experiments. The rheological properties of the prepared non-Newtonian fluids are measured using the highly automated and multifunctional BOHLIN rheometer. The measured shear stresses versus shear rate data for different CMC-water mixtures are shown in The repeatability of the three readings for each individual concentration is found to be sufficient and, therefore, only one data set is used in the analysis. The flow behavior index Measurements using particle image shadowgraphy (PIS) technique were calibrated by comparing the measured diameters of spherical glass beads with the standard glass bead sizes provided by the manufacturer (Corposular's Glass Spacers Millibeads). Comparison of the measured and actual diameters of the spherical glass beads are given in PIS technique measurements were further verified by using the universal drag coefficient, C The experimental results were then compared with the universal drag coefficient, C Drag coefficient, C By combining the definitions of Reynolds number and drag coefficient, particle diameter (m) consistency index (Pa fluid flow behavior index, dimensionless particle terminal velocity (m/s) fluid density (kg/m particle density (kg/m By utilizing the observed dependency of drag coefficient on  Using the particle diameter, particle and fluid density, and fluid rheological parameters ( With the measured flow behavior index The Reynolds number is calculated using the relationship given in Eq. Settling velocity is then calculated by using the definition of particle Reynolds number given by Eq. The shadowgraphy technique, which can measure settling velocity up to seven decimal places, is a highly accurate image processing technique. Experiments using four different sizes of spheres were conducted, with the result of increased precision. In order to find time required for a particle to reach its terminal settling velocity, we have used the method and the example calculations presented by For each fluid particle system three or more sets of experiments were performed to ensure a high level of accuracy and repeatability of the experimental results. The measured average settling velocity values are reported in Flow behavior index The model discussed in The experimental results from the shadowgraph are plotted in the form of (C The coefficients, where The developed model for settling velocity of a sphere in Power-law fluid is compared with a completely new set of data measured using a shadowgraph technique. The CMC wt% 0.1714 is prepared and settling velocity of spheres has been measured. The results are shown in The settling velocity of freely descending spheres in Power-law fluid has been measured using the highly accurate PIS technique. In order to study the influence of a fluid's rheological parameters on the settling behavior, the effects of Using the experimental results from shadowgraph experiments, a new empirical correlation for predicting the sphere's settling velocity has been proposed. The proposed model is an improved version of the highly accurate This research is financially supported through the funds available from