This study experimentally analyzed the influence of shear processes on nonlinear flow behavior through 3D rough-walled rock fractures. A high-precision apparatus was developed to perform stress-dependent fluid flow tests of fractured rocks. Then, water flow tests on rough-walled fractures with different mechanical displacements were conducted. At each shear level, the hydraulic pressure ranged from 0 to 0.6MPa, and the normal load varied from 7 to 35kN. The results show that (i) the relationship between the volumetric flow rate and hydraulic gradient of rough-walled fractures can be well fit using Forchheimer’s law. Notably, both the linear and nonlinear coefficients in Forchheimer’s law decrease during shearing; (ii) a sixth-order polynomial function is used to evaluate the transmissivity based on the Reynolds number of fractures during shearing. The transmissivity exhibits a decreasing trend as the Reynolds number increases and an increasing trend as the shear displacement increases; (iii) the critical hydraulic gradient, critical Reynolds number and equivalent hydraulic aperture of the rock fractures all increase as the shear displacement increases. When the shear displacement varies from 0 to 15mm, the critical hydraulic gradient ranges from 0.3 to 2.2 for a normal load of 7kN and increases to 1.8–8.6 for a normal load of 35kN; and (iv) the Forchheimer law results are evaluated by plotting the normalized transmissivity of the fractures during shearing against the Reynolds number. An increase in the normal load shifts the fitted curves downward. Additionally, the Forchheimer coefficient β decreases with the shear displacement but increases with the applied normal load.Fluid flow in fractured rock masses is important in many engineering activities, such as nuclear waste disposal, geothermal energy extraction, oil and natural gas production, CO Generally, incompressible, steady state fluid flow through single rock fractures is governed by the well-known Navier-Stokes (NS) equations and the mass conservation equation, which can be written as follows ( The most extensively adopted mathematical description of nonlinear flow through rough-walled fractures is Forchheimer’s law ( Natural rough-walled fractures are often subjected to field stresses or mechanical displacements, which directly influence the fracture aperture and, hence, the fluid flow behavior in the fractures. The void space between opposing surfaces (fracture aperture) may increase due to shear dilation ( This study experimentally investigates the effects of the shearing process on the nonlinear flow characteristics of 3D rough-walled fractures subjected to a normal load. A new apparatus with good sealing performance and a high-precision control system was developed to conduct stress-dependent fluid flow tests. Then, plate granite specimens (495 A special apparatus was developed to study stress-dependent fluid flow through fractured rocks, as shown in    Hard granites (average unit weight of 2.69 First, intact granite specimens with rectangular prismatic shapes, 600 According to the lengths of the fractal curves and variations in the curves for various fractal dimensions The fractal curve of After both the upper and lower surface profiles of the single fractures were determined, plate granite specimens (495 After the granite specimens containing artificial open fractures were prepared, ethylene propylene diene monomer (EPDM) waterproof rubber with a thickness of 3 Then, a fractured granite specimen was placed in the sleeve, and the extra rubber was seamlessly glued to the rock surface ( When the glass glue dried, the sealed fractured rock was placed on the platform for fluid flow in fracture networks ( During the test, water was fed through the inflow manifold connected to a water tank that supplied a constant water head at all times using an air compressor ( The boundary loads and water inlet pressures of the granite specimens are shown in The volumetric flow rate out of each fracture was measured using high-precision glass tube rotameters. For a certain boundary load and hydraulic pressure, the average volumetric flow rate at the water outlet could be obtained when the glass rotor was relatively stable with almost no fluctuations. The effluent was then collected in another storage tank and recirculated. The entire hydraulic experiment was conducted under isothermal conditions at a room temperature of approximately 20 To evaluate the sealing performance of the test apparatus, a stress-dependent fluid flow test of the intact granite specimen was performed. The intact granite matrix used in this study was extremely dense and considered impermeable. After sealing treatment, four water inlet holes were punched through the rubber at the middle positions of the four specimen boundaries ( The test results show that when According to curve features for After properly sealing the granite specimens with different shear displacements, an For each rock fracture specimen, when The back-calculated  In this study, the hydraulic head at the water outlet of the fractures was assumed to equal zero. Thus, in the tested hydraulic pressure drop range of 0–0.6 Based on Eq. In the range of At a given For rough-walled fractures with a certain In Eq. The transmissivity When assessing the flow characteristics of a rock fracture, the Reynolds number (  The tests indicate that for a certain For fluid flow in rock fractures, nonlinear flow effects become more significant as the volumetric flow velocity increases at the water inlet. To quantitatively evaluate the nonlinearity of fluid flow in rough-walled fractures during shearing, a factor Some scholars have noted that for engineering purposes, the nonlinear term The variations in The results show that for rock fracture specimens subjected to a certain As The critical Reynolds number ( Note that for a certain From the quadratic relationships between Some previous studies have focused on variations in the normalized transmissivity, which is the ratio of the apparent transmissivity ( In this study, the Forchheimer coefficient results were tested by plotting the normalized transmissivity as a function of the Reynolds number, as defined as in Eq. As The variations in This paper experimentally studied the effect of shearing on variations in nonlinear flow through 3D rough-walled fractures. First, a high-precision and effective sealing apparatus was developed for stress-dependent fluid flow tests. Hydromechanical laboratory experiments using rough-walled rock fractures with different shear displacements (0, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 Hydromechanical tests of the intact granite specimen demonstrated the good sealing performance of the experimental apparatus. For rough-walled rock fractures with no normal load and an initial mechanical aperture of 4 Forchheimer’s law fits the experimental results of nonlinear flow through rough-walled fractures undergoing shear and normal loads. Both the linear coefficient and nonlinear coefficient decreased as the shear displacement increased, and the extent of the decrease when the shear displacement increased from 0 to 9 As shear displacement increased, the critical hydraulic gradient increased. The variation process is characterized by three stages. When the shear displacement is less than 3 The transmissivity of the fractures based on the Reynolds number can be approximated using a polynomial function. As the Reynolds number increases, the transmissivity decreases more for a small normal load (7 and 14 In this paper, we have attempted to explain the effects of shear processes on the nonlinearity of fluid flow through 3D rough-walled fractures. Clearly, more in-depth studies must be conducted on this issue. With the support of the new testing apparatus, our future works will focus on the effect of the JRC on flow regimes in fractures during shearing. In addition, experimental models made of transparent acrylic materials will be constructed to conduct visualization studies of flow paths through fractures. The financial supports from the State