Background
                  Two-dimensional measurements are used to describe displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures (DIACF). Our study evaluates the performance of Böhler's angle (BA) and the crucial angle of Gissane (CAG) among orthopedic surgeons.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-four pre- and post-operative lateral foot radiographs from patients with DIACF were shown to four orthopedic surgeons who measured BA and the CAG. The intra- and inter-observer reliability were calculated using the intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC). Additionally, we calculated frequency of consensus given an allowed discrepancy. We then determined the tolerance limit for each measurement.
               
                  Results
                  The ICC for inter-observer reliability of BA was 0.83 in the first session and 0.77 in the second. The ICC for intra-observer reliability ranged from 0.83 to 0.98. For the CAG, the inter-observer ICC was 0.28 and 0.1 in the two sessions. Intra-observer ICC ranged from 0.16 to 0.67. With an allowed discrepancy of 20°, there was lack of consensus for BA in 37.5% and for the CAG in 59% of measurements on average. The 95% confidence interval for 90% agreement in BA involved a range of 76°. For CAG, the 95% confidence interval of tolerance for 90% agreement was 56°.
               
                  Conclusions
                  For BA and CAG, there is frequent disagreement among experienced observers, even given a wide tolerance range. We recommend use of caution when applying BA as currently measured in making treatment decisions for DIACF.
                  Level of Clinical Evidence: Diagnostic, level III.The treatment for displaced intra-articular calcaneal fracture (DIACF) has been described for over a century and a half Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at  With the advent of axial three-dimensional imaging, new methods have been developed to radiographically classify a DIACF While the CAG has largely been abandoned in routine outcome reporting for patients with DIACF, BA remains a commonly used gauge for injury severity and a standard by which radiographic outcome after surgery is determined. Furthermore, clinical outcomes frequently correlate with particular ranges for pre-operative or post-operative BA These results prompt a comprehensive evaluation of Böhler's angle with more descriptive statistics. We report the intra-class correlation coefficients and tolerance limits for BA and the CAG, establishing the range of angles between which practicing orthopedic surgeons may reasonably be expected to agree. Sixty-eight lateral foot radiographs were collected by an investigator who did not serve as a study observer and formed the source material for the study. The lateral radiographs were from 31 of 43 patients with DIACF treated surgically by a percutaneous technique Four fellowship-trained orthopedic surgeons (three trauma specialists and one foot and ankle specialist) were given the X-rays along with instructions for measuring BA and the CAG (Supplementary Fig. A). Definitions were adapted from the original publications in which the angles were described and a current authoritative text on orthopedic trauma Angle measurement requires a numerical result that exists within a continuum. Therefore, we chose to determine intra-observer and inter-observer reliability for Böhler's angle and the crucial angle of Gissane by calculating the intra-class correlation coefficient assuming a two-way mixed model with measures of consistency, ICC (3,1) There is a low probability of all observers measuring the exact same value for a given X-ray. To determine how often the four observers achieved consensus in measuring BA and the CAG, the frequency of consensus given an allowable discrepancy between observers’ measurements was calculated. For each X-ray, the difference between each combination of two measurements was calculated. The proportion of X-rays for which the maximum calculated difference was at or below a given value was determined, and this value was called the maximum allowed discrepancy. The frequency of consensus given a maximum allowed discrepancy of 5°, 10°, 20°, 40°, and 80° was calculated. Because a single outlier for each X-ray could dramatically affect consensus, the data was used to determine tolerance limits for each measurement according to the method described by Remington and Shork The inter-observer ICC for BA was 0.83 in the first round of measurements and 0.77 in the second round of measurements. When analyzing pre-operative and post-operative X-rays separately, we observed a slightly higher inter-observer ICC for post-operative X-rays compared with pre-operative films in both rounds of measurement. For the intra-observer ICC of BA, values ranged from 0.83 to 0.98 ( For the CAG, inter-observer ICC was 0.28 and 0.1 in the first and seconds rounds of angle measurement, respectively. The intra-observer ICC for the CAG ranged from 0.16 to 0.67 ( To better understand the clinical applications of the data, the frequency with which observers achieved consensus in measuring BA and the CAG, given a maximum allowed discrepancy between measurements, was calculated. For a maximum allowed discrepancy of 20°, there was lack of consensus among observers in 36% and 39% of films for BA and 56% and 62% of films for the CAG in the two rounds of measurement, respectively ( Because a single outlier could dramatically affect consensus among four observers, tolerance limits for BA and the CAG such that one could be 95% confident any two similar observers will be in agreement (measurements will lie within a given range) 90% of the time were calculated. For BA, the tolerance limit in the first round of measurement involved a range of 76°. For the CAG, the tolerance limit included a range of 56° ( Our study corroborates previous reports of good intra-class correlation for BA and poor intra-class correlation of the CAG Many classification and measurement schemes have suboptimal reliability We found the original description of Böhler's tuber-joint angle to be exceedingly ambiguous. The definition instructs observers to measure the angle “between the upper contour of the tuberosity of the os calcis and the line uniting the highest point of the anterior process with the highest point of the posterior articular surface” There are inherent limitations in interpretation of plain X-rays of DIACF. A key source of variability is difficulty in identifying – and lack of consensus regarding – the highest point of the depressed posterior facet. In analysis of the data, we encounter an interesting point worth discussion. How can one, with the same data set, calculate an inter-observer reliability as good as 0.8 for BA, but still have disagreement up to 20° nearly 40% of the time? The intra-class correlation coefficient as calculated is favorable for sets of measurements in which ordering is consistent Interestingly, despite a superior ICC for BA compared with that of the CAG (0.77 versus 0.1 in one round of measurement), the tolerance limit reflected poorer performance of BA (76° versus 56°). In the tolerance limit analysis, it was discovered that measurements for BA were more widely scattered than those for the CAG. For the CAG, measurements were seemingly random within a narrow range of values, while for BA, measurements were more consistent but within a wider range. This is a function inherent to the nature of the angles as measured. Several potential limitations may influence the results of our study. First, X-rays used in our study were taken by technicians in the context of patient care and not for research purposes. Therefore, foot positioning and beam angle were not standardized. This may alter projection of shadows and affect the measured angles. We attempted to control for this by excluding X-rays of substandard quality. Our set of X-rays is likely representative of the types of images used by clinicians in everyday practice. Another source of difficulty in angle measurement could be a potential obscuring effect of implants on bony landmarks in post-operative x rays. Interestingly, we did not observe a dramatic difference in inter-observer or intra-observer ICC for BA or the CAG in post-operative versus pre-operative X-rays. The degree of comminution of the posterior facet in our level-one trauma population may be greater than in the community, so the wide tolerance range of BA and the CAG may be over-estimated. Finally, the vague original definitions of BA and the CAG may lead to variable interpretation in the community. Though we agreed upon and used a single definition for both angles, their measurement still required a degree of subjectivity reflected in the wide variability we noted ( Three-dimensional imaging has improved understanding of the comminution of the posterior facet in DIACF In summary, like other radiographic measurements, Böhler's angle and the crucial angle of Gissane possess limitations in reliability. Using trained observers for measurement, we show that even in optimal settings, disagreement in X-ray interpretation is common. This may explain discordant conclusions in the literature regarding the correlation of BA to clinical outcomes in patients with DIACF. Admittedly, the CAG is rarely used in the literature today. Our study shows that in some respects, BA performs more poorly than the CAG. The wide tolerance limits and frequent disagreement on measurements demonstrated in our study lead us to recommend use of caution when applying BA with its current definition to guide clinical decisions, assess radiographic outcome, and as a metric to predict functional outcome after surgery. Three-dimensional imaging could potentially be used to improve the reliability of Böhler's angle. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. The authors would like to acknowledge Kyle Askling for his assistance in electronic records keeping and electronic angle measurement. No external funding sources were utilized in performance of research toward or in preparation of this manuscript.