Ground calcium carbonate (GCC) is one of the most commonly used pigments in paper. In order to study the colouring effect of selected minerals on a GCC slurry, a high-quality calcite concentrate was spiked with contaminating minerals prior to micronisation and subsequent spectrophotometric measurements. 14 different mineral contaminant concentrates were tested: pyrite, pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite (light and dark type), magnetite, hematite, ilmenite, quartz, K-feldspar, phlogopite, hornblende and graphite. The results show that the pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and graphite concentrates display the most detrimental reduction in brightness R457 of the GCC slurry. In addition to brightness, the colour space for each contaminant concentrate is evaluated by using the CIELAB parameters. Furthermore, by applying the Kubelka–Munk function, the results show that most of the contaminants tested follow the Kubelka–Munk model with good accuracy, allowing a prediction of the brightness in a mixture to be made. Hence, the Kubelka–Munk model can provide a useful method to predict the colour of mineral mixtures in the production of GCC slurries.Micronized ground calcium carbonate (GCC) has been widely used in the paper industry for several decades, and is now one of the most commonly used pigments. GCC is derived from high-quality calcium carbonate deposits. The beneficiation of such deposits includes purification, usually by flotation, followed by subsequent micronisation yielding very fine grained slurries ( The colour and reduction in brightness introduced by a specific mineral will depend on the inherent properties of the mineral itself and the concentration in the raw material. In addition, since the properties of the GCC slurry depends on the beneficiation and micronisation process, liberation characteristics and textural aspects must always be taken into consideration ( The Akselberg marble deposit is an example of a high-quality calcium carbonate deposit situated in Brønnøysund, 250 The deposit is more thoroughly described by The aim of the present study is to investigate the colouring effect of selected contaminating minerals on high-quality GCC slurry produced from the Akselberg deposit. The experiments are conducted with both individual contaminant concentrates and with defined mixtures of two contaminant concentrates. Furthermore, for systems that follow the Kubelka–Munk model, a prediction of colour produced as a function of contaminant concentration(s) can be made. Thus, the efficiency of the Kubelka–Munk model in order to make such predictions of a mixture of high quality calcite concentrate with one or two contaminant concentrates is evaluated. The colouring effect of iron oxides have been investigated earlier by several authors ( The colour control of pigment is usually performed using the quantitative CIE colour system, published by the International Commission of Illumination (CIE) in 1931. This system is based on three experimentally derived colour matching functions, reflecting the human perception of colours. From these functions, described by the The Kubelka–Munk model ( Here, The corresponding reflection ( A total of 15 different mineral samples were used in the experiment. The calcite marble, pyrite and pyrrhotite samples were handpicked in the open pit of the Akselberg deposit. Only pieces of the purest available quality were sampled. Further, magnetite, hematite, ilmenite, quartz, K-feldspar, phlogpite, hornblende and graphite were obtained from mineral collections at NTNU. The respective samples of chalcopyrite, galena, light and dark sphalerite were purchased from Fossheim Steinsenter. The light sphalerite displayed adamantine luster and iron content Comminution of the calcite sample was carried out using a jaw crusher with 3 Elemental analysis of the calcite concentrate was determined on a pressed powder disk by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), using a Bruker AXS S8 Tiger equipped with wavelength dispersive spectrometer. The mineralogy of the calcite concentrate was then calculated from the XRF analysis. The result is shown in All contaminant minerals were crushed manually using a hammer and further concentrated by handpicking the minerals of interest. Further reduction in particle size was carried out using a Fritsch P6 Pulverizette planetary mono mill at 300 The mineralogy of contaminant concentrates were determined by XRD, using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with a Krystalloflex K780 Generator, scanning from 2° to 80° (2 Carefully weighed amounts of contaminant concentrates were added to the calcite concentrate immediately prior to micronisation in order to obtain a set of predefined contamination levels (see Section The micronisation was conducted in a custom made stirred mill, equipped with a 2000 The micronised slurries were then dried in a Panasonic microwave oven at 1800 Following deagglomeration, a powder tablet of each dried micronised product was prepared with a pneumatic press. Great care was taken to ensure that the surfaces of the tablets were smooth and free from scratches. The pressed tablets were subjected to spectrophotometric measurements at room temperature using an Elrepho Datacolor 600 spectrophotometer with optical geometry d/8°, illuminant D65 and standard observer 10°. The spectrophotometer was calibrated using a barium sulphate tablet and a black box as the respective white and black standards. Several parameters were calculated from the measurements of the light reflected from the pressed tablets. The reflected light R457 was used as a measure of brightness ( Two experimental series were conducted. In the first series, the brightness and colouring response of single contaminant systems ( In the second experimental series, a mixture of two contaminant concentrates was added to the calcite concentrate prior to micronisation in order to test the prediction accuracy of the Kubelka–Munk model. Pyrrhotite, being a common colouring contaminant in the Akselberg deposit, was chosen as a contaminant in all these experiments. The pyrrhotite concentrate was mixed with either pyrite, graphite or dark sphalerite concentrate before the total contaminant mixture was added to the calcite concentrate and micronised. Any two contaminant concentrates were mixed in the ratios 4:1, 1:1 and 1:4. The experiments were conducted at a total contamination level of 0.02% and 0.05%.  The iron oxides magnetite, hematite and ilmenite concentrates, significantly reduce brightness ( Regarding the sulphides, the pyrrhotite concentrate displays a pronounced detrimental effect on the brightness of the micronized slurry, more than the pyrite concentrate, which is consistent with the results of The brightness parameter represents the relative amount of light reflected at a specific wavelength of 457 Hematite differs from all other minerals in the CIE In contrast to the CIE The average brightness, the In order to test the applicability of the Kubelka–Munk model, the brightness values presented in Note that the linear regression was performed without any constraints. The reflectance of the calcite concentrate alone was found to be R457 As seen in The strong linear correlation for most of the sulphide contaminant concentrates (except sphalerite light type), the iron oxides and graphite suggests that the Kubelka–Munk function can be used to model the system under the conditions tested in this study. For systems that follows the Kubelka–Munk model, the When using Eq. The corresponding predicted reflectance value, As can be seen from The prediction becomes less accurate when graphite is part of the system. As seen in From a geometallurgical point of view, the application of a prediction model based on the link between mineralogy and Kubelka–Munk transformed brightness values could be a valuable tool in both the planning and utilization of a pigment raw material. In order to use the Kubelka–Munk model in the prediction of product quality, the mineralogical composition of the raw material and its influence on product brightness measurements must be determined. Once the relationship between raw material characteristics and product quality has been established and adequately modeled, the data could be included in a geostatistical block model. By using the block model, the mining operation can be planned such that the predicted quality will fulfill the product specifications. In addition, in a producing plant where online mineralogical analysis are already installed as the raw material enters the plant, the quality of the finished product can be predicted and necessary adjustments of the process can be carried out in order to achieve the product specifications. Although the results in this project are site specific, the experimental procedure and the principle of prediction could be applied in pigment production or other processes where colour is the most important quality parameter, e.g. GCC, talc and kaolin. Ground calcium carbonate (GCC) is one of the most commonly used pigments in paper. As the competition in the GCC market grows stronger, the quality requirements for GCC fillers will inevitably become stricter and specific colour information is likely to become more important. This work has quantified the influence of individual colouring phases on a GCC filler by spiking a high quality calcite concentrate with predefined levels of different contaminants, separately, following a standardised GCC lab procedure. Of the 15 mineral concentrates tested, the pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and graphite concentrates displayed the most rapid reduction regarding brightness, with a reduction of Furthermore, this work has shown that most of the colouring contaminant concentrates tested follow the Kubelka–Munk model with good accuracy. By conducting multi contaminant experiments, the results show that the Kubelka–Munk model can be applied in the prediction of brightness of a mixture. Of the three contaminant concentrates that exhibit the most detrimental effect on brightness (i.e. the pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and graphite concentrates), a slightly poorer fit to the Kubelka–Munk model was displayed by the graphite concentrate, thus resulting in a somewhat less accurate prediction. By establishing site-specific empirical data bases describing the colour response of the various contaminants in a GCC raw material, the Kubelka–Munk model can be applied to predict the main quality parameter (i.e. the brightness R457) of the GCC filler. Hence, in a geometallurgical program, the Kubelka–Munk model could represent a powerful tool in the planning and beneficiation of GCC raw material deposits. In addition, it is likely that other pigment producers where colour is the most important quality parameter can benefit from the same procedure, e.g. talc and kaolin. The authors are grateful to Anne Berit Hansen, Brita Lünser and Vivian Björnback Molid at the laboratory of Brønnøy Kalk A.S. for conducting the practical analysis of the experiments. In addition, Laurentius Tijhuis at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway, must be thanked for characterising all samples using XRD. Financial support from the Research Council of Norway and Norsk Mineral A.S. is acknowledged.