The aim of this work is to develop new selective cation exchange membranes (CEMs) from bivalent to monovalent selectivity by surface functional groups. So, a novel hybrid cation exchange membrane was prepared by polymerization of polyaniline on a composite membrane, made of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and sulfonated PVDF (S-PVDF). Polyaniline was doped with different doping agents and their effect on total salt extraction and selectivity of bivalent to monovalent cations was evaluated. The chemical and morphological properties of hybrid membranes were characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Ion exchange capacity (IEC), transport number, ion conductivity and water uptake decreased after surface polymerization. Composite membrane has a good selectivity (∼2) for bivalent and excellent removal of both cations. The hybrid membrane, doped with pTSA has a very high selectivity for monovalent ions (∼7.1) and a high removal of monovalent ions.Electrodialysis (ED) is a separation technology in which ions are removed by an alternating arrangement of ion-exchange membranes (IEMs) in a direct electrical field. Among the different basic elements in an ED set-up, IEMs play a key role by allowing selective passage of counter-ions and inhibiting passage of co-ions One of the important potential applications of ED is selective ion permeation Polyaniline (PANi) is an interesting conductive polymer because of its ease of synthesis and chemical stability The influence of polymerization time and surface formed PANi density on electrochemical properties of membranes have been well-investigated by previous works In this work, the influence of PANi surface polymerization with different doping agents on the extraction and selective permeation of cations was investigated, using Na PVDF (grade Solef® 6020) was purchased from Solvay. Other materials that were used include 1,2-dichloroethane from Merck, N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and aniline (99.8% purity) from Acros, ammonium peroxodisulfate (APS) from Chem-Lab and chlorosulfonic acid (⩾95%) from Fluka. Camphorsulfonic acid (CSA) (98%), para-toluene sulfonic acid (pTSA) (ACS reagent, ⩾98.5%), dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (DBSA) (mixture of isomers, ⩾95%) and sulfuric acid 95–97% were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) 1 The sulfonation of PVDF was carried out according to our previous work As described elsewhere The membrane with 70% S-PVDF was selected to be modified by surface polymerization. This selection is because of the best cation removal that achieved by this composition in our past work The hybrid membranes were synthesized according to the steps shown in The membranes then were immersed in a 1 To determine the polymerization of PANi with different doping agents on the surface of S-70 membrane, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used. The prepared membranes were characterized by different methods to evaluate the performance of hybrid membranes for selective desalination. For this purpose, the ion exchange capacity (IEC), transport number, permselectivity, ion selectivity, ion conductivity, water uptake and contact angle were measured. The functional groups of synthesized membranes were analyzed by using a Perkin–Elmer FTIR spectrometer (Spectrum 100) in the range from 4000 to 650 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Philips XL30 FEG, the Netherlands) was used to visualize morphology of the membranes. SEM images were taken in high vacuum condition at 20 The compactness and crystallinity of membranes were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) method. The XRD studies were performed on a Philips X-ray diffractometer (PW1830 model) using a Cu Kα radiation source (1.542 All membranes were dried in vacuum at 60 The contact angles of water on membranes were determined at room temperature with a Kruss device (DSA 10-MK2, Germany) according to the plate method. At least three angles were measured and averaged for every sample. The counter-ion transport number in the membrane phase ( The permselectivity ( For the measurement of conductivity, following the procedures described earlier The ion exchange capacity of the membranes was estimated by a conventional titration method For the ED experiments, a Berghof BEL-500 system was used, which included two anion exchange membranes (AEM) and two cation exchange membranes (CEM). The CEM was in contact with the anode in order to prevent Cl The ED performance was evaluated by conductivity measurement (using a CDM 83 conductivity meter) of the diluate each 30 The spectra in The band ∼3301 SEM pictures of the surface and cross section of composite and hybrid membranes are presented in The functional groups of PANi obtained from FTIR and change in surface morphology of hybrid membranes knew by SEM, demonstrate the surface polymerization of aniline on top of composite membranes. For a deeper investigation of the membrane structure, X-ray diffraction was used to evaluate chain ordering and crystallinity in composite and hybrid membranes. The XRD patterns for composite and PANi coated membranes with different dopants are given in Apart from the small crystalline peak for PANi–pTSA (at 2 Water uptake is an important property that influenced on dimensional stability and cation selectivity of membrane. By coating the composite membrane, water uptake decreased for all hybrid membranes. Since the sulfonation degree of all composite membranes was equal, the surface PANi layer can play the main role. This layer can act as a barrier for diffusion of water inside the membrane, while it can be affected by the surface morphology and hydrophilicity. Because PANi–CSA has a less ordered structure and low contact angle, its water uptake does not substantially decrease. PANi–DBSA has a higher contact angle because of the hydrophobicity of the long chain alkyl group DBSA, leading to a lower water uptake than in case of PANi–CSA. PANi–pTSA is more hydrophilic than PANi–DBSA, because of its more crystalline structure, and therefore exhibits the lowest water diffusion and water uptake. In The IEC and ion conductivity are given in The transport number and permselectivity are presented in In the final step, the performance of the synthesized membranes was evaluated during electrodialysis (ED) by measuring the change in solution conductivity and cation removal in the diluate after 2 As presented in The flux of Na Furthermore, the removal of each cation by membranes is provided in As shown in To explain the selectivity of these membranes, the diffusion theory of cations through a CEM can be applied. Firdaous et al. Van der Bruggen et al. The S-70 membrane, with higher water uptake and a more hydrophilic surface with a less ordered structure provides easier conditions for Mg PANi–CSA has nearly the same structure as S-70 and a more hydrophilic surface, but its water uptake is less, so the diffusion of Na PANi–DBSA has a lower flux for both cations. This may be due to its more hydrophobic surface and ordered structure and the presence of long chain alkyls that prevent the diffusion of cations. However, the diffusion of Na An attractive result was obtained for PANi–pTSA, particularly in view of the high selectivity for the monovalent cation. pTSA is not as large as DBSA and does not hinder cations to be close to the membrane; the surface is more hydrophilic. This membrane has a crystalline structure on the surface and less water inside the membrane to prevent the diffusion of Mg Novel hybrid cation exchange membranes were synthesized by surface polymerization of polyaniline (PANi) on S-PVDF/PVDF composite membranes with different doping agents. FTIR and SEM proved the formation of a PANi layer on the membrane surface, leading to a change in surface morphology and functional groups. XRD showed that after surface polymerization, the hybrid membrane structure becomes more ordered than that of the composite membrane, especially for pTSA and DBSA doping agents. The combination of structure information by other membrane properties as water uptake, IEC and permselectivity helped to determine the relation between membrane properties and ED performance. The results show that S-70 is a bivalent selective membrane with high salt extraction. After surface polymerization this selectivity decreases, but the salt extraction remains high for PANi–CSA. PANi–pTSA has a very high selectivity for monovalent cations with relatively high extraction of Na