Background
                  The treatment of multifragment Mason type III fractures is challenging. Open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF), radial head arthroplasty, and in some cases, even radial head resection are the current options; however, each of these treatment methods is associated with characteristic benefits and complications. We present our experience with a radial head salvage procedure in comminuted radial head fractures irrespective of concomitant injuries, which are not accompanied by typical ORIF-related complications.
               
                  Methods
                  The first group comprised 29 patients with multifragment Mason type III fractures treated surgically with biological radial head spacers (group S). The fragments were reduced and fixated in an extracorporeal manner, and the reconstructed radial head was placed in its anatomic position without fixation to the shaft. The second group comprised 12 patients treated with conventional ORIF using mini-fragment plates (group P).
               
                  Results
                  Thirty patients were enrolled to undergo clinical and radiographic follow-up at an average of 76 months (range, 12-152 months). In group S, nonunion at the head-neck junction developed in 70% of the cases; however, the overall Mayo Elbow Performance Index averaged 94.8, which was superior to the average Mayo Elbow Performance Index of 83.1 in group P. Radiographic evaluation showed development of osteoarthritic changes in 75% of patients in group S and 62.5% in group P. None of the patients had wrist-joint pain.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Preserving the native radial head in comminuted Mason type III fractures without fixation to the radial shaft is a reliable option. Excellent functional results can be expected; however, the development of osteoarthritis cannot be impeded.Radial head fractures are common injuries and make up about one-third of all fractures around the elbow. For 95% of radial head and neck fractures, conservative treatment can be performed, expecting good or excellent results in over 90% of cases. Treatment options include open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF), In this retrospective case-control study, a search of our medical database discovered 188 surgically treated radial head fractures between 2005 and 2015. We used the original classification system of Mason All patients were treated in our department. Classification of injuries was made using plain radiographs and computed tomography scans. Patients with associated injuries were assigned into different groups of complex injury patterns according to Ring, Single-shot antibiotics are routinely used in every patient immediately prior to the operation. Patients with open fractures receive intravenously applied antibiotics for a minimum of 7 further days. A lateral or posterolateral approach is used for the treatment of the radial head fracture. A long curved posterior approach with the patient in the prone position is performed if both the ulna and radial head have to be addressed. Care is taken to preserve the LCL, if uninjured. If the radial head is replaced with an autologous implant, the fragments are removed and assembled in an extracorporeal manner on the nurse table in most cases. In our opinion, the extracorporeal reassembling is an essential step during surgery to check whether all fragments are retrieved and reconstruction is feasible. The benefits of the “on-table reconstruction” for head sizing in RHA or reduction in ORIF techniques have already been reported in the literature. All patients are immobilized using an upper arm splint with elbow flexion of 90° until wounds are healed. The period of immobilization depends on the severity of concomitant injuries. Complex elbow injuries are immobilized with a cast for up to 3 weeks, followed by a hinged brace with limited motion for a further 3 weeks. Passive motion exercises start at day 14. At 6 weeks postoperatively, active full radius motion is permitted, followed by strengthening exercises after the eighth postoperative week. Return to arm-demanding sports and heavy manual work is permitted at 12 weeks postoperatively. A total of 30 patients (73%) met the inclusion criteria and were included ( In 70% of group S patients and 75% of group P patients, ectopic ossifications developed according to Hastings and Graham. In the remaining 20 patients treated with biological radial head implants, the overall MEPI was 94.8 (range, 55-100) at a mean follow-up of 6 years (73.1 ± 41.3 months; range, 12-133 months). According to the MEPI rating scale, the functional outcome was excellent in 16 patients, good in 3, and poor in 1. In patients who were treated with low-profile mini-fragment plates, the average MEPI was 83.1 (range, 55-100) at a mean follow-up of 8 years (97.6 ± 28.6 months; range, 57-152 months). The outcome was excellent in 3 patients, good in 3, fair in 1, and poor in 1. The mean sagittal motion arc was 135° (range, 90°-150°) in group S and 122° (range, 90°-155°) in group P. The mean forearm rotation arc was 169° (range, 130°-180°) and 154° (range, 65°-180°), respectively. None of the patients complained about wrist-joint pain during daily activities or had pain in the wrist joint during clinical examination ( In group S, 2 patients underwent revision surgery ( Implant removal on the radial side was required in 50% of patients in group P. Secondary arthroscopic joint débridement was performed in 2 patients (cases 21 and 28); olecranon tip resection, in 2 patients (cases 21 and 25); and olecranon fossa–plasty, in 1 patient (case 21). We believe that preserving the radial head in Mason type III fractures as a biological implant provides excellent clinical results following reconstruction of Mason type III radial head fractures without fixation to the shaft. In comparison with a group of patients treated with ORIF using low-profile mini-fragment plates for full fixation of the radial head to the shaft, the functional results were superior. Most authors still recommend reconstruction of the radial head, especially in young and active patients. Satisfactory outcome rates have been reported, but implant-related complications are not uncommon, including implant failure, restricted forearm motion, and secondary hardware removal at rates of up to 83% to 100%. Another study group has presumed that biomechanical instability in symptomatic nonunions following conservative treatment can be due to high-demand activities and the inability of patients to comply with a non–weight-bearing treatment regimen or immobilization. In severely comminuted radial head fractures, ORIF has been associated with highly unsatisfactory results. In comparison with RHA and ORIF, we believe that similar functional results can be expected without the risks encountered with ORIF- or RHA-typical complications, such as pain, implant loosening, overstuffing, instability, infection, and disassembly of the bipolar prosthesis. To our knowledge, this is the largest study reporting the mid-term functional and radiographic outcomes using biological radial head implants in uncomplicated and complex Mason type III, Ikeda type IIIB and IIIC fractures. However, our study has several limitations concerning the retrospective nature, the small study cohort, and the absence of radiographic analysis of ulnar variance. Regarding the nonunion rate of 70%, if the radial head is not fixed to the shaft, we cannot preclude minimal proximal migration of the shaft in some cases. However, there were no clinical signs indicating distal radioulnar joint disturbances. Nevertheless, study protocols of future prospective randomized trials should include these radiographic measurements. Preserving the patient's own radial head in multifragment Mason type III fractures without fixation to the radial shaft is a reliable and cost-effective alternative to conventional ORIF techniques and RHA. Excellent functional results can be expected even in the mid to long term, but the process of osteoarthritis cannot be impeded. Nonunions are frequently observed, but they remain asymptomatic. Care must be taken to restore additional injuries adequately to prevent radiocapitellar maltracking and early dislocation of the radial head. The vascularity of the shaft is not disturbed, which may be advantageous if future radial head or radiohumeral arthroplasty is required. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.