The interaction between long-flame coal particles and oily bubbles controls the crucial processes of attachment and mineralization in oily-bubble flotation thus dominates the recovery of coal. In this study, the interaction energy between long-flame coal particles and diesel oily bubbles was estimated by both DLVO and EDLVO theories, while the attachment of coal particles to oily bubbles was evaluated by induction time measurements and oily-bubble flotation tests. The results indicated that the isoelectric points of oily bubbles and coal particles were observed at about pH 3.5 and 2.3, respectively. Over the entire range of pH 2–11, the attachment between coal particles and oily bubbles was confirmed by the results of the induction time and oily-bubbles flotation tests. Additionally, it was found that the flotation recovery of coals was inversely related to the induction time. The attachment could be accurately predicted by the EDLVO theory over the tested pH range. On the contrary, it showed a great deviation for the DLVO theory to predict the attachment over the tested pH range except at pH 3. The reason for the deviation in prediction may be that the hydrophobic force on the interface of coal particles and oily bubbles is too great to be ignored.China as the largest energy consumer in the world accounted for 23% of global energy consumption in 2016 and 27% of global energy consumption growth. Coal is the major primary energy source and its share of China’s primary energy consumption is 62% in 2016 Gravity separation including wet and dry density-based separation technologies are applicable for the effective separation of low-medium rank coals with particle sizes more than 0.5 mm Flotation efficiency is determined by oily bubble-coal particle attachment and mineralization processes, while the attachment process is controlled by the interaction, i.e., surface forces, between oily bubbles and coal particles. These processes involve the fields of colloid and interfacial chemistry. In flotation pulp, when coal particles and oily bubbles collide and approach each other closely to about 100 nm, various surface forces begin to play a role that include the London-van der Waals attractive force, the electrostatic double layer repulsive force, the hydrophobic force and so on Moreover, it was reported that induction times were a more sensitive marker than contact angles in predicting the attachment efficiency and closely correlated with the flotation recovery A method to measure the induction time is particle dropping techniques in which sliding interaction between a particle and a bubble is observed by a high-speed camera, as shown in Although the oily bubble flotation has been proven to be an efficient technology for the beneficiation of low-medium rank coal and the minerals difficult to float, its mechanism is still not well understood. In this study, we focused on the interaction and attachment between particles and oily bubbles to explore the mechanism of oily bubble flotation of low-medium rank coal. The characteristics of the low-medium rank coal were investigated based on its SEM, XPS, and XRD analyses, the interaction between low-medium rank coal particles and oily bubbles was studied by both DLVO and EDLVO theories, and the attachment of coal particles to oily bubbles was evaluated by the induction time and oily bubble flotation tests. The extended DLVO theory takes into consideration the London-van der Waals energy ( For two spherical particles of radii R A  For two spherical particles of radii R Therefore In the case of only one symmetric electrolyte in the solution, such as NaCl or CaSO4, κ The polar surface interaction energy between two spherical particles of radii R For the ternary system (the material 1 and 2 in the medium 3), V According to Young equation, the relationship between the surface free energy of solid/liquid and interfacial free energy can be expressed as follows: Additionally, according to Van Oss–Chaudhury–Good theory, the surface free energy of solid/liquid is given by Furthermore, the interfacial free energy between solid and liquid is expressed: Combining Eqs. Consequently, the surface free energy and its components of the coal particles can be calculated by Eq. The low-medium rank coal sample, a long-flame coal, less than 0.5 mm was collected from Meizhiyou Coal Preparation Plant in Shanxi Province, China. The results of proximate and ultimate analyses of the coal sample are shown in The SEM photograph, as shown in XPS analysis was used to characterize the surface chemical properties of coal samples, and performed with an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analyzer (ESCALAB 250Xi) that was equipped with an Al Kα (1486.6 eV) source. For a typical experiment, about 0.2 g of coal samples ground to −0.045 mm were pressed with 10 MPa pressure into pellets for the test. A wide scanning test for the elements of carbon, oxygen, silicon and aluminum was performed with an analyzer pass energy of 100 eV, while a narrow scanning of carbon was performed with an analyzer pass energy of 20 eV. Both scanning tests were carried out in a sample chamber with a vacuum of 5 Micro electrophoresis apparatus (JS94H) was employed to measure the zeta potentials of coal particles and oily bubbles, and 10 mmol/L KCl aqueous solution was used as an electrolyte solution. Whereas NaOH and HCl solutions were employed to adjust the pH of solutions, and a pH Meter (pH-25, Shanghai) with a accuracy of 0.01 was used to determine the pH of solutions. For a typical zeta potential measurement, about 0.06 g of coal particles less than 0.045 mm were first transferred to a centrifuge tube containing 3.0 mL of KCl solution with different pH to prepare a coal-water suspension. Then the coal particles were sufficiently dispersed in the solution using an ultrasonic cleaner. Afterwards, centrifugal processes were carried out and the upper layer of coal suspension was taken for the zeta potential measurements. For the zeta potential measurement of oily bubbles, taking into account the similar surface properties, the oily bubbles were replaced by the micro oil droplets to resolve the problem of difficult to generating large amount of oily bubbles in solution. Therefore, 0.03 mL of diesel was added into 3 mL of KCl solution with different pH using a micro syringe. Then, the diesel oil in the solution was sufficiently dispersed into micro oil droplets, i.e., emulsion of diesel oil, using the ultrasonic cleaner. Afterwards, the emulsion was diluted into 2 wt% by the KCl solution with the same pH for the measurement. Five trials were conducted for the reproducible result in each measurement. The contact angle measurements were performed with the contact angle measurement apparatus made in Shanghai of China, and the angle measurement way was used in this experiment. For a typical contact angle measurement, about 1.2 g coal samples ground to −0.045 mm were pressed for 50 s with 15 MPa pressure into thin circular plates. Whereas liquids, such as deionized water, formamide and α-bromonaphthalene, were sucked in a micro syringe to generate a droplet, and the contact angle of a droplet on the coal plate was recorded by camera system. Three repeated tests were conducted in each measurement and the average value of them was considered as the final result. Induction Timer Instrument (2015EZ), as seen in The induction measurement was conducted by driving the oily bubble towards and in contact with the coal particle bed for a preset period through a computer-controlled amplifier. After retracting away from the bed, the oily bubbles-particles attachment will be visually observed on the monitor if particles are picked up by the oily bubble, and the induction time can be interpreted as the minimum time required by the attachment. However, it must be noted that the effects of physical parameter settings on the measurement are profound. Therefore, all the parameters in the measurements were fixed, unless otherwise specified, which included the oily bubble size (1.30 mm), coal particle size (0.074–0.125 mm), the distance between the oily bubble and particle bed (0.27 mm), approaching and retracting speed of bubbles (2.34 cm/s). The oily bubble flotation tests were performed with an oily bubble flotation system, as shown in The wide scanning results for primary elements of carbon, oxygen, silicon and aluminum in the coal sample are listed in The studying of organic carbon in coals can be used to identify the chemical form of organic oxygen owing to their close relation. The peaks of C1s at binding energies of 284.40–284.80 eV, 285.80–286.30 eV, 287.30–287.60 eV and 289.00–289.20 eV belong to the groups of C  For the attachment and mineralization to occur in flotation, the time required by attachment, i.e., induction time, should be less than the contact time. In the present work, the induction time measurements were conducted by an oily bubble contacting with a particle bed. Therefore, it was believed that the induction time was a more reliable and sensitive indicator than the contact angle in evaluating the floatability of mineral particles in a flotation cell and predicting the attachment efficiency. It is well known that shorter induction times mean higher attachment efficiency. The induction time between coal particles and oily bubbles as a function of pH is shown in The combustible matter recovery and ash content of concentrate in flotation as functions of pH are shown in In order to determine the surface free energy and its components of the coal particles, deionized water, formamide (polar liquids), and α-bromonaphthalene were employed to measure the liquid contact angles for coal samples. The surface free energy parameters of liquids and the results of contact angle measurement are shown in Inserting the data listed in Based on the data listed in The reason for the deviation in prediction may be that the classical DLVO theory only takes into consideration the London-van der Waals attractive energy and the electrostatic interaction repulsive energy. In this case, the electrostatic repulsive energy is dominant over the London-van der Waals attractive energy, leading to energy barriers. However, the polar surface interaction energy, known as the hydrophobic force, existing on the interface between coal particles and oily bubbles is too high to be ignored, which originates from the rearrangement of the ordered water molecule structure on hydrophobic surface This study focused on the interaction and attachment between particles and oily bubbles to explore the mechanism of the oily bubble flotation of long-flame coal. The interaction energy between long-flame coal particles and diesel oily bubbles was estimated by both DLVO and EDLVO theories, and the attachment of coal particles to oily bubbles was evaluated by the induction time and oily bubble flotation tests. The results indicated that the induction time between coal particles and oily bubbles varied from 38.3 to 64.0 ms over the tested pH range. However, the combustible recovery was found to decrease from 84.50% down to 78.17% as the solution pH increased, indicating the inverse relation between the combustible recovery and the induction time. As a result, the attachment between coal particles and oily bubbles was verified by the results of both induction time and flotation tests. According to the DLVO theory, the energy barriers were observed at pH = 2 and over the range of pH higher than 3, which was inconsistent with the results of the induction time and flotation tests. On the contrary, over the studied pH range, the interaction energy estimated by the EDLVO theory was less than 0 J in the tested distance and no energy barrier was observed. Therefore, it was believed that the EDLVO theory was more appropriate than the DLVO theory to explain the attachment between coal particles and oily bubbles. Consequently, it was concluded that the hydrophobic force on the interface of coal particles and oily bubbles couldn’t be ignored. This study was supported by the