Accurate identification of the working conditions of froth flotation remains challenging because of the inherent chaotic nature of the underlying microscopic phenomenon. The froth surface is generally used as an effective indicator of the working condition and performance of flotation. In this study, we developed a novel method for determining the complex working conditions of flotation through statistical modeling of froth images. Gabor wavelet transformation was used for modeling because of the optimal localization properties in both spatial and frequency domain of the Gabor functions. The characteristic parameters of the probability density functions of the Gabor filter responses of the froth image, rather than conventional statistics (mean and variance), were then modeled using the empirical probability distribution models, t location-scale and gamma distributions. A simple learning vector quantization-neural network (LVQ-NN) was adopted to obtain an effective classifier for identifying the working conditions of froth phases under different production phenomena. The proposed model was validated through experiments on a bauxite flotation plant located in China and compared with commonly used determination methods.Froth flotation, a highly versatile method used to selectively separate hydrophobic from hydrophilic materials, is a complex and poorly understood phenomenon; this process is difficult to robustly and optimally control because of its inherent chaos and upsets ( The working condition of the froth phase cannot be easily identified through naked-eye observation and assessment of several traditional metallurgic parameters because of the following factors. (1) The entire flotation circuit is complex and features a large time-delay process, which consists of several sub-processes; each sub-process possesses a large number of variables coupled with one another. (2) Key metallurgical parameters, such as concentrate grade, recovery or tailing grade, and process variables of flotation, cannot be measured in real time. (3) Naked-eye observation of the froth surface and analysis of measurable process parameters (e.g., pulp level, temperature of slurry, and pulp flow rate) are insufficient to identify the stochastic disturbances of the process operation and the imperceptible changes in the appearance of the surface under different working conditions as a result of fluctuations in feeding grade. Automatic classification and recognition of the froth behavior are vital aspects in controlling flotation. This study aims to provide a practical solution for automatic identification of the working conditions of froth flotation. This goal was achieved by obtaining distinctive visual features of froth images through image statistical modeling incorporated with the commonly used pattern recognition method, namely, LVQ neural network (LVQ-NN), without performing time-consuming bubble segmentation and other complex image processing techniques. Various image analysis and feature extraction methods can be used to characterize and evaluate froth images for automatic recognition of the working condition of froth flotation.  Feature extraction methods for the morphological characteristics of bubbles are not only time consuming but also yield inaccurate characterization results of the froth surface. By contrast, texture feature extraction methods can be used to accurately depict the froth structure and are thus suitable for effective classification of flotation working conditions. Previous studies focused on the flotations of heavy metals (e.g., copper and zinc ore) or nonmetallic ores (e.g., coal dressing) on the laboratory scale, where bubbles are relatively regular and can be easily distinguished from the froth image. However, in flotation of light metal–mineral (e.g., bauxite) at the industrial scale, the shapes of froth bubbles in concentrated froth images are irregular and cannot be clearly distinguished. Image texture is an important element in the computer vision analysis and real machine vision applications ( Depicting the micro heterogeneity, complexity, and uncertainty of the froth surface remains challenging when using traditional image processing and analysis methods for computer vision technologies. Extensively studied processing and analysis methods include gray value-based methods (e.g., GLCM, SGDM, and NGDM) and MR-MIA with PCA-based texture feature extraction( More recently, multiresolution or multi-channel analysis for image texture analysis received considerable attention in the field of computer vision. The Gabor wavelet transform has been recognized as a very useful tool in texture analysis due to its optimal localization properties in both spatial and frequency domain and found widespread use used for image texture feature extraction ( In this study, Gabor wavelets are used for image analysis to determine the distinctive visual features of froth for classifying and recognizing flotation working conditions. Mean and variance are traditional statistics of Gabor filter responses, which are equivalent to the assumption that the Gabor filter responses obey the Gaussian distribution (GD) model. However, several studies demonstrated that the Gabor filter responses of natural images do not present GD. Therefore, obtaining the essential features from the Gabor filter responses in accordance with their inherent distribution profiles is also challenging. Modeling the statistical structure of natural images or image patches is widely performed in image processing and analysis processes, e.g., image denoising ( To determine the precise statistical features of the froth surface, we investigated the statistical distribution characteristics of the real part of the Gabor filter response (RGFR), the imaginary part of the Gabor filter response (IGFR), and the Gabor amplitude response representation (GARR) of the froth image sorted by a set of Gabor filters. The corresponding parameters of the probability density function (PDF) can be used as the froth feature vector to describe the froth structure without losing essential information on froth surface appearance. The working conditions of forth flotation were then identified using supervised pattern recognition methods (e.g., neural network). Based on the recognition results and operational experiences in different working conditions, appropriate control and operational guidelines can be applied to maintain the optimal production conditions. The traditional theory of Gabor filters is presented in the study of The Gabor filter generates a complete but non-orthogonal basis set. This method is used to describe local frequency in many fields. Similar to wavelet decomposition ( The Gabor filter responses of the froth image can be described by computing the convolutions between the image and a set of Gabor wavelets. Let Commonly evaluated visual features are obtained from RGFR, IGFR, and GARR, whose relationship is presented as:  The statistical mean and variance of GARR are commonly used as image features. The use of these parameters is equivalent to the assumption that GARR obeys GD. However, based on actual experimental results, GARR apparently does not follow GD but is generally skewed to the left. Therefore, simple mean and variance-based statistical features from RGFR, IGFR, or GARR cannot depict their corresponding distribution shapes. Hence the distinctive features from Gabor filter responses should be obtained according to their special statistical distribution profiles through the corresponding statistical distribution models to determine the accurate working condition. Over the recent years, scholars have focused on modeling the statistics of natural images ( Researchers investigated various statistical models, such as generalized Laplacians, mixtures of Gaussian, and Gaussian scale mixtures (GSMs), to fit the non-GD behavior ( If a random variable Without loss of generality, the special GSM distribution is rewritten as a t location-scale distribution to effectively control the distribution location and shape. PDF can be written as a three-parameter function Let The corresponding log-likelihood function can be written as: MLE can be achieved by determining the value of The statistics   As RGFR and IGFR statistically follow the t location-scale distribution, the Gabor filter responses of the froth image can be characterized using model parameters The statistical features of RGFR and IGFR are described as follows: Practical experience and previous studies indicated that the marginal distribution of GARR obeys Gamma distribution ( The As the sampling data The iteration rapidly converges in practice. When The goodness of fit is empirically assessed by measuring KLDs to evaluate whether the marginal distribution of GARR can be modeled by The goodness of fit values obtained using the KS test are displayed in The model parameters of The corresponding PDF parameters of RGFR, IGFR, and GARR for all sub-bands are extracted to generate the visual feature vector of the froth images for classification and recognition of froth flotation working conditions. As such, the visual characteristic of the froth image can be expressed as: The texture descriptor An expanded texture description of RGFR, IGFR and GARR can be achieved by combining global and local distribution information. Thus, the feature parameters of the statistical distribution found in the Gabor filter response of the froth image can be presented as: If the Gabor wavelets of Typical flotation circuit is a long process composed of rougher, scavenger, and cleaner banks. Each flotation bank includes dozens of flotation cells. In this study, we selected a bauxite flotation plant located in China as the research and application object for automatic classification and identification of working conditions through statistical modeling and analysis of froth images. A glimpse of the flotation banks in this plant is displayed in  The machine vision-based flotation froth monitoring system is composed of an industrial computer connected to the froth image acquisition devices, which consist of an industrial camera, high-frequency light source, and a waterproof cover. The visual inspection system is set up to monitor the flotation working conditions. The froth visual information is automatically analyzed for timely adjustment of the flotation operation and for obtaining stable and optimal flotation production. The plant is equipped with several froth image acquisition devices to monitor the entire flotation circuit. The installation locations of the equipment in the circuit are denoted in Numerous froth image samples and corresponding production process variables are collected. The froth visual features are highly related to the dosage of the reagent in the flotation cell, and the visual features are correlated with bubble loading; these features reflect flotation performance indices (concentrate grade and recovery of valuable ores). To utilize the surface texture characteristics of the froth images for classifying and recognizing the working conditions of froth flotation, we predefined the froth phases into six working conditions (Classes I–VI); these phases are displayed in The flotation working conditions and their corresponding froth images are manually chosen through reagent addition and are subjected to bubble loading assay by off-line and manual froth sampling. Reagents for collection and pH adjustment are added. These working conditions can be denoted as follows:       Supervised artificial neural networks (ANNs) are learning methods used for classifier training and for modeling complex systems, which contain unknown explicit equations. ANNs have attracted significant interest in many application areas ( LVQ-NN is based on supervised competitive learning, which contains input, competitive (intermediate), and output layers. Each neuron in the output layer corresponds to one production condition. The intermediate layer is used to train the classifications, each unit of which corresponds to a cluster. During training, the distance between the input vector and each process element is computed, and the nearest process element (the winner) is established. The winning process element located in the same class as the training vector moves toward the training vector or repulsed. As a result of the training, the process elements assigned to various classes migrate to the regions associated with these classes. Several different LVQ algorithms are available, all of which yield similar accuracies. The optimized learning-rate LVQ ( The use of the extracted froth features for classifier design and training is inefficient when considering the statistical features of froth images, such as very large dimensions, with increasing number of sub-images PCA is an effective feature reduction method that preserves most uncorrelated information from the original data. Thus, PCA is implemented to select the first Froth images are first processed through Gabor wavelet transformation, and the corresponding distribution parameters are extracted to generate the feature vector. The training and test samples are resized and truncated to 256 The LVQ-NN-based classifier is then constructed. The condition recognition performance is validated by selecting different numbers of local texture characteristics (with different  The number of competitive layer nodes of LVQ is heuristically determined. Under a predefined range of the number of the hidden-layer nodes, the optimal performance leading to the optimal LVQ structure can be determined. The experiments indicate that 38 nodes of the hidden layer produce the optimal classification performance. The classifier structure is thus fixed, and subsequent comparative results are conducted with 38 hidden-layer nodes. Two experiments are implemented to validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. In this experiment, 400 samples of each class are used for classifier training. A small test set is conducted to determine the performance of condition identification. The unsupervised clustering method is used to validate the classification ability of the six froth working conditions on the PCA scores. The supervised LVQ-NN classifier is then trained to obtain the automatic recognition results of the working conditions based on the extracted statistics of the froth images. In addition to the LVQ-NN classifier, LS-SVM is another effective method used to solve problems in nonlinear classification, whose key differences from the commonly used SVM is calculation of linear equations, rather than quadratic programming problems. LS-SVM has been successfully applied in solving different pattern recognition problems in the engineering field and scientific research ( An LS-SVM classifier is also established with the sample training and test samples to identify working condition and verify the effectiveness of the classification performance of the extracted statistical features of the froth images. The recognition results of the LS-SVM classifier-based froth working conditions are displayed in The combination of the recognition results shown in In summary, statistical distribution modeling-based features extracted from RGFR, IGFR, and GARR can be used to effectively identify froth flotation working conditions. This recognition method can be effectively applied to monitor the actual working conditions of industrial processes. Large training and test sets (including 5700 samples of all six working conditions) are prepared for determining froth flotation working condition. The recognition performance of the proposed method results are analyzed and compared with other commonly used feature extraction methods. Six additional sub-experiments are conducted by randomly choosing 400–500 samples of each working condition as the training samples and the rest of the samples as the test samples. The number of training and test samples is related to each predefined working condition in each experiment, as shown in In these sub-experiments, the proposed method is compared against commonly used determination methods based on GLCM ( In the comparative experiments, similar LVQ-NN classifiers are applied for the classification and recognition of froth flotation working conditions. The WT method achieves the highest recognition accuracies on classes I and II, and MR-MIA achieves the highest accuracies on the remaining classes of the working conditions. The mean recognition accuracy of commonly used methods is only 85%, which is significantly lower than that of the proposed method. The proposed method can achieve stable recognition performance in terms of the numerical comparative results of the standard deviations. The average standard deviation of the proposed method in the six sub-experiments is 1.51, whereas those of the other methods are larger, i.e., 2.42, 2.89, 2.15, and 2.70 for WT, MR-MIA, GARR mean and variance, and GLCM methods, respectively. Based on the experimental results from This study proposes a method for feature extraction of image statistical distribution through Gabor wavelet transformation for monitoring of flotation process performance. The PDF parameters of the Gabor filter responses of the froth images are extracted to construct the froth surface features; this technique significantly differs from common energy-based feature extraction methods. After extraction of froth surface features, a simple LVQ-NN based working condition classifier is designed for the automatic recognition of the working conditions. This method is validated using a real production data of an industrial bauxite flotation plant in China. The results of determining the optimal working condition are satisfactory and exhibit relatively high recognition rates and low false-positive rates. Comparative results also indicate the excellent performance of the proposed method compared with other detection methods. In conclusion, the proposed method is effective and economical for automatic identification of the working condition. This technique can be used to devise proper control strategies for optimal control of the flotation process. Method for extracting the statistical distribution features of froth images indicates a future direction for multi-resolution and multi-orientation analysis of image texture. Subsequent studies should theoretically obtain optimization parameters and develop machine vision-based flotation optimal control strategies according to the recognized optimal production condition. This work is supported by the key program of the The authors would like to thank Dr. Jianyong Zhu, with school of electrical and electronic engineering, East China Jiaotong University, for valuable discussions, and the editors and anonymous reviewers for suggestions and very careful checking that helped to improve the paper. The t location-scale model parameter An iterative procedure is used to numerically search for the maximum value of the log-likelihood function because the above-mentioned equations set (Eqs. The convergence properties of this procedure are presented in the study (