We report Ag–Cu solid solution formation by chemical reduction of silver and copper salts in aqueous medium. Depending on the proportion of silver and copper salts taken, varied degrees of solid solubility in the Ag–Cu system are observed. In most systems, we have got hexagonal Ag(rich)-2H phase in addition to Ag-rich face centered cubic one. It seems that the formation of Cu-rich phase is facilitated by the presence of Ag(rich)-2H phase.The Ag–Cu equilibrium phase diagram shows significant amount of terminal solid solubility of Cu in Ag Bimetallic alloy nanoparticles have excellent optical, electronic and catalytic properties different from those of the component metals. The Ag–Cu nanoparticles have been used to improve the properties of lead-free interconnects, dental amalgams, etc. Materials used in our synthesis were AgNO The X-ray diffraction (XRD) of all the samples (scan speed of 0.25°/min) is shown in The X-ray diffractograms of sample S1 in Except in S1, in all other samples we find the formation of the hexagonal 2H-(Ag) phase. In the XRD of S2, S3 and S4 only the (0002) line of the 2H-(Ag) phase is observed. While for S5 both (101̄0) and (0002) lines of the 2H-(Ag) phase are found. In case of S6 we only observe 2H-(Ag) (101̄0) line. The Clusters of (Cu) and (Ag) ultra-fine particles having different contrast and size distributions are clearly discernible from the SEM micrograph given in Having presented the results we now discuss the nature of phases that were formed during the synthesis. The growth of (Cu) phases seems to be feasible if AgNO It is important to mention here that all the diffractograms (cf. We have thus shown the formation of ultra-fine particles of (Ag) and (Cu) of varied degrees of solid solubility by co-reduction of silver nitrate and copper nitrate in their aqueous solution. The maximum solid solubilities in (Ag) and (Cu) have been found to be ~ We have carried out AFM studies in the unit of Nanoscience and Technology at BHU created with the help of DST support under