The present work explores the application of microwave heating for the melting of powdered tin. The morphology and particle size of powdered tin prepared by the centrifugal atomization method were characterized. The tin particles were uniform and spherical in shape, with 90% of the particles in the size range of 38–75 μm. The microwave absorption characteristic of the tin powder was assessed by an estimation of the dielectric properties. Microwave penetration was found to have good volumetric heating on powdered tin. Conduction losses were the main loss mechanisms for powdered tin by microwave heating at temperatures above 150 °C. A 20kW commercial-scale microwave tin-melting unit was designed, developed, and utilized for production. This unit achieved a heating rate that was at least 10 times higher than those of conventional methods, as well as a far shorter melting duration. The results suggest that microwave heating accelerates the heating rate and shortens the melting time. Tin recovery rate was 97.79%, with a slag ratio of only 1.65% and other losses accounting for less than 0.56%. The unit energy consumption was only 0.17 (kW·h)·kg–1—far lower than the energy required by conventional melting methods. Thus, the microwave melting process improved heating efficiency and reduced energy consumption.Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths that range from as long as 1 The present work attempts to apply microwave heating to tin smelting and the tin recycling industry. Powdered tin is mainly used in the production of solder paste, powdered metallurgy products, and so on. In the electronics industry in particular, solder paste has become a new type of welding material with better technology and added value Tin alloy powder was provided by Yunnan Tin Group (Holding) Company Limited, China. Its main components are tin (Sn), silver (Ag), and copper (Cu) in a Sn-3.0Ag-0.5Cu alloy. The powdered tin was prepared using centrifugal atomization at an atomization rate of 24000–30 000 r·min The morphology and particle size of the powdered tin were analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (JSM-5610LV, JEOL Limited, Tokyo, Japan). The heating rate of the tin powder was measured by thermocouple (Type-K). A platform for dielectric performance testing was established using the resonant-cavity method and dielectric property testing. The testing temperature ranged from room temperature to 1200 °C.  In general, skin depth is relatively small in metals (varying between 0.1 µm and 10 µm); however, most metallic powders have equivalent dimensions. For powdered tin with a particle size range of 38–75 µm, the electrical resistivity In addition, when microwaves act on metal particles, electrons gather on the surface. Under the action of the microwave electromagnetic field, an induced eddy current will be produced on the surface of the tin particle ( Furthermore, the mechanism of microwave heating of ceramic and dielectrically lossy materials has been widely investigated. Microwaves penetrate the dielectric material and generate an internal electric field within a specific volume, thus inducing polarization and the movement of charges. The internal, electric, and frictional forces attenuate the electric field to resist these induced motions. These losses result in volumetric heating There are two main loss mechanisms for non-magnetic materials: dipolar losses and conduction losses. Conduction losses dominate in metallic and high-conductivity materials, whereas dipolar losses dominate in dielectric insulators We established a dielectric constant measurement system using the cylindrical resonant-cavity perturbation method (as shown in Experiments on the melting of powdered tin via microwaves were attempted, using 2.5 In addition, Mishra et al.  The industrial-scale microwave melting unit is utilized to recycle tin powder.  In this study, we analyzed the morphology and particle size of tin powder prepared using the centrifugal atomization method. We studied the skin effect and dielectric properties of powdered tin, and carried out research on the microwave melting of tin powder. Our results showed that microwave heating greatly accelerated the heating rate and shortened the process time. The heating efficiency was improved and the energy consumption was greatly reduced. In addition, we designed and developed a new type of microwave melting equipment and applied it to industrial tin powder melting and recycling, thus improving the recovery rate of powdered tin and reducing the proportion of slag. The recovery of industrial tin powder by microwave melting achieved a very good application effect. Lei Xu, Jinhui Peng, Hailong Bai, C. Srinivasakannan, Libo Zhang, Qingtian Wu, Zhaohui Han, Shenghui Guo, Shaohua Ju, and Li Yang declare that they have no conflict of interest or financial conflicts to disclose. This work was financially supported by the