The presented datasets relate to the research article entitled “Land changes in Slovakia: past processes and future directions” [8]. The datasets include the land use and cover (LUC) maps of Slovakia for the years 2006 and 2012 and maps of five future land use scenarios for 2040 developed along the axes of globalisation vs. regionalisation and low vs. high policy intervention (IPCC). Datasets were produced in raster format by combining thematic maps, outputs of models defining particular LUC sector and statistical data taken from European and national predictions of future land change development.The maps have a spatial resolution of 20m  Thematically and spatially enhanced LUC data provide most detailed and accurate temporal layers of LUC for the years 2006 and 2012 available for Slovakia on national level Overlay of LUC dataset for 2006 and 2012 improves on existing knowledge of recent changes in LUC Five future land use scenarios for 2040 were developed along the axes of globalisation vs. regionalisation and low vs. high policy intervention. Future scenarios provide important baseline information for researchers and practitioners for implementation into management practice and to gain insights into likely magnitudes and locations of land-change in the future. The LUC classification for Slovakia was developed using the existing CORINE dataset for 2006 and 2012. Improvements of the CORINE LUC classification encompassed higher thematic improvement (20 The enhanced LUC datasets were used as an input for developing the spatially explicit future scenarios of land change in Slovakia. Scenarios assumed different development trends as defined by the development pathways from recent years (TREND scenario; To improve the spatial resolution of urban land cover areas within the CLC dataset, we used the soil sealing layer, which is part of the Pan-European High-Resolution Layers For the purpose of refinement, we also used the European waterbody map derived from the Pan-European High-Resolution (HR) datasets. Here, significant water courses and lakes are distinguished, which represent landscape features that are not entirely contained within CLC or the Urban Atlas layers. The illustration of the 2012 LUC refinement shows that most changes that occurred within those areas that were mapped in the Urban Atlas project (Fig S1a,c) correspond to regional capitals and their hinterland. Updating the CORINE LUC dataset by using the Urban Atlas dataset, ZB GIS and HR waterbody dataset substantially decreases the occurrence of urbanised areas. Most of the urbanised ( areas were converted to permanent crops (CLC class 22), which implies the allocation of gardens within cities and their hinterlands in the refined dataset. The opposite change towards urbanised and industrialised areas (CLC class 11 and 12, respectively) was recorded on the small or dispersed settlement patterns which are not able to be mapped by applying the CLC nomenclature (minimum area size of CLC patch is 25 Future scenarios consist of four general parts that define the spatial policies and restrictions, specific land use conversion settings and land use demand and local suitability assessments This research was funded by the Transparency data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 