The efficiency of a bank of dense medium cyclones treating medium coking coal in the size range of −13+0.5 mm was evaluated. Performance indicators for evaluating the efficiency of the separation were identified. Various variables affecting the efficiency of the dense medium cyclones (DMC) were examined to identify those that affect the DMC operation and new levels of the parameters identified to bridge the gap between the actual and the ideal. The studies showed that for coals having a high level of NGM, feed rate could be one of the critical parameters affecting the efficiency of separation. Feed rate and the spigot diameter were used to reduce the E
                     p and for coarser adjustments of cutpoints.
                  Mathematical model for the cyclones was developed using the generalised distribution curve, represented by the equation of the form:
                        
                           y=100[exp−(x−x0)a/b]
                        
                     where y is the percent distribution of clean coal corresponding to a reduced specific gravity x, x is defined as Sg/Sg50, and a, b and x
                     0 are constants.
                  Corelations were then developed relating the coefficient of separation (showing the separation efficiency) and the E
                     p to the design and operating variables of the cyclones.The DMC, which works on the principle of gravity separation, employs the use of a dense medium, which for coal washing is an aqueous suspension of ultrafine magnetite. The density of the suspension is adjusted to a value that is between the densities of coal and the associated mineral matter. As such, the light coal particles float, while the heavy particles sink. In the dense medium cyclone, a mixture of medium and raw coal enters tangentially near the top of the cylindrical section, thus forming a strong vortical flow. The refuse/high ash particles move along the wall of the cyclone (due to the centrifugal force) where the velocity is the least and is discharged through the underflow orifice or the spigot. The lighter washed coal moves towards the longitudinal axis of the cyclone due to the drag force (where a high velocity zone exists) and passes through the overflow orifice, or vortex finder, also called the overflow chamber. In a coal washery, which makes use of DMCs, two or more DMCs are normally connected in parallel to form a bank sharing a common feed pipe. Depending upon the operating and the design variables, and also the wear and the tear of the equipment, the efficiency of the cyclones would vary. Washery-II of West Bokaro, Tata Steel, India has eight such cyclones in a bank treating medium coking coal in the size range of −13+0.5 mm. The cyclones are of 610-mm diameter with a vortex finder diameter of 260 mm and a spigot diameter of 203 mm. Studies were carried out to determine the efficiency of the cyclones. Efforts were made initially to determine the major performance indices that would be used for measuring the separation efficiency and then the significant variables, which affect the separation  The performance of any cyclone can be determined by drawing its distribution curve, otherwise called the tromp curve, which is a plot of the percentage recovery of clean coal (distribution factor) in any particular specific gravity range against the nominal specific gravity. For an ideal equipment, which separates the clean coal and rejects perfectly, the curve would be a step curve. In usual practice this is a The DMC cutpoint Sg Apart from The higher the value of CS, the better the separation. The feed characteristics are mainly determined by particle size, particle shape, the amount of near-density material and the feed rate. Among these variables, the size of the feed particle is one of the important variables affecting DMC performance. When the size of coal particle falls below 2 mm, the DMC performance becomes increasingly sensitive to the influence of medium properties and cyclone operating conditions The feed rate becomes another major factor affecting DMC performance when the amount of near gravity material is high. In the present case, the feed size of coal being coarser, i.e. −13+0.5 mm and the NGM being quite high (44%), the media stability and feed rate only were considered for the study. The third group of variables in The medium split ratio can be varied by changing the vortex finder diameter and spigot diameters (also called the orifice diameters) or by changing the cyclone inlet pressure. Various researchers have concluded differently on the effect of orifice diameters on cyclone performance. It was observed that by decreasing spigot diameter, the separation efficiency The cyclone spigot and vortex diameters were found to be interrelated They found that at a higher cone ratio, the dense medium became more stable and the cutpoint shift was less sensitive to the effect of the cyclone feed flow rate. Thus it ca be said that the cyclone geometry influences cyclone performance mainly through modifying the medium flow pattern or the medium split ratio. In this work, the cyclone inlet pressure was kept constant and the medium split ratio was controlled only by changing the cone ratio. The medium flow rate is another important operating variable that determines the centrifugal acceleration. This was also maintained constant throughout. Medium composition affects DMC performance by changing its stability and rheology. Medium rheology has a negligible effect on the separation of coarse particles in DMCs An analysis of the products from the cyclones showed that the cyclones produced a clean coal of 17.5% ash at a yield of 33% from a feed ash of 36%. The cyclones were gravity-fed with an inlet pressure head of 9 The specific gravity of feed to the cyclones was 1.38 and the coal/magnetite ratio was 1:4. Theoretical sink–float studies with the feed coal showed that the yield under ideal conditions would be 39% at 17.5% ash at a specific gravity of separation of 1.505. The near gravity material was as high as 44%. Ten different trials were carried out varying the feed rates and the cone ratio. Since the cyclones had in-built vortex finders, only the spigots were changed to obtain different cone ratios. The effect of the variables on the performance indicators under different conditions of operation were studied. Equations were developed relating The samples collected under different operating conditions were subjected to sink–float tests to determine the specific gravity of separation and to draw the distribution curves. Mathematical corelations were developed relating the specific gravity of separation to specific gravity of feed, and other variables. The distribution curves obtained under different conditions of operation of the cyclone were plotted against a reduced specific gravity abscissa (Sg/Sg Effect of feed rate on cutpoint shift is shown in The cutpoint shift is only a function of the medium split ratio The feed rate influences the cutpoint shift by indirectly influencing the medium split ratio. An optimum feed rate is required to maintain required flow patterns in the cyclone and hence an optimum medium split ratio. As the feed rates are raised, the medium split ratio increases exponentially. Very low medium split ratios at very low feed rates would cause short-circuiting of the feed and the media. As the medium split ratio reaches an optimum, the cutpoint shift also reaches a minimum at optimum feed rate. Increasing the feed rate further obviously causes the holdup of near gravity material inside the cyclone with intermittent roping or plugging With increase in feed rate, initially, the separation efficiency increased slightly. The efficiency after reaching an optimum again deteriorated Every cyclone has a maximum capacity as regards to the capacity of its vortex finder and that of its spigot. For a good separation efficiency, it is essential that the equipment be utilised to its optimum capacity. In the case under study, the minimum As far as the coefficient of separation or CS is concerned, generally, decrease in feed rate showed a trend of increasing CS This is because in the presence of a large proportion of near density materials, as in the above, a high feed rate causes the build up of near density materials inside the cyclone, since the spigots are not large enough to discharge the whole quantity of the rejects. The near density particles, which cannot discharge through the spigot, migrate to the axis of the cyclone into the upward flowing medium. When being too heavy to be carried by the upward flowing medium, these particles become entrapped in the eddy current adjacent to the spigot until a sufficient amount is accumulated and resulting in congestion and an eventual breakdown of the medium flow pattern. At any given cone ratio, by varying the feed rate, it would be possible to decrease/increase the cutpoint shift, the In order to determine the effect of the feed rate and the cone ratio together, a new index was developed, which would be a function of both the cone ratio and the feed rate. The variation of the cutpoint shift, The reason can be explained as follows: the separation efficiency, especially for coals where the NGM is high, is also a function of the medium residence time. A better separation efficiency can be achieved with smaller spigot diameters at the expense of lower cyclone throughput. The increased residence time of the feed particles in the cyclone improves their chance of reporting to the correct product streams. Any attempt to increase DMC throughput or use a combination of larger vortex finder and spigot diameters will result in lower separation efficiency The final trials confirmed the earlier findings. As discussed earlier, medium stability is the only property that affects cyclone performance when used for separating coarse particles. The difference between the overflow and the underflow density differential was measured as an indicator of medium stability. Increase in density differential increases the cutpoint shift Increasing The relationship for Sg  The generalised distribution curve for the industrial cyclone is shown in The above equation along with The   The effect of the feed characteristics, the operating variables and the medium composition on the It was found that the feed rate, the cone ratio and the density differential were the most significant variables that would affect the efficiency of separation. A new index, a function of both the cone ratio and the feed rate, could show better relationships and trends on the It was found that a combination of optimum feed rate and highest cone ratio would give the best separation efficiency. A mathematical model was developed for the plant cyclone, which along with the washability data can be used to predict the yields from the cyclone under any conditions of operation, provided the feed size and the coal remains the same. Specific gravity of separation Specific gravity of feed media Feed rate in the bank of cyclones (tons/h) Cone ratio=diameter of vortex finder/diameter of spigot Density differential of the heavy media between underflow and overflow Ash in clean coal (%) Yield in clean coal (%) Coefficient of separation Efficiency parameter Cone ratio feed rate index