One of the challenges in soil ecology is to determine which organisms utilise stable forms of carbon in soil. Recent studies have indicated that endogeic earthworms are able to mobilise such stable carbon compounds. However, it remains unclear which particular compounds of stabilised carbon in soil are utilised by earthworms. Furthermore, current knowledge on ecological groups and food resources of earthworms is mainly based on direct observations, hence only reflecting what was ingested but not what was actually assimilated. We analysed seven earthworm species in beech and spruce forests and the associated litter, earthworm middens and soils, and employed compound-specific 13C stable isotope analysis of fatty acids (FAs) to identify the origins of carbon resources of the earthworms. To relate food resources to carbon compounds of different stability, we analysed 13C signatures of FAs of different particle size fractions. FA δ13C profiles of epigeic and endogeic earthworm species indicated assimilation of recently-fixed and recalcitrant carbon resources, respectively, whereas anecic earthworms assimilated a mixture of resources of different stability. Utilisation of carbon resources did not differ between beech and spruce forests. Endogeic species were associated with neutral lipids of soil particle size fractions with δ13C signatures of the bacterial marker a15:0 in earthworms resembling those of the clay fraction. This suggests that they assimilated carbon associated with small particle size fractions attached to clay–humus complexes. The results showed that earthworms of different ecological groups utilise carbon pools of different origin and stability. As indicated by neutral lipids of bacterial origin, physically-stabilised organic matter appears to contribute to the nutrition of endogeic earthworms in forest systems.Earthworms function as important ecosystem engineers by structuring the habitat for other soil biota ( Earthworms are classified into three ecological groups: epigeic, anecic and endogeic species ( Organic matter associated with stable carbon pools comprises a multitude of complex recalcitrant compounds including cellulose, lignin and humic acids, but also simple and easily degradable compounds, such as sugars, amino acids and lipids ( As shown for collembolans, oribatid mites and soil macrofauna, stable isotope signatures of lipids, i.e. We analysed seven earthworm species of beech and spruce forests and employed compound-specific The study formed part of the ‘Biodiversity Exploratories’, an integrated research project on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in three regions of Germany ( Adult earthworms were sampled by a combination of modified mustard extraction ( The following seven earthworm species common at all study sites were selected for the analyses: Part of each soil sample (upper and lower soil merged) was sieved (4 mm mesh) to remove plant roots and stones and for homogenisation. Samples were physically disaggregated by low-energy sonication ( Earthworm lipids were extracted and fractionated as described in For the analysis of δ The remaining soil particle size fraction material of beech and spruce forest sites was dried at 105 °C for 24 h before analysing natural variations in δ Absolute amounts of NLFAs and PLFAs were converted into percentage values and logit-transformed. NLFA profiles of earthworm species and PLFA profiles of litter, upper soil, lower soil and middens of beech and spruce forest sites were analysed by discriminant function analysis (DFA). Due to the high number of different FAs gained, for PLFA data non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) was used prior to DFA. In case of significant DFA, proportions of individual FAs were analysed by single factor analysis of variance (ANOVA). Means were compared by Tukey's honestly significant difference (HSD) test. Compound-specific δ PLFA composition of resources (earthworm middens, litter, upper soil and lower soil) differed significantly between beech and spruce forests (DFA after NMDS; reduced to four dimensions; In spruce forests FA composition also differed significantly between resources, but differences were less pronounced than in beech forests (DFA after NMDS; reduced to four dimensions; NLFA profiles did not differ between forest types (DFA; To relate feeding strategies of different earthworm species to resources, δ δ FA composition of resources differed significantly between soil layers and middens as well as between soil layers and litter, with higher proportions of bacterial markers in soils and higher proportions of fungal markers in middens and litter. This suggests distinct bacteria-dominated microbial communities in soil and fungi-dominated microbial communities in middens and litter which is consistent with earlier observations ( FA compositions of the two epigeic earthworm species, δ δ δ Confirming our second hypothesis bulk δ Notably, FA δ Overall, using novel techniques the results suggest that earthworms of different ecological groups utilise carbon pools of different origin and stability. The seven earthworm species studied differed markedly in assimilation of carbon resources. However, earthworms did not differ in mobilisation of carbon pools between beech and spruce forests, presumably due to similar decomposition and humification processes in these systems. FA δ The work has been funded by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at