To comprehensively utilize the laterite resources, the present study focused on the selective recovery of valuable metals Ni, Co or Al, Cr, and concurrent synthesis of spinel ferrites from saprolite-limonite laterite leach liquors by a one-step selective precipitation method. The precipitation behaviors were investigated in detail, as were factors such as precipitant reagent, pH value, precipitation method, and initial metal ion concentration. In optimal conditions, about 93.0% Ni and 92.0% Co could be enriched in the filtrate by using ammonia (aqueous NH3) solution as precipitant reagent while the recoveries of Al and Cr were 92.0% and 90.0% by using sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution. After the separation and selective precipitation processes, the precipitates were utilized to synthesize spinel ferrites and the effects of saprolite to limonite laterite mass ratio (MS/L) and calcination temperature on the product purity are discussed. Single phase multi-metal doped magnesium ferrites with high purity could be synthesized when the precipitates were obtained using MS/L ratio of 9:1 and 7:3 by using aqueous NH3 and NaOH solutions as precipitant reagents, and then calcined at 1000°C for 2h, respectively. The overall metal recoveries from laterite blends using aqueous NH3 and NaOH precipitant reagents were 89.2% and 85.4%, respectively.With the depletion of sulfide nickel mineral resources and rising demand for nickel, extraction of valuable metals such as Ni and Co from nickel laterite ores have been paid greater attention although such ores have lower grades (0.75–3%) and are more difficult to treat compared with sulfide nickel ores ( Up to now, many efforts have focused on separation and removal of impurities from laterite leach liquors by using chemical precipitation and solvent extraction methods ( In the present study, approaches to the cooperative utilization of metal ions in the laterite leach liquor have been proposed. In our previous work ( Spinel ferrites such as NiFe In this paper, a selective precipitation method with ammonia (aqueous NH The saprolite and limonite laterite ores studied in this paper were supplied by Beijing Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. Analytical reagents aqueous NH The detailed flow chart used for this study is shown in The laterite leach liquors were obtained as follows: the saprolite laterite and limonite laterite with different saprolite to limonite laterite ore mass ratios (M During the selective precipitation process, different precipitant reagents including aqueous NH When aqueous NH When NaOH solution is chosen as a precipitant reagent, the main reactions include the above Eqs. All the selective precipitation experiments were conducted in a 250 During the precipitation process, the precipitation percentage α of each metal ion in the leach liquors was calculated using Eq. During the separation and enrichment of valuable metals process, the recovery (R) of valuable metals Ni, Co, Al and Cr in the filtrate was calculated according to Eq. After selective precipitation process, the precipitates were calcinated to synthesize spinel ferrites. The preparation reactions were as follows: Aqueous NH NaOH solution as precipitant reagent: Spinel ferrite synthesis procedures: firstly, the precipitates were dried in an oven at 100 Concentrations of Ni The detailed analysis of the raw ores can be found in the previous work ( In this section, the effects of precipitant reagent, pH value, precipitation method and initial metal ion concentration on the precipitation percentage and recovery of each metal ion during the selective precipitation processes were investigated systematically. Metal ion precipitation behavior mainly depends on the pH values of the solutions ( When NaOH solution was chosen as a precipitant reagent as illustrated in After solid-liquid separation process, images of the filtrates were taken as shown in By controlling the pH value of the leach liquor (normal precipitation), the recovery of valuable metals reached about 80–85%. A reverse precipitation method was also used to investigate the effect of precipitation method on the metal recovery. The metal recovery results are illustrated in After separation and selective extraction, spinel ferrites were synthesized from the precipitates. The metal recoveries during the separation and selective extraction processes indirectly influence the synthesis of spinel ferrites. Considering that the R Based on the above experiments, selective recoveries of 93% for Ni, 92% for Co and 92% for Al, 90% for Cr could be achieved by using aqueous NH As mentioned previously, the molar ratio of metal ions which depends on the M In addition, comparing the single phase spinel ferrite sample F3 with sample F6, it is worth noting that the M  According to the experiments described, the optimum conditions for selective recovery of valuable metals and preparation of single phase spinel ferrites from laterite leach liquors are summarized in In this paper, separation and selective recovery of valuable metals Ni, Co, Al, and Cr, and concurrent synthesis of spinel ferrites from laterite leach liquors was systematically investigated. Conclusions from this work are as follows. By using aqueous NH The work was financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at