The Nechalacho rare earth element (REE) deposit is located in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Of the various REE-bearing minerals in the deposit, zircon is significant due to its elevated heavy rare earth element (HREE) content. Most studies performed on this ore to date have focused on fully liberating REE-bearing minerals through fine grinding prior to a separation stage. However, previous lab scale work has shown that zircon can be concentrated in relatively coarse sizes, suggesting the potential to pre-concentrate the ore by gravity separation without complete liberation. The current work investigates the pre-concentration of the Nechalacho deposit using a spiral concentrator and a Knelson Concentrator on a relatively coarse (d80 = 97 μm) feed. The feed sample and the resultant fractions, produced by each separation technique, were analyzed with ICP-MS to determine the zirconium and REE content. The samples were also analyzed with QEMSCAN to identify the effect of particle size, mineral liberation and association characteristics, and mineral particle SG distributions for each gravity separation technique. The results suggest that the value minerals can be effectively concentrated by gravity separation even when they are poorly liberated. It is important to note that the process examined here is not representative of the currently selected process design or recovery for the Nechalacho deposit. Any application of this process to this deposit would require optimization to ensure appropriate grade and recovery targets are met.The rare earth elements (REE), which encompass the 15 elements of the lanthanide series of the periodic table of elements, plus yttrium (Y), are strategic metals which are indispensable to the development of modern defense systems, electronic applications and green technologies. The growing economic and strategic importance of these sectors, coupled with uncertainty in the global supply of REE from China (highlighted by the implementation of export quotas in 2010), have led to concerns about the future supply of many of these metals ( Pre-concentration is a processing step aimed at rejecting waste early in the concentration process. Earlier rejection of gangue can have significant benefits, including increased feed grades to downstream processes, and lower ore throughputs and operating costs. Ores amenable to pre-concentration at coarser particle sizes would also benefit from lower energy requirements in the comminution stage. The method of separation used to reject gangue material during pre-concentration is dependent on the physical properties of the ore and often rely on differences in specific gravity (SG), color, particle size, radioactivity, conductivity, or magnetic susceptibility between valuable material and gangue. Gravity separation is a common pre-concentration step for many REM deposits (especially heavy mineral sands deposits), focussed on rejecting low SG gangue material ( Gravity concentration is the separation of minerals based upon differences in SG. It offers multiple advantages over other separation techniques, such as flotation. Gravity separation techniques generally have low capital and operational costs (no reagent costs), comparatively little environmental impact and are relatively simple processes ( The main REE-bearing minerals in the Nechalacho deposit are zircon, allanite, bastnäsite, synchysite, monazite, columbite (Fe) and fergusonite. The major gangue minerals are quartz, feldspars and iron (Fe) oxides. Zircon is of significant importance, due to its high HREE content compared to other REMs in the deposit ( This work investigates the use of gravity separation to pre-concentrate the Nechalacho deposit, building upon the findings of The ore used in this work was obtained from the Nechalacho deposit (Avalon Advanced Materials Inc., Canada). A 50 kg sample of ore, with an initial top size of 3.36 mm, was riffled to produce 1 kg representative samples. Samples were then ground wet at 50% DMS is a process by which minerals are separated based on differences in SG. The process utilizes a liquid or an aqueous suspension of fine particles with a predetermined density for which particles less dense than the liquid will float while those heavier will sink. This work used a heavy liquid solution [lithium metatungstate (LMT), purchased from LMT Liquid, LLC (USA)] as the dense medium. An important consideration for DMS is particle size. When using centrifugal separators, DMS is effective at processing material down to 0.5 mm, which is significantly coarser than the gravity feed produced in this work. However, in lab-scale DMS, particle size is not a factor and sharp separations remain possible at fine particle sizes ( To perform DMS on the gravity feed, three 15 The spiral separator used in this work was a Walkabout assembly from Mineral Technologies (Australia). The unit is composed of a four turn Wallaby trough, with a 208 mm pitch and trough diameter of 360 mm. The sample was fed as a slurry (20% The Knelson Concentrator used in this work was a KC MD3 model (FLSmidth Knelson, Canada). It was operated with a bowl speed of 1250 rpm and fluidizing water rate of 2 L/min. The material was fed with a flow rate of 250 The REE and zirconium (Zr) content of the feed and products produced from DMS, spiral and Knelson experiments were determined by ICP-MS. To digest the samples, a homogenous melt was formed by mixing 0.1 g of sample with sodium peroxide which was then heated. The melt was then digested in hydrochloric acid. All digestions and ICP-MS analysis in this work were conducted by SGS Canada (Lakefield, Canada). The products of spiral and Knelson separation experiments, along with a feed sample, were sieved at 150 μm, 106 μm, 75 μm and 53 μm. Representative samples from each size fraction were then prepared as polished sections and analyzed using QEMSCAN at the Advanced Mineralogy Facility at SGS Canada (Lakefield, Canada). This technique employs an EVO 430 automated SEM equipped with four light-element energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers and iDiscover software for data and image processing. A reference mineral list was developed using XRD (primarily to define the major minerals), a SEM equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM-EDS), and electron probe micro analysis (EPMA). REMs were identified based on their major REE composition. The samples were analyzed with the Particle Mineral Analysis (PMA) method. PMA is a two-dimensional mapping analysis aimed at resolving liberation and locking characteristics of a set of particles. A pre-defined number of particles were mapped at a pixel size of 3.4–7 μm. The typical diameter of a polished section was 30 mm. Representative samples from DMS experiments were prepared as polished sections and analyzed with a Hitachi SU8000 cold field emission SEM (Hitachi High-Technologies, Canada) equipped with an 80 mm The mineralogy of the feed for gravity separation is shown in Liberation and association characteristics for all major mineral classes in the deposit are shown in Mineral particles in the feed can be grouped into different SG classes using the QEMSCAN data. This is done by assigning each mineral a SG value and then calculating the SG of each particle as a function of its constituents. Thus, upgrade ratio and recovery plots for each mineral can be produced by artificially splitting the sample at the desired SG.  SEM-EDS was used to identify Zr, Fe, cerium (Ce) and Y in the sink and float fractions at a SG of 2.75 ( Plots of the upgrade ratio Although quartz is relatively well liberated, it is not well rejected by the spiral concentrator.  An analysis, like that performed on the spiral products, was conducted on the Knelson concentrate and tailings. This study investigated the use of a spiral concentrator and a Knelson Concentrator as a pre-concentration step for a coarse Nechalacho feed. ICP-MS was used to determine the content of valuable elements in gravity products and QEMSCAN to identify how particle size, mineral liberation and association characteristics, and mineral particle SG distributions affect each gravity technique. The conclusions are as follows: DMS results were accurately predicted by QEMSCAN gravity modeling of the feed. QEMSCAN gravity modeling and DMS experiments indicate that mineral grain size differences and association characteristics provide opportunities to pre-concentrate the Nechalacho deposit at relatively coarse particle sizes using gravity separation. Both the spiral concentrator and the Knelson Concentrator were effective at pre-concentrating the material, achieving zircon upgrade ratios of 2.0 and 2.3, respectively. Both processes reject predominately feldspar gangue and fine quartz particles. Particle size had a significant effect when using the spiral, but much less so for the Knelson Concentrator. The spiral preferentially recovered coarser particles, whereas the Knelson showed little bias between particles sizes. The spiral concentrator was only effective in the −150 μm particle range, whereas, the Knelson Concentrator remained effective at coarser sizes; suggesting opportunities for even coarser grinds when using centrifugal separators. The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Avalon Advanced Materials Inc. for providing funding for this work through the Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) Program (CRDPJ 44537-12). C. Marion and S. Rudinsky would also like to acknowledge funding from the McGill Engineering Doctoral Award and the NSERC Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarships Program. The authors would also like to thank the Advanced Mineralogy Facility at SGS Canada (Lakefield) for the ICP-MS and QEMSCAN analysis. We would also like to acknowledge the reviewers for their comprehensive anayses of our submission. (see