Introduction
                  The management of pilon fractures is controversial primarily due to the high rate of complications irrespective of the mode of treatment. Limited internal fixation with external fixation is associated with minimal soft tissue handling. This may reduce the chances of wound dehiscence and infection. This study was designed to evaluate the functional and clinical outcomes in patients treated with limited internal fixation combined with external fixation in pilon fractures.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This study was conducted as a prospective clinical study on 56 skeletally mature patients with closed fractures with poor skin condition, and with open grade 1 and grade 2 distal tibial intra-articular fractures. All patients were treated with combined limited internal fixation and ankle spanning external fixation.
               
                  Results
                  All fractures in this series united with an average time period of union of 18.3weeks (ranging from 13 weeks to 30 weeks). There was no non-union in any case. There was malunion in 4 cases, varus malunion (>5 degree) in 2 cases and recurvatum in another 2 cases). Excellent to good functional results were observed in 88% cases based on the modified Ovadia and Beals score. The mean ankle dorsiflexion and planter flexion movements were 10.2±5.3 degrees and 27.4±7.2 degrees respectively. infections occurred in 6 patients which included 4 pin tract infections and 2 superficial wound infection, all 6 healed after removal of pin tract and with oral antibiotics.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The technique of combined external fixation with internal fixation is safe and effective management option for intra-articular distal tibial fractures.Intraarticular distal leg bone fractures involving the weight bearing area of tibia are termed as pilon or tibial plafond fractures and constitute 1% of lower limb fractures and 7% of tibial fractures. Conservative treatment with cast is often associated with joint stiffness, nonunion, malunion, secondary arthritis and reflex sympathetic dystrophy and has limited indications now adays. Limited internal fixation with external fixation associated with minimal soft tissue handling, leaving no large implant subcutaneously may lead to less chance of wound dehiscence and infection. With this approach pilon fractures with poor skin condition can be managed definitively early with good results. Considering all these facts this study was conceived and designed so as to evaluate overall function and clinical outcomes of patients treated with this procedure and to discuss merits, demerits and cost effectiveness of this procedure. This prospective clinical study was conducted on 56 patients with intra-articular fracture of distal tibia treated with combined limited internal fixation and external fixation by a single senior surgeon (MCB) at a tertiary trauma centre, over a period of four years. After exclusion of 6 patients (which were lost to follow up), a total of 50 patients were included for final outcome analysis with minimum of one year follow up. Ethical clearance was obtained from the institutional review board and patients were included after written informed consent was obtained. Skeletally mature patients with closed fractures and poor skin condition and open grade 1 and grade 2 pilon fractures were included in the study. Patients with metadiaphyseal distal tibial fracture without intra-articular extension, open grade 3 fractures, pathological fractures and patients with multiple musculoskeletal injuries to same or opposite lower limb were excluded. All patients were subjected to a detailed history, clinical and radiological evaluation. Fractures were classified according to Ruedi and Allgover classification. Under all aseptic precautions, patients were operated under spinal or general anaesthesia with patient in supine position on a radiolucent table under tourniquet control. Preoperative intravenous antibiotic (cefuroxime) was administered to all patients. A thorough debridement and wound irrigation was done in patients with open fractures. The fibula was fixed first after open reduction using 1/3 tubular plates in spiral or comminuted fibula fractures and by closed reduction and fixation with Rush pin or Kirschner wire (K-wire) in transverse fractures, to maintain the length and rotation of the limb. The tibial fracture was reduced under image intensifier using traction and manipulation. A 4.5 Postoperative intravenous cefuroxime along with amikacin was given for three days. The limb was elevated on two pillows and patients were advised to do active toe movements. Wound was inspected after 48 All patients were followed up at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 2–3 months, 6 months and at 1 Of the 50 patients studied 40 were males and 10 were females, with age ranging from 19 to 62 years ( minor infection occurred in 6 patients which included 4 pin tract infections and 2 superficial wound infections( Average time period for union was 18.3 weeks (ranging from 13 to 30 weeks). There was no nonunion in any case. There was malunion in 4 cases, varus malunion (>5°) in 2 cases and recurvatum in another 2 cases ( Excellent to good results were observed in 88% based on the modified Ovadia and Beals score. The mean ankle dorsiflexion and planter flexion movements were 10.2 Controversy exists over treatment of pilon fractures and wide variations in management have been reported. Traditional treatment methods such as skeletal traction or immobilization in a cast are infrequently used nowadays, because they had unsatisfactory results including insufficient anatomical reduction and joint stiffness. Ruedi and Allgower in 1969 attempted open reduction and internal fixation in 84 fractures using their principles of Restoration of the correct length of the fibula, Reconstruction of the articular surface of the tibia, Cancellous bone auto-graft to fill the metaphyseal bone defects, and medial support by a buttress plate. While the quality of reduction was better with open reduction and fixation, these procedures were associated with an increased incidence of impaired wound healing and post-traumatic arthrosis. In order to combine the benefits of ORIF (direct visualization and manipulation of fragments) with the advantages of external fixation (indirect reduction, soft tissue protection), a staged approach was introduced. The results of the two-staged procedure have been promising To minimize the risk of postoperative complications, minimally invasive techniques and methods combining external fixation with minimally invasive fixation materials were developed. Various external fixation methods such as circular, unilateral, and hybrid fixators, The mean time of union in our series was 4.3 months which was comparable to previously published literature. Minor infection occurred in 6(12%) of our patients. The majority of minor infections occurred in relation to the pin tracks. No deep infection was observed in any of our patient. In metaanalysis by Papadokostakis et al. minor and major infection was observed in 11.7% and 3.9% cases respectively, treated with ankle spanning fixator with or without minimally invasive techniques. In the present series there were no soft tissue complications. Thus this technique of treating both closed and open pilon fractures may be considered in achieving desired bony alignment with minimal surrounding soft tissue damage. Closure of wound could be done in our cases without any skin tension which we believe was possible because of use of small stab incisions and minimal implants. Papadokostakis et al. observed malunion in 13% and nonunion in 7% of pilon fractures treated with ankle spanning external fixator. Malunion and nonunion rate in our series were 8% and 0% respectively ( Satisfactory range of movement was observed in patients treated with combined external fixation with limited internal fixation in our series. This might be the result of joint distraction and stretching of the ligament during the period of immobilization thereby preventing compression and shortening of the ligaments which in turn may lead to stiffness and restriction of movement. Treatment of tibial pilon fractures continues to be challenging with no single treatment modality to be considered as the gold standard. Decisions should be taken not only on the basis of the clinical and radiographic situation but also on the basis of the expertise of the surgeon and this technique of combined external fixation with internal fixation is safe and an effective management option for intraarticular distal tibial fractures, especially associated with severe soft tissue compromise. There are few important limitations in this study. A pre-operative CT scan of the ankle was not obtained which we retrospectively believe would have helped in proper planning of the surgery. Also, a randomized trial between the described technique and the other treatment modalities would have been more useful. The authors have none to declare. None UKM − conceived the idea and co-wrote the paper. UKM and MCB–analyzed the notes, acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data and contributed to the discussion. RU and GCG–analyse the notes and contributed to the discussion. GCG & UKM − co-wrote the paper and revised it critically before submission.