Surface roughness plays an important role in the floatability and wettability of mineral and coal particles. However, the role of surface roughness in the floatability of coal particles has not been sufficiently investigated because coal consists of organic and inorganic materials. This paper is to obtain some insights into the role of surface roughness in the coal surface wettability. In this investigation, Taixi ultra-low-ash coal particles, with ash content of 1.55%, were polished and the polished flat coal surfaces with various roughness were obtained. The attachment time between air bubble and flat coal surface were tested at the water solution without flotation reagents. Throughout this paper, it was found that the attachment time increased with the increase of roughness of coal surface. The attachment area between bubble and flat coal surface was decreased with the increase of surface roughness. The attachment between bubble and flat rough coal surface was unstable, compared to the attachment between bubble and smooth coal surface. The rougher coal surface makes the detachment between bubble and coal surface easier than the smoother coal surface. The higher the roughness of coal surface is, the more pores and grooves the coal surface has. The pores, gaps and grooves are filled up with the water in the slurry and have negative effects on the attachment between bubble and flat coal surface.The floatability of mineral surface usually corresponds to the hydrophobicity and wettability of mineral surface. As is known, a higher hydrophobicity and lower wettability of mineral surface mean this mineral surface has a higher floatability. The hydrophobicity and wettability of mineral surface are usually characterized using the contact angle measurements. For example, a higher water contact angle on mineral surface usually represents a higher hydrophobicity and lower wettability of mineral surface. However, the flotation process is not only determined by the hydrophobicity and wettability of mineral surface, but also affected by other factors, such as bubble size, particle size, flotation energy input, intensity of turbulence and so on. Throughout these influential factors, the bubble-particle attachment and detachment should have the fundamental role in the flotation performance. The bubble-particle attachment time consists of three parts of time ( The particle-bubble attachment time is greatly affected by the roughness of mineral surface. In addition, it is difficult to study the accurate coal-bubble attachment time because coal is usually heterogeneous as a mixture of organic and inorganic materials. For example, the bubble-particle attachment time measurement is found to be dependent on the particle composition of copper-sulphide ore ( Ultra-low ash coal samples were selected from Taixi Coal Preparation Plant in Ningxia province of China. The Taixi coal is anthracite. The contents of elements (C, H, O, N, and S) based on dry ash free are 94.43%, 3.73%, 0.91%, 0.79% and 0.13%, respectively. The ash content of selected ultra-low ash coal samples is 1.55% which is very low and the coal samples can be considered as ultra-low-ash coal. It is considered that each coal particle has its similar surface property ( In order to gain the flat surfaces of coal particles with various surface roughness, lump coal particles were polished using different sand papers with various meshes by hand. The sand papers were made by MATADOR in Germany. The meshes of sand papers surface are 600, 2500 and 5000. Based on the sand papers with various meshes, the flat surfaces of coal particles with various surface roughness values were gained. These flat coal surfaces with various surface roughness values were used in the surface roughness, SEM, contact angle and attachment time measurements. The Mitutoyo SJ-210 surface roughness measurer was used to measure the surface roughness of flat coal surfaces with various surface roughness values. As a probe moved on the surface of coal, the surface roughness readings of coal surface were recorded on the work line and the average value was used for analysis. Roughness parameter Ra was obtained and used for representing the flat coal surface properties. Each flat coal surface was measured by three times and the final Ra value was obtained using the arithmetic mean values of roughness values. As shown in The bubble-particle attachment time measurements were conducted with the Attachment Timer (made by University of Alberta, Canada) ( First, the lump coal was agglutinated to a slide glass in order to ensure the measuring surface is level. It was a required experimental condition for the Attachment Timer. Then, the lump coal was transferred to a small cell filled with distilled water. The immersed coal were remained in the water-filled cell for > A bubble holder was on the top of the flat coal surface. The bubble of about 1.5 Even though the ash content of used lump coal sample is ultra-low, the surface of the ultra-low ash coal surface may be still heterogeneous. In order to obtain the accurate bubble-coal attachment time, five measurements were performed at different positions of the flat coal surface and five attachment times were recorded. The final attachment time was obtained using the arithmetic mean values of five attachment times. The water contact angle analyzer ( Quanta 250 SEM (FEI, USA) was used to analyze the surface morphology of each polished coal surface. The same coal surface used in the attachment time testing was also forwarded to the SEM testing. Before the SEM testing, each coal surface were sputter-coated with a layer of gold. From In other words, the attachment time between micro-bubbles and bubble is very short if compared to that between coal surface and bubble ( As shown in As shown in  Differing from the results of contact angle, the grooves on coal surface during the contact angle measurements are filled with air and the water is difficult to immerse these pores and grooves because of highly hydrophobic surface. The contact angle has an increase with the increasing surface roughness caused by the prevention of spreading of water drop by the gullies and grooves. During the testing of attachment time, the gullies and grooves are filled up with water firstly and a thick water film will cover the rough surface. The water-filled pores and grooves may reduce the rates of both thin film drainage and the rupture of film ( The bubble-coal attachment is unstable while the surface roughness is about 1.6 In addition, a very interesting phenomenon was observed during the detachment between bubble and smooth coal surface. In  Taixi ultra-low-ash coal surface is very hydrophobic. The attachment time between bubble and flat coal surface is increased with the increasing surface roughness. Bubble is difficult to adhere to rough coal surface while it is easy to attach to smooth coal surface. The contact angle increases with the increasing surface roughness. The bubble-coal surface attachment is unstable at rougher coal surface while that is very stable at smoother coal surface. The adhesion area between bubble and coal surface is larger for smoother surface than for rougher surface. The rougher surface is not suitable for the formation and expansion of the three-phase contact line on coal surface. The rougher surface has many pores, gaps and grooves. The pores, gaps and grooves are filled up with the water, which can prevent the formation and expansion of the three-phase contact line. The contacting line require to get across the water-filled pores and grooves on rough surface in order to get a stable adhesion area. The water-filled pores have negative effect on the bubble-coal surface attachment. A micro-bubble is produced as soon as the attached bubble detaches from the smooth coal surface. This micro-bubble is the small part of large bubble. This small part of air from large bubble will remain on coal surface. The residuary micro-bubble on the detached coal surface will promote the next attachment between other bubbles and coal surface. This work was supported by the