In the extraction of metal from a mine, the intermediate ore between the economic and the breakeven cutoff grade is usually stockpiled for future processing once the mine is depleted. This research establishes a theoretical two-stage economic model to derive the value of this stockpile and how it affects optimal mining rate. By deriving the optimal condition for objective profit function and parameterized analysis, this research finds the stockpiling option can significantly boost a mine's profit. Processing the stockpiled material affects the optimal mining rate and cutoff grade strategy significantly compared to the case that it is not processed. The research also investigates the optimal mining rate's sensitivity to input variables such as commodity price, discounting rate, capital cost, and processing capacity, etc. In addition, the intrinsic advantages of this approach compared to the broadly used Lane's model (1988) are discussed.In the extraction of metal from a mine, the intermediate ore between the economic and the breakeven cutoff grade is usually stockpiled for future processing once the mine is depleted. As widely studied and discussed, the economic cutoff grade is defined as the cutoff grade strategy that maximizes the net present value of a mine by considering the opportunity cost, which is usually higher than the breakeven cutoff ( Based on a theoretical two-stage model, this research examines the production of stockpiled material after depletion. The profit functions in both stages and their first order conditions (FOC) are formulated explicitly and the optimal mining rate is obtained. Profit from the stockpiled material in our model accounts for more than 15% of the mine’s total value. The model also examines optimal mining rate's sensitivity to input variables, such as the commodity price, the capital cost and the processing capacity. This paper is organized as following:  Theoretical work by   There are also several pieces of literature that have explored the issues of ore quality, cutoff grade, and breakeven grade in a metal mine using numerical methods. In this section, a model of two-stage production of a metal deposit with variety in quality is presented. There are two stages of production (as shown in The material in the deposit is assumed to have homogeneous tonnage-grade distribution ( Assume For one ton of material that has been mined, given processing cutoff grade The average grade of the ore that goes to the first stage of production is, Let the price for per unit of metal be The first stage of production will last The exponential fraction term in the above equation is needed to discount future value to present value. There is a minimum quality in the reserve that is economic to produce (or to generate positive cash flow), which is denoted as By manipulating which is the minimum quality in deposit that is economic to produce. Let the second stage end at time and Thus, the profit function at a time point The present value (the exponential fraction term in the following equation is needed to discount future value to present value) of the total profits in the second stage in continuous time is therefore Assume there is a uniform distribution of grade, such that As the grade distribution is uniform, in the first stage the portion of ore that is processed is (which is constrained by the mining capacity This implies Eq. The present value of the total profit in the first stage becomes, From the beginning of production to the end of the second stage, all the tonnage of material with grade higher than With Since the grade distribution is uniform and processing capacity is constant, Based on Eqs. Then It can be shown mathematically that the grade function in the second stage With denotations in formulas The present value of the total profit for the two stages The first order condition for the profit functions for both stages will be derived below. It is known that the length of the first period is The derivative of the profit in the first stage respect to the mining rate is (using formula In formula The first order condition for the second term in By summing The sign (positive or negative) of FOC for the first stage in formula The economic parameters of a gold mine are adopted to examine how the changes in the mining rate in the first stage will affect the mine’s total profit based on the two-stage model. Following to a hypothetic gold mine’s information and data from Assuming the above parameters, the cutoff grade by the end of the second stage Using on Eq. Based on   From To examine how responsive the optimal mining rate To estimate the pseudo-elasticities of input variables, six scenarios of change in each input variable are considered. The corresponding percent of change in From Total material quantity has the highest value of pseudo-elasticity, and the elasticities are almost unchanging across the relevant levels (around 0.6); Gold price, recovery rate, and highest grade in deposit all have same pseudo-elasticity (around 0.58); and processing capacity has a pseudo-elasticity around 0.4. Processing capacity has a positive pseudo-elasticity on the mining rate. The pseudo-elasticity of discount rate is positive and close to zero (0.03). Higher discount rates will make the mine's owner set a higher mining rate to deplete the mine faster, and partially avoiding the discounting effect for the future cash flows. This effect, however, is relatively small. The optimal production rate is perfectly inelastic to processing cost, as processing cost’s elasticity is zero. This means the processing cost will not affect the optimal choice of the production rate, which is for the reason that, the two-stage model assumes that the processing plant always operates in full capacity until the depletion, no matter how the processing cost changes. The capital cost per ton of mining rate has a negative pseudo-elasticity, so an increase in capital cost per unit of mining rate decreases the choice of optimal mining rate. The elasticity of mining cost is negative and close to zero (−0.01). Higher mining cost for each ton of mined material (due to it is more difficult to mine) promotes the mine’s owner to use a lower mining rate.  Lane’s approach calculates a cutoff grade strategy, which is usually higher than the breakeven cutoff, the lowest grade in the deposit that is economic to process. This leaves the intermediated grade material, or the stockpiled ore that still may generate positive cash flows, but does not consider this portion of the deposit when making decision on the optimal cutoff grade strategy and mining rate. The two-stage model in this research covers processing the stockpiled, and determines the optimal mining rate and cutoff grade strategy by considering the profits from the first stage production as well as from processing the stockpiled. Additionally, there is a gap in previous literature incorporating the capital cost of building up the mine and optimal mining capacity. The model introduced in this research explicitly formulates the profit function for production and its first order condition, and solving for the optimal mining capacity by modeling capital cost. As the mine is constrained by processing capacity, choosing an optimal mining rate strategy is equivalent to choosing an optimal cutoff grade strategy. In addition to determining the optimal mining rate, this research measures how responsive the optimal mining rate is to changes in input variables by calculating the pseudo-elasticities for input variables. Variables from the most positively responsive to least responsive for the optimal mining rate, are total material quantity, gold price, recovery rate, highest grade in deposit, and processing capacity; optimal rate is the most negatively responsive to per unit capital cost, and is much less negative responsive to the mining cost; processing cost proves to be perfectly inelastic with the optimal mining rate; the effects of several input variables (total material quantity, gold price, recovery rate, highest grade in deposit, processing capacity, and per unit capital cost) are found to be diminishing. The Lane model, at best, can be helpful on determine the effects of input variables on the mine's profit, but not on the optimal mining rate, or whether their effects are diminishing. There are also some intrinsic advantages of a theoretical model compared to the Lane's approach, which can be used to explain the results intuitively. It is found that the processing cost is perfectly inelastic with the optimal mining rate. This can be clearly explained by the theoretical model, as the terms of the processing cost are canceled out in the first order conditions of the profits in the first and second stages. However, it is fairly difficult to reach this conclusion based on methods in previous literature. This research finds the grade function in the second stage In mining practice, the Lane model has been used for decades as a standard tool to determine a metal mine's cutoff grade policy. The Lane's algorithm proposes a higher cutoff grade than the breakeven cutoff, which leaves part of the deposit with intermediate grade not processed. These materials are usually stockpiled, and processed to contribute to the mine's value. The stockpiling has been discussed and interested extensively by the industry and academic researchers, but there is limited literature addressing this issue by incorporating the mining strategy of the original deposit. This research has established a theoretic two-stage model, examining the processing of the stockpiled, and its impacts on the optimal mining rate, cutoff grade strategy, and mine's profit. Profit from the stockpiled material cannot be ignored, which may account as much as 15% of the mine’s total profit. The mine is assumed to have variability in ore's quality and is constrained by the processing capacity. It is assumed that the processing plant is always in full capacity across all the production years. By deriving explicitly the mine’s profit function and its first order condition, the optimal mining rate strategy is determined by the two-stage model with parameterized analysis. This research also measures how responsive the optimal mining rate is to the changes in the input variables, with the calculations of their pseudo-elasticities. Total material quantity, metal price, recovery rate, highest grade in deposit, processing capacity and discount rate prove to positively impact the optimal mining rate; as the mine’s processing plant is always operating in full capacity during the production years; the processing cost is perfectly inelastic with the optimal mining rate; mining cost and the capital cost of the mining equipment negatively impact the optimal mining rate; the effects of several variables are diminishing as their percent of change increases. The two-stage model in this research has intrinsic advantages over previous numerical work. By a theoretical model, it is straightforward to explain that the processing cost is perfectly inelastic to the optimal mining rate, as well as why the change of ore' quality is not a function of mining rate when processing the stockpiled. This research implies that, by choosing an optimal mining strategy, the stockpiled material contributes to the mine’s value by a great part, and should not be ignored. In addition, the consideration of the stockpiled material significantly impacts the mining strategy (mining rate and cutoff grade) of the deposit. The two-stage model is also beneficial to policy makers and mineral property owners, when assessing the impacts of a policy promoting the stockpile management, as well as making mining strategic decisions. Last but not the least, this theoretical research has its limitations by the nature of model, primarily to balance for the mathematical simplicity and consistency. These limitations will be the future research directions. 1) a constant marginal capital cost is assumed in the model, which does not cover the effect of “economics of scale”; 2) it should be noted that the stockpiling is not necessarily to be processed after depletion, which is examined in this research and can be processed any time before depletion; 3) Some ores such as sulfuric ones cannot be stockpiled for a long time due to degrading and oxidizing, and which can be depicted by multiplying a degrading factor to the profit function in the second stage; 4) the location of stockpile is very important, and will affect economic feasibility for the mine; for simplicity, this research assumes that the stockpiling is stocked just on ground besides the processing facility with no degrading or additional capital expenditure; 5) the economic cutoff grade considering the opportunity cost is usually decreasing as the mine exploration goes on; however, this research assumes that the economic cutoff grade maintains constants during the mine’s life, which will be also improved in the future research; 6) the optimal condition for processing capacity The authors wish to thank Dr. Antonio Nieto for helpful discussion on the topic. Support from Energy and Environmental Economics and Policy Initiative in Pennsylvania State University is gratefully acknowledged. This appendix proves that the function of grade change in the second stage is not Based on formula Look at the numerator of the formula Look at the numerator the formula Thus, by formulas It has been shown that the grade change in the second stage is not a function of the mining rate