Al–7Si alloy reinforced with in situ TiB2 particles was synthesized successfully by using salt reaction route. These in situ composites have shown significant improvement in mechanical properties in comparison to the base alloy. The wear resistance of the alloy also significantly improved with the addition of TiB2 particles. The hardness, strength and wear resistance increased with increasing TiB2 content of the composites. TiB2 appears to not only act as a grain refiner for primary α-Al but also as a modifier of Si in eutectic mixture. The mechanical properties of the present Al–Si/TiB2 composites are better than those reported earlier with SiC reinforcement. Analysis of the worn surface of Al–Si/TiB2 composites tested under normal loads of 40 and 120N suggests that adhesion and ploughing are predominant at lower loads and delamination is predominant at higher loads.Al–Si alloy-based composites are widely used in automotive, aerospace and mineral processing industries because of improved properties such as strength, stiffness, tribological behaviour and a low thermal expansion coefficient. Conventional practice of preparation of Al–Si alloy-based composites ( Eventhough the Among the different routes to synthesise Al–Si/TiB  The Vickers's hardness of the composites was determined at 5    The variation of coefficient of friction ( The influence of applied normal load on the wear rate of Al–7Si alloy with different wt.% of TiB Wear resistance is defined as the reciprocal of wear rate. The wear resistance of CP Al is improved by the addition of Si and further significantly improved with increase in the wt.% of TiB The increase in load bearing capacity of Al–7Si alloy by the addition of TiB The influence of hardness on the specific wear rate (SWR) is depicted in   In order to understand the changes that occur on the sliding surface of the samples during wear, EDS analysis was carried out. Al–7Si/TiB TiB Analysis of the worn surface of Al–7Si/10TiB The present work was funded by the Naval Research Board, Government of India. Authors would like to thank Prof. M. Rathinasabapathi, Annamalai University and Dr. M. Kamaraj, IIT Madras for help in SEM and wear studies, respectively.