Since most geological contacts in Earth's crust represent potential sites of interface cracks, these cracks are of particular importance in geological engineering. Fracture propagation of interface cracks growth between dissimilar rock layers depends on the contrasting elastic properties across the bedding interface. Most of the topics associated with interfaces in rock mechanics and geological engineering have focused on the reciprocal influence between ordinary cracks and layer surfaces without taking into account the presence of interfacial flaws between rock layers. In this research, the case of an inclined internal interface crack between two dissimilar rock layers under compression and tension was studied in detail. The effect of crack inclination angle on the stress intensity factor and on the stress distribution functions in the vicinity of an interface crack tip was investigated. Our results indicated that interface crack growth can occur in stiffer or more compliant layer depending on the elastic stiffness contrast (differences in Young's Modulus between two layers of rock) and crack inclination angle. The critical value of crack inclination angle, after which interface crack growth can occur in one of two dissimilar rock layers, was determined by taking into account the elastic stiffness contrast and Poisson's ratio of rock formations. Fracture envelopes for the heterogeneous rock medium are located above those of the homogeneous rock medium and by increasing the elastic stiffness contrast of dissimilar rock layers, the area under fracture envelope increases and the interface cracks needs more energy to satisfy fracture condition.Maximum Tangential Stress Criterion Stress components around an interface crack tip in polar coordinates Radial stress around an interface crack tip Tangential stress around an interface crack tip Shear stress around an interface crack tip Radial distance from the crack tip The angle between original crack plane and the direction of new branch Crack extension angle which corresponds to MTS Stress intensity factor for an interface crack between two dissimilar rock layers Real part of stress intensity factor Imaginary part of stress intensity factor Half-length of an interface crack Oscillation parameter Second Dundur's parameter Crack inclination angle Elastic modulus for upper and lower layers, respectively Poisson's ratio for upper and lower layers, respectively Normal stress acts on an interface crack Shear stress parallel acts on an interface crack In the rock mass, fracture forms are associated with the type of flaws which exist in rock masses. These flaws can be found in homogeneous or heterogeneous rock media. For homogeneous and heterogeneous rock media, depending on flaw type and loading conditions, fractures can be mainly divided into ( For a heterogeneous rock medium, properties of bedding contacts, layer thickness, sedimentary bedding, fracture spacing, the presence of joints and veins, the effect of filling materials, etc. all affect the fracture process. Thus, the investigation of crack growing in heterogeneous rock medium is more difficult than homogeneous rock medium. Wave propagation in layered rock medium are affected by bedding interfaces and it can be reflected or refracted through these interfaces ( In this study, a special case of heterogeneity was highlighted. This case takes into account the presence of internal flaws between two dissimilar rock layers and the growth conditions of these flaws. The mentioned flaws can be referred to as interface cracks. Interface cracks can be found between horizontal and inclined bedding surfaces. Inclined bedding surfaces can frequently be found between deformed and folded rock layers. The potential sites of vertical, horizontal and inclined interface crack between horizontal and inclined bedding surfaces are shown in Elastic fracture mechanics solutions for interface cracks under compression and tension were used in this study in order to understanding the behavior of cracks between different lithologic layers, as might occur on bedding contacts in sedimentary rocks. The mixed mode fracture toughness and propensity for propagation of interface cracks as a function of contrasting elastic properties of the layers, as well as the inclination of the bi-material interface were explored. Crack tip stress functions in polar coordinates for the case of an interface crack between two dissimilar rock layers can be expressed as follows ( Where K is the stress intensity factor for an interface crack between two dissimilar rock layers, σ In Eqs. The main parameters that influence stress distribution functions between dissimilar rock layers are elastic modulus, shear modulus and Poisson's ratio. These parameters were introduced in stress functions by using Dundur's parameters (α In materials science, the use of Dundur's parameters are more common than in engineering geology. In order to clarify the physical concept of second Dundur's parameter (β Eqs. In LEFM, the term of (1/ r/a = 0.002, area close to the crack tip; the singularity of tangential stress cannot occur for any value of crack inclination angle and second Dundur's parameter (β r/a = 0.01, the limit at which tangential stress appears to be unaffected by the ratio of (r/a). r/a = 0.006, average value between two previous values. This value was chosen to show how the tangential stress, crack extension angle and other parameters of an interface crack change when r/a increases from 0.002 to 0.01. There are some analytical, numerical and theoretical based models for calculation of stress intensity factors for bi-material cracked system. A micromechanical model of heterogeneous material was shown by ϭ is the remote stress, ϭ is negative under compression and positive under tension. The real and imaginary parts of the stress intensity factor can be expresses as: The distribution of real and imaginary parts of the stress intensity factor versus crack inclination angle for the case of an inclined interface crack between two dissimilar rock layers is shown in ( For a heterogeneous rock medium (β In LEFM problems, most experimental results have been focused on crack initiation and propagation in homogeneous rock medium ( In addition, the current model was validated depending on the studies of In this study, maximum tangential stress criterion (MTS) ( When rocks are subjected to tectonic forces, they deform by bending and folding. By taking into account the deformation of rocks when the Earth's crust is compressed or stretched, an inclined interface crack can be found between deformed rock layers. In this case, an interface crack is subject to the effect of combined normal and shear stresses and it can grow in stiffer or more compliant layer depending on the elastic stiffness contrast and Poisson's ratio which can be represented by second Dundur's parameter. This extension occurs when the local tensile tangential stress at the crack tip exceeds the critical value of material strength (ϭ If the more compliant layer is on top (positive β If the stiffer layer is on top (negative β Interface crack extension angle versus the ratio of r/a under compression and for β = 45° is shown in As mentioned previously in the introduction, there are some important cases in geological engineering at which an interface crack is subject to pure tension and it grows under pure mode I. Pure tension is formed due to the internal pressure of fluid in open fractures. For example, in hydraulic fractures, when the crack is located between dissimilar rock layers it subjected to internal fluid pressure and the layer at which can grow depends on the elastic stiffness contrast and Poisson's ratio. The distribution of the tangential stress in the vicinity of interface crack tip under tension is shown in Fracture toughness envelopes or fracture loci are particularly important for the determination of conditions of interface crack growth under given stress state. For pure mode I, an interface crack is subject to pure normal stress ϭ Eq.  When the more compliant layer is on top (positive β In general case it can be concluded that whenever the elastic stiffness contrast between two dissimilar rock layers increases, the probability of fracture growth decreases and an interface crack needs more energy for fracture extension. In this study, an inclined interface crack between two dissimilar rock layers was investigated in detail. Noteworthy, the elastic stiffness contrast and Poisson's ratio of rock layers, crack inclination angle and the ratio of radial distance from the crack tip to the characteristic length of the crack can all influence the results. The results of this study can be concluded as follow: For horizontal bedding planes under compression: the position of stiffer or more compliant layer is not important, because maximum positive tangential stress concentrates only in the more compliant layer and an interface crack will only grow in the more compliant layer. For inclined planes under compression: if the more compliant layer is on top, maximum positive tangential stress will occur only in this layer and an interface crack will extend only in the more compliant layer. While if the stiffer layer is on top, the maximum positive tangential stress can take place in stiffer or more compliant layer depending on the value of crack inclination angle and second Dundur's parameter and an interface crack may extend in stiffer or more compliant layer. For extensional interface crack under pure tension: the maximum positive value of tangential stress concentrates only in the stiffer layer and an interface crack will only grow in this layer. Fracture envelopes for the heterogeneous rock medium are located above those of the homogeneous rock medium and by increasing the elastic stiffness contrast of dissimilar rock layers, the area under fracture envelope increases and the interface cracks needs more energy to satisfy fracture condition.  Fracture under pure mode I This case corresponds to (β = 90°). In this case an interface crack is only subjected to normal stress (ϭ Substituting Eqs. Eq. Fracture under pure mode II In this case an interface crack is only subjected to shear stress (τ Substituting Eqs. Eq. Based on Eqs. Fracture under mixed mode I-II Under this case an interface crack is subjected to normal (ϭ From Eqs. By solving fracture Eq. Remarks about ϭ As mentioned previously, (ϭ Under pure mode II (β = 0.0°), (ϭ Under mixed mode (0.0° < β < 90°), (ϭ Under pure mode I (β = 90°), (ϭ The ratio of (ϭ