[Zn(NH3)4](ReO4)2-tetraamminezinc diperrhenate salt has been synthesized. Salt composition has been confirmed by chemical, X-ray phase and infrared spectroscopic analyses. Salt behavior in water, aqueous solutions of inorganic and organic acids and ammonia has been studied. It has been determined that the salt is decomposed in water and acid solutions with the conversion of zinc and rhenium in different phases (solid or aqueous). At the same time, salt is dissolved in ammonia; salt solubility increases with the increasing ammonia concentration. On the basis of acquired data, a process has been developed to recover rhenium from mother liquor containing rhenium to produce ammonium perrhenate. The process has been tested on pilot scale and put into practice at two manufacturing works in Kazakhstan.The production of ammonium perrhenate from solutions generated as a result of copper, molybdenum and lead production, as well as from solutions resulting from the processing of rhenium-containing secondary raw materials (spent oil-reforming catalysts, wastes of aircraft and electronic industries), is accompanied as a rule by the formation of a considerable amount of rhenium-containing ammonia solutions From our perspective, rhenium can be recovered from ammonia solutions in the form of complex salt [Zn(NH Zinc sulfate, aqua ammonia Complex rhenium salt was produced in a temperature-controlled cell while stirring constantly at 25 °C. Ammonia, zinc sulfate, and ammonium perrhenate solutions having proper concentrations were poured into the cell one by one. Solutions of required concentrations were prepared depending on the salt composition. The precipitate was filtered under vacuum, washed with ammonia and absolute ethyl alcohol, and dried at 105 °C until a constant weight was achieved. The composition of precipitates was determined by chemical, X-ray phase, crystal optical, and infrared spectroscopic analyses. Infrared absorption spectra of the salts were recorded based on specimens in the form of pellets with KBr by spectrophotometer “Specord M-80”. X-ray patterns were made by “Dron-1” apparatus with cobalt anode. The crystal optical analysis was made with the help of the microscope “MIN-8”; optical constants were measured by using the standard set of immersion fluids. The interaction of [Zn(NH The production of tetraamminezinc diperrhenate was studied at various concentrations of rhenium in the solution. The concentration varies from 0.025 to 0.1 mol/L. The amounts of ammonia and zinc sulfate required for the formation of [Zn(NH There were white precipitates at any concentration of rhenium in the solutions. With increasing concentration of rhenium in the solution, the weight of precipitate grew from 1.3 to 6.0 g. The chemical analysis showed that the precipitate contained (wt.%): 58.7 rhenium, 10.3 zinc, and 10.7 ammonia. The element composition of the precipitate corresponded to tetraamminezinc diperrhenate [Zn(NH Tetraamminezinc diperrhenate is a colorless isotropic phase having the index of refraction Infrared spectra of [Zn(NH The formation of complex salt can be expressed by the following reactions: The lack of information about [Zn(NH To determine the weight of salt required for the study of salt solubility in water, a special series of experiments was run. The weight of salt in the experiments was changed from 0.2 to 6.0 g at 25 °C. The data in Further studies involved an effect of phase contact time and process temperature on salt behavior in water. The time effect was studied within the range of 0.5–24 h. The experiments were run by using 5 g of salt and 95 mL of water at 25 °C. The data in The data in The interaction of tetraamminezinc diperrhenate with water can be expressed by the following reaction: The experiments were run by using 5 g batch of salt and 95 mL of ammonia solution during 8-h contact time at 25 °C. Ammonia concentration varied within the range of 1.2 to 12 mol/L. It was found that with increasing ammonia concentration, the content of both rhenium (from 0.7 to 1.9 g/L) and zinc (from 0.15 to 0.25 g/L) increased Based on chemical and physical analyses, one can say that the solubility of salt [Zn(NH It is common knowledge that ordinary salts interact with acids by an exchange-type reaction resulting in the formation of new salt and new acid. We have failed to find information about the interaction of complex rhenium-containing salts with inorganic and organic acids in research and patent literature. Therefore, we have studied the interactions of [Zn(NH The visual examination of the process proved the presence of a precipitate in contacting with acids. After the completion of the experiment, the solid phase was filtered out from the solution. The precipitate was washed with cold water and alcohol and dried at 105 °C. The solutions and precipitates were analyzed to determine the presence of rhenium and zinc. Physical analyses were used for the study of the precipitates. The X-ray analysis of the precipitate identified it as a monophase-ammonium perrhenate. The crystal optical and infrared spectroscopic analyses confirmed that the precipitate was the salt NH Ammonium perrhenate to be formed is converted into a precipitate because its solubility is lower as compared to that of zinc and ammonium salts. According to the Chemist's Hand Book The study of the effect of acid concentration on salt decomposition was of interest to us. This factor was studied by taking sulfuric acid as an example. The concentration of sulfuric acid in the experiments varied from 1 to 2 mol/L at intervals of 0.2. The experimental conditions were similar to those of the previous series of experiments. It was found that salt decomposed only partially when the content of acid in the solution was 1 mol/L Salt decomposition with acids can be expressed by the following way: The data acquired were used for recovering rhenium from ammonia mother liquor generated by a sorption process. The experiments were run by using a solution containing 0.169 mol/L rhenium, 1.0 mol/L ammonium sulfate, and 0.4 mol/L ammonia. The effects of rhenium to zinc mole ratios (1:0.5–10), concentrations of free ammonia (0.1–2.5 mol/L) and ammonium sulfate (1–4 mol/L), contact time of solutions (0.50–48 h), and process temperature (15, 25 °C) on rhenium precipitation have been studied. It was found that the addition of zinc sulfate in rhenium-containing ammonia solutions resulted in the precipitation of white salt [Zn(NH Ammonia concentration increasing from 0.1 to 2.5 mol/L leads to a decrease in rhenium recovery in the precipitate By injecting additional ammonium sulfate (up to 4 mol/L) into contacting solutions, rhenium precipitation increases from 20 to 78% Rhenium precipitation time during the contact between original solutions and zinc-containing ammonia solution directly depends on the rhenium to zinc mole ratio A change in temperature from 15 to 25 °C has little effect on rhenium recovery from the solution containing 1 mol/L of both ammonium sulfate and ammonia (at the ratio of Re:Zn=1:8). When stirring lasts 1 h at 15 °C, rhenium recovery is 83.6% and at 25 °C, 81.9%, while during 7 h of stirring, rhenium recovery is 86.4% and 86.2%, respectively. Based on the results of the study, the optimal conditions for rhenium recovery from production mother liquors have been selected. For the production of ammonium perrhenate from tetraamminezinc diperrhenate, the following two methods have been studied: salt decomposition with water and with sulfuric acid solutions. Salt [Zn(NH The effect of S:L ratio (1:1–50), temperature (25–98 °C), and stirring time (15–60 min) on rhenium recovery in the solution has been studied. An increase in S:L ratio (at 25 °C) contributes to rhenium recovery in the solution within the range of 1 to 50% Leaching time increasing from 15 to 60 min has inconsiderable effect on rhenium recovery in the solution and consequently on salt decomposition. During 15 min of salt contact with water at 80 °C, 85.6% of rhenium is recovered in the solution; during 30 min, 99% of rhenium is recovered. Under these conditions, the complete decomposition of salt is achieved. Zinc hydroxide passes into the cake and ammonium perrhenate passes into the solution. The effect of acid concentration (0.5–3.0 mol/L) and L:S (1:1–4) has been studied. It has been determined that the amount of acid in the system is a critical factor affecting the decomposition of complex rhenium salt. When acid content is less than 2 mol/L, tetraamminezinc diperrhenate is not completely decomposed. The precipitate contains [Zn(NH The analysis of experimental data on the decomposition of salt with water and sulfuric acid has indicated that from an economic perspective the decomposition of [Zn(NH The results achieved in the course of the experiments enabled us to propose a process for the independent processing of mother liquors including the precipitation of complex rhenium salt with zinc sulfate solutions, the filtration of pulp, the decomposition of salt with sulfuric acid solutions, and the cooling of rhenium-containing solutions resulting in the crystallization of crude ammonium perrhenate The recovery of rhenium from mother liquor in complex salt was 84.2–91% (dependent on rhenium concentration); in crude ammonium perrhenate—95% (of the content in salt [Zn(NH The process has been tested on pilot scale and put into practice at lead and copper smelters in Kazakhstan. The implementation of the process has proved the results of laboratory studies. Rhenium recovery in crude ammonium perrhenate has amounted to 82%. The studies performed have indicated that the interaction of ammonium perrhenate with zinc sulfate in ammonia medium results in the formation of complex salt [Zn(NH The acquired data have been used for the development of a process for the production of ammonium perrhenate from process mother liquors. The developed process has been put into practice at two manufacturing works in Kazakhstan. The work was supported by INTAS-Project 00-00689.