With the planned length of 36km, Ghomroud tunnel is one of the longest tunnels under construction in central Iran. About half or 18km of this tunnel was excavated by a double shield TBM. Several adverse geological conditions encountered, consisting of ground squeezing and face collapse, hindering TBM performance, and caused several TBM stoppages and jamming. This paper presents the impact of ground conditions on machine performance based on the information obtained from field observations and geotechnical site investigations. As built geological conditions are described while the method and results of tunnel convergence measurements and their impacts on tunneling operation is examined. Based on the detail study of the available geological information and tunnel convergence measurements, it was evident that the existence of weak structures in rock mass resulted in high rate of the convergence, which was the dominant factor in the TBM jamming. Since it was not possible to make observation and measurements of geological parameters when working in a lined tunnel built by a shielded machine, an attempt was made to correlate TBM operational parameters and ground convergence. The preliminary result of the analysis has indicated a good correlation among machine’s operational parameters and tunnel convergence. If the system is fully developed, these parameters can be used as an indicator of the potential for high rates of convergence. An early warning on ground convergence is essential for taking precautionary measures to avoid TBM from getting jammed by squeezing ground.Tunnel boring machines (TBM) have been used for excavation of water tunnels because of their high excavation rate and circular tunnel profile which is the preferred choice for such applications. Range of application of TBMs has expanded considerably in past two decades. Although a more comprehensive tunneling machine classification and selection chart has been developed by ITA/IATES, for simplicity, it is possible to classify the rock TBMs into three classes according to Open type or unshielded TBM (for hard and sound rock formations consisting rock classes I and II according to RMR classification). Single shield TBM (for weak to very weak rock formations in relatively short tunnels). Double shield TBM (for weak to hard rock formations in relatively long tunnels). The use of shield around the TBM allows the machine to pass through weak grounds and tunnel through adverse geological conditions. However, TBM may get stuck (including shield jamming and cutterhead blocking) in the complicated geological structures, especially under high cover in weak rocks. This could cause major delays and impose a heavy and expensive burden on the tunneling operation. Machine stoppage in adverse ground is bad news in many respects as it was reported in some tunnel projects such as Evinos-Mornos tunnel in Greece ( In previous articles by the same authors ( One of the new components of water conveyance system in central Iran is a 36 The tunnel is driven in Sannandaj-Sirjan geological zone of central Iran. This zone consists of series of asymmetric foldings and faults and has experienced mild to high metamorphisms which have caused schistosity and recrystallization of minerals. The lithology of the area consists of a sequence of Jurassic-cretaceous formations. The cretaceous formations comprise massive limestone and dolomite, while the Jurassic formations mainly consist of slate, schist and metamorphic shale and sandstone units. These rock types have similar geomechanical properties. The rock types along tunnel alignment are classified into four major categories as shown in Highly foliated and schistose rock types (schist, slate). This category covers more than 70% of the tunnel length. In general, they easily separate along the foliation planes, which are highly persistent. The uniaxial compressive strength of this formation was measured at a range of 30–60 Massive rock types (limestone and sandstone units). Intact strength of these rocks ranges between 40 and 80 Quartzite and quartz veins. These veins can be seen randomly in different parts of Jurassic formations. The maximum thickness of these veins reaches up to 80 Crushed rocks (shear zones). Tectonic activities have caused formation of various faults with thick shear and crushed zones along the tunnel alignment. Most of these faults are of reversed type. In addition some normal and strike slip faults have been observed in the area. Based on the geological studies, about 20 faults were recognized along the tunnel alignment with width ranging from 10 to 50 As mentioned, the intact rock strength of the formations are generally medium to low and have low abrasivity, except for quartzite and quartz veins, which are not long sections of the tunnel. Joints, fractures and shear zones have reduced the strength of rock mass where they are present. The majority of the rock masses are classified as weak to fair quality. Permeability of the rock masses is generally low (with hydraulic conductivity below 10–7 The prime contractor for the design-built project was Ghorb Khatam and two of the subsidiaries Ghaem Co. and Sahel Co. were selected to perform as prime contractor and engineer/consultant, respectively. SELI of Italy was later subcontracted to assist in set up and operation of the TBM. Tunneling of Ghomroud tunnel was commenced in fall of 2002. About 380 In the TBM driven section, machine has had several stops including a major delay due to getting stuck in squeezing grounds and also for face collapses (see Tunneling operation has encountered adverse geological conditions at several stations, which has caused TBM jamming (cutterhead blocking and shield jamming) along the tunnel driven length up to now. According to the field observations and site investigations, the geological causes of TBM jamming may be divided into two main categories: 1. Ground squeezing/jamming, 2. Face/Ground collapse. As stated by the International Society of Rock Mechanics (ISRM) ( On the basis of the available data, it is possible to study squeezing behavior according to the semi empirical criteria proposed by     A possible way to estimate On the basis of the above consideration and study of several case histories of tunnel practices in Venezuela, Taiwan and India (the cases considered, include 16 tunnels in graphitic phyllites, sandstone, shale, slates, fractured quartzite, sheared metabasic rocks and fault zones.), The results of analysis for Ghomroud tunnel using the rock mass properties ( In order to quantify and classify the real squeezing behavior, it was necessary to monitor tunnel wall convergence. Tunnel wall convergence was measured by comparing the available annular space around the segmental lining at the end of the tail shield (in vertical direction) and the annular space around the segmental lining in the non-squeezing ground. This was done by measuring the amount of grout backfill used behind the segments to estimate the amount of ground closure and thus reduced volume of annular space between the lining and bored tunnel. For two kilometers of tunnel (km 30–32), wall convergence was directly measured using a scaled instrument in the grout holes inside the segmental lining (  As can be seen from The rock mass in the shield jamming locations consisted of schist, quartz veins and some soft interbedded graphite schist. In these locations, the strike of the schistosity was parallel to the tunnel axis and this was very important for occurrence of ground squeezing. Moreover, estimated RMR for the rock mass at these section was about 25–30, meaning that the rock mass could be considered weak and low in strength. As shown in In double shield TBM, the shield is tapered cylinder, meaning that the diameter of the front shield is larger than the tail shield. There was excess capacity in the auxiliary thrust cylinders to overcome shield friction in squeezing ground, nonetheless, this large capacity could not pull machine through in some tunnel sections. In such conditions, because of the quick and large radial displacement (more than 3 Joint surface condition has a very important role in tunnel stability. During the excavation, when some intersecting joints with weak surface conditions were encountered, they produced sizable rock wedges falling out at the face or the walls. This is referred to as fallouts or ground collapses. This process typically occurs in highly jointed rock mass or in fault/crushed zone. Based on the Geological investigations for Ghomroud tunnel it was predicted that the tunnel alignment would intersect several faults and crushed zones. Upon the last revision of this paper, there has been several face collapses along the excavated tunnel length. In some locations, the TBM passed through such zones successfully, while in other locations, the cutterhead was blocked. The encountered geological conditions comprised graphite schist with slickensided schistose surfaces and quartz veins, interbedded soft rocks with high percentage of Graphite, and localized wet conditions even dripping water. Existence of the quartz veins in the rock mass in these locations ( At some locations, the dip direction of these fractures and joints was against the tunnel advancing direction (the situation of drive against dip) and the excavation process was followed by relatively large over breaks (about 1–2 RMR values for these sections were typically around 20–30 (poor rock mass). In the Ghomroud tunnel project, some geotechnical investigations and observations were carried out during the construction phase and while TBM was being operated. Some basic activities are summarized as follows: Field observation and investigation to prepare various geological maps (structural and engineering geology). Drilling probe holes to evaluate ground conditions and rock mass permeability. Additional geomechanical laboratory tests on retrieved samples. The results of these geotechnical studies show that the geological conditions encountered along the tunnel, especially the structural features observed during construction, were hardly predictable. Therefore it was not possible to find exact locations of crushed and highly squeezing zones from the available maps of pre-bid site investigations. One of the best methods for detail geological investigations during the tunnel excavation was to perform probe drilling ahead of the tunnel face. The main objective of the probe drilling was to detect water and gas, as well as major faults. For this reason, it was necessary to observe drilling rate, drill cuttings, and groundwater inflow while drilling. However, in a shielded TBM, the probe drilling can only be performed through designated holes in the tail shield. This limited the observation of ground features especially when the rock mass behind the shield had collapsed. In this situation, the only available data from probe drilling was general operational parameters such as feed pressure and drilling rate. Moreover, since the Graphite schist has plastic behavior, there was no notable water flow detected in related zones because of low rock mass permeability. On the other hand, selection of the suitable starting point for probe holes could be crucial. Many approaches were used to predict the location of unfavorable geological conditions by probe drilling during the excavation, before entering such zones. But this proved to be very difficult in the field due to practical restrictions indicating the need to develop alternative methods for predicting the location of unfavorable ground. The following section describes one of the methods developed and studied in this project to provide some level of observation on ground conditions from peripheral measurements. The method involves observing TBM operational parameters and subsequent analysis to predict ground behavior at the face and around the front end of the machine. Based on the analysis of the TBM operational parameters such as thrust, torque and RPM, near the TBM jamming locations, some notably different values for these parameters can be identified for the last few boring cycles. It should be mentioned that the behavior of the ground near areas of potential face collapse could not be easily distinguished from squeezing ground (because of plastic behavior of schist). TBM penetration rate and cutterhead coefficient are two important parameters used by many researchers in TBM performance prediction. Composite indices such as specific penetration, “SP” ( The study shows that the ratio between Tq and Th changes and deviates from the predicted trend based on the Cutting Coefficient (ratio of rolling to normal force). This deviation can be attributed to the nature of a shielded TBM, where the total thrust force in reality is not transferred to the cutters because of the imposed frictional forces on the shield, resulting in unusually low Tq/Th ratios. To compare the validity of the indices, the daily average parameters of SP, CC for the first 5 Finding evidence of squeezing conditions during the excavation is very important in allowing the operator to prepare for upcoming unfavorable conditions. If known in advance, operators can implement measures to avoid TBM jamming and time-consuming activities of releasing the machine with manual labor. Based on our preliminary findings, TBM operational parameters (TBM thrust, torque) and some composite indexes including SP, CC, and penetration rate (ROP) can play a very important role in predicting potential problems in ground conditions near the sections with high potential of squeezing. Preliminary findings show that unusual increase in regripping pressure, higher than normal thrust level, and sudden decrease in CC and penetration rate are indicative of the upcoming squeezing situations. This could be explained by the fact that in high ground convergence and squeezing ground, ground pressure against the shield increases, leading to shield confinement. In this situation, shield friction increases, resulting in decrease in net cutter load for given applied thrust and therefore the amount of penetration rate decreases. This results in high compensatory thrust pressure from the machine to achieve the least acceptable penetration. In this situation, the contact pressure between cutterhead and the tunnel face decreases; which in turn results in lower torque. Increasing thrust and decreasing torque lead to low CC index, which can easily be observed by monitoring machine parameters. On the other hand, the tail shield could be moved with difficulty because of high imposed ground pressure and high amount of frictional forces. This causes the amount of regripping pressure to increase. Using these indexes, early indications and warnings could be generated to the contractor for revising machine operational parameter, tunneling operation, and scheduled activities to cope with the ground conditions at and ahead of the tunnel face. The encountered adverse geological conditions including squeezing ground and face collapses have caused several TBM stoppages and delays during excavation of Ghomroud tunnel lots 3 and 4. Weak intact rock and rock mass and the existence of extensive foliated structures and faults are main effective causes of the TBM jamming. Based on the tunnel convergence measurements, about 10% of the TBM excavated length of the tunnel was in sever squeezing category, while unfavorable orientation of weak structures such as joints, crushed zones, and faults caused several face collapses. Review and analysis of TBM operational parameters shows that, in highly squeezing grounds, machine thrust and regripping pressure has increased gradually while the cutterhead torque has decreased. In order to analyze the TBM parameters during the excavation in adverse situations, two indices (Including CC and SP) have been used. These indices demonstrate a considerable decrease in the vicinity of unfavorable geological locations. Although preliminary, these results can provide a useful tool to examine rock quality during tunnel excavation by TBM or shielded machines and develop a measure of potential for occurrence of machine jamming while tunneling is in progress. Once these areas are identified, suitable precautionary measures can be taken to avoid long delay and prevent machine from being held by adverse geological conditions. The authors wish to thank SAHEL consultant Engineers Co. for permission to publish information contained in this paper. The authors thank especially Dr. Salehzadeh for his reviewing the content of the paper and valuable commenting. Thanks are also due Mr. Shamsi, Mr. Hasanpour, Mr. Khatabi, Mr. Zolfaghari, Mr. Alizadeh and Mr. Arasteh for their help during preparation of the paper.