Serpentinic laterite ore, after suitable mineral processing operations as described in Part I, was subjected to heap as well as atmospheric agitation leaching. The heap leach results showed that serpentinic laterites can be leached by this technique. The nickel and cobalt recoveries achieved were 60% and 45%, respectively, in 10 days. The sulphuric acid consumption amounted to 40 kg H2SO4/kg Ni. However, the effectiveness of leaching depended on the calcite content of the ore as this adversely affected the permeability of the heap.
                  The agitation leach tests showed that the ore could be leached at atmospheric pressure without problems. Recoveries achieved were up to 74% for nickel and 51% for cobalt, after 2 h of leaching. The sulphuric acid consumption, depending on conditions, averaged 55 kg/kg Ni. Pulp mixing and filtration were excellent.Until recently, atmospheric pressure leaching of laterites with sulphuric acid had been studied by a relatively small number of investigators, including The bulk of the work on sulphuric acid leaching of laterites concerns pressure leaching. However, because of the problems encountered during commissioning and operation of the modern Australian plants (Murrin Murrin, Cawse and Bulong), atmospheric pressure leaching has recently received much closer consideration The aim of the present work was to investigate the leachability of the “Kastoria” orebody by atmospheric sulphuric acid leaching, using both heap and agitation leaching techniques. The “Kastoria” orebody contains two different layers of laterite, a lower serpentinic with a limonitic layer above. The serpentinic component was tested during this work after an upgrading process to reject its calcite content (Part I). The limonitic component was tested without prior upgrading treatment. Both ore types were leached in columns, simulating heap leaching, by dilute sulphuric acid. The serpentinic fraction was also leached in stirred tank reactors. The chemical analyses of the limonitic and the serpentinic ores are shown in In order to conduct a preliminary evaluation of the leaching behaviour of each type of ore, three small columns were initially used. These were of 10 cm internal diameter, 60 cm height and were filled with 6.4 kg of ore. One was loaded with limonitic “Kastoria”, with grain size −15 mm, and the other two with upgraded serpentinic “Kastoria”, with grain sizes −4+1 mm and −1 mm. The sulphuric acid leach solution was of 2N or 3N concentration. The solution was uniformly introduced onto the top surface of each column at a flow-rate of 4 L/day (500 L/day/m Following the above preliminary experiments, another three columns were subsequently used. These had the same diameter (10 cm) and various heights: 140, 170 and 190 cm. They were loaded with −1 mm upgraded serpentinic “Kastoria” ore. Prior to loading into each column, the ore was homogeneously wetted with water, in a mixer, to raise total moisture from 6.5–7% (natural moisture) to 10%. This agglomeration was found to be beneficial for reasons explained in a previous paper After passing through the column, the solution was collected from the bottom in a pregnant solution tank. There, the free acid concentration was measured and adjusted to the initial predetermined value. Then, a dosometric pump recirculated it for another leach cycle to start. A number of leach cycles were thus performed until maximum nickel extraction from the ore was achieved. Finally, the exhausted ore was washed with water in the column. Samples of the pregnant solution were collected at the end of each leach cycle and analysed for nickel, cobalt, iron, calcium, magnesium, chromium, aluminium and silicon by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. For concentrations of iron higher than 0.10 g/L, volumetric analysis was used as the most reliable method. The free acidity of the pregnant solution could not be determined reliably by measuring the solution pH because of the high acidity and the relatively high ionic strength and density of the solutions encountered. Besides, titration with sodium hydroxide was not feasible due to the presence of hydrolysable cations (e.g., Fe The agitation leaching tests with sulphuric acid were carried out in mechanically stirred 500 ml spherical flasks at atmospheric pressure under various conditions (see The results of the column tests are presented in Cobalt extraction was lower than that of nickel, ranging from 30% to 45%. Generally, the limonitic and the serpentinic components of the deposit were leached to the same extent and only showed a difference in the iron and magnesium content of the leach liquor due to the high magnesium and low iron content of the latter component. Unfortunately, the taller columns encountered percolation problems, which slowed down the process considerably. In particular, the 190-cm column had to be stopped before the completion of leaching. These problems were attributed to gypsum formation due to the high remaining calcite content in the upgraded ore. Furthermore, the very high solution flow rate (2300 L/day/m Sulphuric acid consumption was high in all columns because the magnesium contained in the nickeliferous minerals and the incomplete calcite removal. For the serpentinic ore, it ranged from 36 to 44 kg H Aluminium extraction values were around 12%, while silica was not dissolved during the leach process. Detailed concentration values for all metal cations in the various leach liquors, including Al, Cr, Si and Mn, are not given here, due to space limitations, but they are available on request. A factorial experiment 2×2×3, in duplicate, was conducted in order to study the effects and interactions of the factors on agitation leaching efficiency. The factors studied and their levels are given in The Fe/Ni ratio, equal to 6.8:1 in the ore, was reduced to 1.4:1 in the leach liquor, showing again the selectivity for nickel over iron during atmospheric pressure sulphuric acid leaching of the Greek laterite ores. On the contrary, the Mg/Ni ratio in the leach liquor (5.2:1) was on average almost equal to the value of this ratio in the ore (5.1:1). This indicates that both nickel and magnesium come into the leach liquor from the dissolution of serpentine and cronstedtite, the main nickel carriers in the “Kastoria” ore, which are leached preferentially to haematite and goethite. The data for the various responses were statistically analysed. As the statistical analysis for nickel recovery showed, the only statistically significant factor was the sulphuric acid concentration, at the significance level Cobalt recovery as well as magnesium and iron co-dissolution were also found to increase with increasing the sulphuric acid concentration. The similarity in the leaching behaviour of nickel, cobalt, magnesium and iron, exposed by the statistical analysis indicates that these metals are leached from the same mineralogical phases, in particular serpentine and cronstedtite. It should be stressed that during agitation leaching, pulp mixing and filtration were excellent. This fact indicates that the mild leaching conditions used did not substantially fragment the serpentine silicate lattice to produce fine silica (silicate) particles in the liquor.  The nickeliferous ores from the “Kastoria” deposit can be leached by dilute sulphuric acid at atmospheric pressure, using both heap and agitation leach processes. Calcite contained in the ore adversely affects the permeability of the heap and the sulphuric acid consumption. Its removal prior to leaching is an important pre-requisite. The nickeliferous serpentine is dissolved in preference to the haematite and goethite minerals under the mild conditions for heap leaching. In the case of agitation leaching, the selectivity is lower. Nickel and cobalt recoveries achieved during heap leaching were 60% and 45%, respectively, in 10 days. It is thought that these values would be higher if less calcite was present in the upgraded ore. The sulphuric acid consumption amounted to 40 kg H Maximum nickel and cobalt recoveries obtained during agitation leaching, within the range of values studied, were 74% for nickel and 51% for cobalt, after 2 h. The average sulphuric acid consumption was 55 kg/kg Ni. The major acid consumers were residual calcite in the upgraded ore and magnesium in the nickeliferous phase of serpentine. Nickel and cobalt recoveries as well as magnesium and iron co-dissolution were found to depend only on sulphuric acid concentration, increasing independently of the ore grain size and the temperature. The agitation leaching technique was readily applicable to the ”Kastoria” ore, provided that market values of sulphuric acid and nickel are favourable. Further research is being conducted in order to improve the nickel/cobalt extractions and lower the acid consumption. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the European Commission, Directorate General XII, for financial support according to the contract no. BRE2-CT94-1020 and also to G.M.M.S.A. LARCO for the laterite samples provided.