Natural convection is studied in an isosceles triangular enclosure with a heat source located at its bottom wall and filled with an Ethylene Glycol–Copper nanofluid. This paper examines the effects of pertinent parameters such as the Rayleigh number, the solid volume fraction, the heat source location, and the enclosure apex angle on the thermal performance of the enclosure. The thermal performance of the enclosure is improved with an increase in the Rayleigh number and solid volume fraction. The results also show that the variation of heat transfer rate with respect to the enclosure apex angle and heat source position and dimensions is different at low and high Rayleigh numbers. A comparison is also presented between the results obtained from the modified and original Maxwell models. The results show that the heat transfer is generally higher based on the modified Maxwell model.Specific heat, J kg Heat source distance from the left vertex, m Dimensionless heat source distance from the left vertex ( Gravitational acceleration, m s Heat source height, m Dimensionless heat source height ( Thickness of nano-layer, nm Thermal conductivity, W m Length of enclosure bottom wall, m Local Nusselt number on the heat source Average Nusselt number Fluid pressure, Pa Modified pressure ( Dimensionless pressure ( Prandtl number ( Radius of nanoparticles, nm Rayleigh number Temperature, K Velocity components in Dimensionless velocity components ( Dimensionless velocity vector Heat source length, m Dimensionless heat source length ( Cartesian coordinates, m Dimensionless coordinates ( Thermal diffusivity, m Thermal expansion coefficient, K Apex angle of the triangular enclosure (°) Solid volume fraction Dynamic viscosity, N s m Kinematic viscosity, m Dimensionless temperature Density, kg m Stream function Cold wall Effective Equivalent Fluid (pure) Heat source Left side Nanofluid Nano-layer Nanoparticle Right side Top side. In recent years, the number of studies conducted on natural convection in triangular enclosures has increased, as evidenced by the research articles cited in If the cooling strategy utilises a coolant fluid with a low thermal conductivity, the natural convection flow field only acquires a limited strength. It is, therefore, of fundamental interest to explore innovative and practical strategies that strengthen the natural convection flow for various geometries of electronic components. Bergles For the first time, Choi The conductors in the electrical engineering industry often have the form of a prism of triangular cross-section. Triangular-shaped enclosures can also be found in the electronic equipment such as the power transistors, the printed wiring boards and the chip packages mounted on computer motherboards. In particular, a triangular-shaped chip package mounted on a motherboard is used to dissipate heat from the motherboard. This can be modelled by considering a triangular enclosure with a heat source located at the bottom wall. Recently, many researchers have studied natural convection in isosceles triangular enclosures filled with a fluid having a low thermal conductivity The present model consists of an isosceles triangular enclosure filled with an EG–Cu nanofluid ( The governing equations of continuity, momentum and energy can be written in non-dimensional forms as shown in Eqs. The thermophysical properties of the EG–Cu nanofluid are determined using the formulae presented in According to the original Maxwell model The modified Maxwell model takes into account a nano-layer with a solid-like structure formed by the liquid molecules close to a solid surface. According to this model, the thermal conductivity of the EG–Cu nanofluid The governing equations Other useful quantities such as Nusselt number for each side of the heat source can be determined after solving the governing equations for The present numerical approach is validated against the study developed by Varol et al. In the present analysis, the Prandtl number is assumed to be In this section, the effects of Rayleigh number (Ra) and solid volume fraction ( The variations in the vertical component of velocity ( The heat transfer rate is studied in terms of the average Nusselt number In this section, the effect of apex angle of the triangular enclosure ( It is also noteworthy that since the length of the bottom wall of the enclosure is kept constant, as the apex angle increases, the enclosure becomes smaller and the circulating cells become more limited. Thus, an increase in the apex angle results in a decrease in the strength of the circulating cells. However, this does not mean that the heat transfer rate will be lower for higher apex angles. It is worth noting that as the apex angle increases, the heat source becomes closer to the cold inclined walls and the conduction heat transfer rate is expected to increase.  In this section, the effect of the heat source position on the heat transfer performance of the enclosure is studied. It is assumed that   In this section, the effect of heat source dimensions on the heat transfer performance of the enclosure is studied. It is assumed that Ra=10  As mentioned in the introduction, the models used to estimate the properties of the nanofluid significantly affect the heat transfer performance of the nanofluid A numerical investigation has been presented to study the natural convection in an isosceles triangular enclosure with a heat source located at its bottom wall and filled with an Ethylene Glycol–Cu nanofluid. The effect of parameters such as Rayleigh number, solid volume fraction, apex angle of the enclosure, position and dimensions of the heat source on the flow and temperature fields as well as the heat transfer rate are examined. A comparison study between the results obtained from the modified and original Maxwell models indicates that the heat transfer rates obtained based on the modified Maxwell model are generally higher than those obtained based on the original Maxwell model. The enclosure filled with Ethylene Glycol–Cu nanofluid shows a better heat transfer characteristic compared to the enclosure filled with pure Ethylene Glycol. For an isosceles triangular enclosure filled with Ethylene Glycol–Cu nanofluid, an enhanced heat transfer is achieved as the solid volume fraction and Rayleigh number increase. Symmetrical flow and temperature fields are only observed for the right-isosceles triangular enclosure with a relatively long heat source located at the centre of the bottom wall. However, irregularities in the flow and temperature fields are observed when the apex angle is different from 90° or the heat source moves away from the centre of the bottom wall. At low Rayleigh numbers, the heat transfer rate continuously increases with the enclosure apex angle and decreases with the distance of the heat source from the left vertex. However, at high Rayleigh numbers, the heat transfer rate reaches its minimum at certain values of the apex angle and heat source distance. For shorter heat source length, the highest heat transfer rates are obtained for the lowest heat source height. However, for the longer heat source lengths, the heat transfer rate first decreases and then increases as the heat source height increases.