Advanced tools, including atomic force microscopy (AFM), sum frequency vibrational spectroscopy (SFVS), and molecular dynamics simulations (MDS), are being used to describe interfacial water structure and to contrast the structure of water at a hydrophilic mineral surface with that at a hydrophobic mineral surface. Specifically, this contrast is revealed from interfacial water features based on the extent of H-bonding, dipole orientation, exclusion zone thickness, and residence time. Progress in our understanding of interfacial water structure and wetting phenomena is reported for different mineral classes including sulfides, oxides/hydroxides, layered silicates (phyllosilicates), and salt-type minerals, including both semi-soluble and soluble salts.Flotation separation processes are of great significance to the mining industry with millions of tons of mineral resources being processed each day for the separation and recovery of valuable mineral commodities. It is most appropriate to recognize Professor Heinrich Schubert on the occasion of his 90th year since he has made significant contributions to the development of flotation technology, including the flotation chemistry of non-sulfide minerals, particularly the flotation chemistry of potash. Interfacial water structure and the wetting of mineral surfaces are of fundamental importance in the area of flotation chemistry, as well as having importance in other areas of technology. Now, with advanced tools, the features of interfacial water structure and wetting phenomena at mineral surfaces can be considered in greater detail. These tools include atomic force microscopy (AFM), sum frequency vibrational spectroscopy (SFVS), and molecular dynamics simulations (MDS). Specifically, atomic force microscopy can be used not only to describe charging of mineral surfaces, but also to describe the wetting characteristics of the surface using selected cantilevers with hydrophobic tips such as a diamond-like-carbon tip ( In the case of sum frequency vibrational spectroscopy, the surface spectra reveal information regarding the structure and the degree of coordination of water molecules at the mineral surface ( Finally, molecular dynamics simulations are being used in flotation chemistry ( Progress in our understanding of interfacial water structure and wetting phenomena is reported for different mineral classes including sulfides, oxides/hydroxides, layered silicates (phyllosilicates), and salt-type minerals, both semi-soluble and soluble salts. The low degree of surface polarity and more hydrophobic character distinguish the sulfide mineral class from other mineral classes. This feature accounts for the fact that the hydrophobic surface state can be created at low concentrations of short chained collector molecules. The sulfide minerals are also distinguished by the fact that generally their surfaces are thermodynamically unstable with respect to oxidation and hydrolysis which increases the surface polarity and hydration. This instability of the sulfide mineral surfaces makes analysis and generalization regarding their wetting characteristics more difficult. Several investigations have demonstrated that many sulfide minerals exhibit native floatability and can be floated without a collector. Flotation of various sulfides in the virtual absence of oxygen (i.e., in water containing less than 5 MDS sessile drop contact angles for selected sulfide mineral surfaces are consistent with experimental results. See However, due to the instability of these sulfide mineral surfaces with respect to oxidation, the surfaces become hydrophilic on exposure to air and water. For example, after oxidation of the pyrite surface with a 30% hydrogen peroxide solution for 90 In summary, under anaerobic conditions the sulfide minerals are not well wetted by water and exhibit a hydrophobic surface state. In most practical cases, sulfide surfaces will have reacted with oxygen, depending on the pH, creating polar sites and a more hydrophilic surface state. Oxide minerals are generally thought to be hydrophilic and well wetted by water. However, complete wetting, as shown from recent studies, depends on hydroxylation of the mineral surface in order to provide H-bonding sites for interfacial water molecules. Certain anhydrous oxides (sapphire, rutile, hematite) have a hydrophobic character prior to hydroxylation as shown in Further, the wetting characteristics depend on the procedure used to prepare the surface. For example, in some cases, when treated after polishing with acetone, ethanol, and water washing, followed by drying at 60 Specular hematite is an interesting example since the (001) surface exhibits a rather significant contact angle of about 50° when prepared by polishing without plasma treatment. The kinetics of the hydroxylation/wetting reaction for the anhydrous (001) hematite surface depend on the pH of the solution. At pH The (001) hematite surface can be organized to conform to a surface state revealed by STM results reported in the literature ( The wetting characteristics of layered silicate minerals (phyllosilicates), also known as clay minerals, are of interest from a number of perspectives and vary significantly with respect to composition. The layered silicate minerals consist of silica tetrahedral sheets bonded to aluminum or magnesium octahedral sheets, the gibbsite sheet in the case of aluminum and the brucite sheet in the case of magnesium. Classic examples are the bilayer silicates designated TO for the tetrahedral to octahedral bonding, and the trilayer silicates designated TOT for the sandwich structure having bonding of the octahedral sheet between two silica tetrahedral sheets. The layered phyllosilicate mineral particles are anisotropic having at least two surfaces, a face surface and an edge surface. The edge surfaces are hydrophilic with significant sites for H-bonding of water molecules. On the other hand, the silica face surfaces can have low polarity in some cases and exhibit a hydrophobic surface state. Properties of these surfaces have been established by traditional methods and most recently by atomic force microscopy ( Consider the sequence of the trilayer silicate minerals with aluminum in the octahedral position. The sequence is well known; pyrophyllite, illite, and muscovite mica as shown in Talc is another TOT layered silicate, similar to pyrophillite except that magnesium is in the octrahedral position rather than aluminum. Like pyrophillite, the talc face surface is naturally hydrophobic due to the low polarity of the siloxane rings formed by the silica tetrahedral sheet. The interfacial water structure at the talc silica surface has been examined by MDS and is characterized by the presence of a water exclusion zone, interfacial water dipoles parallel to the surface, a short residence time for interfacial water molecules (usually less than 10 So it is evident for the TOT structures that the low polarity of the silica tetrahedral layer accounts for the hydrophobic state of the face surfaces for both pyrophillite and talc. Substitution in the tetrahedral sheet increases the polarity of the face surface and results in a hydrophilic surface state for illite and muscovite. More recently the wetting characteristics of bilayer clay nanoparticles (TO structure) have been established by AFM, specifically the kaolinite surfaces ( It is expected that the salt mineral surfaces, both semi-soluble and soluble salt mineral surfaces, will be well wetted by water. Generally, this is the case but interestingly there are some salt minerals that exhibit a small degree of hydrophobicity. Analysis is complicated because of the dynamic equilibrium with the solution involving dissolution and recrystallization at the salt surfaces. In this regard, the interfacial water structure is influenced by the hydration characteristics of ions present in solution and at the salt surface. In the case of semi-soluble salt minerals, surface hydration of oxyanion salts is usually observed and minerals such as calcite, magnesite, apatite, bastnaesite, monazite, and gypsum generally have a small or zero contact angle and are well wetted by water. An exception is fluorite which is reported to have a distinct water contact angle of 20° ( With respect to the soluble salt minerals, wetting of a soluble salt surface by its corresponding brine seems to depend on how the salt ions influence the water structure. For example, in the case of sylvite (KCl) wetting by brine is not complete and a contact angle of a few degrees (12–15°) is found ( Interfacial water structure is described by characteristic features including H-bonding, dipole orientation, exclusion zone thickness, and residence time. In contrast to polarized hydrophilic surfaces with oriented water dipoles, MDS analysis of water at hydrophobic surfaces reveals that these water molecules are not oriented; rather, the water dipoles are separated from, and parallel to, the surface. Sulfide mineral surfaces are found to be hydrophobic under anaerobic conditions and become hydrophilic upon oxidation and hydrolysis. The hydrophobic sulfide surface is characterized by a “water exclusion zone” of ~ Oxide mineral surfaces have a modest hydrophobicity depending on how the surface is prepared. However, given sufficient time and an appropriate pH, surface hydroxylation occurs and the surfaces become hydrophilic. In the case of layered silicates, the silica face surface of the anisotropic clay minerals exhibits a hydrophobic character in the absence of isomorphous substitution in the silica tetrahedral sheet, examples include pyrophyllite, talc, and kaolinite. Of course, the edge surfaces are well wetted by water. Salt-type minerals are generally well wetted by water, but some salt surfaces appear to have a lower level of polarity such as the (111) surface of fluorite (CaF Information on interfacial water structure should help to explain film rupture during bubble attachment in the flotation process, and such research is in progress. This research was funded by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the