Softening ammonia sulfate wastewater is one of the vital issues in the rare earth industry. In this article, a novel softening process using [4,4′-isopropylidenebis (phenoxyacetate)] (H2IPOAA) for Ca2+ and Mg2+ (M2+) is developed. The effect factors, i.e., equilibrium time, pH value of aqueous phase and saponification degree are investigated. The extraction mechanism is proposed to be cation exchange. With a saponification degree of 85%, H2IPOAA is successfully used for the precipitation of Ca2+ and Mg2+ from ammonia sulfate wastewater within 10 min. The process can form precipitated particles with an average size of 35 μm, which are much larger than the precipitates formed by H2C2O4, Na2C2O4 and Na2CO3. The precipitated particles can be easily separated from the raffinate. In addition, H2IPOAA is repeatedly used for five times with a little loss. To a considerable extent, the reuse of H2IPOAA contributes to lowering the cost and reducing the pollution. The concentrations of Ca2+ and Mg2+ in the raffinate extracted by H2IPOAA are up to the MVR standard for wastewater treatment. The economical and efficient softening process meets the need of green chemistry, which is expected to replace traditional industrial processes for water softening based on H2C2O4, Na2C2O4 and Na2CO3.Hard water containing high concentration of soluble calcium and magnesium ions. A most challenging problem is the formation of calcium & magnesium scale onto the reactor wall or inner pipeline, which is harmful to the heat exchange and solution fluidity. Therefore, the effective removal of calcium and magnesium ions in many industrial solutions are very important. ( Chinese rare earth (RE) industry produces over 20 million tons of wastewater annually, with the ammonium sulfate level ranging between 300 and 5000 mg/L, which is more than ten times or even one hundred times higher than the national emission standard ( Because the insoluble scale has poor thermal conductivity, it affects the heat transfer of boiler, further causing the wastewater treatment capacity of MVR system reduces drastically with high energy consumption. In addition, it may cause equipment corrosion problems, affect the equipment's life, also pose a safety hazard. However, the elimination of scale requires a lot of manpower and financial resources ( The MVR process requires the concentrations of Ca It is the most common method. Nevertheless, it demands plenty of chemical agents and produces a large volume of sludges (  Oxalic acid precipitation of RE is a traditional process with the most research and industrial application ( Phenoxyacetic acid type extractants are considered to be a promising class of extractants for rare earth elements (REEs) separation, such as sec-octylphen-oxyacetic acid (CA-12) and sec-nonylphenoxyacetic acid (CA-100) ( Bisphenol A and sodium chloroacetate were supplied by Xiya Reagent Company, Limited (China). The synthetic solution was prepared by dissolving 0.01 mol/L CaSO H The Ca Excepting for the precipitation mechanism and unless otherwise noted, the experiments of H [M] In an attempt to better understand the softening performance and efficiency of H As a kind of weaker acids, the phenoxyacetic acid type extractants are readily to form hydrogen-bonded dimers. Accordingly, the saponification using acid/base neutralization reaction is needed to increase their extractabilities and selectivities by breaking the dimers and eliminating protons ( The mechanism can be written as the following equations. The qualitatively analysis of precipitate formed by H The thermodynamic parameters of extraction-precipitation reaction can be obtained by examining the effect of temperature on the equilibrium while keeping the other conditions constant. A series of extraction-precipitation experiments at 298–323 K were carried out. Distribution ratio (D) and equilibrium constant (K Taking the logarithms of Eq. As shown in In order to better study the performance of saponified H SEM images for the precipitates are given in The loading capacity of H Stripping is an important property for evaluating the regeneration of a precipitant for industrial application. However, the common precipitants, i.e. H This article develops a novel extraction-precipitation strategy for softening the nitrogen wastewater produced by rare earth industry. Compared to traditional precipitants, such as Na This work is supported by ‘Hundreds Talents Program’ and Technology Service Network Initiative from