Hydrocyclones used for solid–liquid separation are usually composed of a single cone. In this paper, we designed hydrocyclones with two cone combinations for solid–liquid separation and studied the flow field and separation performance. Simulation and experimental results showed that when the second cone remained unchanged, the angle change of the first cone had significant effect on the value of three-dimensional velocities, flow split, separation efficiency, energy consumption, and separation sharpness, but little effect on the distribution of pressure and that of three dimensional velocities, the capacity and cut size. The bigger of the first cone's angle, the smaller of the flow split and the higher the separation efficiency, the stronger of the centrifugal force, and the more the small particles in underflow. The smaller the angle change between the two cones, the larger the sharpness of the grade efficiency curve, i.e., the hydrocyclone is more suitable for the classification process.inlet equivalent diameter of the hydrocyclone (m) separation capability of the hydrocyclone, flow split of the hydrocyclone, the concentration of solid in the overflow and feed (mg/L) modify grade efficiency, the pressure in the feed and overflow of the hydrocyclone (MPa) pressure drop of inlet and overflow of the hydrocyclone Δ individually the volume flow of the underflow and feed (m inlet Reynolds number of the hydrocyclone, inlet velocity of the hydrocyclone, liquid medium kinetic viscosity (Pa liquid medium density (kg/m Hydrocyclones are widely used for particle separation, classification and thickening in many solid–liquid processes for their advantages such as simple structures, robust separation devices with no moving parts, small physical size of unit, and low installation and maintenance costs. In the recent years, the hydrocyclones have been widely applied in mineral processing The investigations on the design and performance of hydrocyclones have been continued for several decades. It is well known that the structure of the hydrocyclone and the operating parameters affect the hydrocyclone separation performance. For the established solid–liquid separation system, the structure of hydrocyclone is the determinant factor. To get satisfactory separation performance, a great number of investigations have been made concerning on the structure and the geometric dimension scale of hydrocyclones Three hydrocyclones with diameter of 100 The multiphase flow in a hydrocyclone is quite complicated. In this work, pressure and velocity fields of the hydrocyclones with different cone combinations were numerically simulated using FLUENT computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software. Some works of simulation of hydrocyclones using the Reynolds stress model (RSM) have been reported to be suitable for modeling the flow in the hydrocyclone in recent years Three hydrocyclones are designed as that shown in The feed was a mixture of solids and water. The solid was from the flue gas desulphurization (FGD) system of a power plant. The suspended solids were composed of CaSO The schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is illustrated in Because the objective of this study is to understand the effects of different cone combinations on the hydrocyclone performance, the characteristics of feed slurry and the operating parameters were the same for each hydrocyclone in the experiments. The solid weight concentration of feed slurry was same with simulation in all the experiments. The inlet pressure Pressure profiles had been simulated using FLUENT computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software. The axis and the wall pressure profiles of hydrocyclones are shown in The axis center pressure profiles of hydrocyclones are shown in The position of vortex finder tip is defined as The axial velocity profiles in different cross-sections are shown in The radial velocity profiles in different cross-sections are shown in Tangential velocity is the most important one among the three-dimensional velocities, which is one of the key indexes of the separation factor by determining the value of centrifugal force. It is because the tangential velocity is greater in value than the other two velocities, and what is more important is that, the centrifugal force deriving from the tangential velocity is the prerequisite for the separation of the two or more phases in hydrocyclones. The cone combination has great influence on the value of tangential velocity. The maximum tangential velocity of hydrocyclone A is significantly higher than that of hydrocyclones B and C, and that of hydrocyclone B is slightly higher than that of hydrocyclone C. Thus, the variation of cone angles of a hydrocyclone influences the tangential velocity profile in that the tangential velocity increases with the angle of the first cone. The capacity and flow split were investigated under experimental method. The capacity is the volume flow of the feed, which is directly related to the inlet pressure of the solid–liquid hydrocyclone. It is an important factor for a hydrocyclone. When the inlet pressure is maintained constantly and the separation performance of hydrocyclone could meet the technological requirements, the larger the capacity of hydrocyclone the better. Under normal operating conditions, the capacity has a direct relationship to the pressure drops of inlet and overflow across the solid–liquid hydrocyclone. The relationship between the two pressure drops is also important and can be used for control purposes. The effect of different cone combinations on the capacity is shown in The relationship between pressure drop and the flow split of hydrocyclones is shown in The removal performance was also investigated under experimental method. The inlet Reynolds number is a key factor and has significant effect on the separation efficiency of hydrocyclones. The different cone combinations have significant influence on the separation efficiency of hydrocyclones. On the one hand, the changes of two cone angles have the influence on high separation efficiency area of the hydrocyclone. The effect degree of the changes of two cone angles on the high separation efficiency area is in an order as follows: hydrocyclone B The grade efficiency curves of hydrocyclones are shown in The smaller the change of the angle between the two cones, the greater the sharpness of the grade efficiency curve; and Simulate and experimental study of hydrocyclones with different cone combinations for solid–liquid separation and flow field inside hydrocyclones show that, the angle change of the cone has significant effect on the value of three-dimensional velocities, flow split, separation efficiency, energy consumption, and separation sharpness, but little effect on the distribution of pressure and that of three-dimensional velocities, the capacity and cut size. For solid–liquid separation, when the angle of the second cone does not change, the bigger the angle of the first cone, the smaller the split, the higher separation efficiency area, the bigger the pressure drop, and the stronger the centrifugal force. The smaller the angle of two cones changes, the larger the sharpness of the grade efficiency curve, and the less the energy consumption; and We would like to express our thanks for the sponsorship of the New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-08-0777) and