One of the more interesting recent topics in flotation modelling is the association between the fraction of air that overflows to the concentrate as unbroken bubbles (air recovery, α) and concentrate recovery. This paper analyses several models to estimate air recovery. These models were tested using experimental data obtained with a laboratory flotation column (2m high; 0.095m diam.), which was used to float sphalerite. Predictions from these models were compared with the results obtained by image analysis. The aim of this last technique was to have a reference measurement, quantifying by visual detection (manual method) the bubbles bursting on the surface. Based on the experimental results, the best models were identified. This kind of comparison is valuable for simulator developers.Researchers and operators are mainly interested in flotation modelling for optimization purposes. This objective will be more easily achieved if the concentrate recovery can be monitored or estimated on-line. Artificial vision, one of the most modern techniques available in mineral processing, can be used for this purpose. In one interesting application of artificial vision, the air in the concentrate overflow is estimated with parameters measured by this technique. This variable is important because it is directly related to the charge of solids on the bubbles overflowing ( The experimental measurement of air recovery is difficult ( Until the 1990s, most of the research focused on the collection zone and to a lesser extent the froth zone. Since then, several studies have renewed interest in the froth zone. Air recovery was introduced by  Based on geometrical models, the association between air recovery and the mass flow rate of solids recovered in the concentrate was studied by  The most conventional method for estimating the air recovery is the use of  Even though froth depths in columns are generally greater than those in mechanical cells, Eq. The same authors ( Considering that two flow rates (i.e., of the concentrate slurry and gas) are ascending close to the top of a froth, then, before bubble collapsing begins, the gas holdup ( A similar equation is available in the literature for an air–water system ( Since Then, air recovery can be estimated by combining Eqs. Note that Eqs. In this paper, a semi-phenomenological model is proposed to estimate air recovery (Eq. Even though the independent variables in Eq. As indicated by Eq. Image analysis is another method for estimating the air recovery (collapsed bubbles counting). Although this is not really a model, it is described in this section because it is an additional method to estimate this variable: A series of tests was conducted to generate experimental data for comparison purposes. The experimental results are shown in For superficial froth image acquisition, a video camera connected to a PC was installed 120 The surface image of the froth was modified by changing the hydrophobicity of the solids using different collector additions and controlling the froth depth. The series of tests was conducted using five different collector additions. For each test, four levels of froth depth were examined. A series of photographs was taken during each set of experiments to record the superficial froth image. To evaluate Eq. To identify and quantify the number of burst bubbles, our image analysis method is based on the comparison of two consecutive images. Knowing the number of collapsed bubbles per unit of time and the mean bubble diameter, the collapsed air flow rate may be estimated, and consequently, the air recovery may be computed once the air flow rate injected into the cell is known. As previously mentioned, two forms of image analysis method to account for the collapsed bubbles were used: (a) visual inspection of each image (manual estimation) and (b) automatic image analysis using Matlab The Image Pro To validate the automatic counting of collapsed bubbles, the results reported by automatic computation are compared with the results obtained by visual inspection (a tedious task).  Once the collapsed bubbles in each pair of consecutive images are quantified, the collapsed air flow rate (  The dispersion of the results of Eq. A qualified estimation of the fraction of air overflowing to the concentrate as unbroken bubbles (“air recovery”, Image analysis techniques can be useful for evaluating the collapsed air flow rate and the air recovery, but these methods remain reliable only as long as the image is representative of the froth surface. As for further work, it would be interesting to make a similar evaluation of the analysed models in an industrial flotation cell, paying special attention to the results reported by the artificial vision technique that make use of the velocity of the froth above the launder lip ( One of more interesting findings of this work is the empirical equation that relates the solids flow rate and the inter-lamella distance ( Traditionally, the concentrate recovery has been associated with the bubble surface flux in the collection zone of a flotation column. Once the experimental data is collected, as in this work (air recovery, surface bubble diameter, and air flow rate), it will be interesting to estimate the bubble surface flux that overflowed to the concentrate. This will permit an evaluation of the relationship between this variable and the mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate. The authors are grateful to CONACYT (Mexico) for the financing received and to M.Sc. J.A. Gonzalez for technical support in the laboratory. The objective of this appendix is to derive a new model to estimate the air flow rate that overflows in the concentrate ( To estimate the volume of pulp contained in a single bubble, Eq. Once the volume of pulp contained in one bubble is known, the flow of bubbles that overflowing into the concentrate may be estimated by using the next equation Then, the gas flow that overflows in the concentrate will be estimated by using the following relationship: From Eqs. Then, to obtain the air recovery, the right-hand side of Eq. As Eq. To validate this assumption, Eq. Then, from Eqs. See