The paper aims to identify a reasonable method for mining ultra-thick coal seams in an end-slope in surface mine. With a case study of Heidaigou surface coal mine (HSCM), the paper conducted a comparative research on three mining methods, namely Underground Mining Method (UMM), Highwall Mining System (HMS) and Local Steep Slope Mining Method (LSSMM). A model was firstly established to simulate the impact that UMM and HMS exert on monitoring points and surface deformation. The way that stripping and excavation amount varies with different slope angle, and the corresponding end slope stability were analyzed in the mode of LSSMM. Then a TOPSIS model was established by taking into account six indicators such as recovery ratio, technical complexity and adaptability, the impact on surface mining production, production safety and economic benefits. Finally, LSSMM was determined as the best mining method for mining ultra-thick coal seams in end slope in HSCM.Most coal seams of surface coal mines in China are thick or ultra-thick, and the occurrence depth in large-scale surface coal mines could normally reach 300–600 m. Hence, as mining depth increases, a large amount of coal resources would be buried beneath the end slope. In addition, even if this part of coal resources could be extracted, due to the temporal and spatial correlation of coal mining and dumping, they have to be extracted in a timely manner. Otherwise, with inner dump developing and advancing, they could gradually end up being stagnant coal reserves whose economic benefits and mining feasibility would be both reduced. Therefore, provided the slope stability is ensured, it is of great significance to increase resource recovery ratio by recovering the reserves beneath end slope (RBES) using reasonable mining method and technology. Since end slope area is influenced by surface coal mining and dumping engineering practice, the selection of RBES exploitation method should be based on the characteristics of end-slope and meanwhile should be in combination with open-pit mining and haulage system. Three typical methods in this regard are Underground Mining Method (UMM), Highwall Mining System (HMS) and Local Steep Slope Mining Method (LSSMM), respectively. To be specific, UMM refers to the combination between underground coal mining method with surface mining, HMS refers to a special mining system applied in end-slope working face, and LSSMM means surface mining method applied in the end-slope area with the end slope angle enlarged to be steep. Meanwhile, other factors such as the geological conditions of the mines, coal seam occurrence conditions, technical and economic conditions etc. shall be taken into full consideration as well. Besides, the three RBES exploitation methods mentioned above are quite different in terms of their technical process and their impact on normal production organization. From the perspective of resource recovery rate, in the mode of UMM and HMS, a large number of coal pillars have to be retained and additional equipment is also required to reach a recovery rate of 60%–70%. While in the case of LSSMM, the end slope angle could be enlarged using current technological method of surface coal mining and its enlargement range directly determines the corresponding recovery rate. Therefore, no additional mining equipment is required in comparison with the former two. Nevertheless, coal resources excavated using this method would be limited and there would be a large amount of in situ RBES left unexploited. From the perspective of production mode and economic investment, both UMM and HMS require additional investment of mining equipment and personnel and the investment is relatively large. But this is not the case in the mode of LSSMM. Since it could take full advantage of existing surface coal mining equipment to realize the exploitation of RBES, its production organization and management is relatively simple. In addition, UMM method takes many specialized technical staff and HMS also takes three to four technicians to complete production. So both modes would exert certain effect on normal surface coal mine production and that how to make the coordination has to be considered. Furthermore, the layout of the first two modes needs to meet certain requirements about open pit bottom width, while in the case of LSSMM, the smaller bottom width, the more favorable for local steep mining and slope stability. Che et al., Liu et al., Xu et al., and Shang et al. conducted analytic research on end-slope coal mining process system and mining method As a matter of fact, each mining method is characteristic of different advantages in terms of RBES exploitation and the economic benefits are remarkable especially in the case of mining thin coal seams. But when it comes to thick or ultra-thick coal seam extraction, these mining methods are yet put into application. Under this situation, this paper probed into the mining method for extracting ultra-thick coal seams in end slope. The objective of this study herein is the RBES in nearly horizontal surface coal mine with ultra-thick coal seams. The applicability of various mining methods to this end was discussed in the paper, respectively. HSCM came into use in 1992 and its initially designed production capacity was 12 Mt/a. After two technological modifications, the current production capacity has exceeded 35 Mt/a. The main minable coal seam in HSCM is 6# coal seam. Its average mining depth is 185 m and its average thickness is 28.8 m. HSCM is divided into three mining districts, as shown in In HSCM, semi-continuous mining system is adopted, which includes single-bucket excavator, truck, semi-fixed crushing station and belt conveyor. For the rock steps that are 40 m above the coal seam roof, casting blast and draglines stripping technique have been used. As for the stripping work of the other rock steps and topsoil, it is accomplished by a discontinuous process consisting of single-bucket excavators and trucks. The operation bench height for single bucket excavator is 15 m and the working bench of inner dump is 30 m. A transport berm is set on the end slope step at an interval of every 30 m. Trucks deliver the stripped overburdens to inner dump via transport berms. According to strip mining theory, the width of excavated strip should be less than a third of the buried depth, and the width of remaining strip should meet the following Eq. The coordination between end-slope underground mining and surface coal mining is mainly composed of underground mining time, working face moving and shifting time, new roadway excavating time and surface mining-and-dumping advancing speed, as shown in The burial depth of 6# coal seam in HSCM is around 150 m and the RBES width is 200 m. Based on The strips before exerted quite limited the impact on vertical displacement of monitoring points at current strip, yet once mining practice began at the current strip, the corresponding vertical displacement was gradually increased and the scope of influence was around 400 m. According to the analysis results, the monitored subsidence at central strip roof caused by single layer strip mining was around 24 cm. And the maximum vertical displacement at surface monitoring point was about 20 cm. With single-layer stripping mining method, approximately 12 Mt of RBES could be exploited on one side and the resource recovery rate could reach 17.36%. Considering estimated equipment investment of 356,000 yuan and strip mining cost of 50 yuan/t, the economic benefits for RBES excavation is expected to reach 1.56 billion yuan. HMS integrates the features and technique of surface mining with underground mining. And the retaining of unexploited coal pillars is a basic guarantee for operation safety. In order to ensure that coal pillars manage to support rock mass as well as prevent the occurrence of group collapse and failure, permanent coal pillars should be set among supporting coal pillars at certain interval Based on the coal pillar strength formula given by Mark-Bieniawsk, the supporting and permanent coal pillar strength would be respectively given by equations derived below: To make sure HMS operates smoothly under the condition of surface mining and dumping, it is a necessity to guarantee that pit bottom is as wide as at least one mining strip. Meanwhile HMS’s mining period for excavating a cut width should be no longer than the advancing time of opencast coal mining and dumping. The center of each cave roof was taken as a monitoring point to record the excavation amount change of each mining cave. These mining caves were spread among permanent coal pillars. And the deformation at monitoring points was illustrated in HMS application in ultra-thick coal seam excavation in HSCM allows to exploit 2.25 Mt raw coal from one side of the end-slope, and the recovery ratio is merely 3.25%. Assuming that the investment for HMS equipment is 200 million yuan per set, and the mining cost is 12 yuan/t, then the economic benefits achieved on one side of end slope would be 178 million yuan. When the mining method of inner-dumping with end-wall covered is applied in surface coal mines with nearly horizontal occurrence, end slopes are normally buried soon after being excavated. So they are not those permanent slopes that exist in the entire mining process. As a matter of fact, their being and disappearing are periodic. Generally speaking, rock slope stability is inclined to decrease with the passage of time. The traditional slope angle is usually designed under the assumption that the open pit slopes are permanent. Hence, if they only exist for a short time, the originally designed slope angle would seem far too conservative. As mentioned earlier, with the mining method of inner-dumping with end-wall covered, the exposure time of end slopes is shortened to a certain extent. And this feature serves as technical support for improving end slope stability and enlarging end slope angle. According to surface mining engineering features, when establishing the relationship between rock mass strength and existence time of end-slope, the only requirement is to guarantee the end slope stability within its life span At present, the end slope angle in HSCM is 33° and the corresponding stability coefficient can reach 1.4, representing relatively high stability. However, the stability coefficient is inclined to decrease as slope angle goes up. For instance, when end slope angle is enlarged to 38°, the stability coefficient would be reduced to 1.21. In this case, recoverable resources on one side of the end-slope is 11.6 Mt and the recovery ratio is 17.2%. Meanwhile, 19.95 × 10  Resource recovery ratio Resource recovery ratio is an important reflection of sustainable resource development, and it is also a significant index to weigh up resource recovery method. The major objective of end-slope resource recovery is to improve overall coal resource recovery ratio. With differentiated technical methods, processes, equipment, etc., each mining method could achieve varying degrees of end slope resource recovery. And a higher recovery ratio translates into an advantage that a certain mining method possesses in this regard. Technical process complexity Different mining methods require different technologies and devices. The production organization and management patterns are quite differentiated in the following aspects such as working face layout, roadway excavation, haulage system arrangement and working face moving and shifting. There is also a remarkable disparity in technical complexity, equipment amount and personnel matching. Technical process adaptability Mining method and process selection for excavating resources beneath end-slopes are influenced by their occurrence characteristics such as coal seam thickness range and its change, seam dip angle and rock mass strength. Specifically, HMS is only applicable to recover crop coal or end-slope coal resources with flat occurrence and a less-than-8° dip angle, but it is especially effective in thin seam extraction. When it comes to thick coal seam mining, the efficiency of UMM and HMS is restricted; yet the thinner the coal seam, the fewer resources can be excavated by LSSMM. Impact on surface mining production In the aspect of working face layout, both UMM and HMS application require minimum bottom width of open pit coal mine. In addition, working face moving and shifting in end-slope should be temporally consistent with the advancing of open pit mining and dumping. In this sense, the effect that RBES excavation and haulage system exerts on regular open pit haulage system is something that cannot be neglected. As a matter of fact, the implementation of LSSMM is accompanied by the amalgamation, revocation and reconstruction of end-slope haulage berm, hence, the economic rationality of raw coal haulage system and the end slope stability would both be affected to a certain degree. Production safety After the introduction of end-slope mining methods, their own production safety issue along with their impact on normal open pit mine production security would bring about higher probability of accidents. For example, mining disturbance might cause surface deformation and undermine slope stability, and end-slope resources haulage system may be coupled with that of raw coal. Economic benefits Economic benefits represent an important indicator to determine whether end-slope resources could be mined. Specifically, UMM cost and investment are closely related to technical mining process. HMS is characteristic of large one-time investment and low production cost, while LSSMM requires no additional equipment investment. By calculating the proximity between evaluated objects and ideal targets, TOPSIS ranks a finite number of evaluated objects based on their pros and cons, thus obtaining the optimal mining method. According to TOPSIS calculation principle, firstly, normalization treatment is carried out on original data matrix to obtain the optimal vector and the worst vector. Secondly, the distance between every single evaluated object and the optimal/worst vector is calculated, respectively. The calculation results are used to determine the proximity between them and the optimal method  Qualitative indicators are quantified using the scaling method of the constructive judgment matrices in Normalization treatment was conducted on original data matrix and the corresponding matrix was established. The normalized matrix is shown as follows:  The maximum value of each column is the optimum vector  Indicator weight was determined using set-valued iteration method. And the distance between indicator value of every single evaluated object and its optimum method  The proximity  The evaluated objects ranked according to their respective proximity. The higher value of To identify the optimal mining method for extracting ultra-thick coal seam in HSCM, factors such as technical process adaptability, mining parameters, resource recovery ratio and economic benefits of different mining methods were analyzed, respectively. And the preliminary evaluation indicators are as shown in All indicators but recovery ratio and economic benefits in Rank the evaluated objects based on the value of  Based on advancing relations of open-pit coal mining and dumping engineering, the temporal and spatial characteristics of open pit end-slope were analyzed. The stability coefficient of end-slope decreases dramatically with increasing exposed area, and a smaller exposed free face is beneficial to the improvement of slope stability coefficient. The free face area of end-slope is closely related to pit bottom width, the advancing speed of operating lines at working slope and inner dumping site. This paper analyzed and summarized three mining methods, namely UMM, HMS and LSSMM. Mining parameters regarding UMM and HMS were identified and the impacts that mining activities exert on surface deformation were also obtained through analysis and simulation. Specifically, in the case of UMM application, the subsidence of monitoring points at central strip roof was around 24 cm and the maximum vertical displacement of surface monitoring points was 20 cm. In comparison, the application of HMS method had a smaller influence on surface deformation. Besides, with the aid of analysis software, the critical end-slope stability angle in HSCM was identified as 38° and the recoverable resources in unilateral end-slope was 11.6 Mt. On the basis of TOPSIS method, a model was established for the sake of selecting the optimal mining method for mining resources beneath end-slope. Resource recovery ratio, technical process complexity, technical process adaptability, production safety and economic benefits were taken as evaluation indicators in the model. The final results indicate that LSSMM was superior to the other two methods except that its resource recovery ratio was merely 17.2%. Financial supports for this work, provided by the