The study of terrestrial impact structures lies in the cross-field between the effects of the instantaneous and extremely forceful passage of the shock and rarefaction waves unique to impacting and subsequent processes during crater modification that take place in normal geological P-T-t space. In the discussion of impact-related processes this distinction between instantaneous and subsequent cratering events is important. Reimold et al. (2017) address the origin of the pseudotachylytes in the Vredefort dome, South Africa, introduced and described as “enigmatic, impact-generated melt rocks”. By means of Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd and Pb-Pb systematics of pseudotachylytes and their host rocks in three quarries they demonstrate a close match between the respective isotopic signatures of pseudotachylytes and adjacent hosts, showing that the pseudotachylytes constitute representative chemical aliquots of their respective hosts and were all locally derived. The authors compare their results with a very similar study from the Sudbury crater, Canada, by The distinction between instantaneous and subsequent cratering events in the opening paragraph of this comment is important in the context of the proposed decompression melting. Instantaneous shock melting on expansion during the passage of the rarefaction wave can be considered a special case of decompression melting, see below. Reimold et al. (2017) propose the alternative, namely decompression melting under more normal crustal conditions upon formation and collapse of the central uplift, during the crater modification stage. This is theoretically possible inasmuch as the relevant solidus for potentially melt-producing crustal rocks has a positive dP/dT slope ( Pseudotachylyte formation by partial melting triggered by post-shock decompression would also cause Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd and U-Pb fractionation between melt and restite due to different partition coefficients, which would be reflected in different present-day isotope signatures of the pseudotachylytes and their host rocks. For the sake of the argument let us assume that a 3.15 Ga granitoid rock with 300 ppm Sr and 100 ppm Rb and a If, on the other hand, the pseudotachylytes were formed by shock melting, they would be whole-rock melts and might thus comply with the authors’ geochemical data. However, it is generally accepted that impact-related pseudotachylytes form after the contact stage. The authors themselves rule out the hypothetical possibility of the pseudotachylytes being deep-seated decompression melts and also concede that the shock and rarefaction waves were much attenuated at the present depth of erosion ∼10 km below the impacted surface and incapable of producing bulk shock melting. It follows that impact-generated pseudotachylytes cannot be formed by decompression melting. We now turn to the authors’ first premise that the pseudotachylytes are melt rocks (and not products of cataclasis). We first note that the bulk chemical and isotopic similarities between the pseudotachylytes and their hosts can readily be explained by wholesale mechanical degradation and mixing of the local host rocks at 2.0 Ga, much like milling a rock in the laboratory to obtain an average composition. This process would not cause compositional or isotope fractionation between pseudotachylyte and host. Reimold et al. (2017) list what they regard as the six most important properties of the Vredefort pseudotachylytes to be considered for their origin. This list is incomplete inasmuch as the abundance of cataclastic particles in all major pseudotachylyte occurrences is not considered, although this probably constitutes their single most characteristic physical property. The authors do not present much evidence for their assumption that pseudotachylytes are melt rocks, although we agree that the black, exceedingly fine-grained pseudotachylyte matrix and its occasional vein-like field appearance might superficially Pseudotachylytes were first described from the Vredefort dome by It was later suggested that the massive pseudotachylyte zones at Vredefort were melts produced by frictional melting on sliding on fault planes, but most authors including Reimold et al. (2017) agree that the pseudotachylytes are not accompanied by such fault systems, and The above constraints on cataclasis and frictional melting disappear if the cataclastic process does not take place by lateral frictional sliding but by Oscillatory cataclasis with pseudotachylyte formation by impact-induced seismic shaking has also recently been documented in the Vredefort dome itself ( The decompression melting model for the Vredefort pseudotachylytes presented by Reimold et al. (2017) raises fundamental questions pertinent to the general understanding of these spectacular and characteristic rocks, which occur both in large impact structures and along major terrestrial seismic zones. The authors’ treatment of pseudotachylytes as melt rocks seems to be incomplete as it does not acknowledge the ubiquitous abundance of cataclastic particles, which has been documented in many other studies. It is shown here that the authors’ model of bulk decompression melting during crater modification is incompatible with inherent melting constraints, because decompression melting is an anatectic (i.e. partial) melting process which cannot generate melts of the same composition as their source. It is also noted that the references chosen by the authors do not adequately reflect recent developments in the study of pseudotachylytes, and that the authors prefer to use a term (pseudotachylitic breccia) which they restrict to impacting. In fact, contemporary studies document a great similarity between pseudotachylytes and other cataclastic rocks formed