Roadheaders, one of the mechanized excavation equipment, has an exceptional place among those other excavation machines. However they are not suitable for using in hard and abrasive rock conditions since their cutting tools wear out rapidly. Therefore new technologies have been developed and one of them is mini-disc cutter technology. There are some experimental studies made to carry out efficiency of using these cutters in roadheaders. Determination of the stability states of roadheaders is also important matter for the efficiency of the excavation. For this reason, new machine designs should be analyzed considering stability states. There is an analysis method to estimate numeric values of both longitudinal and transverse cutting head type roadheaders by establishing stability equations for the states of turning around the vertical axis, turning to the side direction, turning to the back direction and sliding in all cutting modes. In this study, stability of roadheaders with mini disc cutters have been analyzed and discussed in different cutting modes and compared with roadheaders equipped classic point attack cutters.In today’s world, hundreds of kilometers of galleries/tunnels are being constructed, since high rates of urbanization and demand of infrastructure has also increased and tunnels need to be excavated in the quickest and safest way. Moreover, mining activities will be operated near the urban areas and because of this, the contractors tend to choose the underground mining methods to avoid causing environmental impact. The machinery in mechanical excavation is mainly divided in two parts, full face or partial face excavation machines. The full face tunnel excavation machines are classified as tunnel boring machines (TBM), earth pressure balance and slurry TBMs, raise boring and micro-tunneling machines. Roadheaders, hydraulic hammer and continuous miners are partial face tunneling machines ( Roadheaders have an exceptional place among those other excavation machines. They have lower initial costs than the full face excavation machines. They are also flexibly move to excavate galleries in various shapes. On the other hand, they are not suitable for hard and abrasive rock conditions and more preferable for excavating stable rocks with low to medium strength. This disadvantage is an obstacle to usage of roadheaders widely ( The main reason why roadheaders cannot be used in abrasive and hard rock conditions is the cutting tools used in roadheaders. Drag bits are used in the cutting heads of roadheaders and these bits wear out very rapidly or suffer total structural failure. Moreover, roadheaders cannot handle the forces in hard conditions and these reaction forces cause the stability problems on roadheaders. To overcome this problem, more powerful roadheaders are produced, however the power of machine is directly proportional to the size and weight of the machine. The bigger size of these machines eliminate the mobility and flexibility features of them. Furthermore, the increase of weight causes to raise the initial cost of the machines and also creates some sinking problems of machines in the wet grounds. To increase the machine stability, generally side and rear stabilizer pistons are used but these stabilizers may not be useful if the tunnel has wide profile and wet ground ( The stability of roadheaders is vital matter for effective cutting process. There are some studies regarding the importance of the stability and comparing the longitudinal and the transverse head type roadheaders ( A method has been developed to analyze the stability of roadheaders since before studies has not given stability states in quantitively ( Machine parameters considered in this method are “machine weight, boom length, machine width, track width, distance between the back leg of the machine and the center of gravity, distance between start of the boom and the center of gravity, distance between the horizontal point and vertical rotation point of the boom, distance between ground and the boom axis when it is parallel to ground”. In addition to machine parameters, reaction forces against the boom, ground friction coefficient and slope of the tunnel are also considered being used in this method ( Researches have been carried out for increasing rock cutting ability in hard and abrasive rock conditions. These technological developments can cause different effects on rock cutting forces and reaction forces acting on roadheaders which may result in stability problems. In this study, stability situation of a heavy type roadheader with mini-disc cutters which is a new development for rock cutting has been analyzed by using the stability analysis method for roadheaders and the comparison with stability of a cutting head with point attack cutters has been made. To overcome the disadvantages of roadheaders such as rapidly wear out of the cutting tools and inability of handling the big reaction forces in hard rock conditions, the bigger and more powerful roadheaders are produced. However more powerful, bigger size and heavier weight roadheaders have negative effects as mentioned above. Due to these, there are some studies for increasing roadheaders’ ability of cutting in hard rock conditions without increasing the dimension of roadheaders. These studies are mainly focused on auxiliary cutting assistances, new design cutting heads, cutting tools and control system addition to roadheaders ( Cutting tools with water jet are aiming for reducing cutting forces, tool wear and dust hazard. They have been used in coal strata or other soft formation successfully however, implementations of water jets in hard rock formations are not complete ( Another research is focused on energy consumption of roadheaders in hard rock conditions by controlling the rotational speed of cutting head due to optimize the energy consumption ( Asymmetrical disc tool having a complex motion trajectory is a new design for hard rock cutting, a cutting head of this technology was manufactured and tested. Test results have stated that the head can excavate effectively the rock whole at suitable direction and rotation of cutting head and tools. On the other hand, some modernization were made in order to increase reliability of the machine in real mining condition ( Mini-disc cutters are another new cutting tool design. Due to disc cutters being the standard tool for hard rock excavation, the mini-disc cutters were designed since standard disc cutters were too big for the cutting heads which were less than 2 Stability analysis method of roadheaders is based on stability state equations for cutting modes of different head types of roadheaders. Method has been conducted for turning around vertical axis of the machine, turning to the side and back direction of the machine and sliding stability states in “sumping, arcing, lifting and lowering” cutting modes of transverse or longitudinal head type of roadheader. For each situation, stability state equation has been established and then a computer program based on these equations has been developed to make stability analyses along the whole tunnel face or for a particular point on the face ( The stability state equations have been based on the calculation of three moment values of x, y, z directions and the sliding state of a roadheader as given in Calculate the moment values with respect to C point on the vertical y-axis taken in the plane of the center of gravity that allows us to control if the roadheader turns around vertical axis. Calculate the moment values with respect to B point on the z-axis taken in the plane of machine floor that allows us to control if the roadheader turns to both side directions. Calculate the moment values with respect to A point on the x-axis taken in the plane of machine floor that allows us to control if the roadheader turns to back or not. Estimate the sliding state of the roadheader along the z-axis in the plane of the floor ( The forces in the cutting process are used in the stability analysis of the roadheaders. One of these forces is created by machine weight that acts at the center of gravity. The others are boom reaction forces that have three components of the resultant forces acting on the cutting head as shown in  α: cutter tilt angle θ: cutter position angle F F F n: number of cutting tools in contact i: cutting tool index Using machine design parameters and defined reaction forces, three moment equations and an equation of sliding state have been established for transverse and longitudinal cutting head type roadheaders for all cutting modes. As chancing the cutting modes, roadheader stability is affected due to changes in the directions of the boom reaction forces ( As an example, the transverse cutting head type roadheaders in lowering mode are given in Eqs. Stability equations of transverse type roadheaders for lowering mode: The state of turning around the vertical axis of the machine  The state of turning to the side direction of the machine  The state of turning to the back direction of the machine  The state of sliding of the machine As shown in flowchart given in Roadheaders were considered for using in Yucca Mountain Experimental Studies Facility (ESF) because of their features such as excavation various shapes and size of openings, flexibility and mobility etc. To be excavate effectively in ESF project, roadheaders must have excavated a highly abrasive welded tuff. However even the largest roadheaders could not be able to excavate this formation since the drag bits on their cutter heads wear out very rapidly or suffer structural failure. Computer simulation of original transverse type cutting head used on the AM 105 which the general specifications of roadheader and applicable boom forces of the machine can be seen in The original cutting head with point attack cutters consists of 62 point attack tools in double track design and diameter of the cutting head is 1240 As shown in In this study, the stability analysis has been applied on the cutting head with mini-disc cutters considering machine parameters of AM 105 roadheader for evaluating effects on this new design on stability states of roadheaders. The analysis has also been performed for AM 105 roadheader with point attack cutters which has also used in market, in order to compare stability states of two different cutting heads on the same roadheader ( Boom reaction forces on the boom axis (SR, AR, and VR) were calculated by a computer program based on Eqs. Considering efficient cutting conditions, sumping depth of the heads was taken as 400 Two different cutting heads on the same machine were analyzed for four stability states as turning around the vertical axis, turning to the side directions, turning to the back direction and sliding in sumping, overcutting, undercutting, lifting and lowering cutting modes. Stability states were determined for whole face in every 5 The negative values of stability were calculated in lowering and sumping cutting modes for roadheader with mini-disc cutters. Moreover, in the sumping mode, the stability values were approaching the zero for sliding states. Horizontal axis referred as boom position on the tunnel width and vertical axis referred as boom position on the tunnel height thus the stability values were calculated for whole tunnel face and then isomoment graphics of the troubled stability states were obtained and given in According to stability analysis, manufactured cutting head with mini-disc cutters which is designed for using in only sumping and lowering cutting modes will have stability problems in these cutting modes. In lowering cutting mode, negative stability values have obtained for turning around vertical axis, turning to back direction and turning to the side direction stability states. Machines must sump into the tunnel face before passing lowering cutting mode. Negative value is also obtained in sumping mode for turning to the side direction stability state which can be seen in The machine can turn to the side direction at the maximum horizontal position angle of the boom (tunnel width >3.30 The negative stability value isomoment graphics during excavation of the face by AM-105 roadheader with mini-disc cutters in lowering cutting mode are given in This analysis states that the cutting head with mini-disc design will encounter a high stability problem in chosen cutting conditions even if the cutting head is mounted on the heavy type roadheader such as AM 105 roadheader. Although there is not any stability problem in lifting and arcing cutting modes, the cutting head is not designed for working in arcing mode and lifting mode will comprise abnormal forces in front of the machine that can cause damage on the roadheader. In arcing cutting mode of original cutting head with point attack cutters at the same rock and cutting condition has a stability risk at the turning around vertical axis state which can be seen Researchers have continued for increasing cutting ability of roadheaders in hard and abrasive rock conditions. Therefore, experimental studies regarding application of mini disc tools on the roadheaders have showed that cutting heads can be effective for cutting in the hard and abrasive rock. In this study, stability situation of a heavy type roadheader with mini-disc cutters has been analyzed by using the stability analysis method for roadheaders and the comparison between stability of a cutting head with point attack cutters tool has been also made. The stability of mini-disc cutters equipped a transverse type roadheader was analyzed in four different cutting mode for four different stability states. According to results of this analysis, the mini-discs equipped roadheader has serious stability problems and it is not suitable for cutting in lowering and sumping mode which are cutting modes for this cutting head. Stability problems has not occurred in lifting and arcing modes. However, the cutting head was not designed for using in these modes. The reason of the stability problems is bigger reaction forces of mini disc cutters which apply to the boom than forces of point attack cutters'. According to stability analysis for roadheader with point attack cutters, there might be a stability problem at turning around the vertical axis stability state in arcing cutting mode. There are some cautions that can be held for reducing the stability risks in cutting sequences. One of these cautions is reducing the sumping depth of cutting head and cutting depth of the cutters, however these cautions has a negative effect on cutting efficiency. Moreover, machine design parameters can also be modified such as machine weight can be increased or length of the boom can be reduced for more stable cutting actions but these changes are major changes for the machine and they are required advanced engineering and have negative effects on the flexibility of roadheaders. These results show that success of a cutting head design and efficiency should also include the stability of the machine. In cutting operations unstable states can cause energy consumption without production thus this will increase the specific energy and reduce the cutting efficiency. Also instability of machines can cause accidents and damage to machine and operators. Moreover, according to the stability distribution on the face, roadheaders may not cut the maximum ranges without motion. The cross section area of the excavation will be reduced because of the unstable regions and the machine will have difficulties. To conclude up, this study shows that stability analysis of roadheaders should be considered for evaluating roadheader and cutting head efficiency. The stability analysis also should be used as one of machine selection criteria since the stability has effects on cutting efficiency and maximum ranges that machine can excavate. It is important to evaluate the stability of roadheaders in designing and selection stage of machines and cutting heads. This paper was determined from the MSc Thesis of C. Erdogan. The research was realized by the support of