Three-dimensional quantitative structure-activity relationship (3D-QSAR) method is introduced for the first time into the structure-performance study of organic sensitizers using topomer comparative molecular field analysis (Topomer CoMFA). A total of twenty-three phenothiazine derivatives was utilized to establish the 3D-QSAR model. The generated Topomer CoMFA model is statistically significant with the leave-one-out correlation coefficient (q
                     2) of 0.698 and the non-cross-validated correlation coefficient (r
                     2) of 0.966, respectively. The theoretically predicted power conversion efficiencies (PCE) match well with the experimentally observed values, verifying the high predictive ability of the Topomer CoMFA model. Molecular field information (i.e., electrostatic and steric fields) of the substituted phenothiazines was analysed in detail. The structural modification of substituted phenothiazines has been performed and novel phenothiazine derivative with theoretically improved PCE has been proposed. The resulting Topomer CoMFA model in this work could provide a new perspective and offer new insights into the structure-performance relationship of dye sensitizers and potentially facilitate the rational design, selection and prediction of as yet unsynthesized organic sensitizers for the dye-sensitized solar cells.During the last decade, significant progress has been made in the field of photovoltaics ( Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs) provide a promising alternative to silicon based solar cell due to their low fabrication cost and reasonable power conversion efficiency (PCE). Despite these advantages, further improvements in power conversion efficiency (PCE) of DSSCs are necessary to render them more economically feasible and competitive over other solar cell technologies. There are a variety of ways being explored to enhance the DSSCs efficiency such as the use of various metal oxide materials and development of different electrolytes ( Currently, trial-and-error methods still dominate the identification of novel, highly efficient dye sensitizers, which is guided by serendipity and chemical intuition. We are entering a data-rich, modelling-driven era where such fully empirical approaches are increasingly being replaced by rational strategies. Consistent with this emerging paradigm, advanced drug design strategy (i.e., 3D-QSAR) in this paper was creatively introduced into the quantitative structure-performance relationship study of dye sensitizers, which could provide new theoretical insights into the rational design of highly efficient dye sensitizers. The substituted phenothiazines from the literature ( The molecular modelling technique of 3D-QSAR in this work was performed using the SYBYL 8.1.1 software (Tripos, L.P., USA) running on a HP Z600 workstation. For the 3D-QSAR method, the focus is to establish the relationship between 3D molecular field descriptors (steric field calculated using Lennard Jones potential and electrostatic fields evaluated by Coulomb potential) and power conversion efficiency (  In this paper, topomer comparative molecular filed analysis (Topomer CoMFA) was tentatively used to establish quantitative relationship between the molecular field descriptors and the power conversion efficiencies of phenothiazine derivatives. Topomer CoMFA, as an alignment-free 3D-QSAR method, has combined the topomer and CoMFA techniques ( To avoid overfitted 3D QSAR, the partial least squares (PLS), instead of standard multivariate analysis, was used for statistically linking the molecular filed descriptors to the power conversion efficiency of substituted phenothiazines ( The internal predictive ability of Topomer CoMFA is evaluated by the cross-validated coefficient ( The external predictive ability of Topomer CoMFA model is assessed by the predictive correlation coefficient ( In view of the molecular structure of the substituted phenothiazines, the structural variation exists in the R1 and R2 substitutes while the phenothiazine (i.e., the common scaffold) is the same for all the compounds investigated. Thus, all the studied molecules are fragmented into three parts: (1) the common scaffold; (2) R1 substituent and (3) R2 substituent. The fragmentation mode is graphically shown in  To further evaluate the external predictive capability of the Topomer CoMFA model, the predictive correlation coefficient ( Considering that the R1 and R2 substitutes are the dominant factors affecting the power conversion efficiency of substituted phenothiazines, the Topomer CoMFA contour maps are presented in In In this work, only one of the 3D-QSAR methods (i.e., Topomer CoMFA) has been applied to study the structure-performance relationship of dye sensitizers. The Topomer CoMFA method considers two specific molecular fields, namely, steric and electrostatic fields. It is well known that there are a large number of other structural features affecting the power conversion efficiency of organic dyes ( According to the established 3D-QSAR model, the design of new molecule with theoretically higher PCE than the existing phenothiazine-based dyes would be of great significance. The structures of phenothiazine derivatives were modified with different substituents. Considering that the 3D-QSAR model has excellent predictive ability, the power conversion efficiency of these newly designed phenothiazine derivatives were theoretically predicted. One of the newly designed phenothiazine derivatives with the theoretically improved PCE is presented in An essential prerequisite of performing a QSAR study is that the experimentally observed difference in molecular activities/performance must be merely dependent on their structural variety. Although there are many other factors affecting the PCE of organic sensitizers such as electrodes, transport layers and interfaces, the factors associated with the device structure (e.g., electrolyte, transport layers and electrodes) are maintained constant during the PCE testing, guaranteeing that the only variable is the molecular structure of organic dyes, which is the very scientific rationale behind the three-dimensional quantitative structure-activity relationship study of this work. For the phenothiazine derivatives investigated in our manuscript, their molecular architectures consist of the common scaffold of phenothiazine, R1 substitute and R2 group. Considering that the structural difference of phenothiazine derivatives lies exactly in the R1 and R2 groups, it is rational to conclude that R1 and R2 substitutes should be the dominant factors responsible for the difference in the measured PCE values. Despite the fact that 3D-QSAR is a methodology originally developed to accelerate discovering and optimizing drug leads, it has made its way into numerous unconventional domains such as environmental toxicology ( In terms of the significant statistical parameters, 3D-QSAR seems to be effective for investigating the quantitative structure-device efficiency relationship of organic sensitizers. However, the inadequate mechanistic interpretation has hindered further understanding of how molecular field descriptors affect the PCE of phenothiazine-based sensitizers, which is probably due to the possibility that the underlying mechanism of interaction in the dye solar cells may be fundamentally different from that between the drug and the targeted protein. Other parameters (e.g., excited state energy, hydrophobic and hydrogen-bonding effects) should be explored in the future study. Currently, there are two types of QSAR models. The first type (known as “pure” or classical QSAR) is often interpretable in light of the underlying mechanism of interaction. The second type has emerged that uses various regression or classification methods to develop models from chemically heterogeneous molecules, whose main purpose is making reliable predictions for the activities/performance of new compounds while the mechanistic understanding of the model remains elusive ( This research work was focused on testing the feasibility of introducing 3D-QSAR to investigate structure-efficiency relationship of organic dyes. Despite its little mechanistic interpretability, the significant statistical results of 3D-QSAR model may manifest the robustness of its predictive ability ( In this work, 3D-QSAR method (i.e., Topomer CoMFA) has been tentatively and creatively used to study phenothiazine derivatives as organic sensitizers of dye-sensitized solar cells. The developed Topomer CoMFA model is successful for estimating the power conversion efficiency. Molecular field information has clarified the crucial structural factors determining the PCE of substituted phenothiazines. The small difference between the experimental observations and theoretical predictions of PCE demonstrates the good predictive ability of the 3D-QSAR model, which was further employed to predict the PCE of new molecules. The selected new phenothiazine derivative with theoretically improved PCE has been proposed. The 3D-QSAR method can be also applied to investigate the structure-performance relationships of other organic dyes. The initial effort of introducing 3D-QSAR method into rational design/selection of organic dyes is expected to facilitate the search for highly efficient sensitizers. Financial support of this work was provided by the