The nanopore size and roughness of nanoporous surface are two critical variables in determining stem cell fate, but little is known about the contribution from each cue individually. To address this gap, we use two-dimensional nanoporous membranes with controlled nanopore size and roughness to culture bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs), and study their behaviors such as attachment, spreading and differentiation. We find that increasing the roughness of nanoporous surface has no noticeable effect on cell attachment, and only slightly decreases cell spreading areas and inhibits osteogenic differentiation. However, BMSCs cultured on membranes with larger nanopores have significantly fewer attached cells and larger spreading areas. Moreover, these cells cultured on larger nanopores undergo enhanced osteogenic differentiation by expressing more alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, osteopontin, and secreting more collagen type I. These results suggest that although both nanopore size and roughness can affect BMSCs, nanopore size plays a more significant role than roughness in controlling BMSC behavior.Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSC) are skeletal progenitor cells that originate from bone marrow, which has the ability to differentiate into many cell types such as adipocyte cell, osteoblast cell and chondrocyte cell[ Nanoporous surface topography can be characterized by many parameters, with nanopore size and surface roughness being two of the most fundamental ones. Both parameters can dramatically affect the behavior of BMSC cells such as attachment, spreading and differentiation, which are all critical to cell survival and function[ In this paper, the goal is to distinguish the contribution of nanopore size and roughness to the BMSCs behavior. To achieve this, we culture BMSCs on biocompatible nanoporous polycarbonate membranes with controlled nanopore size and surface roughness, yet with similar stiffness to cortical bones [ Surface topography of membranes is characterized by Cypher Atomic Force Microscope (Oxford Instruments Asylum Research, Inc., CA, USA). A cantilever with a cone tip (Innovative Solutions Bulgaria Ltd., Sofia, Bulgaria) is used to scan a 30 μm * 30 μm area in the air-tapping mode. The arithmetic average roughness of the solid regions excluding the nanopores of the membranes are measured by Igor pro software (WaveMetrics, OR, USA). To visualize the nanopore distribution on membranes, scanning electron microscopy images are taken with Ultra55 scanning electron microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, LLC, NY, USA). Nanopore size and density are quantified by ImageJ ( To fabricate the cell culture membrane assembly, hydrophilic polycarbonate membranes (Sterlitech Corporation, WA, USA) of different nanopore sizes (10 nm, 80 nm, 200 nm) are sandwiched between stainless steel metal washers (Mcmaster, NJ, USA) and laser cut ring made with 0.004″ polyester shim stock (Mcmaster, NJ, USA). This sandwich assembly is glued between each layer using epoxy NOA81 (Norland Product Inc, NJ, USA) and cured under a 365 nm wavelength handheld UV lamp (AnalytikJena, Germany) for 1 h. Each side of the cell culture membrane assembly is sterilized with a germicidal lamp in the biosafety cabinet for 40 min. Cell culture membrane assemblies are subsequently transferred to a 35 mm glass-bottom Petri dish (Cellvis, CA, USA) and immersed in PBS for 2 h before cell seeding. Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) (ATCC, VA, USA) are used in this study. MSC growth medium is prepared by mixing mesenchymal stem cell basal medium (ATCC, VA, USA) with mesenchymal stem cell growth kit (ATCC, VA, USA). Cells are cultured in the MSC growth medium and maintained in the 37 °C, 5% CO2 infused incubator. All experiments are carried out with early passage hBMSCs (passage 2–passage 6). For cell morphological (Area, Volume, Height) and attachment studies, cells are stained with the celltracker green CMFDA dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) before seeding. Briefly, cells are centrifuged at 400 g-force after trypsinization, and re-suspended in the staining medium (2 μg/ml celltracker green CMFDA in MSC growth medium). After 40 min, stained cells are centrifuged again at 400 g-force to remove the staining medium and re-suspended in the MSC growth medium. Stained cells are then seeded onto the cell culture membrane assemblies at a density around 5000 cells/cm For observation of the cell focal adhesions, cells are seeded onto cell culture membrane assemblies at a density around 5000 cells/cm For cell differentiation study, cells are seeded on cell culture membrane assemblies at a density around 8000 cells/cm For staining of alkaline phosphatase protein and collagen type I, cells are fixed after 16–18 days of culture in osteogenic differentiation medium. Briefly, cells are fixed with 4% formaldehyde and 0.1% Triton X100 diluted in PBS, followed by PBS wash for 3 times to remove excessive reagents. After fixation, cells are triple stained for alkaline phosphatase protein, collagen type I, and nucleus. ImmPACT Vector Red Alkaline Phosphatase Substrate (Vector Laboratories, CA, USA) is used to stain alkaline phosphatase protein. Briefly, reagent 1 and 2 from the kit is mixed with Vector Red Diluent and incubate with fixed cells for 1 h in the dark, followed by PBS wash for three times. To stain collagen type I, fixed cells are blocked with 10% normal goat serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) in PBS for 1 h, followed by a two-step immunostaining process. Briefly, fixed cells are incubated with COL1A mouse monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, TX, USA) diluted 200 times in 10% normal goat serum for 1 h at room temperature. Samples are then washed 5 times for 5 min each with PBS and incubated with goat anti mouse alexa 647 secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) diluted 200X in 10% normal goat serum for 1 h in the dark. The cell nucleus is stained with DAPI. Stained cells are then washed 3 times for 5 min each with PBS and imaged with Axiozoom.V16 microscope (see Optical microscopic imaging). For immunostaining of osteocalcin and osteopontin, cells are fixed after 24–26 days of culture in osteogenic differentiation medium. Briefly, cells are fixed with 4% formaldehyde and 0.1% Triton X100 diluted in PBS, followed by PBS wash for 3 times to remove excessive reagents. After fixation, cells are stained for osteocalcin and osteopontin. Fixed cells are blocked with 10% normal goat serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) in PBS for 1 h, followed by a two-step immunostaining process. Briefly, fixed cells are incubated with osteocalcin mouse monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, TX, USA) and osteopontin chicken polyclonal antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) diluted 200 times in 10% normal goat serum for 1 h at room temperature. Samples are then washed 5 times for 5 min each with PBS and incubated with goat anti mouse alexa 647 secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) and goat anti chicken alexa 488 secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, MA, USA) diluted 200X in 10% normal goat serum for 1 h in the dark. Stained cells are then washed 3 times for 5 min each with PBS and imaged with Axiozoom.V16 microscope (see Optical microscopic imaging). For cell attachment, morphology, and focal adhesion assays, stained cells are observed using 25X/0.95-NA water immersion objective on a TCS-SP5 confocal laser scanning microscope (Leica Microsystems Inc., IL, USA). For cell attachment and focal adhesion studies, fluorescent images of the nucleus or focal adhesion in focus are taken. Image J is then used to analyze the number of nuclei or focal adhesion. For cell morphology studies, optical cross-sections are recorded at 0.3 μm z-axis interval to show intracellular fluorescence. Each slice image is taken at a scanning rate of 8000 Hz with line average of 2 to minimize photobleaching. Image J and MATLAB (Mathworks, MA, USA) with customized written code are used to analyze the images and calculate cell area, volume, and height. For cell differentiation assay, stained samples are fluorescently imaged using Plan-NEOFLUAR Z 1x objective on Axiozoom.V16 microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, LLC, NY, USA). Fluorescence intensity of alkaline phosphatase protein, collagen, osteocalcin and osteopontin in each sample are measured by Image J. For observation of cell morphology under the scanning electron microscope, fixed cell samples are dehydrated in ethanol graded series (50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 100%) for 30 min each and eventually immersed in 100% ethanol for 2 h. After dehydration, samples are transferred to a critical point dryer (Tousimis 931 GL, MD, USA) and dried under the critical point of CO Statistical analysis is performed on Origin software. Statistical tests used one-way ANOVA for multiple comparisons, or Student's t-tests for comparison between two groups. P-values larger than 0.05 are assumed to be non-significant in all analyses; P-values smaller than 0.05 are marked with *; P-values lower than 0.01 are marked with **; P-values smaller than 0.001 are marked with ***. Nanoporous polycarbonate membranes are used as a model system to study effect of nanopore size and surface roughness on the BMSC behavior. We select commercially available nanoporous membranes which have randomly distributed nanopores that are mono-disperse in size due to the track etching method by which they are formed [ To culture cells, membranes are sandwiched between two spacer layers to ensure that the membrane is flat and that media can reach the cells from all sides. The sandwich structure is then UV sterilized, immersed in medium, and seeded with cells; a simplified workflow is shown in To investigate the effects of nanopore size and surface roughness on initial cell adhesion of BMSCs, we count the number of cells 16 h after seeding. For fluorescence imaging, we fix the cells and stain their nuclei using DAPI, as shown in In addition, we also study the morphology of BMSC cells cultured on the membranes. We fluorescently stain the cell cytoplasm with cell tracker green and fix the cell with formaldehyde after 16 h of culture. Cells are then imaged by using confocal microscopy to obtain a z-stack images. The confocal images are further analyzed with MATLAB to calculate cell spreading area, volume and height. Top and side views of the 3D cell shape on smooth membranes are shown in Given that we see a dramatic change in spreading area, we hypothesize a corresponding change in focal adhesion structures, which are thought to involve in mechanotransduction process that can affect cell spreading area[ In the nanopore sizes used, the total nanopore area ranges from less than 1% to over 10%, which may lead to differences in the diffusion of cell culture medium beneath the cells. To investigate whether the observed differences in cell spreading area are due to the diffusing profile difference as a result of different nanopore area, we fix the nanopore size of membranes at 200 nm and attach a polyacrylamide hydrogel layer underneath, which enables us to change the diffusion profile beneath the membrane without changing its surface topography, as illustrated in a simplified cartoon in One of the primary functions of BMSC cells is their ability to differentiate into various lineages, of which osteogenic differentiation is most desirable for bone implant. Given that in short time scale, nanopore size and roughness can dramatically affect the cell attachment and spreading, we expect the long-term behavior of BMSC cells will also be altered. Since the membranes are very stiff (~Gpa), our system is particularly suitable to study osteogenic differentiation which is known to occur on stiff substrate [ Since ALP, collagen type I, osteocalcin and osteopontin all increase with the nanopore size of the membranes, we conclude that increases of nanopore size can promote osteogenic differentiation of BMSC cells. Surface roughness, however, does not have a major influence on osteogenic differentiation, as suggested by minor change in fluorescence intensity of stained protein markers, though the change is still statistically significant, as shown in In this study, we use nanoporous polycarbonate membranes to decouple the effects of nanopore size and roughness on BMSC cell adhesion, spreading and differentiation. We demonstrate that increasing nanopore size will inhibit the initial adhesion number of BMSC cells, but promote larger spreading area and cell volume. Furthermore, we find more osteogenic differentiation on larger nanopore size membranes, as indicated by higher expression levels of ALP, collagen type I, osteocalcin and osteopontin. In addition, changing the surface roughness does not have significant effect on initial adhesion of BMSC cells or their osteogenic differentiation, but instead, surface roughness plays a non-negligible role in regulating cell spreading area and volume. Overall, our results suggest that, both nanopore size and surface roughness can regulate the cell spreading and differentiation behavior, but to different extents; compared with surface roughness, nanopore size plays a more significant role in governing BMSC cell behavior. Not only does nanopore size affects the short-time behavior such as adhesion and spreading, but also affects the long-time behavior such as differentiation, which suggests that nanopore size affect long-time behavior by affecting short-time behavior. This is supported by other studies using different substrate system such as petridish and PDMS, which shows that increased spreading area or decreased initial cell plating density can promote BMSC osteogenic differentiation [  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank David J. Mooney (Harvard University) for helpful discussions and suggestions. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at