Water adsorption by bis-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) during the extraction of zinc, cobalt and nickel using a D2EHPA–kerosene/H2O mixture is investigated. Based on the experimental results, about 1 mol of water is adsorbed by 2 mol of D2EHPA (which exists in the form of a dimer), irrespective of the pH. Water adsorption decreases with presence of zinc, cobalt and nickel. The stoichiometric coefficients of D2EHPA in water adsorption reactions are determined with and without zinc, cobalt and nickel by applying the slope-analysis method. It is experimentally confirmed that 1.0, 1.8 and 1.2 mol of adsorbed water will be rejected from the organic phase when zinc, cobalt and nickel are extracted, respectively. It is predicted that a similar organic complex is formed by D2EHPA and water during the extraction of different metallic ions.Solvent extraction used in hydrometallurgical processes consists of an aqueous phase containing metallic ions and an organic phase. Water is an important component of these systems. To develop a solvent extraction process, much research must be carried out to ascertain the effects of influential parameters like pH, extractant concentration, metal concentration and temperature. However, compared to the metallic ion, the information on water adsorption is scarce and the effect of water adsorption requires more detailed studies. The adsorption of water into an organic phase in a solvent extraction process has particular significance in: (a) influencing the mass balance in an engineering design process and (b) formation of organo-metallic complexes. Limited information is given by previous authors on these aspects.  This paper deals with water adsorption of the organic phase present in MSO The commercial bis-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) extractant was purchased from Sandong Chemical, Chengdu, China. The Tehran Petrochemical Company supplied kerosene, which was used as a diluent. Aqueous solutions of 5 g/L zinc, cobalt and nickel were prepared by dissolving metal sulfates in distilled water; and NH A batch of experiments was carried out in a flask containing equal volumes (20 ml) of aqueous and organic solutions. The mixture was agitated at a constant temperature with a mechanical shaker for 60 min. Samples were then retained in the flask for a half an hour to allow complete separation of the phases. It was experimentally found that there was no change in the amount of adsorbed water after 30 min, especially in the acidic pH range. The water content of the organic phases was measured using a Karl–Fischer titration method by Mettler Toledo DL18 titrator. For estimating the number of moles of water, it is necessary to know the density of water which was measured using a Mettler Toledo DE40 density meter. The water concentration in the organic phase was calculated as: It has been found that the amount of water adsorbed by D2EHPA is significant ( As shown in The equilibrium constant is described by Eq.  In this work, it has been observed that two molecules of D2EHPA extractant are associated with each molecule of water adsorbed. Hence, the adsorption equation of water can be represented as follows: For simplification, the water adsorption during metal ion extraction by an acidic extractant could be considered as: If the above equation is considered to be pre-equilibrated with water then: Values of According to Eqs. The extraction constant is described by the relation: The distribution coefficient of Therefore the following expression can be derived: The variation in % extraction of these metals with pH is illustrated in The stoichiometric coefficient of H  Eq. Similar results have been obtained for the aqueous Co In the large scale industrial solvent extraction process, the amount of water adsorbed by D2EHPA is significant and should be taken into account in mass balance determinations. When D2EHPA concentration varies from 1 to 80 vol.%, the amount of adsorbed water at ambient temperature varies from 109 to 16,000 ppm and is independent of pH. These amounts are less when D2EHPA extracts zinc, cobalt and nickel and forms complexes. By applying the slope analysis method, the stoichiometric amount of D2EHPA per mole of water was found to be about 1.5–2.0 with D2EHPA predominantly present as dimer. The stoichiometric coefficients of water in the D2EHPA–kerosene/aqueous Zn