The results of investigation of sintering and magnetic beneficiation of brown iron ore concentrate are presented. The investigations are based on using a possibility of redistribution of phosphorus from the ore constituents into slag-forming ones in the process of sinter roasting.The aim of this work is to study the behavior of phosphorus in the process of sinter roasting of brown iron ores to develop a technology for obtaining high-quality iron ore concentrates. The reserves of brown iron ore are known to rank third in the world and they are common in North America, Australia, China, Kazakhstan, and other countries. Ores of most brown iron deposits are readily and inexpensively mineable and require low power for crushing and beneficiation. However, the mechanical methods of their beneficiation do not provide high-quality iron ore products that meet modern requirements ( In the Republic of Kazakhstan the following trend is observed: about 67% of the registered reserves of iron ores are represented by brown iron ores of two largest deposits (Lisakovsk, Ayatsk). The import of high-quality iron ores to Kazakhstan is problematic due to its continental location and lack of such ores in neighboring countries. The Republic of Kazakhstan has an integrated iron-and-steel mill of the complete cycle (“ArcelorMittal Temirtau”), which annually produces over 6 Such a situation is typical for many brown iron ores ( The researchers ( This work investigates: the regularities of redistribution of phosphorus between ore and slag-forming minerals at sintering the brown iron ore concentrate while varying the basicity of the charge from 0 to 2; the possibility to separate ore and slag-forming minerals of the sintering products by magnetic separation. The material used for this study was the concentrate of gravity-magnetic separation (GMC) of brown iron ores of the Lisakovsk deposit. Composition of the concentrates and by-products of their roasting was determined by chemical, crystal-optical, X-ray diffraction and micro-X-ray spectral analyses. The following instruments were used: microscope (Axioskop 40 Pol from Zeiss, Germany), electron-probe microanalyzer (JEOL ISM-6510, Japan), X-ray diffractometer (BRUKER D8 ADVANCE, Germany). The polished sections were made on grinding-and-polishing machines of S-1000 type of LECO (USA). The quantitative evaluation of the structure of mineral phases was performed with the help of the computer program Video-Test Structure (Russia). The experiments on roasting of GMC were carried out in a sintering plant (the bowl of 350 The wet magnetic separation was carried out in a tubular magnetic analyzer of 25 The brown iron ore concentrates of the Lisakovsk deposit have the following chemical composition, %: 49 Fe; 0.5 FeO; 10.7 SiO They are represented mainly by oolites of the minerals of goethite, hydrogoethite and inclusions of quartz. Oolites have a rounded, elliptical and clastic shape; their size varies from 200 to 700  When sintering GMC without fluxing agents, high temperatures have a refining effect on the minerals of ore grains. In particular, magnetite without phosphorus impurities has been obtained. This fact is illustrated by the results of scanning of the structure of non-fluxed sinter of GMC ( As follows from Thus it has been established that during sinter-roasting GMC there is a large-scale transfer of phosphorus from ore minerals into slag-forming minerals. To separate those minerals and obtain iron-ore concentrates free of phosphorous impurities it is expedient to use magnetic separation. The crystal-optical analysis helped in the determination of the optimal degree of grinding of the sinter roasting products as 95 to 99% of the class minus 0.044  The experimental data ( The impact of high temperatures on the mechanism of recrystallization can be presented as follows. During the agglomerative heating the moisture is removed from the non-fluxed charge (minerals goethite, hydrogoethite), and hematite is formed, which then reduces to magnetite and wustite. At high temperatures magnetite and wustite react with silica (SiO In the process of cooling, magnetite crystals of a regular shape, with sizes of 1.0 to 50 Formation of the structure occurs in a similar way on agglomeration of the fluxed charge. The difference is the following: phosphorus segregates into calc-ferrous olivine (CaO) Hence it is demonstrated that there is phosphorus transfer from ore minerals into slag-forming ones over the entire range of the changing basicity of the charge (from 0 to 2). That is why it was supposed that magnetic separation would provide a selective isolation of ore minerals from phosphorus-containing phases concentrated in slag-forming minerals. However, the obtained magnetic fractions of the products of sinter roasting of GMC cannot be classified as a qualitative magnetite concentrate. The crystal optical analysis showed that intergranular space of the aggregates of fine grains of magnetite is filled with a phosphorus-containing glass phase ( To obtain a qualitative magnetite concentrate containing not more than 0.3% of P Sintering followed by magnetic separation has been considered as one of the possible ways of processing brown iron ore phosphorous concentrates. Experiments have demonstrated that on sinter roasting of the concentrate over the entire range of the studied parameters (basicity from 0 to 2 and coke consumption from 3 to 10%) there occurs the transfer of phosphorus from ore constituents into slag-forming ones. The micro-X-ray spectral analysis confirms the absence of phosphorus in ore minerals (magnetite, wustite). The composition of iron-silicate and phosphorus-containing phases depending on the basicity of the charge has been determined. The research into wet magnetic separation of the finely ground products of sinter roasting has been carried out. According to the content of iron and phosphorus, magnetic fractions do not correspond to qualitative magnetite concentrates. The crystal optical analysis had shown that gaps between the grains of magnetite in the sinter were filled with a glass phase of a complex composition containing phosphorus oxides. Further work on obtaining a qualitative concentrate will be focused, while sintering, on the target-oriented formation of crystal silicates having a lesser strength of interphase boundaries. This article is dedicated to the memory of Maximov Ye. V.—Professor, Doctor of Technical Sciences, who was the author of the idea and research supervisor of the project. The work was carried out within the framework of the state program for basic research of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan on the theme: Physical and chemical fundamentals of thermal selection of products of solid-phase recovery of brown iron ore raw materials.