Introduction
                  Fractures of the distal radius are very common and mainly occur in the elderly. There has been an increasing use of locked volar plate fixations which report satisfactory results. However, some authors advocate the use of nail fixation.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The aim of this study is to compare dorsal nail plate versus locked volar plate fixation in the treatment of distal radius fractures with dorsal tilt.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The mean age of the patients was over 50 years. The study included extra-articular distal radius fractures with posterior tilt. We conducted a prospective randomized study between December 2007 and February 2009 including a group of 16 patients treated with a dorsal nail fixation (group 1) and a group of 15 patients managed with a locked volar plate fixation (group II). We analyzed both the clinical results (complications, Range of motion [ROM], tightening strength, Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand [DASH] and Mayo Clinic scores) and the radiographic results from A/P and lateral radiographs in the early postoperative period and at 6-month follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  ROM toward extension was better in the volar plating subgroup (group I, 42.5°, group II, 57.5°; P
                     <0.05). Pronation mobility was better in the dorsal nail subgroup (group I, 85°; group II, 80°; P
                     <0.05). The locked volar plate fixation subgroup demonstrated a better recovery of the tightening strength as compared with the uninjured side (group I, 78%, group II, 90%, P
                     =0.03). The DASH score was similar in both groups (group I, 22.09±22.9; group II, 20.62±20.3, P
                     >0.05). The Mayo Clinic score was better in the locked volar plate fixation subgroup (group I, 65±13.4; group II, 85.6±19.2; P
                     =0.002). Radiographic results were good in both groups, however anatomical reduction of the volar tilt was significantly better in group II (plate) when compared with the uninjured side. Moreover, we report on two cases of tendinous damages to the long extensor muscle of the thumb in the dorsal nail fixation subgroup despite the use of a minimally invasive implant.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The management of distal radius fractures with locked volar plate fixation in active elderly patients has proved successful and leads to better results than nail fixation regarding both reduction quality and objective functional scores.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level II, prospective, randomized of low-level.Fractures of the distal radius are very common since they account for 20% of all fractures However, since the volar approach requires significant soft tissue dissection, new intramedullary implants have been developed to be inserted through a minimally invasive approach. Among these implants, the Distal Nail Plate (DNP We compared this new implant with the locked volar plate which is the current reference system. We present a prospective randomized study, conducted in the Department of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery of the Brugmann Hospital Center (Brussels) which protocol was submitted to the approval of our institution Ethics Committee and was approved. This protocol compares the dorsal nailing fixation (DNP, Hand Innovation, Miami, Florida) with the locked volar plate (Dorsal Volar Radial [DVR We used a 10 random quote using pre-established and mixed envelops, patients being randomly allocated on admission. Patients with a history of trauma to the injured wrist as well as those with advanced dementia were excluded. On admission, each patient was clinically evaluated and radiographically examined using AP and lateral radiographs of the wrist for fracture classification and radiographic measurements. All patients were operated on by the same operator (Dr Philippe Bouté). The type of anaesthesia was selected in accordance with the anaesthesist's preference. In most cases, a locoregional anaesthesia was chosen. Patients were placed in the supine position with the operated upper limb resting on an arm support. A tourniquet was placed at the proximal part of the operated limb. Surgery was performed under image intensification. Patients from group I were managed with a DNP nail fixation Patients were then reviewed during follow-up visits and at last follow-up (6 During the follow-up visits, patients were examined to record the range of movements, the tightening strength of the healthy and injured sides using a Jamar At 6-postoperative Residual pain assessment was made using a VAS scale. Our results were analyzed using an Excel The Student We have collected all necessary data at 6 postoperative The overall data regarding the population of patients are reported in Regarding their professional activity at the time of trauma, 12 were retired and four still active in group I whereas 12 were retired and three still active in group II. Among the active patients from group I, there were two secretaries and two administrative workers. In group II, two active patients were cleaning operatives and one was a secretary. All retired patients were physically active (mainly gardening, sewing and sporting activities) and/or autonomous. Once standard radiographs were analyzed on admission, patients’ fractures could be recorded according to the Frykman classification. Therefore seven type I, five type II and four type VI fractures were recorded in group I and seven type I, five type II, 1 type V and two type VI fractures were recorded in group II according to the Frykman classification ( According to the AO classification, there were 12 A2 and four A3 fractures in group I whereas there were 10 A2 and five A3 fractures in group II ( The results obtained from radiographic measurements in both groups are reported in Early postoperative measurements were made on early postoperative radiographs whereas late measurements were performed on 6-postoperative month radiographs. Regarding volar tilt, a significant difference could be observed between group I and group II for immediate postoperative values and six months postoperative values ( The range of motion (ROM) and tightening strength results are reported in Regarding the tightening strength, expressed in percentage of recovery relative to the healthy side, a 78% recovery was observed in group I versus 90% in group II, such significant difference being in favor of group II ( The DASH questionnaire analysis did not demonstrate any difference between the two groups with a mean score of 22.9 Analysis of the Mayo Clinic scores revealed a significant difference in favor of group II ( Complications are reported in There were two cases of tendinous damages to the long extensor muscle of thumb in group I. These patients were managed by tendon transfer of the extensor muscle of index finger. Their functional evolution was unfavorable regarding the DASH and Mayo clinic scores despite a satisfactory ROM. Moreover, two cases of algodystrophy were reported in group I and one case in group II thus requiring an additional calcitonin treatment. Their functional evolution was unfavorable regarding the DASH and Mayo clinic scores but also the ROM. Our prospective study has a small sample size (16 patients in group I and 15 in group II). However, the existing literature shows that studies published on nail fixation of distal radius fractures, two of which being prospective, had 10 to 27 patients enrolled When taking into account the age of the patients, our cohort is comparatively older since the mean age of the patients in our series is 71.69 in group I and 71.73 in group II. This is due to the inclusion criteria which only retained patients aged more than 50 years. In series from the literature, the mean age of the patients is commonly younger due to the absence of age-related inclusion criteria (from 53 to 60 years). In a study conducted by Kaba et al. The comparison of radiographic data is reported in When comparing the results from group I (nail) with those achieved in the series of Kaba et al. Our results correlate those published in the literature on volar plates. Restoration of volar tilt is better than that observed with nail fixations. There is no loss of reduction unlike reported in isolated cases by several authors. Orbay et al. The DASH scores in our series are reported in These results are similar in the two groups and correlate those observed in the literature. The ROM and tightening strength results in our series are reported in All these measurements were made at 6 In group I, tendinous complications could be observed which consisted in two cases of tendon tears of the long extensor muscle of the thumb. These two patients were managed by tendon transfer of the extensor muscle of index finger. However, their DASH and Mayo clinic scores demonstrated an unfavorable functional evolution. These tendinous complications have not been described by Kaba et al. Two cases of algodystrophy were observed in our series (12.5%) which functional evolution was unfavorable. Kaba et al. Both authors describe three and two cases respectively of paresthesia in the superficial sensory radial nerve territory that resolved spontaneously Ilyas et al. One case of algodystrophy was observed in group II of our series (6.6%) which functional evolution was unfavorable. Among the reviewed series, several authors A carpal tunnel syndrome was noted in one case of our series at 3 Tendinous lesions after volar plate fixation were also described in the literature The treatment of distal radius fractures with locked volar plate fixation in active elderly patients has proved successful and leads to better results than nail fixation regarding both reduction quality and objective functional scores. The occurrence of two tendinous lesions related to the use of a nail fixation technique points out the need to further improve this type of fixation. We thus recommend the use of locked volar plates in daily practice as a reliable method of treatment of extra-articular fractures of the distal radius. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.