The selection of Genetic Algorithm (GA) parameters is a difficult problem, and if not addressed adequately, solutions of good quality are unlikely to be found. A number of approaches have been developed to assist in the calibration of GAs, however there does not exist an accepted method to determine the parameter values. In this paper, a GA calibration methodology is proposed based on the convergence of the population due to genetic drift, to allow suitable GA parameter values to be determined without requiring a trial-and-error approach. The proposed GA calibration method is compared to another GA calibration method, as well as typical parameter values, and is found to regularly lead the GA to better solutions, on a wide range of test functions. The simplicity and general applicability of the proposed approach allows suitable GA parameter values to be estimated for a wide range of situations.The fact that Genetic Algorithms (GAs) are guided search methods that are capable of carrying out optimization in conjunction with any simulation model has allowed them to be adopted in a wide range of areas, such as engineering, numerical optimization, robotics, classification, pattern recognition and design A number of approaches have been proposed to assist in the setting of GA parameter values. The different methods typically fall into three categories: (i) empirical experiments; where results from GA experiments are used to develop empirical relationships, (ii) parameter control; where the GA parameter values are changed as the GA is solving the problem, and (iii) dimensional analysis; where simple models are used to represent how certain aspects of a GA will behave. Each approach has a number of drawbacks; either the results do not generalize to other fitness functions, additional parameters are introduced to control the GA parameters, or the models used to represent the GA over-simplify reality. Hence, there still does not exist an accepted approach to determining GA parameter values. In this paper, a simple equation is proposed to allow the most suitable GA population size to be determined, based on when the population is expected to converge due to genetic drift. The only information required to determine the population size is the problem size (i.e. the length of the GA string) and the number of function evaluations that are available before a solution is required. The approach is applicable to any algorithm that implements two parent tournament selection, and the other operators do not significantly alter the population variance. Relationships are also proposed for the remaining GA parameter values, resulting in a complete GA calibration methodology. Section Typically, GA parameter values are found using a trial-and-error approach. This involves manually tuning the parameter values, where all parameters are initially given typical values, and then one parameter at a time is changed until a suitable set of values is identified. However, the GA operators will interact with each other, and therefore the behavior produced by the value of one parameter will be dependent on all the others. Due to computational requirements, only a limited number of parameter combinations can be trialled; therefore it is unlikely that a trial-and-error approach will identify parameter values close to those that will produce the best performance from the selected algorithm. A number of alternate approaches have been developed in an attempt to provide information on the best GA parameters for a given problem. The different methods typically fall into three categories: (i) empirical experiments; where results from GA experiments are used to develop empirical relationships, (ii) parameter control; where the GA parameter values are changed as the GA is solving the problem, or (iii) dimensional analysis; where simple models are used to represent how certain aspects of a GA will behave. Each approach is considered in more detail in this section. The simplest method for determining useful relationships considering all aspects of a GA is to perform empirical analyses on a range of test functions Recently, a number of feedback based adaptive methods have been developed to alter the population size Setting GA parameter values can be considered a poorly structured, poorly defined, complex problem. GAs are generally considered to perform better than other methods on these types of problems A number of theoretical modeling studies have been performed to provide an insight into the complex mechanisms at work in a GA run, to assist with the calibration of certain parameters. To enable any meaningful results to be drawn, generally the models can consider the effect of only one or two aspects of a GA. Some of the more important studies consider convergence due to genetic drift Goldberg et al. As GAs are derived from observations about natural selection, it is not surprising that results from Quantitative Genetics have been applied to the GA field. One of the most common relationships used in GA theories is the Genetical Theory of Natural Selection Based on the results derived from a number of dimensional analysis studies, Reed and Yamaguchi From the review of literature presented, it is evident that there does not exist an accepted method to determine a suitable GA population size, without resorting to a trial-and-error approach. Either: (i) generally unknown parameters must be quantified, as in As outlined in Section The selection operator will decrease the variance in the fitness function values, by replacing the worst solutions by better ones. As outlined in Section Beyer and Deb Rogers and Pruegel-Bennett This estimate of the best population size to use for a given problem is very useful, however it is only one of the many GA parameter values that must be determined before the algorithm can be applied. Hence, the following section adopts an empirical approach to determine the best parameter values to use, before the proposed calibration method is outlined. The aim of this section is to provide guidelines to set the GA parameters, other than the population size (which can be determined using The GA used in this research uses real coding to represent the decision variables, as all the optimization problems considered have real valued decision variables. This approach has avoided any further complexities being added to the problem by the encoding scheme, such as Hamming Cliffs, or discretization issues. To allow A one-point distributed crossover operator has been used, as neighborhood-based crossover operators such as this have been found to exploit the numerical nature of Real Coded GAs (RCGAs) A uniformly distributed mutation operator has been adopted, producing any value over the range of each decision variable. A Gaussian mutation operator is commonly used for RCGAs, however, this would provide a very similar search mechanism to the crossover operator adopted for this work. This operator has been selected as it has the potential to generate values all over the entire search space and it does not introduce additional parameters to be calibrated. Therefore, for the operators selected, the following parameters values are required: population size, probability of crossover, probability of mutation, number of elite solutions, and standard deviation of the distribution used for the crossover operator. In this work the probability of mutation, In order for  Along with the common benchmark optimization problems, F4, F5, and F6 have had parameters introduced to allow their characteristics to be altered. These parameters allow for different degrees of epistatic interaction, roughness in terms of the size and frequency of the local optima, and the scaling of the variables to all be considered. By changing these parameters, the size of the set of test functions is increased, and by considering many different function characteristics the results are more likely to generalize to other situations. Each function has been constructed using the guidelines proposed by Variations in the multi-modality and roughness of the Rastrigin function have been considered in function F5B. Values of Variations in the salience of the decision variables for the Rastrigin Function, or the contribution of each variable to the fitness function values, have been considered in the different cases considered for F5C in changes to the The interval of To determine the most effective GA parameter values, a large-scale parametric study has been undertaken. Population sizes of Each combination of parameter values was tested 30 times with different sequences of random numbers to evaluate the performance. This resulted in a total of 8640 GA runs for each problem size considered for each function. As 148 functions have been considered, a total of 1,278,720 separate GA runs were required to produce the results presented. The average and standard deviation of the fitness function values of the best solution found over the 30 different GA runs for each GA parameter set were recorded after the relevant Mutual information (MI) has been used to determine if any relationships exist between the best performing GA parameter values identified from the parametric study. MI is a non-linear correlation static, based on the concept of Entropy The results presented in A number of previous studies From The next strongest relationship identified between the GA parameters by the MI analysis was between the number of elite solutions, The number of occurrences for a GA with ( The GA parameter that had the strongest relationship with the standard deviation of the crossover operator was the probability of mutation, with The number of occurrences for each value of The final GA parameter value that must be determined before the GA can be applied is the probability of crossover. The MI results indicate that this parameter also had the strongest relationship with the probability of mutation, with The number of occurrences of each probability of crossover for each probability of mutation considered in the parametric study is given in By combining the results presented so far in this paper, a complete GA calibration methodology is proposed. The approach is summarized as follows: Determine Solve Compute Use This approach assumes that the true optimal solution is never found, hence the implication is that a longer run time will locate a better solution. The GA parameters In this section, the utility of the proposed GA calibration method is assessed by comparing its performance with that of another approach to determining the GA parameter values, as well as ‘typical’ GA parameter values. Next, the different GA calibration methodologies that have been tested are outlined, before the range of test functions they are applied to are presented. This is followed by a comparison of the solution quality found by the different GA calibration methods. Three different methods for determining the GA population size have been selected to be tested on a range of fitness functions. Other approaches for self adaptation of the population size are available The second method selected to be tested was the ‘Parameterless’ GA calibration method. This GA calibration methodology was first proposed by The GA calibration methodology proposed by The third GA calibration method tested was used to represent the GA parameter values used typically, and is therefore referred to as ‘Typical’. The values adopted for this method were; Each of these three GA calibration methods has also been used in a self-adaptive framework. The three methods described above have been used to determine the population size, and for each method To avoid biasing the results toward the proposed GA calibration methodology, a set of fitness functions that have not been used in the calibration of the methodology have been selected. The test functions developed for the special session on real-parameter optimization at the 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation Formal definitions of the functions used can be found in The population sizes (rounded to the nearest 10 solutions) computed by For each function, the mean and standard deviation of the difference between the true optimal solution for each function and the solution found by the GA with each calibration method has been computed for each of the 25 runs with different random number seeds. Based on these statistics, the performance of each GA calibration method over each of the 20 fitness functions has been ranked in order of decreasing ability to locate the best solutions. The ranking has been performed using a Student’s It can be seen from When each method is considered on a function by function basis, the Drift GA calibration method with set parameter values (Method 1) consistently ranked as the best approach, with the method producing the best solutions for 13 of the 20 functions considered. The Parameterless method with set parameter values (Method 2) produced the second best performance, locating the best solution on average for 5 of the 20 functions. The Drift method with self-adaptive parameter values (Method 4) located the best solutions for f14, while the Parameterless method with self-adaptive parameter values (Method 5) located the best solutions on average for f9. However, in those cases where the Drift method with set parameter values was not ranked as the best calibration method, it was the second best, suggesting that it is a robust approach. Somewhat surprisingly, the calibration methods with set values for From Eq. Eiben et al. A complete GA calibration methodology has been proposed in this paper. One of the main advantages of this approach is its simplicity; the only information required to apply the method is the problem size and the number of function evaluations that are available to find a solution. The population sizing equation is derived from a number of theoretical results based on quantitative genetics and GA convergence, and is therefore applicable to many algorithms provided that two parent tournament selection is the only operator that will significantly alter the population variance. For the GA used in this work, a complete GA calibration method is developed, where The proposed GA calibration method was compared with a number of other GA calibration methods that are currently available. A wide range of functions, problem sizes, and convergence criteria were considered. The results indicate that the proposed GA calibration methodology produced the best overall results of the six different GA calibration methods considered, while the typical GA parameter values produced the worst results. These findings highlight the importance of calibrating the GA parameter values to the characteristics of the fitness function. The population sizing equation based on convergence due to genetic drift can be considered to provide a minimum bound on the most suitable population size to use, where even on a flat fitness function, the population can be expected to converge to a solution. An approach to provide a prediction of the population size that can be expected to converge due to the selection pressure, based on the characteristics of the fitness function, is the focus of further work. The authors would like to thank the South Australian Partnership for Advanced Computing for the use of their facilities in generating the results presented in this paper. The authors would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions, which improved the quality of this paper.