Concentrated leachate is collected from two-stage anaerobic/aerobic-membrane bioreactor (MBR) and nanofiltration (NF) unit in landfill leachate treatment process and featured with non-biodegradation compounds and high salts content. E+-ozonation process was developed and introduced to deal with concentrated leachate, to make good use of chlorine ions (Cl−) and the associated O2 during ozonation process. 74.5% and 69.7% of COD and TOC were removed in E+-ozonation under the optimum conditions with initial pH of 9 and current density of 30 mA∙cm−2, and the corresponding enhancement factors were 1.36 and 1.13, compared to the sum of the electrolysis and ozonation individual. The co-generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive chlorine species (RCS) made a complementary effect on the degradation of refractory substances presented in concentrated leachate. 10.1% of total COD removal was improved by non-radical RCS generated in situ and 6.5% of total COD removal was achieved by ●OH-enhanced and Cl
                        
                     /ClO
                        
                     -emerged. With the help of electrolysis, the 
                        
                     OH quencher of Cl− was converted into non-radical RCS (such as Cl−, ClO− and Cl2) at anode, and the un-reacted O2/O3 was reduced into 
                        
                     OH at the cathode simultaneously. E+-ozonation offers a synergetic degradation potential for special wastewater with refractory matters and high Cl− content.The increase of solid waste disposal resulted in the rapid growth of leachate generated, and more than 33.5 million tons leachate was presumably generated in 2020 in China Recirculation has been allowed for concentrated leachate disposal, which is a recessive defect on accumulation of pollutants in landfill body. Conventional evaporation basins or thermal evaporation are capital- and energy-intensive Interaction between Cl In this work, electrolysis was introduced into the ozonation system, and a combined system of E Concentrated leachate was obtained from a MSW landfill leachate treatment plant located in Shanghai, China. The plant employs a combined two-stage anaerobic/aerobic-membrane bioreactor (MBR) and nanofiltration (NF) process for leachate treatment, which is a typical process for MSW landfill leachate treatment in China. The flow diagram of the MSW landfill leachate treatment process is illustrated in Ozonation, electrolysis and E Direct and indirect demonstrations for functioned radicals were employed in our study. NaCl and Na Concentration of Cl 5, 5-dimethyl-1-pyrolin-N-oxide (DMPO) was utilized to produce stable paramagnetic adducts for electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, Bruker EMX-E spectrometer, Germany) characterization to confirm free radicals produced in these three processes. The basic parameters were: room temperature; microwave frequency 9.77 GHz; microwave power 6 mW; modulation amplitude 1.0 G; modulation frequency 100 kHz; sweep time 60 s; and DMPO 100 mM. Non-radical RCS was determined by iodometry Kinetic data for COD removal in the concentrated leachate was formulated to identify the contribution ratio of free radicals and oxidizing molecules (Eq. Eq.3 can be time integrated as follows: The COD removal rate (R) can be expressed as, The analyses were performed in triplicate and Error bars represented the standard error. The SPSS Statistics (version 18.0.3) was employed to process all data. The organics removal performance of E  More H More Cl Another influential factor was initial pH, which was controlled ranging from acidic condition (pH = 3) to alkaline condition (pH = 11) by adding small amounts of 0.1 M NaOH and Na Alkaline condition (pH = 9 or 11) contributed to improve COD abatement, which was mainly due to the enhancement of The optimum TOC removal was obtained at pH of 11. A minor TOC change could be observed latter 60 min of the whole process at pH of 9, which was anastomotic with the variety of pH (SI A higher COD removal rate was observed in E An obvious difference of peak was investigated in EPR spectra, as shown in Cl COD removal shifted from steep slope to a slow slope, which was coincidence with non-radical RCS tending to a dynamic balance after 15–30 min. Non-radical RCS might be converted into ClO  The removal rate of COD and TOC attributed by non-radical RCS, radical (ROS + RCS) and O During E The potential degradation processes in E Path I was one of the main pathways to generate Cathodic O The predominant non-radical RCS in the anode were Cl A complementary effect was achieved for removal of organic matters in concentrated leachate. Multi-functioned electrolysis solved the negative effect of Cl The authors declare no competing financial interest. This work was financially supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: