Background
                  Humeral shaft fractures can be managed conservatively or operatively. Fracture characteristics were analyzed to identify patients who would benefit from early operative fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a retrospective cohort study of 126 consecutive humeral shaft fractures (2008-2015). Fractures were classified according to fracture type, location, separation, and comminution.
               
                  Results
                  Of 126 patients, 96 were managed conservatively. In 54%, union occurred before 26 weeks, and 13% had delayed union after 26 weeks, whereas 33% did not achieve union. Of 30 patients managed surgically, 63% had union before 26 weeks, 33% had delayed union, and 4% did not achieve union. A statistically significant difference favored operative management. This difference was maintained in specific fracture patterns (simple and spiral fractures) and locations (proximal- or distal-third humeral fractures). Early surgery had a significantly higher union rate than delayed surgery. No difference was present between plate and nail fixation regarding union or neurologic injury. Separation of fragments, open injury, and comminution were not associated with nonunion. A psychiatric history (including psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder, multiple involuntary psychiatric admissions, or dementia) was significantly associated with nonunion after conservative management (P = .016). Two patients with dementia died after their conservatively managed fractures progressed to open injuries.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study found high rates of delayed union and nonunion with conservative management. Patients with a significant psychiatric history may benefit from consideration of operative intervention.The default treatment of adult humeral shaft fractures at our institution has been functional bracing as described by Sarmiento et al. All patients presenting to Peninsula Health with a humeral shaft fracture from June 2008 to June 2015 were included in this retrospective analysis. Patients were identified using health information systems, the emergency department patient record system, and the orthopedic department in-house audit. These systems recorded 471 injuries, of which 30 were excluded because they did not involve the humerus (stage 1). A further 284 injuries were excluded because they were nonshaft fractures (stage 2), leaving 157 undifferentiated humeral shaft fractures. After we applied the final exclusion criteria, 31 shaft fractures were excluded (stage 3) because they were pediatric, periprosthetic, or pathologic cases or their care was continued elsewhere. These exclusion criteria are detailed further in Fracture imaging was reviewed by a fellowship-trained upper limb orthopedic surgeon. Fractures were classified according to the AO classification Demographic and comorbidity data were collected from the scanned and physical medical records. No standard definitions for alcohol abuse or corticosteroid use were available. A body mass index greater than 30 kg/m Conservative management followed the method described by Sarmiento et al. Early surgical intervention was performed at the surgeons' discretion. Thirty cases were managed surgically from the outset, of which 3 were lost to follow-up. A further 18 cases were converted from conservative to operative. Of these 45 cases (27 + 18) with follow-up, 16 were managed with an intramedullary nail and 29 were managed with plate fixation. The techniques and prostheses used were highly heterogeneous because 14 different surgeons contributed cases to this study. Nails included Synthes intramedullary nails (Davos, Switzerland) and 1 CarboFix Fixion nail (CarboFix Orthopedics, Herzliya, Israel). Plates were exclusively from Synthes, but a mixture of Dynamic Compression and Locked Plates were used. Bracing was not used to supplement rigid internal fixation postoperatively. Of the 30 immediate surgical cases, 4 were open (compound). Of the 12 cases with neurologic injury, 5 were managed surgically from the outset. Only 3 of these 12 were Holstein-Lewis–type fractures with radial nerve palsies. This retrospective analysis could not ascertain the reasoning behind early selection of surgery because this was not routinely recorded in the medical record. All follow-up was performed at our institution with computer-archived radiographs (Synapse picture archiving and communication system; Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan). Data were retrospectively collected into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) and analyzed using Stata software (version 13; StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA). The analyses performed included the Pearson χ Analysis was performed on the available 126 humeral shaft fractures. There was no difference between intervention groups at baseline regarding demographic data, as presented in Conservative management was performed in 96 patients (76%), and the specific outcomes are detailed in Initial surgical management was performed in 30 patients, 3 of whom were lost to follow-up. The union rate was 63%. Of the remaining patients, 9 (33%) had delayed union, with an average union time of 50 weeks, with some notable outliers at 57, 60, 62, and 94 weeks. These patients had been pain free, out of bracing, and showing radiologic progression toward union since 3 months postoperatively. Only 1 patient (4%) did not achieve union after initial surgical management. Comparison of union rates between interventions is available in A statistically significant difference in nonunion rates between initial conservative versus operative intervention was present on χ A significant difference between early and late surgical intervention was present, favoring early surgical intervention, with respect to union rates. No significant difference was present between nail fixation and plate fixation overall or when used early versus delayed. These data support the conclusion that plate fixation and nail fixation of humeral shaft fractures do not yield statistically different union rates. These data are presented in In Each fracture type and location were also compared against all other fractures treated in the same manner. No statistically different union rate was evident for conservative management, suggesting position and fracture type did not predict nonunion with conservative management. Traditionally, middle-third fractures have been believed to have the highest union rate when braced; however, the rate was still only 70%. Although spiral fractures have been considered to have the highest union rate when treated conservatively because they have the largest surface area of bone contact, their union rate with bracing was only 62%, lower than the overall average of 65% with bracing. The following classic predictors of union were analyzed using the χ Demographic data and comorbidities were similarly assessed: Age; sex; postcode; diabetes mellitus; anemia; alcohol use; smoking; obesity; and use of corticosteroids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, statins, anticoagulants, or antibiotics showed no significant association with nonunion at the The Fisher exact test found no significant association with nonunion for mechanism of injury (greater force than a fall from standing height, n = 17), open fracture (n = 2), presence of neurologic injury at presentation (n = 10), polytrauma (n = 6), or delay to presentation (n = 3). However, each of these was quite uncommon in our cohort, and therefore, an association cannot be excluded. A multiple logistic regression analysis of comorbidity, demographic, injury, and fracture-type data was performed, as described in There were 14 fractures isolated to the distal third of the humerus; however, only 3 were Holstein-Lewis fractures with neurology. Of these 3, 2 were plated at presentation. Both united and had complete neurologic resolution by the time of union. One was treated conservatively and went on to union. However, the neurologic changes did not improve at 1 year in an 84-year-old patient with diabetes. The frequency of Holstein-Lewis fractures with neurology was low in our cohort. Of 15 patients treated surgically with an intramedullary nail, none had pre-existing neurologic changes and in 1 patient, changes developed postoperatively, which subsequently resolved. Of 28 patients treated surgically with a plate, 5 had pre-existing neurologic changes. Of these 5 patients, 3 had resolution within 3 months; resolution did not occur in the others. In 3 patients who did not have pre-existing neurologic changes, such changes developed postoperatively. All of these resolved within 6 months of surgery. These changes all involved the radial nerve. These data are too limited in number to support statistical analysis. They do not recommend either technique as being less likely to be associated with iatrogenic nerve injury. A history of psychiatric illness (including psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder, multiple involuntary psychiatric admissions, or dementia) was identified as significantly associated with nonunion after conservative management. Patients with a psychiatric diagnosis represented 20% of our population. Our group of surgeons generally has been reluctant to operate in such circumstances, fearing the complications of loss of fixation or infection. The choice to initially operate was made less frequently compared with the rest of the cohort (12% vs 27%), confirming a bias against early intervention.  Of the 21 patients treated with functional humeral bracing with available follow-up, only 7 (33%) achieved union in less than 6 months, with a mean time to union of 10.9 weeks. Two achieved delayed union at a mean of 28.5 weeks. Of the 21 patients, 8 (38%) required delayed surgery. Only 2 achieved union after delayed surgery in under 6 months: 1 at 35 weeks and 1 at 79 weeks. Three did not achieve union at maximum follow-up. Two patients with a psychiatric history died after initial bracing, with late progression to open fracture. We are not aware of this late complication of bracing being previously reported. In both instances, the proximal segment generated a pressure area laterally due to the unrestrained pull of the deltoid. Resultant skin necrosis appeared long-standing by the time orthopedic intervention was called upon. In both cases, self-care and insight were significantly impaired. Both patients were nonagenarians with dementia with severe cardiac comorbidities. One was a smoker, and the other lived in a nursing home. In 1 patient, the fracture became compound at 5 weeks and was surgically fixed. He died perioperatively 3 days later. In the other patient, the fracture became open at 8 weeks. The decision was made to provide palliative treatment. These data show a significantly worse outcome with bracing in patients in the cohort with a psychiatric history, but our explanation of the mechanism for this difference can only be speculative. The first reason must be the impaired insight diagnostic of these conditions. Brace compliance is a demanding process over a period of 26 weeks for an otherwise healthy person, and it is probably beyond the capacity of this cohort. In addition, some psychotropic medications inhibit bone remodeling, and dementia is associated with osteoporosis purely because of the age group it affects. Many patients with psychoses have strong cigarette addictions as well. The numbers of patients and specific data on these facets of care were not available; therefore, we stress that these comments are only speculative. Sarmiento et al In contrast to these excellent results, other authors have reported union rates similar to ours. Foulk and Szabo Ding et al Although we performed a multiple logistic regression analysis, it was unhelpful in identifying any useful associations beyond those already identified by the χ The finding that late surgical intervention has significantly poorer union rates than immediate surgery is consistent with the complexity of the 2 operations being performed. Early fixation requires only a reduction, with identification of any nerve at risk, followed by fixation. In the later operation, the meticulous dissection of the nerves from a pseudarthrosis, followed by resection of the pseudarthrosis itself, followed by resection of excess bone and osteotomies to generate a large contact area of bleeding bone, and supplemented by fixation and possible bone graft from local or distant sites, explains the much greater operation involved and hence the lower success rate. This finding was mirrored in the cohort with a psychiatric history. A weakness of retrospective case series is selection bias. Although an attempt was made to determine the indication for surgery, it was not possible; this is a weakness of our study. However, the primary aim of this analysis was to calculate the real-world success of the technique of Sarmiento et al Our study identified that conservative management was more likely to fail in patients with a significant psychiatric history or dementia. A history of dementia has previously been shown to be related to discharge destination to a care facility after humeral fractures Given the limitations of a retrospective audit, we were unable to perform an assessment of cognitive ability or obtain an accurate history of compliance with bracing. Future research may help identify what factors lead to higher rates of nonunion in this subgroup and possibly with a specific reference to brace compliance. This study showed that patients with a humeral shaft fracture treated nonoperatively had an unexpectedly high rate of delayed union and nonunion. Classic predictors of nonunion were not statistically significant in this analysis. A weak conclusion that surgical intervention had a higher union rate can be made. No difference between plate fixation and nail fixation regarding union or neurologic complications was present. Patients with a significant psychiatric history had particularly poor outcomes with conservative management. The risks of conservative management in this subgroup, including death, may be under-recognized. These data do not strongly support the use of the technique of Sarmiento et al Vicky Tobin, research assistant, assisted with statistical analysis. Nigel Broughton assisted with study design and manuscript review. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.