Up to now, most studies corresponding to building structures against progressive collapse are based on the column-removal scenario. However, other cases, i.e., falling-debris impact scenario, which may cause progressive collapse of building structures were limitedly studied. This paper presents numerical simulations and a simplified approach of steel-framed subassemblies with Reverse Channel connection with Extended End Plate (RC-EEP) under the falling-debris impact scenario. The numerical results demonstrate the ductility, load-carrying capacity, and energy-absorption capacity of the steel-framed subassemblies with different Span-to-Depth Ratio under various impacted locations. All specimens showed the same global deformation profile and same load-resistance mechanism under the impact load on the same locations. Under mid-span-impact scenario, axial elongation of connection primarily affected the ductility. Both catenary action and flexural action affected the load-carrying capacity. Failure displacement, maximum load-carrying capacity and energy-absorption capacity all decreased with the increase of the Span-to-Depth ratio. Under beam-end-impact scenario, both the ductility and the load-carrying capacity were primarily controlled by the shear deformation and shear strength of the connection close to the impacted location. The increase of the Span-to-Depth ratio had little effect on failure displacement while slightly reduced the maximum load-carrying capacity and energy absorption capacity. Smaller Span-to-Depth Ratio was recommended in the impact-resisting design for impact load on both impact locations. A simplified approach was also developed to predict the behaviour of the steel frame subassemblies up to total failure. The validation study indicated that the proposed models can represent the key responses of steel-framed subassemblies with different Span-to-Depth Ratio subjected to impact load on various locations, including the flexural action at pure bending stage, the development of flexural action and catenary action at the tension-bending stage, and the failure stage. The accuracy of the proposed approach was validated against the experimental tests and numerical simulations, in the aspects of internal force-displacement relationships, load-carrying capacity-displacement relationships, and energy absorption-displacement relationships. The proposed approach provided an accurate and efficient way to predict the impact resistance of specimens with various Span-to-Depth Ratios under both of the mid-span impact and the beam-end impact scenarios.Falling-debris impact, the structural and non-structural elements that drop down and hit the remaining structures below due to abnormal loads, is a dangerous scenario that may potentially trigger the progressive collapse of building structures. For instance, the bearing wall on the 18th floor of the Ronan Point department was destroyed by a gas explosion in 1968 According to the alternate path method proposed by GSA It should be noted that the column-removal scenario based on single column failure, which was considered by most research studies and design codes, is not the only case to cause progressive collapse. Multiple column-removal scenario (e.g. progressive collapse of World Trade Centre in 9.11 event) and Beam-removal scenario (e.g. progressive collapse of Plasco building in 2017) will also cause falling-debris impact and result in progressive collapse. However, limited studies focused on the falling-debris impact scenario. Kiakojouri et al. Limited attentions have been paid to building structures subjected to falling-debris impact. Kaewkulchai and Williamson Up to now, most studies on progressive collapse are based on column-removal scenario under various loading types. Knowledge of steel-framed structures subjected to falling-debris impact is still relatively limited. Existing experimental and numerical studies focus on dynamic responses of beam and connections individually under impact load. The effect of the interaction between structural elements, viz. beam, column and beam-column connections was ignored. The ultimate impact resistance of structures and substructures needs to be investigated. In addition, the existing approach to assess the impact resistance of structures under impact load lack validation with experimental tests. Qian et al. In this study, parametric analysis was carried out to investigate the effect of SDR on the impact resistance of steel-framed subassemblies with Reverse Channel connection with Extended End Plate (RC-EEP) under both the mid-span-impact and the beam-end-impact scenarios. A novel simplified approach of steel-framed subassemblies subjected to impact from falling-debris was proposed based on previous experimental tests and numerical simulations. The simplified approach was based on energy conservation and the load-resisting mechanism of steel-framed subassemblies under falling-debris impact. The tension-bending interaction was considered in the approach. The impact resistance and dynamic response of steel-framed subassemblies with RC-EEP were obtained by the simplified approach. The accuracy of the proposed approach was validated against the experimental and numerical results. After that, the results of the proposed approach were compared to the parametric studies of specimens with various SDRs. The comparisons showed that the proposed approach was capable of predicting the resistance of steel-framed subassemblies with RC-EEP subjected to impact loads. Therefore, the novelties of the current study are firstly the investigation of the effect of SDR on impact resistance of steel-framed subassemblies with RC-EEP subjected to impact loads on various locations. Moreover, a novel simplified approach is also proposed to effectively assess the impact resistance of specimens. The results of the study can be employed as a technological support for engineering applications. To investigate the impact resistance of steel-framed subassemblies under falling-debris impact, impact tests were carried out at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Material properties for each component of -the specimens, i.e., beam flange, beam web, column flange, column web, channel flange, channel web and end plate were obtained by standard tensile coupon tests and shown in To simulate the impact tests, numerical models were developed in this section by using ANSYS/LS-DYNA, a universal finite element program which was commonly utilised in impact and blast analyses based on explicit time integration primarily. Therefore, numerical convergence difficulties in implicit methods can be avoided. Three-dimensional finite element models were created with Solid 164, an 8-node hexahedral element. Reduced integration algorithm with hourglass control method was selected to improve the computational efficiency. Referring to former studies  As shown in In the experimental test, the drop hammer was released from 3 m height to impact the specimen. In the numerical simulations for free-fall, the drop hammer was placed close to the specimens. The distance between the bottom of the drop hammer and the top of the specimen was set as 1 mm as shown in It should be noted that in the impact tests, failures did not occur on specimens after the first impact. Multiple impacts were applied to each specimen to obtain its final failures. To simplify the numerical simulations, single impact was used since the explicit dynamic analysis is a time-consuming process. The impact velocity in the finite element models was the same as that in the impact tests, while the mass of drop hammer in the finite element models was increased to ensure that the impact energy of the single impact equalled to the total impact energy of the multiple impacts in the impact tests. During the impact process, different parts of the frame specimen came into contact with one another and it was important to simulate the different types of contact. Automatic surface-to-surface contact (ASTS) was set between the drop hammer and the impacted location of the specimen so that the impact force could be obtained by extracting the y-direction force of ASTS. For other parts of the specimen, automatic single surface contact (ASSC) was applied to search for potential contact interfaces. There was no need to apply potential interface pairs for ASSC in the model, for example, bolts and beam webs, bolts and fin plates, bolts and channel webs, bolts and end plates, fin plates and beam webs, end plates and channel webs. Welds were not modelled and instead tied surface-to-surface contact (TDSS) was utilised to constrain the degrees of freedom between the welds joining the butt end of beam flange to the column flange.  When designing steel beams, the depth of the beam section is an important parameter. The depth of the beam section is corresponding to allowable deflections, which was controlled by loading types, support systems, beam span length, and etc. For two extreme conditions, i.e., simply supported beam under uniformly distributed loading and fixed supported beam under concentrated loading, the maximum deflection According to Eqs. The beam section remained constant in the parametric analyses. The SDR was changed by modifying the span of the steel beam. The numerical simulations were named as SDR-A-B, in which A and B indicated the span-depth ratio and the impact locations, respectively. For instance, SDR-8-M indicated that the specimen with an SDR equal to 8 was under the mid-span-impact scenario.  The rotation   The failure displacement tended to be greater with the increase of SDR. The maximum failure displacement (587 mm of SDR-32-M) was roughly two times the minimum one (290 mm of SDR-8-M). According to the Eq. The span length of SDR-32-M was four times that of SDR-8-M. Therefore, the ratio of The maximum bending moments at connections for specimens were −46 kN m to −61 kN m as shown in Based on Eq.  According to the load-resisting mechanism shown in   Based on catenary action and flexural action obtained by Eq.   Under the beam-end-impact scenario, since the lever arm of the right part Combining the load-carrying capacity provided by the left and the right part together, the load-carrying capacity versus displacement curves of specimens with various SDRs were presented in    In this section, a simplified approach to predict the impact resistance was proposed taking the specimen under mid-span-impact scenario for example. The simplified approach could conveniently obtain the impact resistance of specimens with various SDRs under both the mid-span impact and the beam-end-impact scenarios. For a beam subjected to an impact load caused by a mass For a beam subjected to a quasi-static concentrated load at the mid-span, three plastic hinges, i.e., one at mid-span and one at each connection would develop. With the increase of displacement at mid-span, axial force would be mobilised if the beam was restrained by horizontal supports. Under a low-speed-impact scenario, the deformation mechanism is the same as that under the quasi-static loading condition Based on the According to the load-resisting mechanism, both the axial force and the bending moment existed in the specimens during the impact process. For a rectangular beam, as shown in Under the combination of bending and tension, as shown in Combining Eqs. Special consideration should be taken for the location of the neutral axis. If the neutral axis was located in the beam web, as shown in Combining Eqs. In the situation of the neutral axis in the beam flange, as shown in Combining Eqs. For the section of UB 203 × 133 × 30, the coefficient Axial force and bending moment can be expressed as dimensionless forms, i.e., According to Eq. According to Hookes’ law, the corresponding axial force Since any combination of internal forces, i.e., bending moment and axial force, must lie on the yield surface for the plastic hinges, the yield function of plastic hinges at mid-span and connections were expressed as Eqs. According to the flow rule theory, the relationship between the increments of deformations and internal forces at plastic hinges was expressed as Eq. Combining Eqs. Substituting Eq. The increments of rotation and axial elongation corresponding to vertical displacement at mid-span could be obtained according to Eqs. In this section, the process of the simplified approach was discussed. The load-carrying capacity curves could be divided into three stages, i.e., pure bending stage, tension-bending interaction stage, and failure stage, based on the vertical displacement at mid-span. The pure bending stage corresponded to the vertical displacement at mid-span ranging from 0 mm to The tension-bending interaction stage corresponded to the vertical displacement at mid-span ranging from The failure stage corresponded to the vertical displacement at mid-span ranging from To predict the impact resistance of specimen RC-EEP using simplified approach, some parameters, i.e., the displacement at the end of the pure bending stage Based on the process discussed in  Under the beam-end-impact scenario, the load-resisting mechanism in the left part of the specimen was the same as that under the mid-span-impact scenario. The impact resistance of the left part of specimens was predicted by the simplified approach, which was the same as that under the mid-span-impact scenario. Since the distance between the impact location and the right connections was identical, the load-carrying capacity remained generally the same with various SDRs, indicating that SDR had almost no effect on the impact resistance of the right part of specimens. The load-carrying capacity versus displacement was obtained based on Eq. In addition, it should be noted that the simplified approach proposed in this paper was based on the previous experimental and numerical results of specimen RC-EEP. If the geometric size of RC-EEP changed, the mechanical properties of the connection, i.e., the axial force under pure tensile force versus elongation curves and the bending moment under pure bending moment versus rotation curves, would be changed. The axial elongation of 30 mm would not be the demarcation point of the tension-bending interaction stage and the failure stage. The failure elongation might not be 50 mm any more. Thus, more studies should be carried out to investigate the effect of parameters including the thickness of end plate, the thickness of channel section, the height of channel section, etc. on the mechanical properties of RC-EEP. Then, the proposed simplified approach could be widely used in the design of steel-framed structures with RC-EEP under falling-debris impact. This paper focused on steel frame structures subjected to falling-debris impact. A series of numerical simulations of steel-framed subassemblies with various SDRs under both mid-span and beam-end impact scenarios were carried out based on verified finite element models. A simplified approach was proposed to assess the impact resistance of specimens. Conclusions can be drawn as follows: The explicit dynamic solver, LS-DYNA, could accurately predict the process of specimens under both mid-span and beam-end impact scenario. The numerical results, i.e., load-carrying capacity and failure modes, agreed well with previous impact tests. Under the mid-span-impact scenario, the maximum axial force increased and the maximum bending moment decreased with the increase of SDR at both of the mid-span and connections due to tension-bending interaction. The load-carrying capacity-displacement curves were obtained based on the load-resisting mechanism. The maximum load-carrying capacity decreased and the failure displacement increased with the increase of SDR. Under the beam-end-impact scenario, the load-resisting mechanism in the left part of specimens was the same as that under the mid-span-impact scenario. The change of the internal forces and the load-carrying capacities with various SDRs was the same as that under the mid-span-impact scenario. SDR slightly affected the load-carrying capacity in the right part of specimens and the failure displacement. The effect of SDR on the internal force and the load-carrying capacity under the beam-end-impact scenario was the same as that under the mid-span-impact scenario. The energy absorption capacity was obtained by integrating the load-carrying capacity versus displacement curves. Under both the mid-span and the beam-end impact scenarios, the energy absorption capacities decreased with the increase of SDR. Therefore, smaller SDR was recommended in impact-resisting design. A simplified approach was proposed to assess the impact resistance of steel-framed subassemblies with RC-EEP subjected to falling-debris impact. The simplified approach was based on energy conservation and the load-resisting mechanism of steel frame subassemblies under falling-debris impact scenario. The bending-tension interaction was considered in the approach. The impact resistance and dynamic response of steel frame subassemblies with RC-EEP were obtained by the simplified approach. Comparing the results between simplified approach, previous impact tests and numerical simulations indicated that the proposed approach was capable of predicting the performances of steel frame subassemblies with RC-EEP subjected to impact loads. Therefore, the proposed approach provided an effective method to assess the impact resistance of steel frame subassemblies.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: