A large number of scaled-down tunnel experiments were undertaken to investigate the response of unsupported walls to an increased stress field. The experiments were undertaken in 200mm diameter tunnels that were drilled into intact rock blocks of sandstone and granite ranging in strength from moderately strong to very strong. The tunnels were loaded by a servo-controlled, 450 tonne capacity INSTRON compression testing machine. As the ratio of intact rock strength to induced stress decreased, the unsupported tunnel walls became increasingly unstable. Critical ratios of compressive strength to induced stress were determined for critical instability stages such as tunnel spalling and also pillar crushing adjacent to the tunnels. The physical models have been simulated using three-dimensional finite element modelling. The values of the critical ratios correlate well with underground observations of full scale tunnels with similar Uniaxial Compressive Strength materials. Dynamic ejection velocities similar to those calculated from back analysis of actual failures have been determined. In addition, the seismic responses prior and during key failure stages have been established as a function of the increased loadings.As underground mining proceeds to depths below surface approaching or exceeding 1000 The stability and behaviour of the rock masses surrounding an excavation are dependent upon several factors including the rock mass strength, the geometry of the excavation, the induced stresses surrounding the opening, the blasting or construction practices and the amount of water and weathering process ( Historically, the ratio of intact rock Uniaxial Compressive Strength ( In order to investigate stress-driven fracturing around underground excavations, a large number of scaled-down tunnels have been constructed and tested at the WASM Rock Mechanics Laboratory. The tunnels were constructed by drilling into 400 W The size of the scaled down tunnels was in most cases 200 The blocks of rock were constrained horizontally by two mild steel plates (16 The blocks of rock were loaded vertically using a 450 tonne capacity stiff INSTRON compression testing machine. The rate of loading was 0.5  Vertical load and vertical displacement were monitored during tests. Two acoustic emission sensors were installed to monitor the seismic response from initial loading to wall spalling and pillar crushing. A high speed Canon EOS 650D video camera was used to monitor the tunnel walls during the progressive loading. This digital single-lens reflex camera, was set up in front of the sample and the tunnel behaviour was recorded through a special window within the INSTRON protective door. The camera is capable of capturing up to 50 frames per second. A set of special lights and a suitably placed background grid were used to estimate the displacement versus time motion of the failed particles that were ejected. In order to better understand the failure processes and to check the three-dimensional calculations, computational modelling was undertaken using the program Abaqus. A finite element mesh used for 3D modelling of the test geometry is shown in For each block tested the 200 In addition, triaxial testing was undertaken to obtain the cohesive strengths and friction angles at failure. Three different confining pressures ranging from 5 to 15 The initial lateral stress During a test, the specimen deformed subject to the applied vertical loading. The specimens behaved elastically until spalling occurred with the lateral strain obtained by: Then, the bolt force   The computational modelling solution for the maximum tangential stress ( For an unsupported scaled-down tunnel (and adjacent pillars) Ejection velocities ranging from 3 to 6 Stress-driven damage in brittle materials occurs as progressive, often violent, slabbing of the excavation walls and is localized within areas of maximum induced stress concentrations ( For the laboratory experiments described here, as the load was being increased, the ratio of compressive strength to induced stress was calculated. For immediate wall failure (spalling), the ratio monitored was the value of compressive strength to maximum tangential stress (i.e. effectively near zero confining stress at the excavation boundary). For a total of 14 laboratory tests for a range of intact rock strengths results are shown in The laboratory results correlate well with observations of 4–5 Pillar design and stability analysis is a critical component of a mining engineering design process. Although the fundamental concepts of Factor of Safety as the ratio of pillar strength to average pillar stress and pillar stability have been understood for some time, it is only more recently that the tools have become available to allow more quantitative analyses of pillar strength and stability to be carried out ( In basic engineering mechanics terms, stability refers to the stability of equilibrium, or the ability of the overall structure, or an element of that structure such as a mine pillar, to undergo a small change in the equilibrium state of loading without producing a state of unstable equilibrium involving a sudden release of stored strain energy or large deformations ( For the laboratory experiment described here, the ratio of intact rock compressive strength to the average pillar stress adjacent to the tunnels walls was calculated during loading. The commercial finite element code Abaqus version 6.12 was used for non-linear modelling. A Mohr-Coulomb model with a tension cut-off was adopted to describe the plastic behaviour of the specimens. During the modelling, the top platen was fixed and a constant displacement rate was applied to the bottom platen. The rate of loading during the simulation was 0.5 Pillar crushing was observed as steeply dipping fractures transecting the pillars which occur at higher induced stress compared with tunnel wall spalling. This can also be seen in the non-linear simulation shown in The stress distribution in the final stages of pillar crushing can be seen in  The results for the scaled-down unsupported pillars were compared with the full scale results from the Pillar Stability Graph database ( The confining pressures were modelled using non-linear finite element modelling with a typical result shown in The low confining pressure used in the testing is representative of the confining pressure available in the vicinity of most underground excavations.  The data from the high speed video was used to calculate the strain inside the tunnels at the moment of the spalling failure. The relationships are shown in The emphasis thus far in the paper has been to quantify the critical ratios of intact rock strength to tangential stress that result in spalling and pillar crushing around unsupported circular tunnels in different strength rocks. It is well established that ground support cannot prevent rock mass failure. However, in practice, ground support is used in an attempt to maintain serviceability of excavations after rock mass failure. The research team have developed unique techniques to install reinforcement in boreholes drilled radially in the rock block from within the scale tunnels and materials to simulate mesh and shotcrete surface support. The laboratory experiments also allow assessment and relative comparisons of different scaled-down ground support schemes ( A number of empirical relationships have been determined for the onset of spalling and pillar crushing for scaled-down tunnels drilled into three different material types. The data suggest that a distinctive ratio of compressive strength to induced stress can be determined for the different stages of progressive failure (i.e., spalling at the tunnel boundaries and pillar crushing adjacent to the tunnels). The relationship appears to be linear and a function of the compressive strength of the materials. The results from laboratory scale tests compare well with data from full scale excavations from a number of mine pillars suggesting that the ratios of compressive strength to induced stress that trigger the onset of spalling and pillar crushing are scale independent. Furthermore, ejection velocities determined from the scaled-down experiments are in a similar range to those back calculated from full scale underground failures. The authors wish to acknowledge the invaluable expertise and assistance provided by Prof. E.T. Brown, Dr. Alan Thompson, Pat Hogan and Lance Fraser. Their help during sample preparation, testing, data analysis and paper writing is greatly acknowledged.