Development of robust approaches for calibrating daily rainfall-runoff models to monthly streamflow data is of major practical interest. Such approaches would enable widely used hydrological modelling platforms that operate at daily time step to be applied in practical situations where precipitation is available at the daily scale, but observed streamflow is available only at the monthly scale (e.g. predicting inflows into large dams). This study compares the performance of a hydrological model running at daily time step (GR4J) that is calibrated against daily and monthly streamflow data using a wide range of metrics: fit of the daily and monthly flow duration curve, daily and monthly pattern metrics, and long-term bias. The comparison is undertaken for 508 Australian catchments, two evaluation periods and four objective functions (including sum-of-squared-errors of Box-Cox transformed streamflow and the Kling-Gupta efficiency). Monthly calibration performs similar or better than daily calibration in a majority of sites and periods in terms of bias and fit of the flow duration curve. This result holds even when the flow duration curve is computed at the daily time step, which constitutes a major finding of this study. However, performance of monthly calibration is worse than daily calibration for daily pattern metrics such as Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency in a majority of sites and periods. This performance loss can be reduced significantly by using regionalised values for the flow-timing parameter of GR4J. Similar results are obtained for other pattern metrics and all objective functions. These findings suggest that monthly calibration of rainfall-runoff models to daily-rainfall/monthly-streamflow is a viable alternative to daily calibration when no daily streamflow data are available.Daily versus monthly performance Impact of parameter regionalisation Sensitivity to objective functions Conceptual lumped rainfall-runoff models that operate at hourly or daily time steps are widely used in water forecasting, water resources planning and operations ( The ability to calibrate a daily lumped rainfall-runoff model using monthly streamflow data would enable widely used modelling platforms operating at a daily time step to be applied when only monthly data are available. Such applications are common in practice, e.g. Development of streamflow forecasts ( Calibration of basin scale models ( Calibration of continental scale models ( Previous studies where observed streamflow is aggregated prior to model calibration typically operate at a sub-daily time-scale, but apply model calibration to aggregated daily streamflow data. These studies have shown that calibration of rainfall-runoff models is time step dependent, with parameter estimates affected by the aggregation of climate forcings and observed streamflow data (e.g., Of the few studies that have compared models calibrated to daily and monthly data, Several studies have compared the performance of the same model calibrated at different time steps. For example, Consequently, there is a clear research gap in our understanding of the performance of daily rainfall-runoff models calibrated to monthly streamflow data in terms of daily-scale performance metrics over a wide range of catchments. It is well known that the calibration of a rainfall-runoff model to streamflow data at an aggregated scale may result in a loss of information leading to indistinguishable model parameters (i.e. ill-conditioned), especially those associated with quick flow processes (e.g., This study has the following aims: Evaluate the impact of daily versus monthly calibration of a daily rainfall-runoff model (GR4J) on streamflow predictive performance and parameter estimates over a large sample of catchments, using a wide range of performance metrics computed at monthly and daily time steps; Determine if parameter regionalisation combined with parameter calibration can be used to improve performance metrics when calibrating to monthly data; Test the robustness of the findings using multiple objective functions. The case study employs the rainfall-runoff model GR4J ( This paper is organised as follows. Consider a hydrological model This daily model can be calibrated at the daily or monthly scale, as described next. In daily calibration, The objective functions used here are the Sum of Squared Errors (SSE) applied to Box-Cox-transformed streamflow, and the Kling-Gupta efficiency ( Monthly calibration of a daily rainfall-runoff model employs an objective function applied to monthly streamflow, Monthly predictions are obtained from daily predictions as follows: It is emphasized that the only difference between the daily (using Eq. Calibration of a daily model to monthly streamflow data can increase the uncertainty in parameters associated with quick flow processes. Hence, a regionalisation model is developed for such parameters, using a kriging approach ( When regionalisation is used, the model parameter vector is partitioned into two parts, Note that the kriging-based regionalisation approach used in this study does not take into account catchment descriptors. A simple alternative using linear regression against catchment descriptors was tested, but did not provide better performance (results not reported). The main objective function used in this work is the Sum of Squared Errors (SSE) applied to Box-Cox-transformed streamflow, This objective function is applied with The majority of the analysis (Study Aims 1–2) are undertaken using a single objective function, “SSE-BC0.2”, given by Eq. To explore the impact of the objective function on the findings (Study Aim 3), three alternative objective functions are considered: Two additional objective functions based on the Box-Cox transformation: “SSE-BC0.0” (shortened hereafter to “SSE-LOG”) where The Kling-Gupta efficiency or KGE ( The KGE objective function explicitly separates the contribution of bias, ratio of variances and correlation and is increasingly used for hydrological calibration, including in several recent multi-time step studies ( In total, 9 calibration schemes are compared in this paper as detailed in This study is based on 508 catchments in Australia, with locations shown in Three catchments are selected to illustrate the findings of this study using hydrographs and flow duration curves: Macalister River at Glencairn in Victoria (catchment 225219), Dumaresq River at Farnbro in Queensland (catchment 416310) and Scott River at Brennans Ford in Western Australia (catchment 609002). Additional information for these catchments is provided in The list of all catchments and associated descriptors are provided in the first dataset of the The GR4J model ( GR4J has four parameters, listed in The rainfall-runoff model parameters are optimized in three steps: Draw an initial population of 2000 transformed parameter sets from a multi-variate normal density, with mean Find the parameter set with the best (lowest) value of the objective function; Apply the downhill simplex algorithm ( This parameter optimisation approach is selected because it builds on past experience of the authors with the GR4J model (via the values of In principle, the values of the mean and covariance matrix used to initialise the optimisation may affect the final calibrated parameters, by favouring certain portions of the parameter space. Sensitivity analysis was conducted by changing the mean and covariance matrix to values specific to each calibration configuration (e.g. distinct values for monthly calibration). No significant changes in the results (parameter and objective function values) were found; consequently, these tests are not reported here. A temporal split-sample validation procedure is implemented, with available data split into two periods: 1975–1992 and 1992–2015. Calibration is performed on each period. The model is then run on the other period to compute performance metrics. This process yields two sets of validation periods (and hence validation metrics) for each catchment. Model performance is assessed in terms of streamflow predictions and parameter estimates, as detailed next. Streamflow predictive performance is assessed using five metrics. Unless otherwise specified, these metrics are applied to streamflow at both the daily (i.e. Absolute bias in long-term average streamflow is computed as Note that this metric is independent of the evaluation time step. The mean absolute relative error on flow duration curve (abbreviated as “FDC fit” hereafter) computed for a range of streamflow percentiles is expressed as The FDC fit metric is similar to the FDC diagnostic metric used by Pattern matching of predicted and observed hydrographs is quantified using Spearman rank correlation, Timing errors in the daily peaks are quantified using the metric introduced by Finally, overall accuracy is quantified using the Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency: The metrics described above can be categorised into three groups: long-term bias, FDC fit metrics and pattern metrics, as shown in A monthly calibration scheme is assessed by considering the proportion of sites and periods where its performance metrics is classified as “worse”, “similar” or “better” in comparison to daily calibration. These proportions are computed over the 508 catchments and 2 validation periods, i.e., over a total of 1016 sites/periods combinations. Metric values are considered “similar” if they differ by less than a “practical significance” threshold This comparison approach is used for most results presented in The spatial distribution of differences in performance is inspected visually by plotting the values on a map. In addition, an attempt was made to relate performance differences with catchment descriptors listed in The use of monthly streamflow introduces important changes in the objective function, and could potentially increase parameter instability between calibration periods. This could lead to lower performance of the model for applications requiring extrapolation beyond the hydro-climatic conditions encountered during calibration, such as climate change studies ( The stability of parameters across calibration periods is assessed as follows ( Similar to the difference in performance metric described in To achieve Aim 1 (i.e. to evaluate the performance of daily versus monthly calibration of a daily rainfall-runoff model), the GR4J model ( To achieve Aim 2 (i.e. to determine if parameter regionalisation combined with parameter calibration can improve performance), we consider a hybrid calibration-regionalisation approach ( To achieve Aim 3 (i.e. to test the robustness of findings using alternative objective functions), the GR4J model with regionalised parameters values (the outcome of Aim 2) is calibrated to daily and monthly data using four different objective functions (  The major finding is that monthly calibration performs similarly or better than daily calibration for daily FDC fit metrics in the majority of sites and periods. A second finding is that monthly calibration performs worse than daily calibration for daily pattern metrics in a majority of sites/periods. As shown in A third finding is that monthly calibration reaches similar or better performance than daily calibration for the monthly FDC fit, monthly pattern and long-term bias metrics.   Monthly calibration has a noticeable impact on the distribution of parameter values compared to daily calibration, as can be seen in all panels of  This analysis shows that one of the major impacts of monthly calibration is to reduce the stability of the GR4J parameter To overcome the poor stability of parameter Using regionalised estimates of  The benefits of using regionalised timing parameters to improve the performance of monthly calibration are discussed further in This section reports the performance of monthly calibration schemes when using alternative objective functions, in order to establish the robustness of the findings in the earlier sections. To keep the analysis focused, only the performance of the monthly calibration schemes with a regionalised  The key findings of the preceding sections are robust to the choice of the objective function. Monthly calibration performs similar or better than daily calibration for daily FDC fit on high flows, monthly NSE and long-term bias; For daily pattern metrics, the key result is that the performance difference between monthly and daily calibration is in favour of monthly for SSE-LOG and SSE-BC0.2 objective functions, and in favour of daily for other objective functions (SSE and KGE). In  The hydrographs in The overall flow duration curves in Previous research has indicated that, when a rainfall-runoff model that operates at one time scale is calibrated to streamflow data aggregated to a larger time scale, there is typically some loss of performance, especially in the timing of hydrographs ( The results also suggest that monthly calibration is often (though not always) better than daily calibration for FDC fit metrics at the daily time step, especially for high flow. Results in selected catchments in The performance improvements achieved by monthly calibration for certain metrics could also be explained by considering the changes in GR4J parameter values. Monthly calibration tends to yield smaller values of the two GR4J storage parameters The overall findings in terms of performance trends remain similar across objective functions, for most metrics, except daily pattern metrics, as described in The ability of monthly calibration to improve certain daily and monthly performance statistics comes at the cost of degraded daily pattern matching, as seen in A practical solution to mitigate these two issues is to estimate First, it is of interest to verify if our findings regarding the value of monthly calibration for the parsimonious model GR4J hold for other rainfall-runoff models, particularly more complex models with a larger number of parameters, and for spatially resolved models. A particular challenge of more complex models is the likely difficulty in distinguishing between parameters with low stability ( Second, it is of interest to elucidate the reasons why monthly calibration can produce better daily performance metrics than daily calibration. Results presented in Third, the investigations could be extended to probabilistic prediction (e.g. Fourth, no attempt was made in this paper to differentiate the two calibration periods based on their hydro-climate characteristics, which are known to affect parameter calibration ( Finally, more advanced regionalisation methods could be explored to better incorporate local catchment characteristics, perform regionalisation simultaneously on multiple parameters, select regionalised parameters based on formal parameter identifiability analysis (see first paragraph in this section), and improve the underlying geostatistical model ( This paper explored the calibration of a daily rainfall-runoff model to monthly streamflow data, and whether it is possible to reduce the loss of performance – or even achieve gains in performance – under such conditions. Performance of daily and monthly calibrated models was compared based on long-term bias, daily and monthly flow duration curve fit, daily and monthly correlation, daily and monthly NSE, and daily peak time errors. The comparison was undertaken in 508 Australian catchments, for two evaluation periods and using four objective functions. In addition, parameter regionalisation was applied to fix one GR4J parameter when calibrating against monthly streamflow data. The following key conclusions were obtained: Daily rainfall-runoff models calibrated to monthly streamflow perform similarly or better than models calibrated to daily streamflow, except for metrics related to daily patterns. Monthly calibration schemes reach comparable performance to daily calibrations for a wide range of metrics, such as the fit of daily/monthly flow duration curves in low, medium and high flows, monthly correlation and monthly NSE, with a majority of sites and periods reaching similar or better metric value. Monthly calibration outperforms daily calibration in a significant proportion of sites and periods for all monthly metrics, long-term bias and daily flow duration curves fit on high flow. This finding is surprising because monthly calibration does not access daily streamflow data. Monthly calibration performs worse than daily calibration in most sites and periods for metrics related to daily pattern of the hydrograph, such as NSE, correlation and peak time errors.  Daily patterns of monthly calibrated models can be improved significantly by using regionalised values for timing parameters When using monthly calibration schemes, simulated hydrographs do not reproduce accurately the timing of flood peak and, more generally, the daily pattern. This limitation can be alleviated by fixing the GR4J parameter controlling hydrograph timing to a regionalised value based on adjacent catchments. The proportion of sites/periods where monthly calibration is similar or better than daily calibration was increased from a range of 31–49% when calibrating all parameters, to a range of 47–65% when using regionalised parameter values, depending on the metric considered.  Findings are robust to the choice of the objective function, with similar trends observed for four different objective functions. The finding that monthly calibration performs similar to daily calibration for daily/monthly flow duration curve fit and long-term bias held for all four objective functions considered in this work (SSE-LOG, SEE-BC02, SSE and KGE Overall, the findings indicate that monthly calibration is a viable alternative to daily calibration when no daily flow data is available. Importantly, the findings hold over a large sample of Australian catchments. Future work on extending the findings to broader classes of models is recommended.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was undertaken with the support of the iSSF4 and soil moisture forecasting projects funded by the Bureau of Meteorology. The authors acknowledge the support provided by the AWAP (Jones et al., 2009), AWRA (Frost et al., 2018) and Water Data Online (BoM, 2019) services in supplying high quality datasets used to build the set of study catchments included in this study. We also thank Louise Wilson, Robert Pipunic and Zaved Khan for their comments on early versions of the manuscript. Regionalized values of GR4J model parameters for a particular catchment are obtained by interpolating from neighbour catchments using a kriging approach ( Transform the parameter values at all available gauged catchments as per Subtract the mean ( Formulate a kriging model as a multivariate Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and covariance matrix Obtain the interpolated parameter value at the catchment of interest, denoted  Note that in this work, kriging was implemented with a leave-one-out validation procedure, where the catchment of interest Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:              