This work investigates the dissolution of various uranium oxides in nitric acid medium and the most predominant occurring reaction was determined on the basis of the thermodynamic and kinetic studies. Six uranium oxides were dissolved and studied. The Gibbs free energies of all the reactions ΔrG°(T) were analyzed by Ulich model (Ulich, 1930) and the predominant dissolution reaction was found to be:
                        
                           3U3O8(s)
                              +20HNO3(aq)
                              →9UO2
                              (NO3)2(aq)
                              +2NO(g)
                              +10H2O
                        
                     
                  
                  Three reaction order rate models namely the first, the second and the third order were applied on the predominant reaction reported above. According to the kinetics results, our reaction best fits the second order equation rate.Uranium is the most representative actinide element that is of fundamental importance in the nuclear fuel cycle. Uranium dioxide powder is the starting material for the preparation of the fuel pellets used in nuclear power reactors. The nuclear fuel cycle involves several major steps consisting of the leaching of uranium ore in sulphuric acid ( The physical properties of the oxides obtained are very important for their ultimate use as a fuel in nuclear reactors. It is now established that many of these properties are inherited from the precursor materials used ( The dissolution of the different uranium concentrates by nitric acid constitutes the principal operation of the uranium refining process flow sheet (  Our study focused on the dissolution of the most important uranium oxides in nitric acid, the following reactions have been considered: The purpose of this work was to determine the most predominant reaction during the dissolution process based on the thermodynamic analysis. The kinetics of the most predominant reaction was also investigated. Samples of the uranium oxides used in this study as raw materials: U The uranium was analyzed before and after dissolution process and a sensitive spectrophotometric method based on colored complexes with Arsenazo III has been used ( The dissolution tests of uranium oxide samples were conducted at a laboratory scale through the following procedure for each experiment: 4.0 The gas phase in the vessel was purged with air gas in order to remove NO The effect of the reaction time on the uranium oxide dissolution was studied at two temperatures 298.15 In order to study the influence of the temperature on the uranium extraction yield, a set of batch experiments were performed over the temperature range considered: 298.15 The Gibbs free energies derived from the Ulich model ( The values of the constants M For this thermodynamic study, the thermophysical data and the coefficients for heat capacities of the compounds used in this work were developed by ( The variation of the Gibbs free energies, Δ The results concerning the variation of Δ It was previously found from the thermodynamic study of the different uranium oxide dissolution that the more preponderant reaction at temperatures below 353.15 Thermodynamic parameters including enthalpy change (ΔH), Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) and entropy change (ΔS) should be considered in order to determine which process will occur spontaneously in engineering practice. The entropy and the Gibbs free energy values can be determined by means of the equilibrium constant changes with temperature according to the following equation ( The kinetics of the preponderant reaction has been studied. Three kinetic models ( First order: Second order: Third order: After linearization, the following expressions were obtained. First order: Second order: Third order: The reaction rate constants were studied up to 180 Dissolution of various uranium oxides in nitric acid medium was studied. Dissolution efficiencies of U Through the thermodynamic analysis and kinetic study of the dissolution of the uranium oxides by nitric acid, the following conclusions can be drawn. According to the thermodynamic values of ∆ Regarding the kinetics results of the dissolution reaction no. 2 given in