The results of cyanidation of a pre-oxidized pyrrhotite-rich gold ore in laboratory leaching experiments and in plant trials are presented to highlight the effects of particle size, oxygen and cyanide concentrations during pre-oxidation and cyanidation on the overall gold extraction. The Multi Mix Systems (MMS) unit for oxygen injection significantly enhances the mass transfer of reagents and allows the achievement of high gold extraction. Pre-oxidation of ore of P
                     80=63 μm for 12 h followed by cyanidation at a molar ratio of [CN−]/[O2]≈12 provided the best gold extraction in the first cyanidation tank. The %Au extracted in the first cyanidation tank reached a maximum of 83% when the product [CN−]×[O2] reached ≈5.6 mmol2 L−2.The Bounty Gold Mine located within the Forrestania Greenstone Belt of the Southern Cross Province, Western Australia has recovered over a million ounces of gold from 6.1 megatonnes of ore at an average grade of 5.5 Au g/t. The underground orebody has estimated in-situ reserves (excluding resources) of over 325,000 ounces of gold and a pre-mining reserve of greater than 1.5 million ounces of gold. The economic mineralisation within the Bounty Horizon is dominated by pyrrhotite with minor pyrite, marcasite and trace chalcopyrite. The presence of iron sulphide minerals, especially pyrrhotite, has influenced the optimisation of the processing plant over the years. Without pre-oxidation, the gold cannot be amenable to cyanidation at a cost-effective rate and thus pre-oxidation of the ore is a crucial factor in the leaching circuit. This paper presents a summary of the initial test work carried out in the laboratory and some of the plant trials with particular attention to examining the extent of gold leaching with respect to particle size, pre-oxidation, cyanide dosage and dissolved oxygen concentrations. The gold dissolution described by The concentration of cyanide determines the rate of anodic dissolution of gold whilst the concentration of oxygen determines the cathodic reduction of oxygen. Thus the initial rate of gold dissolution is largely controlled by the factors such as cyanide and oxygen concentrations, pH and temperature. The presence of other catalytic ions in solution and salinity of water also affect the rate of leaching From the electrochemical studies reported by As the reaction proceeds the surface area of exposed gold becomes less and hence the heterogeneous kinetic models become important Oxygen injection, instead of air, gives a high concentration of O Pre-oxidation with air or pure oxygen prior to cyanidation causes degradation of oxygen and cyanide consuming minerals and hence improves the gold oxidation kinetics and gold recovery The plant processes a blend ratio of up to 1:1 of underground sulphide ore and open pit ore at a rate of 115 tph. The gravity circuit recovers the fine free gold ( The water utilised in the process plant is hypersaline and is made up from the tails return water, thickener overflow water, underground de-watering activities, production bores and any fresh rain-water that is collected in catchment dams. The quality of the process water varies, as shown in The pH is modified to 9.3 by the addition of slaked lime to the slurry as it flows from the thickener into the first pre-oxidation tank. The presence of clay material in open pit ore can increase the lime consumption rate by 50–100%. The high salinity of the Bounty process water, as shown in The first four tanks in the circuit The liquid cyanide, 28–32% NaCN by weight, is diluted to half strength with barren eluate from the electrowinning circuit and fresh rain water to contain between 75 and 85 g/L CN Drill core material was crushed and rod milled to the desired grind size for subsequent leaching. The ground ore was thoroughly cleaned from the rod mill and transferred to a 20 cm diameter laboratory scale leach tank at ambient temperature fitted with baffles and an overhead stirrer to achieve the target density of 50% solids (w/w) in the leaching tank using the wash water. The oxidation was carried out by delivering compressed oxygen gas (Industrial Grade) via a small sparger to the slurry to maintain the desired DO level. To enhance the oxygen transfer rate, the speed of the overhead stirrer was increased to disperse the bubbles into the slurry. The DO level of each slurry tank was measured using a Syland Dissolved Oxygen Meter and Probe with a salinity compensation up to 3.5% or 35 g/L NaCl. The pH was measured using a standard pH probe with a TPS 900 series meter calibrated with standard pH buffers. A temperature probe was attached to both meters to compensate for the temperature of the slurry. The solid sodium cyanide used was of A.R. grade and the free cyanide was measured by performing a colorimetric titration with silver nitrate using rhodanine solution as the indicator. Additional experiments carried out using potentiometric titrations showed that the presence of background chloride has no significant influence on the cyanide concentration determined using colorimetry and potentiometry. The pH in the testwork was maintained above 9.0 during cyanidation by adding lime. The slurry samples removed using a small scoop were vacuum filtered and the solids were washed with distilled water before being dried in an oven set at 40 °C to avoid oxidation prior to further analytical testwork. Standard techniques were used to analyse iron (acid digestion followed by titration or atomic absorption spectroscopy), sulfide, sulfate (gravimetry), and thiocyante (titration). The collection of the circuit profile data was undertaken when the plant was in a steady state. All of the samples associated with the laboratory testwork and plant trials were analysed for gold using standard techniques: atomic absorption spectroscopy for gold in solution and fire assay for gold in solids.  A high concentration of O The ore without pre-oxidation consumes cyanide and oxygen according to the following equation: The Bounty process water contains approximately 260 mg/L SCN  The effect of different cyanide and DO levels obtained using oxygen lances on the %Au extraction in the first cyanidation tank are compared in trials A–D. Since the [CN  Prior to upgrading the oxygen addition regime using MMS, the DO levels remained low.  Although the optimum ratio of [CN When oxygen lances were used in the plant, %Au extracted increased with the increase in [CN As noted previously the electrochemical studies have indicated that the rate of gold leaching in air saturated solutions (0.25 mmol/L O  Pre-oxidation and appropriate [CN The use of Multi Mix Systems for oxygen addition provides high dissolved oxygen concentrations in the two pre-oxidation tanks, 1 and 2, allowing a total of 12 h of pre-oxidation without any oxygen injection to tank 3 prior to cyanidation in tank 4. The use of the third Multi Mix Systems unit in tank 4 for oxygen and cyanide addition in tank 4 provides good mixing and a high dissolved oxygen of ≥20 mg/L for cyanidation. This lowers the concentration of cyanide required in tank 4 to achieve good leaching kinetics and avoids the need for further addition of cyanide or oxygen in tanks 5, allowing 8 h of cyanidation prior to the adsorption onto activated carbon. A particle size of The lowest [CN The authors wish to acknowledge Viceroy Australia for financial assistance and permission to publish this technical information. The contribution of the staff at AMMTEC and MPL Laboratories in Perth in analytical aspects of this project is gratefully appreciated.