A simulation rumen model has been developed to function under non-steady state conditions in order to allow prediction of nutrient availability in dairy cows managed under discontinuous feeding systems. The model simulates availability of glycogenic, aminogenic and lipogenic nutrients to lactating dairy cows fed discontinuously. The model structure considers input of up to three different feeds fed independently at any time during the day. Feeds are described by their nitrogen (N), carbohydrate and fatty acid fractions. The N containing feed fractions include ruminally undegraded crude protein (CP), ruminally insoluble but potentially degradable CP, ruminally soluble CP and ammonia N. The feed carbohydrate fractions include ruminally undegradable neutral detergent fibre (NDF), ruminally degradable NDF, ruminally insoluble starch, ruminally soluble starch and sugars. The fatty acids in the feeds are divided between long chain fatty acids and volatile fatty acids (VFA). Additionally four pools were defined representing absorption of amino acids, glucose, long chain fatty acids and volatile fatty acids. The rumen microbial population is represented as a single pool. Besides a flexible structure, new features to the extant model include adoption of the concept of chewing efficiency (or chewing effectiveness) during eating, variable fractional ruminal absorption rates of VFA and variable fractional ruminal degradation rates of NDF as a function of rumen liquid pH, as well as a variable rumen volume which directly affects rumen concentrations of metabolites. The model continuously (i.e., by minute) predicts release of soluble components from the feeds in the rumen, concentration and absorption of fermentation end products in the rumen, rumen pools of nutrients and microbial biomass dynamics, as well as passage of microbial biomass and non-fermented nutrients from the rumen, in response to various feeding strategies. Model evaluation covered a wide range of feeding strategies that included pasture and housed feeding systems. Overall, the mean square prediction error (MSPE) as a percentage of the observed mean was relatively low (<10%) with a high amount of the total variation explained by random variation (>65%). Deviation from unity varied between 23% (rumen dry matter content) and 25% (NDF), indicating some consistent over and/or under prediction. A more detailed evaluation was done based on studies available that reported diurnal behaviour of key model outputs such as rumen pools, rumen pH, and rumen VFA. The predictions broadly simulated the observed values quantitatively, relative to general diurnal patterns, and relative to differences between treatments in the predicted diurnal patterns. Results show that the model provides a tool to assess potential outcomes of changing feeding strategies which may be particularly valuable in assessing selection of feeds, amounts and times of the day to offer the feeds. The continuous nature of the simulated output also allows determination of the time(s) of the day that ruminal (and/or post-ruminal) delivery of nutrients may limit ruminal output of nutrients (and/or availability of nutrients) to support milk nutrient synthesis.Recent progress in representation and quantification of rumen fermentation in models that simulate rumen function has been substantial ( In modern dairy management systems it has become common to offer cows feed on an Feed intake behavior of cattle is characterized by alteration, during the day, of eating, rumination, rest and social activities ( To represent and predict the unique processes of ingestion and digestion under discontinuous feeding situations, such as grazing, it is essential that a rumen model simulate the resulting diurnal fermentation processes. Recently, results of a series of grazing experiments that varied the allowed grazing time, as well as the combinations of rumen fill and fasting length before grazing, were used to evaluate a mechanistic, dynamic model ( Our objective is to introduce development of a simulation model that aims to function under non-steady state conditions in order to allow prediction of nutrient availability in dairy cows managed under discontinuous feeding systems. The ultimate aim of this model is to provide scientists and advisers a sound tool to evaluate actual feeding strategies, as well as facilitate research on new ones. The current model is an advanced version of the mechanistic and dynamic non-steady state rumen model of Although the underlying motivation to build the model came from dairy systems in which cows are grazed, and supplemented with forages(s) and/or concentrates ( The model is written in Smart software ( Although the model does not require specific defined animal characteristics to function, most of the data that were used to derive key functions, as well as during the evaluation process, is based on lactating Holstein dairy cows. At the present stage of development of the model, we consider it best to keep the domain of use to this breed. The model allows input of up to three different feeds offered in independent specified patterns during the day. The specific times of offer ( The three feeds that can be used in any model evaluation are described by their N, carbohydrate and fatty acid components. The N containing fractions include ruminally undegradable crude protein (UCP), insoluble but potentially ruminally degradable CP (DCP), ruminally soluble CP (SCP) and ammonia. Carbohydrate fractions include ruminally undegradable neutral detergent fibre (UNDF), ruminally degradable NDF (DNDF), ruminally insoluble starch (IS), as well as ruminally soluble starch and sugars as a single fraction. Fatty acids are fractionated into long chain fatty acids and VFA. Each feed's insoluble starch pool has its own degradation rate, based on feed characteristics, and the soluble starch plus sugar pool has another rate.   The model utilizes the concept of chewing efficiency ( Chewing during eating serves three functions, being (1) to reduce long forages to a size small enough to be incorporated in a bolus and swallowed, (2) to release soluble nutrients for fermentation and, (3) to damage the inner plant cell structure thereby enabling microbes to colonize it ( We could not identify any published studies in which release of ND solubles during mastication had been measured concomitant with measurements of IR. However an unpublished set of data was kindly provided by Dr. Anne Boudon ( Movement of particles and nutrients from inactive rumen pools to active pools occurs by chewing during rumination for insoluble feed fractions and by diffusion for soluble feed fractions Microbial metabolism in the rumen follows the basic relationships described by As in the model of The pH of rumen fluid was calculated as a function of the rumen concentration of volatile fatty acids (CVFA, mmol/L) according to the equation of Feeding high levels of concentrates, notably those high in starch, reduces ruminal digestion rates of fibre in feeds ( The model of In this section, development of several of the key predictive functions used in the CTR Dairy model will be presented and evaluated, following the same general sequence as was used in Section The equation to predict fch is an important function, since it governs key processes including daily dynamics of soluble component availability to the rumen microbial pool. As already outlined in Section The equation predicting the DMC (g/100 Examination of the equation to predict rumen pH from VFA concentration using independent data derived from three major studies and in which both concentrates and forages were fed ( The equation predicting the rumen degradation rate of feed fibre from pH, and an estimate of the measured rate of degradation at pH 6.5 (Section In this section the prediction accuracy of the model relative to studies available in the literature that were not used in model development are evaluated. We selected four validation studies that have variability in terms of feed chemical composition, feeding regimens, level and type of supplements and levels of milk production. Four ruminally and duodenally cannulated Holstein cows in mid-lactation were fed a mixed forage/concentrate diet Four ruminally and duodenally cannulated Holstein cows in mid-lactation were fed alfalfa or Timothy silage with either 8 or 12 In this study, four rumen-cannulated Holstein–Friesian dairy cows (600 This study was completed with dairy cows to evaluate effects of duration and time of the day within the grazing session on DM intake, milk production and its composition. Twenty-one cows in three treatments (T) were offered the same amount of herbage by strip grazing. In T1, cows grazed for 8 For model evaluation, only the short grazing sessions (  Reported values of rumen DMC as well as rumen pools of DM, CP and NDF either at specific times throughout the day (VS1, VS3, VS4; Overall, the MSPE as a percentage of the observed mean was relatively low (<10%) with a high amount of the total variation explained by random variation (>70%). The lower MSPE was for rumen DMC (6.1%) and the higher for NDF rumen pool (10.2%). Deviation from unity varied between 23% (DMC) and 25% (NDF), indicating some consistent over- and/or under-prediction. The MSPE for CP was higher (38%), but could be largely explained by the data from VS2 ( In The four studies selected for CTR Dairy model evaluation covered a wide range of feeding strategies that included pasture and housed feeding systems. Measurements of the diurnal behaviour of rumen variables in these studies, such as pools, pH and VFA concentrations allow the ability of the CTR model to accurately predict the behaviour of at least some of its outputs within the whole ruminal system to be examined against observed data. Data recorded with higher frequency, such as rumen pH and VFA concentrations, were mostly reported by the originating authors on plots ( Of particular value for these latter comparisons were VS1 and VS3, since they are the most detailed studies available that report diurnal behaviour of the some key CTR model outputs such as rumen pools, rumen pH and rumen VFA. Thus only these two studies will be used in evaluation of CTR model predicted diurnal patterns. Diurnal patterns of rumen pools of total VFA, DM, NDF and CP are in Figs. 3 and 4 of VS1, and predicted values for these variables are in our In general, the overall trends within these observed variables are well represented by CTR Model predictions. In addition, comparisons between CTR Model predicted values for the DAY and NIGHT treatments, shown in a diurnal format ( The CTR Model predicted diurnal pattern in the rumen pool of CP showed a pronounced peak at 3:00 In general, and based upon the limited number of diurnal patterns of output parameters reported in VS1, the CTR Model predictions broadly simulated the observed values quantitatively, relative to general diurnal patterns, and relative to differences between the treatments in the predicted diurnal patterns. In their publication, It seems that fchew We have developed a mechanistic simulation model (CTR Dairy) to function in discontinuous feeding systems in order to allow prediction of nutrient availability in dairy cows managed under conditions when steady state kinetics cannot be assumed. The ultimate aim of this model is to provide scientists and extension advisers a sound tool to evaluate actual or proposed feeding strategies, as well as facilitate research on new ones. Evaluation of CTR Dairy was primarily based on four published studies that had variability in feed chemical composition, feeding regimens, level and type of supplements, as well as levels of milk production. CTR Dairy outputs broadly simulated observed values with a low relative MSPE and a high amount ( Results show that the model provides a tool to assess potential outcomes of changed feeding strategies, which may be particularly valuable in assessing selection of feeds, amounts to feed and times of the day to offer feeds. The diurnal nature of the simulated output allows determination of the time(s) of the day that ruminal and/or post-ruminal delivery of nutrients may limit ruminal output of nutrients, and/or availability of nutrients, to support milk nutrient synthesis. The authors extend sincere thanks to Dr. Anne Bouton (INRA, Theix, France) for providing data that allowed us to link IR with NDS release during ingestion.