Extracts of enamel matrix proteins are used to regenerate periodontal tissues. Amelogenin, the most abundant enamel protein, plays an important role in the regeneration of these tissues. However, the molecular mechanisms by which amelogenin contributes to periodontal regeneration remain unknown. Using primary human bone marrow stroma cells (hBMSCs) transduced with lentivirus encoding human amelogenin (hAm), we performed genome-wide expression profiling to analyze the effects of hAm transduction on the regulation of genes involved in osteogenic differentiation. Our results revealed that BMP-2, BMP-6, OPN and VEGFC were up-regulated. These results suggest that hAm may be a key element in regulating hBMSCs osteogenic differentiation.The use of enamel matrix proteins (EMPs) for inducing periodontium regeneration of new cementum, bone and dentin has been studied in The majority of EMPs activities have been attributed to amelogenin as it is the most abundant enamel protein. Zeichner-David et al. Although it is well documented that amelogenin (Am) products may function as potential epithelial–mesenchymal signaling molecules during tooth development Reconstruction and expression of LV-hAm were performed according to previously described protocols hBMSCs were isolated and cultured by methods reported previously Total RNA from LV-hAm infected hBMSCs and control cells (hBMSCs infected with LV-GFP) were amplified and labeled with the Illumina RNA Amplification kit (Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting material (700 The genes with statistically significant differential expression were determined according to the fold change in transcript level and Diffscore value between LV-hAm infected hBMSCs and control cells. The genes that exhibited at least 3-fold greater expressions in LV-hAm infected hBMSCs compared to the control were isolated as candidate genes for further study. The Diffscore represents the significance of the difference in gene expression between two samples. It is defined as a method of measuring significant differential expression for a gene in two samples by Illumina BeadStudio, with the following levels of significance: Diffscore of >13 or <−13 correspond to Diffscore of >20 or <−20 correspond to Diffscore of >30 or <−30 correspond to Hence the genes with Diffscore values (LV-hAm infected hBMSCs vs. the control cells) from −13 to 13 were eliminated. According to functional annotation of the genes by Illumina, we further selected the genes involved in osteogenic differentiation. The transcript level of the four selected genes (BMP-2, BMP-6, OPN and VEGFC) and one housekeeping gene (β-actin) were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR with the Applied Biosystems 7700 instrument. All PCR reactions were done in triplicate. All statistics were performed using Student’s Third-passage hBMSCs were infected with LV-hAm or LV-GFP. After a 72-h incubation, the FCM assay was carried out to determine the expression of EGFP. As shown in To gain insights into the mechanism by which hAm induces hBMSCs osteogenic differentiation, genome-wide expression profile analysis was carried out in LV-hAm infected hBMSCs and control cells using a cDNA microarray. As shown in Secreted by ameloblasts during tooth development, amelogenin comprises more than 90% of EMPs. Besides its function in biomineralization and formation of enamel, amelogenin has been recently implicated in cell differentiation, proliferation, attachment and migration. Notably, certain alternative- or degradation-spliced products of amelogenin are considered candidate signaling molecules during cementogenesis Among the up-regulated genes, BMP-2 and BMP-6 are involved in the BMP signaling pathway. BMPs are widely expressed in morphogenesis and development of various tissues. There is evidence that certain BMPs play important roles in cementogenesis In the hAm transduced hBMSCs, BMP-6 expression was also significantly up-regulated. Studies Following transduction of hAm in hBMSCs, the expression of osteopontin (OPN) is markedly up-regulated at the mRNA level. Osteopontin, which has been identified in several tissues, was first described as a multifunctional protein that acts as a coupling factor for bone resorption and formation in the process of bone remodeling. Additionally, because OPN expression accumulates at tissue interfaces in teeth, it is considered to play an important role in periodontal regeneration. In the cementum of teeth, OPN is the major non-collagenous protein in root cementum and other mineralized tissues Another up-regulated gene, VEGFC (Vascular endothelial growth factor C), belongs to the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) family. In addition to the regulation of angiogenesis, VEGF has been suggested to play an important role in bone resorption Osteoblast-like and cementoblast-like cells play a significant role in the maintenance, repair and regeneration of the periodontium This research was supported by Grants from the