Taixi oxidized coal surface has many hydrophilic functional groups as well as many cracks and holes. The effect of prewetting time on the flotation behavior of Taixi oxidized coal had been observed in our previous studies, and it was surmised that the oxidized coal surface was easier wrapped by water shell because the hydrophilic functional groups could be bonded with water through hydrogen bond and the cracks and holes could also be filled up with water when the coal was prewetted in the flotation cell. However, the mechanism of how the prewetting/immersion process can affect the flotation performance of Taixi oxidized coal is still poorly understood and should be investigated clearly. This paper was to conduct the fundamental studies on the effect of prewetting/immersion time in the attachment time between air bubble and Taixi oxidized coal. It was found that the attachment time increased quickly with the increase of prewetting/immersion time. The micro-bubbles are produced on the oxidized coal surface when the coal particles are immersed in the water. The micro-bubbles may be primarily from the air entrapped in the cracks and holes on the oxidized coal surface. As the prewetting/immersion time increased, the micro-bubbles would dissolve and get away from coal surface, and then the cracks and holes would be fully filled up with the water. Finally, the oxidized coal surface would be wrapped by a thick hydration shell which could prevent the oxidized coal surface from being attached by the bubbles, and hence the bubble-coal attachment time increases with the increase of prewetting/immersion time.Oxidized coal is considered to be difficult to float with common oily collectors, such as kerosene and diesel oil ( In order to improve the flotation of oxidized coal, several attempts are conducted. The high intensity conditioning, surface attrition and grinding processes were used to remove the oxidized layers, and the surface hydrophobicity and floatability of oxidized coal were increased ( Besides, the rough surface properties of coal surface have an important role in its floatability and hydrophobicity. It has been observed that the surface roughness can affect the flotation performance of quartz, barite and glass beads and complex sulphide ores ( In our previous studies, a novel flotation procedure, named zero-conditioning flotation or flotation without prewetting/immersion period, was proposed ( It is well known that the particle-bubble attachment time is greatly affected by the roughness of mineral surface. The rougher surfaces can accelerate the formation of critical thickness of liquid film and the entrapped air at the rougher surfaces makes the rupture of liquid film easy and quick ( The raw coal in Taixi city of China is oxidized and heated at the condition of self-ignition and the outside/inside of the bulk coal are oxidized. Therefore, we consider the coal is oxidized completely. This coal was named Taixi oxidized coal. We selected the low density coal samples from the Taixi Coal Preparation Plant. Then, the low density was screened and then the coal samples with the size fraction of 0.25–0.125 The bubble-particle attachment time measurements were conducted with the Attachment Timer (made by University of Alberta, Canada) ( The coal particle was transferred to a small cell. Then, the distilled water was transferred to the cell. The coal particles were immersed and remained in the water-filled cell for different times, 0.5, 4, 12, 24 and 48 A bubble holder was on the top of the coal particle surface. The bubble was generated using a microsyringe, and then hold by the bubble holder. Next, the bubble was kept in contact with the coal particle surface for the controlled contact time from 10 In here, the time required to form a suitable bubble to contact coal surface and the time required to adjust the experimental machine cannot be ignored. In other words, the coal samples should wait for the formation of bubble and the adjustment of the experimental machine to begin the attachment measurements. The total time required for the preparation of measurements is about 5 In addition, the attachment time cannot be obtained by only once because the contact time is variable and fixed from short period (10 Compared with the prewetting/immersion time, the measuring time is short and hence we consider we can obtain the different attachment times at the different prewetting/immersion times. Considering the difference in particle shape and surface properties between various coal particles, 10 repeated measurements at different particles bed were obtained and the final coal-attachment time was obtained using the arithmetic mean values of 10 attachment times. As shown in As shown in In here, we declare that the coal-bubble attachment time at the prewetting/immersion time of 4 Taixi oxidized coal is difficult to float because the surface not only has many hydrophilic functional groups but also many cracks and holes. The cracks and holes will be filled up with the water during the prewetting/immersion procedure prior to flotation. This paper investigated the effect of prewetting/immersion time in the attachment time between air bubble and Taixi oxidized coal. The micro-bubbles on the oxidized coal surface play a very important role in the coal-bubble attachment. With the increase of prewetting/immersion time, the number of micro-bubbles on the oxidized coal surface is reduced and the coal-bubble attachment time is increases. The micro-bubbles can significantly reduce the coal-bubble attachment time. The findings of this paper may be an explanation on why the prewetting time can affect the flotation behavior of Taxi oxidized coal in our previous published paper ( This work was supported by the