While it is qualitatively known that the dynamic stress-strain response of granular media is highly influenced by the initial density and moisture content, a detailed characterization of such behavior has not been reported in the existing literature. This paper proposes a simplified empirical approach to quantify the uniaxial compressive stress-strain behavior of partially saturated granular media at a given saturation and initial dry density that requires only the response at a reference dry density as input. The relations were formulated based on experimental stress-strain data of Stockton Beach sand retrieved using a modified split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) at a strain rate between 1000 and 1300 s−1. The tested sand was confined within a hardened steel tube, exhibiting initial dry densities of 1.46 g/cm3, 1.57 g/cm3, and 1.69 g/cm3 across water saturations ranging from dry to above 90%. Through a parametric investigation, the resulting empirical relations were shown to be promising in representing the specimen behavior before and after the initiation of water lock-up. This study ultimately illustrates the feasibility of empirical modeling techniques in predicting and characterizing the high strain rate response of partially saturated granular media as a bulk system.The ubiquity of sand as a construction material accentuates the importance of accurately capturing its dynamic response for applications ranging from civil engineering to defense. However, the behavior of granular materials under high strain rate loading is still poorly understood, making the characterization challenging. The incorporation of water giving rise to a partially saturated state further exacerbates the challenges in evaluating the overall response of sand under impact. Accurately quantifying the dynamic behavior of sand is therefore essential for applications in mining, blast, and earthquake engineering Despite the difficulty of conducting dynamic experiments on porous geologic materials Previous studies into the high strain rate response of partially saturated sand have provided insights into the mechanical behavior of such materials under various conditions. However, most work to date considered their behavior largely from a qualitative perspective The SHPB is commonly used for characterizing the response of engineering materials under high strain rates The preparation and testing of all specimens follow the procedure documented by Wang et al. Three dry densities (1.46 g/cm Hopkinson bar experiments on all specimens throughout this study were modified via the use of pulse shapers. This technique acts to extend the rise time of a loading pulse such that stress equilibrium is achieved within the specimen before the stress attains its peak. The effects of dispersion can also be mitigated as high frequency components in the loading pulse are filtered out, resulting in waves with a narrower bandwidth  However, the response of partially saturated specimens relative to the dry behavior is observed to vary as a function of initial dry density. In general, it appears that the partially saturated stiffness prior to water lock-up relative to the dry stiffness is inversely related to the initial dry density. As the initial dry density increases, relative to the dry behavior at the same density, a softer response is observed for the partially saturated samples, and this trend is very clear for initial dry density of 1.69 g/cm The objective is to formulate equations for the prediction of uniaxial stress-strain relations as a function of initial dry density (represented via the void ratio) and saturation. Due to the occurrence of lock-up behavior witnessed for highly saturated specimens, the theoretical compressive strain required to initiate water lock-up under uniaxial conditions is at first evaluated. Empirical formulae are subsequently established pertaining to the dynamic stress-strain response of Stockton Beach sand from experimental data presented in The manifestation of water lock-up finalizes the transition of a partially saturated specimen from a three-phase to two-phase system under uniaxial high strain rate compression. As the sample response rapidly shifts to that of pure water after lock-up, the strain required to initiate lock-up must first be established as an upper limit for which the contribution of the soil skeleton is applicable to the overall stress-strain behavior. Based on An empirical model to quantify the partially saturated stress-strain response of Stockton Beach sand across the initial dry densities considered as a function of saturation is subsequently proposed under strain rates between 1000 and 1300 s As observed from From The trend lines representing the quadratic coefficients For Stockton Beach sand under strain rates between 1000 and 1300 s Hence, the normalized stress ratio at a given strain prior to the initiation lock-up for Stockton Beach sand under uniaxial compression and strain rates between 1000 and 1300 s As evidenced in The strain range and constrained modulus of the transition phase from pre-lock-up to lock-up behavior as a function of the initial void ratio is empirically determined via: The linear coefficients of The relations proposed in At 0% saturation, a value Eqs. To further enhance the accuracy of the empirical procedure prior to the initiation of water lock-up at The parameters in The updated uniaxial compressive stress-strain relation for a given initial dry density and saturation,   A parametric study is subsequently carried out to examine the capabilities of the empirical model. The stress-strain trends predicted by the empirical model are seen to be consistent with the expected behavior of partially saturated sand under high strain rate loading as observed experimentally in the literature Since derivation of the empirical relations for Stockton Beach sand was based on experimental results, the appropriateness of their implementation is limited by the conditions under which the results were extracted. It is evident that the NSR forms the backbone of the derived equations, to which a linear approximation was adopted in representing the NSR as a function of engineering strain for each saturation for simplicity. However, from A simplified empirical model was proposed based on SHPB data for quantification of the dynamic stress-strain response of partially saturated granular media under uniaxial compressive conditions. The relations were founded based on the normalized stress ratio concept, which expresses the partially saturated behavior in terms of the dry response at a given density. The model was observed to be capable in estimating material behavior of Stockton Beach sand at any given saturation and initial dry density at strain rates between 1000 and 1300 s This work was supported in part by the