Hydrofluoric acid represents the majority of the industrial applications of fluorine in the world. It is synthetized from fluorite, which is commonly purified by the froth flotation process to attain the high-grades required for hydrofluoric acid production. Besides, in metallic ores such as tungsten and phosphate ores, fluorite does not represent any added value compared to the extracted metals and is, therefore, considered as a gangue mineral that has to be rejected. In both cases, the fluorine content has to be known precisely in the flotation process as well as in all the industrial applications involving fluorine, to estimate the process efficiency and to optimise the operations. Nevertheless, fluorine quantification is difficult using conventional techniques since it usually includes heavy sample preparation such as dissolution. Though, Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) provides a multi-element detection that has been successfully used to quantify fluorine using either elementary or CaF molecular bands. Here, rock samples exhibiting a wide range of fluorine contents (from 1.48% to 40.73%) were analysed, the fluorine being mainly comprised in fluorite. These samples corresponded to the products of different flotation tests conducted on the same tungsten-skarn ore. The experimental conditions were optimised to study the two CaF molecular bands, located between 529 and 543 nm, and between 590 and 606 nm, respectively. Systematically, the LIBS emission intensities of the two studied bands were evaluated using the peak areas, which were normalised, averaged over several ablated zones, and correlated with the fluorine content determined by the fluoride-ion sensitive electrode method. The particle size played a key role as significant differences in the LIBS intensities were exhibited between the 10–150 μm and the <20 μm powders, with no discernible correlation between the size ranges and signal magnitude. Furthermore, the matrix effects strongly impacted the LIBS intensities, which displayed a non-linear relationship with the fluorine contents: this induced the development of non-linear univariate models that were calculated on 27 training samples and validated on nine testing samples (3:1 ratio). Although non-linear models fitted adequately the experimental data, a multivariate approach considering the two studied CaF bands was adopted to overcome the matrix effects. A formula with linear, quadratic, and interaction terms was generated from the multivariate regression, predicting fluorine contents with R2 = 0.94 and a mean average error of 2.18%F. The developed models demonstrated that a precise and accurate quantification of fluorine is possible using a calibrated handheld LIBS, providing an on-line estimation of the processes efficiency and a real-time adaptation.Fluorite (CaF Most of the fluorite industrial applications require high CaF During the flotation stage of fluorite-containing ores, quantifying the fluorine content in the flows is a key point to assess the performances of the process, Hence, either non-destructive methods or techniques requiring no sample preparation are much more adapted for the fast and on-line fluorine quantification issue. Some authors demonstrated the efficiency of the neutron activation method on rocks [ In this work, the measurement of the emission of two different CaF molecular bands using handheld LIBS technique is evaluated for the fluorine quantification on 36 pressed powder pellets coming from various flotation tests, displaying a wide range of fluorine contents. The influence of the particle size is assessed and several models are developed to strengthen quantification models based on statistical methods. The 36 rock powders analysed in this work were floated and non-floated products from lab-scale flotation experiments performed on the Tabuaço (Northern Portugal) tungsten-skarn. This ore contained fluorite (CaF To estimate the influence of the particle size of the samples in the models, the particle size distribution (PSD) was analysed for each sample by laser light scattering. The obtained PSD were the average of 5 duplicate analyses, which were performed using a Helium-Neon Laser Optical System Mastersizer 3000. The PSD, which is a function, was assessed by a unique value, the d The actual fluorine content of the samples was measured by potentiometric analyses (SARM-CNRS). The products, corresponding to a + 150–10 μm fraction, after flotation, were completely dissolved in acidic medium with different sorts of acids. The symbols + and – mean “coarser than” and “finer than”, respectively: a − 150 + 10 μm powder is a ground ore which grains are smaller than 150 μm and coarser than 10 μm. Then, the analyses consisted in the use of a fluoride-ion sensitive electrode (ISE) which measured the potential of the solution. The error on the F contents with this method was ±5% of the given value. Froth flotation was performed on a − 150 + 10 μm fraction, corresponding to the ground and deslimed Tabuaço ore. After the flotation tests, the non-floated and floated products were milled in a ring mill to obtain a < 20 μm fraction, usually used for spectrometric analyses. However, among the 36 samples studied here, 13 were randomly selected and analysed prior to the ring-milling stage in order to assess the influence of the particle size on the LIBS intensities. For each sample, a representative aliquot of 1 ± 0.2 g of powder was sampled and compacted into a 2-mm-thick pellet with a basis pressure of 6.5 ton cm All of the LIBS analyses were performed under a constant argon flow controlled directly by the LIBS handheld instrument with an argon purge displaying a pressure of around 12 psi. Argon atmosphere is known to enhance the emission intensities and minimize the effect of air on the LIBS signal (here 10 times higher). Spectral data can be collected in either ungated or gated operation, with user settable gate delays. Here, concerning the temporal conditions of the plasma analysis, the delay time for the beginning of the acquisition of the LIBS emission was 400 ns. Thus, in order to record the molecular emission of CaF, the acquisition time window was fixed to 1 ms. For each pellet, the automatic raster mode has been used while the distance between the ablated zones and the distance to the border of the window was optimised to avoid any problem for the plasma expansion. Nine ablated zones were defined on three lines, with four zones per line for the two upper lines and one zone for the lower line, as presented in Spectragryph 1.2.9 software was used for the spectra processing [ The JMP® statistical software (SAS institute) was systematically used to build the univariate and multivariate models. For univariate non-linear models, a Newton algorithm [ A typical LIBS emission spectrum of a sample with a fluorine content of 14.73% (moderate value) is presented in One of the benefits offered by the LIBS analysis done by a handheld tool is the possibility to perform on-line measurements for fluorine quantification all along the process. In this case, the analysed powders would flow from one separation process to another in the plant and would not be milled down to 20 μm prior to the measurement as it was the case for the present work. Hence, it is of paramount interest to assess the influence of the particle size on LIBS emission efficiency. As mentioned previously, among the 36 samples analysed in this study, 13 were randomly selected and analysed before being milled in the ring mill, their size being then theoretically −150 + 10 μm. For those 13 samples, the CaF peaks areas were then measured before and after the milling stage. Moreover, the particle size distributions of the powders were measured by laser light scattering, providing the d The LIBS apparatus used in this study performed analyses on nine ablated zones for each pellet as presented in Based on these observations, two methods were applied to decrease the peak areas dispersion and to strengthen the models developed on these experimental data. First, for each pellet, the peak areas were averaged on the nine ablated zones following the widely described averaging method [ Prior to the modelling, the 36 samples analysed by LIBS and ISE were divided in training and testing samples, following the usual procedure for calibration development [ Tables S1 and S2 (in SI) regroup sample numbers, fluorine contents measured by ISE, non-normalised and normalised peak areas of the two CaF molecular bands for each ablated zone, and their average over the nine ablated zones. Based on the experimental results, the CaF peak area for the 529–543 nm peak, in arbitrary unit, was expressed as a function of the fluorine content measured by ISE, as presented on Besides, the 590–606 nm peak was studied following a similar procedure. However, the moderate to high fluorine contents displayed constant peak areas, inducing a strong asymptotic behaviour of the curve and, then, the impossibility to inverse the function and to predict the fluorine contents from the LIBS peak areas. The comparison between non-normalised and normalised averaged peak areas ( The prediction models were also compared using the mean absolute error (MAE), which assesses the error that can be done when the fluorine content is predicted ( We demonstrated previously that the particle size affected the LIBS peaks areas, despite no significant relationship. Also, the normalisation affected the modelling part since a univariate model could be developed for the non-normalised 590–606 nm peak areas while no model could fit them when they were normalised. Nonetheless, the univariate models considered each of the 529–543 nm and 590–606 nm CaF molecular bands separately; taking into account a linear combination of the two bands and their possible interactions could lead to an improvement of the models. Hence, a multivariate modelling has also been considered, taking into account the different parameters influencing the calibration between the actual fluorine contents and the LIBS peak areas. Since the univariate models generated previously involved non-linear terms for the CaF peaks areas, quadratic terms were also included in multivariate models, which were developed following the equation: Overall, the multivariate model calculated on non-normalised peak areas exhibited better R For the nine validation samples, the model with normalised peak areas exhibited slightly better performances, with higher R The main goal of this work was to develop a fast and accurate fluorine quantification method on powders for a wide range of applications including mineral processing area. To attain this objective, a handheld LIBS was used on 36 samples from flotation tests, containing from 1.48% F to 40.73% F, which fluorine content was measured by ISE. The handheld LIBS ablated nine different zones for each sample and two CaF molecular bands were studied for fluorine quantification. We demonstrated that the particle size had a significant effect on the LIBS intensities with however no correlation. Moreover, we found a variability in the LIBS intensities regarding the different ablated zones of a sample. Hence, for the fluorine quantification, averaging and normalising with respect to the total light were applied to decrease the values dispersion. Also, the 36 samples were randomly divided into 27 training samples and nine testing samples for model development and model validation, respectively. Then, univariate non-linear models were developed on each CaF band studied separately, with significantly better performances for the 529–543 nm peak. The best univariate model provided a quantification with R We thank anonymous reviewers for their helpful and wise suggestions and comments, their expertise on the data treatment has been gratefully appreciated. The research leading to these results has received funding from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at