Vertical uplifting of boulders and stones is well known to take place in cold regions. Movements of stones in roads might lead to traffic danger, vehicle failures, and cause breakdown of the road surface with the need of expensive repair as a consequence. In addition, freeze/thaw and associated stone movements may cause an increase in permeability, which can lead to contamination of soils and ground water if used as soil liners in landfill areas or even dam failures if used as hydraulic barriers in earth dams. Freeze/thaw tests were carried out in the laboratory on a silty sandy soil in order to study movements of embedded stones and to measure how the overall permeability was influenced by freeze/thaw cycles. The soil samples were compacted at three different water contents, i.e. 11.5% (optimum), 14.5%, and 17.5%. Each sample contained one stone, placed at a predetermined depth. The soil samples were subjected to one-dimensional open system freeze/thaw. Soil temperatures, volume changes, and stone movements were measured. The results showed that upward stone movements took place due to freeze/thaw in the frost susceptible soil compacted at and 3% above the optimum water content. In addition, the permeability increased in samples with initial water contents of 11.5% and 14.5%. This permeability increase was as much as 81 times after six freeze/thaw cycles. For the samples with initial water contents of 17.5%, very small changes in permeability were measured.Freezing and thawing of frost susceptible soils may cause changes in their structure due to particle rearrangements, initiation of cracks, and consolidation Vertical stone movements (stone heave) are a well-known phenomenon taking place in cold regions in frost susceptible soils with stone inclusions Uplifting of stones may cause raised “bumps” on paved surfaces, e.g. roads, streets, and parking lots leading to uncomfortable driving conditions and costly repairs (see In stone heave tests by The object of this study is to investigate how silty sandy soil samples, compacted at different initial water contents and containing embedded stones, behave when subjected to repeated cycles of freeze/thaw in an open water system. Vertical movements of soil surface and stones as well as permeabilities were recorded as a measure of the structural changes caused by freezing and thawing. A non-plastic well graded silty sandy soil with a clay content of 7% and a silt content of 35% was used in the study. In Soil samples were compacted at three different water contents: optimum water content (for maximum modified Proctor density) Freezing and thawing took place from the top down at freezing temperatures of −5°C (Series C) and −10°C (Series B). The maximum thawing temperature was +20°C. The cylinders were located in a freezing room in insulated plywood boxes and wrapped in glass fiber insulation to ensure one-dimensional freezing conditions. The bottom of the soil was connected to an external water supply in order facilitate unrestricted ice lens formation during freezing and drainage during thawing. A heat pad connected to a timer was placed beneath the water container, to achieve a water temperature during freezing in the range of 0°C to +3°C. In After three, six and nine cycles of freeze/thaw, the cylinders were taken out from the insulated box and the permeability was measured in falling head tests. The soil sample was kept in the same cylinder during the whole test procedure to minimize disturbances. The properties of the test specimens, conditions of testing and the major results on soil and stone movements are summarized in  The stone in sample C-1 had been placed adjacent to the transparent wall of the sample container and therefore could be monitored visually during freeze/thaw cycling. The stone within the soil sample is shown for freeze/thaw cycles 3 and 6 in The results for sample B-2 which was also compacted at optimum moisture, but exposed to a freezing temperature of −10°C are summarized in The average rate of stone heave/cycle for the samples compacted at optimum water content was approximately 1 mm/cycle. Sample B-1, which was compacted at a water content of 17.5% (optimum+6%), and exposed to a freezing temperature of −10°C, experienced large soil heave during the first two freeze/thaw cycles with a maximum of 12 mm, but subsequently settled, stabilising at a final heave of only 3 mm (see The average heave results for all tests are plotted vs. the compaction water contents in   The results of the permeability tests are summarized in The average permeabilties of the specimens exposed to freezing temperatures of −10°C, are plotted vs. the number of freeze/thaw cycles in The permeabilities were normalized by relating to the respective initial permeabilities and are plotted for all tests vs. the number of freeze/thaw cycles in In order to relate the results of the laboratory investigation to field conditions, the laboratory study was complemented by a small field program: heave of stones, pushing through the paved surface of a parking lot in Luleå, Sweden (see Stone heave after six to nine freeze/thaw cycles was found to be the largest with 10 mm maximum heave for the initially denser samples which had been compacted at optimum water content to an average void ratio of approximately When comparing the laboratory results with the field observations, it is apparent that the rate of heave per freeze/thaw cycle was generally higher in the field than in the laboratory. For the initially dense samples compacted at optimum water content and exposed to open system freeze/thaw, the average rate of stone heave was 1 mm/cycle as compared to the average rate of stone heave of 5 mm/cycle in the field. Both values are, however, in the same order of magnitude. In this context, it should be noted that in the field and in the lab the rate of stone heave fluctuated considerably from cycle to cycle, as well as between the various observations points or samples, reflecting the continuously changing structure and density of the soil during the freeze/thaw process, which in turn effected again stone heave as well as soil heave. Soil heave after six to nine cycles of freezing and thawing was expressed in terms of volumetric strain Δ The initial void ratios for zero volume change are almost identical to the The cavities observed above and below the stone inclusion in some soil samples may help to explain the mechanism of stone heave. It appears that cavities and fractures were more pronounced in initially strong soil and remained open during thaw more readily than in softer soils. Distinct voids were observed in the specimens compacted at optimum water content above and below the stone inclusions (see The results of this study suggest that in dense silty soil stone heave cannot be prevented, if open system type freezing occurs and water is readily available during freezing. However, considering the results reported by The effect of soil type on stone heave cannot be assessed from the above results because the two materials appear very similar in terms of basic engineering classification characteristics, even though the two soils differ considerably in their optimum water contents for maximum modified Proctor density, which for the soil of this study was 11.0%, as compared to 6.3% for the soil used in Viklander's investigation Temperature gradients during freezing, influence the formation of ice lenses and thus also the magnitude of soil heave. Stone heave is directly dependent on frost heave, because stones included in the soil will be lifted up vertically by the heaving soil. Cavities will be created at the base of the stone, which eventually determine the magnitude of stone heave subsequent to freeze/thaw. If the temperature gradient is too large, the soil freezes too rapidly, no ice lensing and thus only little soil heave occurs. The stone will be trapped inside the frozen soil matrix, without experiencing permanent heave. In the present study no significant difference between freezing at temperatures of −10°C and −5°C can be recognized. Thus, the temperature conditions for optimum stone heave could not be assessed. The effect of stone shape and its orientation with respect to the direction of heat flow could not be clearly evaluated because in the present study relatively bulky stones were used, with a ratio between the longest and the shortest axis of 0.70 and 0.80. In the two cases, the stone rotated and moved laterally away from the container walls, so that in the case of sample C-2 after two freeze/thaw cycles and for sample C-3 after seven freeze/thaw cycles, the stone was not more visible. According to The stones used in the transparent plexiglass cylinders (C-series) were painted yellow for better visual identification. No major difference in heaving between the painted stones and unpainted stones used in the tests of the B-series was indicated. This was to be anticipated because it was found previously Permeabilities of homogeneous low-plastic or non-plastic soils change only little during cyclic freezing and thawing, because self-healing occurs as the fractures created during freezing collapse during thaw, reestablishing the initial hydraulic conductivities Silty sandy soil specimens with stone inclusions were exposed to one-dimensional, open system type cyclic freezing and thawing, with temperatures alternating between −5°C and +20°C in one series and −10°C and +20°C in a second series. The effect of compaction water contents on soil heave and stone movements, as well as on the permeabilities at the end of each freeze/thaw cycle was studied. Both stone heave and soil heave were the highest for soils compacted at optimum water content (in terms of maximum modified Proctor density). The amount of stone heave and soil heave decreased with increasing compaction water contents. The point at which no stone heave and no volume changes took place was about 5% to 6% wet of the optimum water content, in this study as well as in previous investigations Stone heave observed in the field in dense glacial till below a paved parking lot, about 25 years after construction, was generally larger than in the laboratory, however, still in the same order of magnitude as for the laboratory specimens compacted at optimum and exposed to open system freeze/thaw. Permeabilities increased for initially dense soils by a factor of almost 100 during the first three to four freeze/thaw cycles, but subsequently decreased again, whereas for initially loose soils (compacted at water contents 6% wet of optimum) the permeabilities changed only little during freeze/thaw cycles. Thus, when silty sandy soil with stone inclusions (e.g. glacial tills) are used for liners or dikes which are affected by cyclic freezing and thawing, the soil should be placed clearly wet of optimum water content, to minimize volume changes as well as permeability changes. Liners, compacted at optimum water content to maximum densities, will experience initially large increases in permeabilities. However, with time, as the soil loosens up, the permeabilities will decrease again, approaching the values of initially loose soil. This project was carried out as research collaboration between Luleå University of Technology, Sweden and Lakehead University, Canada. The project was financed by the Swedish Building Research Foundation (BFR), Luleå University of Technology and Lakehead University. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the two students Rick Wiljamaa and Reijo Noponen for taking part in the laboratory work.