The giant Sarcheshmeh porphyry Copper deposit is located 65km southwest of Kerman City, southeastern Iran. Numerous Miocene porphyry stocks and dykes intruded thick sequences of Upper Cretaceous sedimentary and Eocene volcanic rocks. Hypogene and supergene porphyry Cu mineralization occurs within the granodioritic porphyry and host rock sequence, which was extensively altered to a dominantly potassic, phyllic, and argillic assemblage with interstitial to distal propylitic types.
                  Biotite-bearing assemblages occur as both primary phenocrysts and secondary replacements showing variable size, colour, and shape. Fluorine contents (0.22 to 1.33wt.%) and XMg (0.54 to 0.71) in biotites from the potassic and phyllic zones are higher than those of non-mineralized granitoids (F=0.09 to 0.56wt.%, XMg
                     =0.43 to 0.54), whereas their Cl contents (Cl=0.05 to 0.24wt.%) are lower than those of the non-mineralized granitoids (Cl=.0.11 to 0.45). The biotites from the phyllic zone have higher log (fH2O/fHF) and log (fH2O/fHCl) values than those of the potassic zone, as well as the granitoid and andesitic dykes. The log (fHF/fHCl) values determined for the granitoid, potassic and phyllic zones are similar, though more negative than those of the andesitic dykes. The log (fHF/fHCl) values have a similar range for biotite from the granitoid, and potassic and phyllic zones. The halogen fugacity ratios established for fluids associated with the Sarcheshmeh deposit from their F and Cl contents in biotite show that the granitoid, potassic zone and phyllic zone are increasingly affected by meteoric waters. The fluids that circulated in the phyllic zone are predominantly of meteoric origin, possibly overprinting original phyllic zone halogen contents.
                  The Cl intercept values of biotite in the granitoid, and phyllic and potassic are similar to other ore-forming systems and tend to be more Cl-rich than Cl-intercept values of biotites in common igneous rocks. Calculated F/Cl intercept values for biotite in the granitoid and potassic zone are also consistent with many other porphyry copper forming systems.The giant Sarcheshmeh deposit is located 65 In general, porphyry Cu deposits are formed by hydrothermal fluids that are derived from crystallizing intermediate to acidic magmas emplaced into the upper crust associated with magmatic arcs ( Between 70 to 90 % of the F and Cl in muscovite- and fluorite-free granitoid rocks is contained in biotite, with the remainder in apatite, amphibole, and titanite ( This paper describes geological and mineralogical features of the Sarcheshmeh porphyry Cu deposit, with a focus on the composition of biotite in the intrusive granitoid rocks and the alteration zones in an attempt to characterize the evolution of hydrothermal fluids responsible for deposit formation. Although several methods of investigation have been previously integrated to examine the evolution of hydrothermal fluids in the Sarcheshmeh porphyry Cu deposit, such as fluid inclusion studies ( The Sarcheshmeh Cu porphyry is located in the SE-trending part of the Central Iran magmatic arc zone known as Sahand–Bazman magmatic arc sub-zone ( The study area is outlined in a regional geological map (1:100,000 The intrusive suite is characterized by variable age, size, and composition, ranging from gabbro to granodiorite ( Samples from intrusive rocks outside of the Sarcheshmeh mine have been collected from a few representative granitoid intrusions ( Samples collected from the intrusions close to deposit are mainly granodiorite with a typical porphyry texture. Phenocrysts commonly comprise 40 to 50 vol. % of whole rock and consist of plagioclase, biotite, quartz, and K-feldspar. The groundmass and vein stockworks are composed of mainly quartz, K-feldspar, albite, anhydrite, and biotite. Pyrite and chalcopyrite veins occur in the vein stockworks. Potassic alteration and extensive silicification have formed during hydrothermal activity, with biotite, K-feldspar, quartz, anhydrite, sericite, chlorite, and clay minerals occurring as secondary minerals in the samples. The Sarcheshmeh porphyries are divided into three types ( The Sarcheshmeh porphyry is the principal host rock of the copper mineralization and is granodioritic in composition. The least-altered Sarcheshmeh granodiorite porphyry consists of plagioclase, quartz, K-feldspar, and biotite Hydrothermal alteration zones are concentrically zoned around the Sarcheshmeh porphyries ( Potassic alteration is not readily evident in the open pit mine at surface. Based on samples from drill cores, this zone occurs in deeper parts of Sarcheshmeh porphyries and in intrusions that were not affected by phyllic and argillic alteration. The dominant mineral assemblage in the potassic zone is represented by K-feldspar, relict plagioclase, biotite, quartz, sericite, anhydrite, magnetite, rutile, pyrite, chalcopyrite, and molybdenite. The hydrothermal products generally occur as groundmass replacement, veinlets, and interstitially among plagioclase, hornblende, and primary biotite phenocrysts ( The altered rocks are mainly Eocene andesitic rocks within the biotitic alteration zone, which are altered or metamorphosed to small, thin, brown biotite crystals, imparting a brownish hue. The biotitic rocks were also locally affected by supergene processes. The biotite grains are characterized by small, thin flakes of biotite. Numerous small biotite, sericite, and clay minerals replaced the original minerals in this alteration zone. The phyllic alteration is widely observed in the present open pit of the Sarcheshmeh and is associated with high-grade ores. The common minerals are sericite, quartz, K-feldspar (relic), chlorite, pyrite, chalcocite and digenite, chalcopyrite, and magnetite. They occur as vein and veinlets and pervasive replacement zones of the preexisting mineral phases, i.e., both primary and potassic assemblages. Brown to pale brown biotite is present in deep parts of this zone, varying in size (0.1–1 The propylitic alteration assemblage is observed as a green outer zone and is characterized by chlorite, epidote, albite, sericite, calcite, quartz, and clay minerals that locally replaced biotite, hornblende, plagioclase, and groundmass. The argillic alteration assemblage is characterized by small veins that are scattered throughout other alteration zones in the Sarcheshmeh porphyry Cu deposit. Relict feldspars are associated with clay minerals (kaolinite, illite, montmorillonite), quartz, and iron hydroxide. Biotite is absent in this zone, because it was completely altered to clay minerals. The mineralized area is divided into three zones; hypogene sulfides, supergene sulfides, and supergene oxides. The hypogene sulfide minerals mainly occur as disseminated blebs and veins and consist of pyrite and chalcopyrite The supergene sulfide zone is characterized by chalcocite and digenite replacing chalcopyrite, with chalcopyrite relicts observed in many samples. Pyrite in this zone also contains tiny grains of hypogene sulfides, such as chalcopyrite, bornite, cubanite, pyrrhotite, enargite, and tennantite. Molybdenite occurs along quartz veins in this zone. The Cu grade within the supergene sulfide zone is generally two times higher than that in the hypogene mineralization zone ( The exposed hypogene ores in Sarcheshmeh were subjected to the supergene processes with their original sulfide minerals have been replaced by Fe-hydroxides, Cu-oxides, Cu-carbonates, and Cu-silicates to form a leached cap and the oxide zone. The oxide zone that locally overlies the zone of supergene sulfides has a reddish colour ( Samples described in this article were mainly collected from exposed granitoid, alteration zones and andesitic dykes. Biotites in the Sarcheshmeh deposit are of three types, including igneous (primary biotite), hydrothermal, and metamorphic biotites ( To plot compositional data on the diagrams, the Sarcheshmeh biotites are divided into those in the granitoid from outside of the deposit as igneous biotite (biotite from granitoid), biotite in Sarcheshmeh granodioritic porphyry stock close to the deposit is known as hydrothermal, formed during the potassic stage (biotite from the potassic zone), and biotite in the transitional potassic-phyllic and biotitic zones are referred as hydrothermal biotites that were formed in the phyllic stage (biotite from the phyllic zone). Biotite phenocrysts in the post-ore andesitic dykes are igneous. The microanalyses of biotite in the various Sarcheshmeh intrusive rocks and alteration zones were conducted by an automated JEOL JXA-8600 Superprobe of Yamagata University with accelerating voltage of 15 The average chemical composition and range for biotite-bearing assemblages from the Sarcheshmeh intrusive rocks and alteration zones are presented in Using Fluorine contents in biotite from the phyllic zone, potassic zone, granitoid, and andesitic dykes range from 0.36 to 1.33, 0.22 to 1.05, 0.09 to 0.56, and 0.22 to 1.05 Biotites in the alteration zones of the Sarcheshmeh deposit have been enriched in Mg and have been depleted in Cl.  Crystallization temperature of the granitoid has been estimated from plagioclase–hornblende geothermometer of The potassic alteration zone in the Sarcheshmeh deposit was formed at high temperatures (340–570 The halogen fugacity ratios of biotites in alteration zones and granitoid from Sarcheshmeh are shown in log (  X Mole fractions of siderophyllite (X The IV(F) for biotite in the granitoid, andesitic dykes, and alteration zones around the Sarcheshmeh deposit are presented in The following Eq. The IV(F/Cl) value is directly related to the fugacity ratio The Sarcheshmeh porphyry Cu deposit is formed by hydrothermal activity related to a subvolcanic Miocene granodiorite stock (Sarcheshmeh porphyry) and fine-grained porphyry, which intrude the Eocene andesitic volcanic and granitoid sequence. The hydrothermal alteration forms concentric zones from a potassic core outward to biotitic, phyllic, and propylitic zones. Hypogene sulfide minerals mainly occur as disseminated blebs and veinlets consisting of pyrite and chalcopyrite Biotite analyses mainly fall within the field close to the phlogopite–biotite boundary composition. Correlations of F and Cl in hydroxyl site and cations in octahedral and tetrahedral sites of biotite structure from Sarcheshmeh are consistent with those of that predicted by experimental studies (F–Fe and Cl–Mg avoidance principles). The weak correlations especially between Cl and Mg in the biotite structure indicate that the biotite has been equilibrated with a heterogeneous fluid. The trend of the biotite chemistry that trends across iso-fugacity ratio contours (parallel lines representing the calculated log ( The IV(F) for biotite in the granitoid and alteration zones is similar to those of igneous rocks and porphyry copper ore deposits whereas IV(Cl) is similar to those of mineralized hydrothermal systems. The IV(Cl) from the Sarcheshmeh intrusive rocks and alteration zones tend to be more Cl-rich than comparable values from biotites in common igneous rocks. Biotites from the Sarcheshmeh intrusive phases and alteration zones show a similar and narrow range of F/Cl intercept value corresponding to a Cl-rich system rather than F-rich system. The