Cutoff grade specifies the available supply of metallic ore from an open pit mine to the multiple processing streams of an open pit mining complex. An optimal cutoff grade strategy maximizes the net present value (NPV) of an open pit mining operation subject to the mining, processing, and marketing/refining capacity constraints. Even though, the quantities of material flowing from the mine to the market are influenced by the expected variation in the available metal content or inherent uncertainty in the supply of ore, the majority of cutoff grade optimization models not only disregard this aspect and may lead to unrealistic cash flows, but also they are limited in application to an open pit mining operation with single processing facility. The model proposed herein determines the optimal cutoff grade policy based on a stochastic framework that accounts for uncertainty in supply of ore to the multiple ore processing streams. An application on a large-scale open pit mining operation develops a unique cutoff grade policy along with a portfolio of mining, processing, and marketing/refining rates. Owing to the geological uncertainty, the approach addresses risk by showing a difference of 14% between the minimum and maximum production rates, cash flows and NPV.In an open pit mining complex, a typical open pit produces material of various categories, which is transported to the appropriate processing streams for recovering metal as a valuable product. Knowing the ultimate pit limit, i.e., the size or extent of an open pit mine, the supply of material in terms of grade–tonnage curves is established ( Cutoff grade policy defines the amount of ore and waste in a given period during the life of an operation. While waste is hauled to the waste dumps, ore being valuable material is sent to the processing streams for crushing, grinding, and upgrading to produce concentrate, which, in turn, may be upgraded further by refining to produce a final marketable product ( While, mine is a source of supplying ore to a number of processes that convert raw ore to a profitable product, expected variation in metal content throughout the extent of the orebody defines the inherent uncertainty in supply of ore. Taking the limited exploratory drill-hole information as an input, the geostatistical technique of conditional stochastic simulation ( Lane proposed a heuristic approach to cutoff grade optimization ( Unlike previous studies, realizing the importance of acknowledging geological risk to open pit mine planning, we propose an extension in Lane's theory herein, such that, it is applicable in a stochastic framework that not only takes into account multiple simulated or equally probable grade–tonnage curves generated from a set of simulated or equally probable orebody realizations ( In the following sections, we discuss the stochastic cutoff grade optimization model, describe the heuristic procedure for calculating optimum cutoff grade, present the steps to implement the heuristic approach, and demonstrate the benefits of the proposed model in a case study followed by conclusions. The stochastic optimization model is limited in application to an open pit mining complex that consists of a single material source (mine), multiple material destinations (processing streams and waste dump), and a market/refinery receiving concentrate from these processing streams. Also, it is assumed that an optimal ultimate pit limit has been established and the available reserves (in terms of multiple simulated or equally probable grade–tonnage curves) within the pit limit are known ( period (year) indicator; life of operation (years); process indicator; grade–tonnage curve indicator; grade categories indicator; number of grade categories in a particular grade–tonnage curve; cash flow for grade–tonnage curve selling price of metal ($/tonne of metal); marketing/refining cost ($/tonne of metal); mining cost ($/tonne of material); processing cost of process administrative or fixed cost ($/year); mining capacity (tonnes/year); processing capacity of process marketing/refining capacity (tonnes/year); quantity of material mined for grade–tonnage curve quantity of ore processed for grade–tonnage curve quantity of marketable product or metal in concentrate to be marketed/refined for grade–tonnage curve metallurgical recovery of process discount rate (%). Given a set of equally probable grade–tonnage curves, the model develops the cutoff grade policy for life of operation, i.e., it determines the cutoff grade The formulation (1)–(4) decides on the optimal cutoff grade Formulation (1)–(4) is solved using a heuristic procedure that maximizes the NPV of operation by keeping the quantities of material mined, processed, and marketed/refined within the available limiting capacities in a given period Given a grade–tonnage curve Hence, the difference between If Eq. The balancing cutoff grades are meant for harmonizing the available material in ground with the production capacities. Hence, they are deduced from the grade–tonnage curves. Assume that a grade–tonnage curve The optimum cutoff grade corresponding to a particular processing stream is selected among the limiting economic The heuristic procedure simultaneously accounts for a set of simulated or equally probable grade–tonnage curves and determines a single as well as optimum cutoff grade policy. The procedure is computation-intensive and iterative, requiring implementation of the algorithmic steps in a programming language. Given a particular period Set Compute reserves Compute balancing cutoff grades Set Set Compute: Limiting economic cutoff grades    Set If  If   Compare Given Set Present the optimal cutoff grade policy from periods 1 to This section presents an application of the stochastic cutoff grade optimization model to an actual copper mining complex. The open pit mining complex constitutes an open pit, four ore processing facilities, and a waste dump. The open pit produces sulphide and oxide ores along with waste material to uncover these ores. The ore may be processed in two flotation-mills, a bio-leach pad, or an acid leaching plant, and the waste material is destined to the waste dump. Mining capacity stands at 182.5 million tonnes of ore and waste. The processing capacity of flotation-mills, bio-leaching pad, and acid-leaching plant is 43.8 million, 21.9 million, and unlimited tonnes of ore, respectively. Similarly, it is assumed that the operation has an unrestricted potential to refine or market the annual copper production.  Knowing the input information, the steps of the heuristic approach given in the previous section are implemented to develop the optimal cutoff grade policy along with a portfolio of production rates and cash flows. As shown in This paper presents an extension in Lane's heuristic approach to cutoff grade optimization. The proposed modification enhances the application of Lane's original model not only to open pit mining operations with multiple ore processing facilities, but also accounts for geological uncertainty. The model utilizes multiple simulated or equally probable grade–tonnage curves derived from equally probable simulated realizations of the orebody model. However, irrespective of considering multiple grade–tonnage curves, the heuristic approach suggests a unique cutoff grade policy and looks into the risk of maintaining the cash flows to maximize NPV based on the possible variations in production from mine, processes, and market/refinery during the life of operation. An application of the approach at a large copper mine that produces relatively uniform (less variable) and high-grade copper ore shows a difference of 13.83% between the minimum and maximum NPV generated through a set of fifteen (15) equally probable grade–tonnage curves. A similar trend may be observed in Apart from considering multiple ore processing streams, the proposed heuristic is limited to single mine or material source and market/refinery (i.e., it sums the quantities of metal in concentrate from individual processing streams). A mining complex with multiple mines and limited capacity of individual market or refining processes presents a very complex supply chain system under geological uncertainty, and a heuristic procedure may not capture the details of such a complex optimization problem. As such, future studies require the development and implementation of Stochastic Integer Programming (SIP) based mathematical formulations to solve such a complex optimization problem. The work in this paper was funded from