Ilmenite (FeTiO3) is an important source of titanium, for which the main application is TiO2 pigment. One route to the production of TiO2 from ilmenite may be the digestion of both the Fe and Ti components in hydrochloric acid and the subsequent direct hydrolysis of the Ti. The process requires that the Ti be solubilized. A kinetic study is performed of the leaching of New Zealand (Barrytown) placer ilmenite (ground to a 10μm median particle diameter) by hydrochloric acid in a stirred reactor. Around 90% extraction of both Fe and Ti is achieved with a 32% w/w HCl concentration, with a 2:1 w/w ratio of HCl to FeTiO3 over the temperature range 60 to 90°C. The shrinking sphere model is a good representation of the kinetics if particle size distribution is accounted for. The reaction rate is estimated to be 4th order in HCl concentration. The temperature rise due to an exothermic reaction is calculated to be c. 41°C. Undesirable, in situ hydrolysis of Ti during digestion can be limited by control of temperature, reaction time and acid concentration. The data and models presented may facilitate the preliminary design of an industrial process to digest ilmenite to dissolve and retain Ti in solution.Extensive deposits of ilmenite occur as placer deposits (beach sands) on the West Coast of the South Island of New Zealand. The size of the resource has been extensively surveyed, with the Barrytown old beach sands deposit near Westport containing approximately 6.9 Ilmenite supplies about 90% of the world's demand for titanium (Ti) minerals. World Ti resources are estimated to be > For the production of TiO The digestion of ilmenite by HCl may be investigated with the view to producing a pigment-grade TiO Various factors affecting ilmenite digestion in HCl have been studied ( Here, we describe the reactivity of New Zealand-sourced ilmenite in concentrated HCl under conditions that might be suitable for industrial production of TiO Ilmenite concentrate from Barrytown, Westland, New Zealand was supplied by Rio Tinto Pty Ltd. The composition of the ilmenite was determined using borate fusion and X-ray fluorescence spectrometry by Spectrachem Analytical Services, Lower Hutt, New Zealand. The ilmenite was then ground in small batches (35 The ground ilmenite was digested in 32% Digestion of ground ilmenite in hot HCl took place in a 3 Samples of liquor were collected at timed intervals and rapidly filtered through glass fiber paper while still hot. The Ti and Fe contents were analyzed by reduction with Al metal followed by quantitative oxidation by titration with cerium sulfate solution using the indicators methyl blue (for Ti) and N- phenylanthranilic acid (for Fe). The results are presented as percentage dissolution, based on the total Ti and Fe contents of the added ilmenite and the Ti and Fe contents of the solution adjusted for solution mass increases due to dissolution and removed sample volumes. The elemental composition of the Barrytown ilmenite, including inclusions, is shown in Being from a placer deposit, the mined ilmenite had a narrow size distribution, centered of around 150–250 Slightly more Fe was digested than Ti ( The ultimate decreases in proportion of Ti digested at 85 Digestion of over 80% of Ti, without hydrolysis, was achieved (concentration of about 81 Complete digestion of the Ti component will not be possible, in part because some Ti is present as rutile inclusions ( The digestion proceeds according the stoichiometric reaction: with 4 The 2:1 For a model to adequately represent the digestion of ilmenite in HCl, many factors must be taken into account, not all of which are well known or readily included. Here, the aim is not to provide an exhaustive analysis of all the factors but rather to consider enough of them to allow development of an industrially useful model for a limited range of conditions. The hard rock ilmenite from the Jos Plateau in Nigerian is amenable to direct HCl digestion and the kinetics of this reaction have been studied ( An alternative model, the shrinking sphere model, where the rate also depends on the exposed surface area of the particles (which decreases with time) and but may be due to one, or a combination, of the diffusion to (and from) the surface and chemical reactions at the surface (Eq. The shrinking core model fits the digestion data presented here well for the 60 By comparsion, a plot of the shrinking particle model fits the data poorly ( However, there are some significant flaws with this model comparison. The observed distribution of particle size ( For the data recorded here, the shrinking sphere model has been applied with a five-point particle size range (approximating measured particle size; Now the plot of The Barrytown ilmenite is known to dissolve in HCl by the hollowing out of the particles, initially along the basal planes, followed by disintegration of the partially dissolved particles ( The temperature dependence of the reaction rate can be investigated with Arrhenius plots ( In the experimental data presented here, where the HCl concentration varied during the reaction, it was not easy to determine the relationship between the ilmenite digestion reaction and acid concentration. However, data for the digestion of Nigerian ilmenite ( Based on the stoichiometry of the reaction, if the digestion is diffusion-controlled (as either a shrinking core or shrinking sphere), then the process could be expected to depend on the fourth power of the H An important experimental factor to consider is the saturation concentration of Fe The reaction of ilmenite with HCl is exothermic. In industrial digestion processes, the ratio of HCl-to-ilmenite is likely to be low (as it was in these experiments), so the temperature rise would be significant. The reactions were not adiabatic here; however, it is possible to estimate, based on some approximations, the temperature rise due to the reaction from available enthalpies of formation of the components ( The reaction is considered to be: The heat capacity of the system is approximated as the sum of the heat capacity of water (4180 For a ratio of 2:1 HCl-to-ilmenite, with an initial HCl concentration of 32% If the goal of ilmenite dissolution in HCl is for the direct production of TiO It has been shown that ilmenite from Barrytown, New Zealand, may be readily digested in concentrated HCl, without pretreatment, and that hydrolysis of the Ti fraction can be avoided. A rate equation for the reaction has been fitted that enables modeling of the digestion reaction rates. The temperature dependence of the reaction has been established and the dependence of the reaction rate on acid concentration has been approximated. Calculations of the heat of reaction have lead to further modeling, in this instance of the temperature rise during the digestion process. As the models are applicable at an industrial scale, this work forms the basis for the development of an industrial process to digest Barrytown ilmenite for the direct production of TiO Westland Ilmenite Ltd. supplied ilmenite concentrate from the Barrytown deposit. Sue Hallas of Nelson assisted with editing the manuscript.