During the manufacture of nitric acid from ammonia there is a slow loss of catalytic platinum gauze. This fine dust, which contains 13.7% Pt, 1.3% Rh and other impurities such as iron oxide and silica, is deposited on the internal reactor walls and cooling coils. The dust was refluxed with aqua regia at a liquid/solid ratio of 7.5 for 1.5 h to solubilise platinum for subsequent recovery. Platinum was separated from the leach liquor by direct precipitation and by solvent extraction using trioctylamine in kerosine. In both cases the platinum was recovered as diammonium hexachloroplatinate by precipitation using ammonium chloride. The precipitate was decomposed by ignition to produce platinum powder with purity of 97.9% and 99.9% for direct and SX routes, respectively. A platinum recovery of 97.5% was achieved by both routes.Platinum gauze is used to catalyse the oxidation of ammonia in the manufacture of nitric acid. During this operation, part of the platinum is lost as fine dust due to operation at high temperature and pressure. The dust is deposited on the internal reactor walls and cooling coils. This dust can be recovered during a plant shutdown, the dust on the walls was collected manually while the dust on the coils was washed with dilute hydrochloric acid and the liquor was dried. In the Egyptian fertilizer industry, large amounts of such platinum enriched dust are accumulated. Recovery of the platinum metal from this dust has a vital economic impact on the process. Different authors have investigated the recovery of platinum group metals from spent catalysts. Platinum recovery from spent reforming and isomerization catalysts has been studied by selective dissolution of base metals in 50% H  Secondary platinum scrap from the glass industry also containing iridium, rhodium and palladium was used to study the refining process. Dissolving this material in boiling aqua regia, diluting with water or hydrochloric acid and adding ammonium chloride gives a Pt precipitate, leaving the accompanying platinum group metals in solution Solvent extraction has been practiced for the preparation of highly pure precious metals The composition of the dust sample under investigation in this work is different from those cited in the literature as it is contaminated with several impurities such as excessive amounts of iron oxide from the surroundings and other base metal oxides. The aim of this study is investigation of the leaching and separation conditions for recovery of platinum from the dust of the spent catalyst arising from a nitric acid production plant. Acid leaching followed by either chemical precipitation or solvent extraction is examined. Parameters affecting leaching and separation processes such as time, temperature, acid concentration and liquid/solid ratio were studied. Rhodium was also found to be partially leached with aqua regia. The leaching residue and the filtrate after platinum separation are used for Rh recovery and the results will appear in a subsequent paper. A representative sample of 1-kg spent platinum dust was obtained from Kima Company for Fertilizers, Aswan, Egypt. The dust sample was homogenized by thorough mixing and the <106-μm fraction used. Preliminary investigations showed that grinding to finer sizes had negligible effect on the leaching of platinum. X-ray diffraction analysis (Cu radiation, Philips PW 1730) indicted the presence of Pt, quartz and haematite as the major phases present. Chemical analysis of the dust and products was determined by using both of atomic absorption spectrometer type (Perkin Elmer Model 3100) and X-ray fluorescence (ARL 9400 Sequential XRF). The composition of the dust is shown in  Preliminary leaching of the dust sample with concentrated hydrochloric acid showed that although the haematite dissolved, so did some of the platinum. This can be attributed to the oxidative nature of the dust sample that was collected as fine particles from the highly oxidizing nitrogen oxide atmosphere. Thus, a preliminary stage to dissolve iron is not appropriate due to the losses of platinum. Leaching experiments were performed in a 250-mL glass container immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath equipped with magnetic stirrer. Aqua regia was freshly prepared by mixing concentrated hydrochloric acid (36%) and concentrated nitric acid (65%) by the volume ratio of 3 HCl:1 HNO Two alternative methods were investigated for separation of both commercial and pure grade platinum from the solution. In the first method, platinum was precipitated as diammonium hexachloroplatinate, (NH Solvent extraction experiments used 10% trioctylamine (TOA) in kerosine and were performed in 250-mL cylindrical glass vessels with equal volumes of the organic and aqueous phases. The vessels were shaken in a thermostatted shaker (GFL Model 1083) for the required time. After phase separation a sample from the aqueous phase was withdrawn for chemical analysis. An aqueous solution of ammonium hydroxide and ammonium chloride was used as the stripping agent with diammonium hexachloroplatinate immediately precipitated. Precipitation stripping was suggested In both cases, the precipitate was filtered washed with saturated ammonium chloride solution and dried. The dried precipitate was ignited to produce sponge platinum powder. The leaching results of platinum dust with aqua regia at different times, temperatures and liquid/solid (acid/dust) ratios are shown in Saturated ammonium chloride solution was added to the leach liquor (as-prepared) that contains hexachloroplatinic acid to precipitate diammonium hexachloroplatinate complex The platinum precipitate was ignited to platinum powder according to: Solvent extraction is a technique proposed for production of pure platinum with separation of Fe(III) from Pt(IV) an important factor in this process. A synthetic solution containing 0.1 g/L each Pt(IV) and Fe(III) was prepared and utilized for optimizing the separation conditions of the two metals. Trioctylamine (TOA) reacts with HCl to form the chloride species as follows: Platinum (IV) is extracted with TOA by an ion exchange mechanism according to following equations The effect of contact time (1–120 min) on extraction of Pt(IV) and Fe(III) from 0.01 M HCl was examined. However, almost all Pt(IV) was extracted to the organic phase within 1 min; even after 120 min there was little uptake of Fe(III). Thus, mixing for only 1 min is enough for effective separation of the two metals. It has been reported that Rh(III) extraction using TOA shows similar behaviour to that of iron(III) The leach liquor was shaken with 10% TOA in kerosine for 5 min to ensure the complete extraction of platinum. In this work, nearly complete precipitation stripping of Pt was achieved by precipitation stripping the Pt-loaded TOA with an ammonium hydroxide-ammonium chloride solution. The yellow precipitate was dried and ignited at 350 °C to produce sponge platinum with purity of 99.9%. Leaching and separation conditions for the recovery of platinum from spent catalyst dust arising from the fertilizer industry have been evaluated. Aqua regia leaching was used with a Pt recovery of 98% after leaching for 1.5 h at 109 °C with a liquid/solid ratio of 10. Platinum was separated from the leach liquor as ammonium hexachloroplatinate by two alternative methods, precipitation with ammonium chloride and solvent extraction with TOA. A separation factor for platinum over iron of >4000 was achieved by loading from 0.01 M HCl. Platinum was precipitation-stripped using an aqueous solution mixture of ammonia and ammonium chloride. The ammonium hexachloroplatinate was ignited at 350 °C to produce commercial and pure grade metals purities of 97.9% and 99.9% after direct precipitation and solvent extraction, respectively.