Acid leaching of manganese from the powders of exhausted zinc alkaline batteries has been studied using carbohydrates as reducing agents. A mono-saccharide (glucose) and a di-saccharide (lactose) have been tested, the second as a template of industrial wastes. Manganese leaching was complete in the presence of both carbohydrates, along with zinc. Data from the factorial test with lactose have been analysed with ANOVA. The most significant effects for manganese extraction were sulphuric acid concentration, temperature, and lactose concentration.There is a growing interest in the study of new processes for recycling of discarded materials; in particular the recovery of metals from exhausted batteries. Various investigations on the recovery of zinc and manganese from alkaline batteries have been published ( The processes for hydrometallurgical recycle of alkaline batteries are based on previously investigated methods of extraction of manganese from ores ( In this work we investigate the acid leaching of exhausted zinc alkaline batteries using glucose and lactose which has not been proposed before. Lactose is the main component of waste from food industries, molasses and whey, and can be obtained by elimination of proteins and fats by ultrafiltration. Our previous focus has shifted from low grade ores to used alkaline batteries, leading to a European patent EP 1 684 369 A1 ( Used zinc alkaline batteries of different size were collected and samples of 1200 g were ground and dried at 105 °C for 24 h. The crushed material was sieved and divided in two fractions: retained (size Samples of washed powders were leached for 3 h with 100 ml of acid solution in a water bath (Dubnoff shaker, ISCO) thermostated at 90 °C and the stirring set to 200 rpm. Operating conditions were planned on the basis of a 2 Therefore, each mole of MnO Similar tests were carried out with lactose as the reducing agent at a solid to liquid ratio of 1:10 w/v and sampled every hour in order to follow the dissolution of zinc and manganese. Again the trials were planned on the basis of a 2 The powders after crushing and sieving were analysed by XRF. In the starting powder, Mn (27.65%) and Zn (13.59%) were the main elements together with K (5.10%) and minor quantities of Ca, Mg, Fe, Ni and Cd (0.2–0.6%) probably coming from external case residuals). After washing three times to remove KOH and soluble salts, the powder showed a 15% weight loss and analysed Mn (33.63%), Zn (19.25%) and K (1.37%). A preliminary test was carried out at 70 °C in the presence and absence of lactose in order to determine the influence of a carbohydrate as reducing agent. As expected, the leaching of zinc was quantitative in both tests, but the extraction of manganese was very low (21%) without lactose and complete with lactose within 1–2 h leaving a small residue (9.5%). This confirms that in absence of reducing agent only the reduced oxide fraction of manganese can be leached. In the second series of tests the leaching of manganese with glucose was investigated. The factorial test studied the influence acid concentration and glucose concentration; with the lower glucose level chosen as 0 and the higher level chosen as four times the stoichiometry set by Eq. The results of these tests are presented in The derivatives of glucose were identified by HPLC, as reported in a preceding investigation with manganese ores ( The factorial tests aimed to fix the optimal conditions to maximize the recovery of manganese and zinc in the presence of lactose. By keeping a constant temperature (90 °C) and sulphuric acid concentration (2 M), increasing the lactose concentration increased the extraction of Mn to 98% in 3 h, when the stoichiometric ratio of lactose: Mn was 1.7 (test 11, The experimental results, given as extraction yields after 3 h, were analyzed by the analysis of the variance (ANOVA), according to the Yates' algorithm ( The effects of all factors and of their interactions are shown in ANOVA results were used to derive a simple linear mathematical model in order to predict Mn extraction yields for many operating conditions that were not directly tested, whatever in the wide range of experimental conditions given (1 M  The semi-empirical equation was also used to predict the leaching of Mn under different experimental conditions which were not tested which represents a valid tool for optimization purposes. Powders obtained from exhausted zinc alkaline batteries contain ZnO, KOH and a range of mixed Mn(II)/Mn(III)/Mn(IV) oxides. A simple method for the complete extraction of Zn and Mn is demonstrated using sulphuric acid leaching in the presence of carbohydrates, mainly lactose, which can be easily obtained from wastes of food industry. The carbohydrates reduce the Mn(IV) and Mn(III) oxides to acid soluble Mn(II). About twice the stoichiometric amount of lactose is required for complete extraction. Factorial test design and analysis of the variance enables optimum conditions to be identified and recoveries predicted under other conditions. Our further work will be focused on hydrometallurgical processes for the recovery of base and precious metals from other kind of batteries and selected kinds of electronic waste.