Determination of dynamic fracture parameters of brittle rocks is of particular importance in assessing rock structure stability, rock strength and rock behavior under the effect of dynamic loading. Major dynamic fracture parameters including initial crack extension angle, stress intensity factors, fracture toughness and crack propagation path are directly affected by crack propagation speed (CPS). In this study, the dynamic form of the maximum tangential stress criterion (DMTS-Criterion) was used to determine the fracture parameters as a function of CPS under three loading conditions: 1) pure mode I, 2) pure mode II, and 3) mixed mode I-II. In addition, a dynamic two-dimensional crack propagation code (DTDCPC) was developed using the DDM to predict the crack trajectory in cracked semi-circular bend (SCB) specimens for different CPS values. CPS ranged from zero (the fully static case) to the Rayleigh wave speed (the fully dynamic case). The results showed that all fracture parameters increased by increasing CPS. In addition, under pure mode I, cracks only grew at acute angles (forward branching) and bifurcated when the CPS exceeded a critical value. Under mixed mode loading I-II and pure mode II, cracks grew at acute (forward branching) and obtuse (backward branching) angles. The backward branching of faults under pure mode II occurred in most rock types when crack propagation speed was greater than 0.81 of the Rayleigh wave speed. In addition, it was found that fracture toughness of pure mode II (KIIC), compared to that of pure mode I (KIC), decreased by increasing CPS to 0.76 of the Rayleigh wave speed, and cracks tended to grow under pure mode II. For high CPS, KIC was greater than KIIC, and cracks tended to grow under pure mode I. DTDCPC showed that the crack propagation path predicted in SCB-specimens deviated away from its original plane as CPS was increased, and the deviation of the crack propagation path decreased as the crack inclination angle increased.Crack propagation speed, crack tip speed or fracture velocity Semi-circular bending Dynamic maximum tangential stress criterion Displacement discontinuity method Boundary element method Poisson’s ratio Shear modulus Crack propagation speed Dilation wave speed Shear wave speed Raleigh wave speed Dimensionless crack propagation speed (c/c Critical dimensionless crack propagation speed for crack bifurcation The ratio of dilation to shear wave speed Dynamic stress intensity factor under pure mode I Dynamic stress intensity factor under pure mode II Static stress intensity factor under pure mode I Static stress intensity factor under pure mode II The ratio of dynamic to static stress intensity factors under pure mode I The ratio of dynamic to static stress intensity factors under pure mode II Fracture toughness under pure mode I Fracture toughness under pure mode II The slowness of the crack tip The inverse of dilation wave speed The inverse of shear wave speed Radial distance from the crack tip Dimensionless tangential stress Crack extension angle Crack inclination angle Displacement discontinuity perpendicular on the element Displacement discontinuity parallel to the element Displacement discontinuity perpendicular on the crack tip element Displacement discontinuity parallel to the crack tip element The half-length of the crack tip element Dimensionless stress intensity factor in the SCB specimen under pure mode I Dimensionless stress intensity factor in the SCB specimen under pure mode II The radius of the SCB specimen Spacing between the bottom supports in the SCB specimen Most geophysics, mining and civil engineering projects are subjected to different loading patterns at different strain rates. In general, the magnitude of the strain rate ranges from 10 Fracture parameters include initial crack extension angle, stress intensity factors, fracture toughness and crack propagation path or crack trajectory. For the static case, all fracture parameters have been studied analytically, numerically and experimentally based on the maximum tangential stress criterion (MTS-Criterion) Over past few decades, several researchers have worked on the crack branching phenomenon using analytical, numerical and experimental methods. Based on the asymptotic fields near a moving crack tip, the stress history due to crack propagation was analytically determined at points away from the crack line and compared with experimental results Most previous studies have focused on the effect of strain rate, stress rate and crack propagation speed on the case of crack bifurcation, the stress intensity factor and fracture toughness under pure mode I Depending on analytical and numerical model for dynamic crack propagation under mixed mode loading by taking into account the effect of CPS on stress intensity factors and angular functions near a moving crack tip, this study aims to cover the fully dynamic case under mixed mode loading I-II. Considering the dynamic formula of the stress intensity factor under pure mode I Under mixed mode loading, a running crack is subjected to normal and shear stresses. For any stress component, asymptotic fields near a moving crack tip can be given as follows In previous equation, r is the radial distance from the crack tip, Tangential stress near a moving crack tip can be obtained by converting stress components from Cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates. Tangential stress in polar coordinates can be written as shown in Eq. Variations of tangential tensile stress around the crack tip under pure mode I, mixed mode I-II and pure mode II for several values of normalized crack speed (χ Under the DMTS-Criterion, crack initiation takes place when maximum tangential stress at the crack tip reaches the material strength. The crack can propagate perpendicular to the direction of the maximum tangential stress. As shown in Accordingly, for a moving crack tip, the ratio of K There are many methods to estimate fracture toughness under pure mode I (K The DDM, a branch of the BEM, was used to study dynamic crack initiation and propagation in a semi-circular bending (SCB) test under different loading modes (I, II and I-II) by using the DMTS-Criterion. The DDM has broadly been used in LEFM-problems and has provided good solutions for different problem types under different loading conditions In this model, the loads on the top and bottom of specimen were applied simultaneously. The loads were gradually increased until the crack started to grow incrementally. For each increment, stress intensity factors were evaluated depending on Eq. The stages of dynamic crack propagation by using DTDCPC can be shown as follows: In the first stage, the SCB specimen and the edge crack is divided into N elements and the geometric properties of each element such as (length, inclination angle, coordinates, etc.) are calculated. The load is applied in the second stage as shown in Normal and shear stresses (ϭ A system of algebraic equations (N × N) is formed and displacement discontinuities (D Stress intensity factors (K If the fracture condition (K For each stage of the crack propagation path, the steps from 1 to 6 repeat. This process continues until the crack trajectory reaches the boundary of the specimen. DTDCPC was verified through two stages based on the experimental and numerical results. Stress intensity factors were verified in stage I. The crack trajectory in the SCB specimens was verified in stage II. The results obtained using the DTDCPC were in good agreement with the numerical and experimental results of similar studies. The stress intensity factor predicted by the DTDCPC for cracked semi-circular specimens was verified by comparing the DTDCPC results with those obtained by Ayatollahi et al. The geometric part of the stress intensity factor (Y In this stage, the DTDCPC was verified for the crack propagation path in SCB specimens. The results of the DTDCPC were compared with the experimental and numerical results obtained by Ayatollahi et al. According to this figure, DTDCPC paths are in good agreement with the experimental and numerical paths predicted by Ayatollahi et al. The DTDCPC can be used to study the crack initiation and propagation in brittle materials such as rocks under static and dynamic loading. The DTDCPC can estimate the crack extension angle under different crack propagation speeds and it can track the trajectory of the crack from the crack tip to the boundary of specimen. Furthermore, the DTDCPC can be used to obtain stress intensity factors and dimensionless fracture toughness (K The DTDCPC was used to predict the crack trajectory in SCB specimens under pure mode I (β = 0°), pure mode II (β = 50°) and mixed mode loading (0° < β < 50°). Crack propagation paths were predicted for different values of dimensionless crack propagation speed (χ Crack propagation paths predicted by the DTDCPC under pure mode I in SCB specimens are shown in Under mixed mode loading I-II, cracks were subjected to normal and shear stresses. In this case, dynamic stress intensity factors under pure mode I (K Crack propagation paths predicted by the DTDCPC in SCB specimens under mixed mode loading I-II and pure mode II are shown in This study focused on crack initiation and propagation in brittle materials such a rock under the effect of dynamic loading. Dynamic fracture parameters were predicted based on the dynamic maximum tangential stress criterion (DMTS-Criterion) as a function of crack propagation speed under the three loading modes (I, II and I-II). It was found that all fracture parameters increased with increasing crack propagation speed. The DTMS-Criterion showed that cracks can only grow at acute angles (forward branching) under pure mode I and can bifurcate when crack propagation speed exceeds a critical value. Under mixed mode loading I-II and pure mode II, cracks can grow at acute and obtuse angles (backward branching). The ratio of fracture toughness (K None. Angular functions under pure mode I: Angular functions under pure mode II: