Academian Boris Vladimirovich Derjaguin, one of the outstanding scientists of the XXth century, world-renowned Russian physico-chemist, has given an important contribution to the development of the physical chemistry of surface phenomena and colloidal systems, which serves as a fundamental basis of many modern technologies. Derjaguin was born on August 9th 1902 in Moscow into the family of famous Russian physicist P.N. Lebedev. After graduating from the Physico-Mathematical Department of Moscow University in 1922, he worked at the Institute of Physics and Biophysics under the guidance of Academician Lasarev. In 1932, the laboratory headed by Derjaguin was transfered to the Institute of Applied Mineralogy, where he and his co-worker Obuchov discovered the disjoining pressure of thin water interlayers between two flat hydrophilic mica surfaces. In 1935, these studies were continued at the Colloid-Electrochemical Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences, which was later renamed the Institute of Physical Chemistry. Here, in Derjaguin's laboratory of thin liquid layers, which later acquired a status of the Department of Surface Phenomena, Derjaguin and his school scientific activity was continued. Application of the theory of disjoining pressure for calculating the interaction energy of solid bodies, including particles with curved surfaces, formed the basis for the quantitative theory of colloid stability. This resulted in the formulation of the theory known as the DLVO theory, developed independently by Derjaguin and Landau, and by Verwey and Overbeek. The DLVO theory takes into account the action of molecular and electrostatic long-range forces. Later, this theory was supplemented by the structural (solvation) forces, which arise when boundary layers with modified structure are overlapped. It was experimentally shown that the structure of the boundary layers is different near hydrophilic or hydrophobic surfaces. In the first case, an enhanced viscosity was observed, and in the second, the effect of water slippage, presumably connected with a decrease in density and viscosity of the boundary layers (Zorin, Sobolev). Specific properties of the boundary layers of various liquids were investigated by Derjaguin and Karasev using an original blow-off method, which allows one to determine the viscosity distribution as a function of distance from the solid substrate. The theory of electrostatic forces developed by Derjaguin, Muller and Martynov, was verified experimentally using an elaborated method, when two crossed metallic treads interact in electrolyte solutions. Direct measurements of the molecular attraction forces between the glass lens and the plate were carried out for the first tine by Derjaguin and Abrikosova in 1949–1956 using a device with a negative feedback. This method was later used by many commercial companies for producing balances and devices for direct measurements of surface forces. These experiments initiated the development of macroscopic theory of dispersion forces by Lifshitz in 1955, and gave a quantitative confirmation of the theory. Derjaguin, Abrikosova and Lifshitz were awarded the Lomonosov Prize of the USSR Academy of Sciences in 1958. Over these years, Derjaguin has developed the theory of interaction and adhesion of dissimilar particles, and the relevant theory of heterocoagulation of lyophobic colloids. This theory was later used to explain the stability of wetting films confined by the gaseous and solid phases. Study of the stability and thickness of wetting films formed between the gas bubble and the solid plate was started together with Kussakov in 1939. The obtained isotherms of disjoining pressure agree well with the theory of repulsive electrostatic forces developed by Derjaguin and Landau in 1955. Derjaguin and Zorin also measured isotherms of disjoining pressure for much thinner polymolecular adsorption films of water and other polar liquids on a glass surface by ellipsometry. The results obtained can be interpreted as a manifestation of solvation forces. In 1939–1940, Frumkin and Derjaguin have shown, that the contact angles of liquids can be calculated on the basis of isotherms of disjoining pressure. This approach was applied further for prediction of contact angles and controlling wettability using the theory of surface forces. In particular, the approach forms the fundamentals of capillary and flotation processes. In 1953 Derjaguin and Titievskaja started to study the mechanism of the stability of foam films formed from surfactant solutions. Fundamental investigations of foam films were performed further by Academician Sheludko and his school in Bulgaria. Disjoining pressure was introduced by Derjaguin into the hydrodynamics of wetting films that allowed us to explain and describe the process of water transport in porous bodies and water evaporation from thin capillaries (Nerpin, Churaev). Later, the flow of non-freezing water in frozen ground was analysed, and the theory of frost heaving was developed (together with Churaev). In 1947, Derjaguin developed the theory of capillary osmosis, that is the flow of solutions under a concentration gradient. This made it possible to explain the motion of suspended particles relative to solution, which was named diffusiophoresis, by the analogy to electrophoresis. Diffusioforesis, registered as a discovery, is widely applied now in the technology of polymer coatings on metals (Ulberg, Dvornichenko). Refined theory of electrophoresis and other electrokinetic phenomena was developed in collaboration with Dukhin. On the basis of this approach, the theory of membrane rejection of electrolyte solutions was created (Starov, Churaev). The obtained results allow to explain the selective properties of reverse osmotic membranes with regard to various electrolytes (Sobolev). A great part of Derjaguin's research was devoted to the study of adhesion and friction on solid bodies. Yet in 1933, he developed the molecular theory of external friction, which resulted in the discovery of the two-termed law of friction. The mechanism of stick-slip regime of sliding has assessed an important application in machinery. The theory of electronic component of adhesion forces was developed, which takes into account the formation of a double electrical layer at the interface of contacting bodies involving the donor and acceptor functional groups. Of great importance was the theory of adhesion and rebound of particles collided with solid substrates, developed by Derjaguin and Muller with allowance for the pulse contact electrization. It was shown jointly with Toporov that the breakage of an adhesion contact is accompanied by the emission of electrons and X-rays. Important practical significance received Derjaguin's works in the capillary hydrodynamics, in particular, in the theory of coating of plane surfaces and filaments drawn-off from liquid. The theory was successfully applied in collaboration with Levi for optimizing of the protective coatings formation on photographic and cinefilms. Derjaguin and his co-workers investigated the fundamental problem of the role of diffusion in aerosol systems. Together with Dukhin, the theory of diffusiophoresis of volatile aerosol particles was developed on the basis of the equations of convective diffusion and gas dynamics. At the same time, experiments were performed in three directions, namely, development of the flow-technique for studying aerosols and other dispersions, condensation methods of dust catching and new procedures that permit control of the state of clouds and fogs (Bakanov). For determination of number and concentration of particles, the method of flow-microscopy was developed, which has found a wide application. As far back as in 1950, Derjaguin pioneered to study the problem of diamond synthesis at low pressures. The development of experimental techniques and theoretical ideas concerning the effect of atomic hydrogen on the gasification of non-diamond forms of carbon made it possible to synthesize the diamond from the gaseous phase and produce mono- and polycrystalline diamond films (Spizin, Fedoseev). In fundamental Derjaguin works, the depth of theoretical developments based on the principal of new physical ideas and original approach to the analysis of complex phenomena were combined with elegancy and fineness of experimental methods and selection of the most simplest and provable explanations of mechanism and the nature of studied phenomena. Derjaguin's activity in the scientific community was very extensive and diverse. Starting with 1959, he organized 10 Surface Forces Conferences, which acquired further the status of International Conferences. In honor to the centennial of his birthday, the XII International Conference on Surface Forces is held now in Zvenigorod with the participation of scientists from many countries.