Hot deformation behavior of an equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi high entropy alloy was investigated. Hot compression tests were carried out at various temperatures ranging from 800 °C to 1000 °C at different strain rates from 0.001s−1 to 1s−1. Stress-strain curves indicated softening due to dynamic recrystallization (DRX) under most conditions. Flow stress analysis was carried out by using Arrhenius type hyperbolic-sine relationship, and a linear dependence of flow stress on Zener-Hollomon parameter (Z) was found. Based on the flow stress analysis, a constitutive equation was formulated for describing interdependency between deformation temperature, strain rate, flow stress and strain. The estimated apparent activation energy (Q) ∼350 kJmol-1 for the hot deformation was approximately similar to the activation energy for diffusion of the slowest diffusing element Ni in this alloy. Microstructural observations were carried out by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). The EBSD analysis indicated that the DRX grains nucleated along initial grain boundaries resulting in necklace like structures. The fraction and size of DRX grains showed a strong dependence on Z. Textures of deformed and DRX grains were found to be similar to each other, but rather weak. This feature could be attributed to the nucleation of dynamic recrystallization without any preferential orientation selection.The classical concept of alloy design for developing structural materials is essentially focused on using one principal element to which other alloying elements are purposefully added in suitable proportions for improving desired properties. In contrast, high entropy alloys (HEAs) are new class of multicomponent alloys having five or more elements in equiatomic or near equiatomic proportions In any case, for understanding the structures and properties of HEAs, various kinds of equiatomic alloys have been studied by now Various severe plastic deformation (SPD) techniques, such as, equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) Low diffusion coefficients and low stacking fault energy Equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi HEA was selected for the present study. The alloy was prepared by vacuum arc melting. The melt was cast into a pancake shape with a dimension of 20 mm in thickness and 80 mm in diameter. The as cast alloy was homogenized at 1100 °C for 6 h to improve the chemical homogeneity in the material. The homogenized alloy was subsequently hot forged at 800 °C by 30% reduction in thickness to break the solidified structure. Cylindrical samples having a dimension of 8 mm in diameter and 12 mm in height were cut from the hot forged material. Uniaxial hot compression test was carried out in a thermo-mechanical processing simulator (Model: Thermecmastor-Z, Fuji Electronic Industrial Company Ltd.) at various temperatures and different strain rates. Mica with glass powder was used as an insulator and lubricant. A thermocouple was welded to the side surface at the mid-height position of the cylindrical specimen for precise temperature control and measurement. Microstructures of the starting material and hot compressed specimens were characterized by orientation mapping using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD; TSL-OIM system) operated in a field-emission type scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) operated at an accelerated voltage of 20 kV. For the EBSD investigation, the cylindrical hot-compressed specimens were sectioned vertically through the center parallel to the compression direction, and the center on the section was observed. The sections were mechanically polished prior to electropolishing using a 10% perchloric acid and 90% methanol. Electropolishing was carried out at −5 °C using a constant voltage of 15 V for 15s. Sound Kikuchi-lines enough for accurate orientation analysis could be obtained at most measured points in the present EBSD measurements. For identifying textures of the specimens, the EBSD analysis was also used. An EBSD system (Oxford Instruments AZtecHKL, attached to a FE-SEM Carl Zeiss, SUPRA 40) was used for the purpose. The EBSD orientation mapping was carried out on the same position described above. A scan step size of 0.20 μm was used for all the scans. The AzTec HKL software (Oxford Instruments) was used for the data acquisition. In the HKL system, only the data points possible to be indexed are stored, and again sound orientation mapping could be done for the hot-compressed specimens. The scanned data were exported in .ctf format files for the analysis by the TSL-OIM™ software (EDAX Inc). Inverse pole figures (IPFs) were calculated using a series expansion method with series rank 22. In order to separate the DRX grains from unrecrystallized matrix, Kernel average misorientation (KAM) approach was adopted. The KAM was calculated up to 10 nearest neighbors of the measured points in orientation mapping using a threshold angle of 5°. The given threshold angle ensures not to include misorientations from or in the vicinity of grain boundaries. Thereby, the recrystallized regions that should involve lower misorientations were defined as those satisfying the criteria of KAM≤ 0.5°. The alloy heat-treated at 1000 °C for 15min prior to the hot compression ( The stress-strain curves at various strain rates and different deformation temperatures are shown in During hot deformation, the flow stress ( For calculating the apparent activation energy ( The flow stress generally decreases with decreasing The values of The obtained linear relationship (Eq. The resulting microstructures after the hot deformation under different processing conditions are shown in A constituent equation for the flow stress of the present CoCrFeMnNi HEA in high temperature deformation (at temperatures from 800 °C to 1000 °C at strain rates from 0.001 s As is known, high temperature deformation behaviors of metallic materials are affected by diffusion of atoms During deformation at elevated temperatures, recovery phenomenon happens simultaneously, which cancels out strain-hardening. When recrystallization even occurs during hot deformation, it is called dynamic recrystallization (DRX) and DRX greatly softens the material. In case of FCC metals and alloys, DRX has been frequently observed when the stacking fault energy (of {111} plane stacking) is relatively low It was noteworthy that DRX grains observed in the present alloy showed fine grain sizes ( It was also interesting that both unrecrystallized and recrystallized regions in the present specimens showed quite weak textures ( The hot deformation behavior of an equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi alloy was systematically studied using hot-compression tests at various temperatures (800 °C–1000 °C) and strain rates (0.001 s A constituent equation for the flow stress of the alloy at high temperatures was successfully obtained as a function of the deformation temperature and strain rate. The hyperbolic-sine of the flow stress had a linear relationship with the Zener-Hollomon parameter. The estimated apparent activation energy for the hot deformation was evaluated as 350 kJmol The flow curves showed a peak stress followed by softening, which was typical in dynamic recrystallization in FCC metals and alloys. The occurrence of dynamic recrystallization was confirmed by microstructural observations. Dynamically recrystallization preferentially initiated along initial grain boundaries, leading to the formation of necklace structures. The fraction recrystallized and the average grain size of the recrystallized grains increased with decreasing Zener-Hollomon parameter. The dynamically recrystallized grain sizes were fairly fine, which suggested sluggish diffusion in the HEA. The dynamically recrystallized grains showed quite weak textures. The fact that the grain growth of recrystallized grains was significantly suppressed indicated nucleation without any preferential orientation selection. The authors sincerely thank Mr. Satheesh of DMRL, Hyderabad for providing starting materials used in the present study. The present study was financially supported by the