In process engineering, the breakage behavior of particles is needed for the modeling and optimization of comminution processes. A popular tool to describe (dynamic) processes is population balance modeling (PBM), which captures the statistical distribution of particle properties and their evolution over time. It has been suggested previously to split up the description of breakage into a machine function (modeling of loading conditions) and a material function (modeling of particle response to mechanical stress). Based on this idea, we present a mathematical formulation of machine and material functions and a general approach to compute them. Both functions are modeled using multivariate probability distributions, where in particular so-called copulas are helpful. These can be fitted to data obtained by the discrete element method (DEM). In this paper, we describe the proposed copula-based breakage model, and we construct such a model for an artificial dataset that allows to evaluate the prediction quality.breakage function: number-scaled density function of fragment properties a copula, see machine function, see Eq. material function, see Eq. probability density function of internal properties of a fragment probability density function of a random variable or random vector Δ (conditional) density function of Δ under condition ⊡ cumulative distribution function of a random variable or random vector Δ loading conditions vector number of internal particle properties [–] number of external particle properties [–] size of loading conditions vector [–] number-scaled density function for particle properties probability density function of particle properties in an apparatus-scale DEM simulation total number of particles in DEM simulation [–] total number of stress events in DEM simulation [–] expected number of fragments of a broken particle [–] expected total number of particles at time breakage probability [–] breakage rate of particle with properties loading frequency [1/s] particle properties ( internal particle properties external particle properties random vector of internal particle properties random vector of internal fragment properties random vector of stress events Population balances are a widely used tool in engineering, especially in the field of particulate materials. They describe disperse properties of entities like particles; these properties are time- and possibly space-dependent ( A complementary but very different approach is the discrete element method (DEM) ( In this paper, we present a new approach to the stochastic modeling of loading conditions and single-particle breakage behavior, The present paper is structured as follows. First, in Section In this section, we briefly describe the methods required to develop the copula-based breakage models in Section The population balance equation is a differential equation that describes the change over time in the number of particles having certain properties. Particle properties are usually split up into internal and external properties, In the simplest form of PBM, one assumes a well-mixed system of particles (no external properties) and considers only one internal property, In this paper, the focus lies on particle breakage. Therefore, we consider It is clear that the breakage behavior depends on the physical (comminution) process. Therefore, the main problem in using PBM is to determine suitable breakage frequencies The discrete element method (DEM, see, DEM is very powerful; however, a problem is that it is hard to investigate large particle systems as necessary for industrial-scale processes. For example, in Recall that a (real-valued) random variable However, there are few parametric models for the description of multivariate distributions. The reason is simple: parametric models with a reasonable number of parameters are often not capable to describe real-world data—such models are not flexible enough. For example, think about a two-dimensional random vector A way out of this problem is to model every marginal distribution separately. This can be done with classical methods from statistics (see, The copula Summarizing, copulas are a tool for modeling the joint distribution function of random vectors. In particular, they provide an easy method to construct the multivariate distribution function by splitting up the complexity into several (less complex) sub-problems. The models of particle breakage presented in this paper are based on multivariate distributions, which are constructed using copulas. More details regarding the basics of copulas, some important parametric copula families and their fitting to data can be found in A very general idea for modeling of particle breakage in processes is given by the approach of It is useful to formalize this approach by defining the machine and material functions explicitly, We introduce a possible mathematical definition of However, in real processes all particles with the same properties  Both the machine and material functions have to be determined using real experiments or computer simulations. Detailed simulations like DEM are ideal because all information can be accessed like, The stress events from DEM calculations on the apparatus-scale can be employed as the main tool to predict the machine function. A stress event of a specific particle appears when this particle interacts with any other type of object. Therefore, a collision between particle and wall will result in one new stress event in the system. A collision between two particles will result in two events. Each stress event may be described by several parameters, In some cases, due to the high computational effort, the real distribution of particles cannot be directly simulated with DEM. For example, to reduce the number of simulated particles, their size can be increased with a scaling approach ( We can model the machine function For convenience, we make some simplifying assumptions. We assume that we have a stationary regime, First, we consider the Based on the random vector ( The material function The This can be implemented as follows. For every vector The same idea works for the Ideally, the modeling of Summarizing, the material function The single-particle breakage behavior is described by the material function, and the loading frequencies and loading conditions are specified by the machine function. Both can be combined to obtain an apparatus-scale breakage model. On the apparatus scale, we need the distributions of breakage frequencies and fragment properties, where both must only depend on the particle properties. In particular, both do not depend on the loading frequencies or loading conditions because this information is already included by an appropriate averaging. Let In this section, we explain the methodology with a simple example. First, we discuss the general procedure for applying the models of Section The general procedure for obtaining the machine and material functions as described in Section Determine the internal and external properties that shall be used in the modeling. Perform DEM simulations on the apparatus-scale to obtain information on stress events for given operation parameters. Note that the DEM simulations require suitable (calibrated and validated) contact models. Fit a multivariate distribution to the observations of the (unknown) random vector ( Perform DEM simulations on the scale of a single particle to obtain information about influence of stress intensity on breakage probability and fragment properties. To obtain such information the bonded-particle model (BPM) can be effectively used. By BPM an investigated particle is represented as an agglomerate consisting of smaller primary particles connected with bonds ( Fit a multivariate distribution to the observations of the (unknown) random vector Fit a multivariate distribution to the observations of the (unknown) random vector Compute the conditional density functions as necessary for evaluation of material and machine functions. Usually, discretization will be needed to solve the PBM. As already mentioned above, in the following section we generate a sample data set without DEM. This has the advantage that the obtained data is simple to model. Otherwise, technical details would obfuscate the fitting procedure in steps (2b), (3b) and (3c). Furthermore, (realistic) DEM simulations would need further elaboration on model choice, model calibration and validation. We generate a simple data set to which we will fit a copula-based breakage model. Here the breakage behavior of particles is investigated where the particles are distributed only through one internal coordinate: their volume In our example, we assume that the vector ℓ of loading conditions is one-dimensional and contains the stress energy. The “critical” stress energy is the breakage energy and it is assumed to depend on the particle volume according to a linear function. In particular, for the particle with volume The data on fragments is generated as follows. We assume that the fragment sizes do not depend on the stress energy. Furthermore, we make the assumption that the relative fragment sizes do not depend on the initial particle volume. This scale invariance means that the distribution of fragments (described by the random fragment volume drawing a realization sampling So far we have described the critical energies and the fragment volumes of the sample data, which is the data required for fitting the material function. Now, we consider the data required for the machine function, In this section, we assume that the there is no information about the distributions of ( We start with the distribution of ( The copula describes the dependence structure of Similar to the modeling of particle volumes and critical energies, the original particle volumes and fragments have to be described by The marginal distribution of The distribution of ( Finally, for all three modeled random vectors ( One quantity that is of great interest is the breakage probability under a given stress intensity. For that reason, we selected three different stress energies and evaluated the predicted breakage probability for all particle volumes. The results are shown in Furthermore, we consider the predicted fragment volume distributions of the copula-based breakage model. We fix three different original particle volumes and compare the predicted fragment volume distributions to the theoretically expected distributions. In In this paper, we presented a new approach to the modeling of breakage behavior of particles. This is important in process engineering, where comminution occurs and processes are modeled using PBM. The proposed approach is based on copulas, a well-known tool for the modeling of multivariate distributions. We showed that copula-based distributions are suitable to describe both the machine function as well as the material function. We generated a sample data set, fitted copula-based distributions and evaluated the quality of their predictions. A big advantage of the proposed approach is its high flexibility. There are almost no restrictions on the effects that can be modeled. However, at the same time, this is also the largest disadvantage. Making only few assumptions in the model construction, there needs to be sufficiently many sample data in order to obtain realistic stochastic models. This makes extensive DEM simulations necessary. In a follow-up paper, we will use data from DEM simulations to describe realistic scenarios, and use the developed models for a PBM-based description of a real process. This is beyond the scope of the present paper. In practice, there may be some technical problems—for example, the fragment size distribution is often not nearly as nice as in the example considered in the present paper. Then, mixed distributions or similar techniques can be used to obtain good stochastic models for the data. Note that this does not change anything in the methodology. From our point of view, the choice of (mixed) distribution families should be made according to the data because it is unlikely that one suggested distribution family for This work was supported by the Although copula-based modeling of multivariate distributions is already applied in different areas, it is not yet well-known on a broad basis. Typical applications are in finance and insurance ( In this section, a short introduction to the modeling of random vectors and their multivariate distributions is given. The modeling idea is to consider marginal distributions and the dependence structure separately—and the dependence structure is described by a copula. More precisely, a copula is an The most simple copula is the so-called independence copula (or product copula). It is given by Most copulas used in practice belong to parametric copula families. For example, such a family is given by the Gaussian copulas. A Gaussian copula corresponds to the dependence structure of a multivariate normal distribution. Let A similar approach works for the multivariate Another important class of copulas is known as the Archimedean copulas. They are easily constructed, very different dependence structures can be modeled, and they have nice mathematical properties ( By choosing different generator functions, it is possible to construct various families of Archimedean copulas. Very important families are: Gumbel, Frank, Clayton, Joe, Ali-Mikhail-Haq. These families are implemented in the R-package A common case is that there are Note that, very often, the copula fitting is based on so-called pseudo-observations ( Sometimes, it is a problem to decide which family of distributions (or copulas) fits the data best. An optical impression may be misleading or different types of deviations cannot be compared easily. When using maximum-likelihood, a reasonable way is to choose the parametric family whose (log)likelihood value is the largest. However, in the case of a different number of parameters, the maximized likelihood value should not be compared directly—the additional flexibility that makes better fits possible comes at the cost of more parameters, which is a clear disadvantage. A standard technique to balance goodness-of-fit and complexity is Akaike's information criterion (AIC) (