The product fineness indicator t10
                      and the pre-weakening degree indicator percentage change of A * b value (CAb
                     ) were used to described the two aspects of the breakage result of processing with pre-weakening effect. However, there lacks a method to evaluate the ‘overall’ breakage degree with a single index. It was observed that when the high voltage pulse breakage (HVP breakage or HVPB) induced cracks inside pre-weakened particles were consumed during impact breakage, the breakage characteristics of the progeny particles are the same to raw ore particles. Based on this phenomenon, the concepts of equivalent size Sie
                      and equivalent size reduction t10e
                      are proposed. Raw ore particles of size Sie
                      is ‘equivalent’ to pre-weakened particles of size Si
                      in terms of their impact breakage product size distribution. Therefore the value of Si
                      and the consequently derived t10e
                      can be used to evaluate the overall breakage degree of pre-weakened particles. The calculation procedure of Sie
                      and t10e
                      is demonstrated in the context of HVP breakage. It is found that the impact breakage product of pre-weakened particles can be well predicted from Sie
                     . In addition to the evaluation of overall breakage degree of pre-weakening processing, this method also has potential to apply in the simulation of comminution circuits with pre-weakening processing and the development of breakage model for processing with pre-weakening effect.Particle processing that leads to an increased number of internal cracks is likely to lead to increased breakage efficiency of downstream comminution processing. This is the so-called pre-weakening effect. Particle processing with pre-weakening effect includes different comminution methods, such as blasting, high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR), microwave and HVPB, etc. All these comminution methods are able to introduce extra cracks into progeny ore particles, reducing the subsequent energy required for crushing and grinding operations Among the comminution methods with pre-weakening effect, HVPB had been investigated systematically regarding the characterization methodology and model development of pre-weakening effect. In order to evaluate the degree of pre-weakening effect, the percentage change of This paper aims to develop a method to evaluate the 'overall' breakage degree for particle processing with pre-weakening effect, and discuss its application. The development of such method is based on data from HVPB study, but the its principal can also be extended to other pre-weakening processing, e.g., blasting, HPGR and microwave. During the impact breakage characterization of raw ore particles with JK Drop Weight (JKDWT) To answer this question, the mechanical breakage characteristics of three groups of samples were compared. All the three groups of samples were prepared from the same raw ore, a porphyry gold-copper ore. Group 1 samples and Group 2 samples were raw ore samples without pre-weakening effect and HVPB treated samples with pre-weakening effect respectively, while Group 3 samples were selected from the JKRBT product of Group 2 samples. Each group of samples comprises 8 size fractions, i.e. 13.2–19 mm, 9.5–13.2 mm, 6.7–9.5 mm, 4.75–6.7 mm, 2.36–4.75 mm, 1.18–2.36 mm, 0.6–1.18 mm, 0.3–0.6 mm. Samples of the 4 coarser size fractions (+4.75 mm) were broken with JKRBT at a fixed  According to the X-ray tomography study by Shi, et al. Based on the observation in Assuming there are a HVPB treated sample (Sample H) and a raw ore sample (Sample R). The Sample H is broken from raw ore particles of a narrow size fraction. The average size of the If the equivalent sizes of all the size fractions of Sample H are determined, an 'equivalent size distribution' can be determined from its practical product size distribution by replacing Impact breakage models developed in Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) are employed in the calculation procedure of Initially, the relation of Then Eq. The advantage of using parameters Eq. Narayanan S.S. and Whiten W.J. In order to demonstrate the calculation procedure of Ore A was collect from a mine site in the centre of Queensland, Australia. The ore samples collected were from sedimentary exhalative Pb-Zn deposits, with finely banded galena, sphalerite and pyrite. Ore B was collected from a mine site located in New South Wales, Australia. The gold–copper mineralization occurs as quartz veins, sheeted quartz sulphide veins and stockworks. The gold occurs mainly as free grains in quartz or on the margins of sulphide grains. The principal copper sulphide minerals are chalcopyrite and bornite. In the pilot scale study, for each ore type, particles in three narrow size fractions were tested, including 22.4–26.5 mm, 31.5–37.5 mm and 45–53 mm. In each test, 30 particles of one narrow size fraction were prepared as one sample and treated by a pilot scale HVPB equipment at different conditions. After HVPB treatment, particles which subjected to body breakage were collected and sieved to determine product fineness ( In the pilot scale study, the HVPB product falls into two kinds, namely body breakage product and surface breakage product. The phrase 'HVPB product' in this paper below only refers to the body breakage product for simplification. The The value of It is worth to note that, since With the procedure illustrated in According to the procedure described in It was found that the value of  In the procedure given in It is interesting to relate the By contrast, the positive relation between the In the procedure described in An Ore A sample with medium pre-weakening degree (  The constant of 100 in Eq. Eq. It is worth to note that the diminishing effect of pre-weakening on JKRBT product fineness at larger JKRBT breakage But if the As the question proposed in Simulation is a powerful tool in the optimization of comminution circuit. In simulation software such as JKSimMet, the inputs for a given comminution circuit with specific machine characteristics are the size distribution and the ore breakage characteristics of feed ore. When processing with pre-weakening effect is embedded in comminution circuit, the downstream comminution may need to treat feed particles of different hardness indicators. The application of However, the effect of a finer feed size distribution to comminution machines due to the replacement of In previous study, the breakage results of particle processing with pre-weakening effect, were represented by both product fineness and pre-weakening degree. Therefore, the The modelling of The R-square values for the fittings of The application of Based on the observation that HVPB induced cracks inside pre-weakened particles can be consumed during impact breakage, generating progeny particles without pre-weakening effect, the concepts of equivalent size The calculation procedure of The value of The size distribution of HVPB product after wide-size JKRBT testing can be well predicted from The significant relation between the The A series of applications are discussed for this method. In addition to the evaluation of overall breakage degree of pre-weakening processing, this method also has potential to be applied in the simulation of comminution circuits with pre-weakening processing to address the variable input problem for mixed feed particles of different hardness. But some problems need to be overcome before replacing The financial support from