The availability of a selective liberation method to eliminate contaminating minerals in quartz is crucial to achieve high purity silicon feedstock for solar cell Si-production. In this study we evaluate and compare the effects of electrical fragmentation to conventional mechanical crushing; particularly to remove fine-grained trace-minerals that often jeopardize otherwise promising high purity quartz commodities. The possibility to combine both comminution techniques upstream in the solar silicon value chain is also discussed.
                  A bulk hydrothermal vein quartz sample containing trace impurities of muscovite and orthoclase is fragmented. After fragmentation the particles are sieved in two fraction sizes [0.3–0.5mm] and [0.5–4mm] and are magnetically separated. The morphology of the particles, the crack distribution, and the degree of mineral liberation are studied by optical microscopy, electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA), and X-ray diffraction (XRD).
                  Electrical fragmentation generates particles with spherical geometries and deep cracks that selectively are pointing towards contaminant mineral inclusions, and produce a higher percentage of liberated minerals. Mechanical crushing, on the contrary, produces elongated fragments with fewer cracks that predominantly run parallel to the fragment surfaces.
                  Muscovite fractures both along its cleavage planes and along its grain boundaries whereas orthoclase fractures along its grain boundaries, only. Muscovite containing 5.8wt.% Fe was easily removed by magnetic separation.The concentration of impurities strongly inhibits the performance of solar grade silicon (SoG-Si) for photovoltaic applications Evonik is scaling up the innovative Solsilc route by Fesil Our study aims at investigating the potential of electric fragmentation for the refinement of hydrothermal quartz. This is the first documentation of the efficiency of electrical fragmentation upon the removal of trace minerals comprising < Quartz purification involves the removal of structural impurities, fluid inclusions, and solid inclusions Solid undesired inclusions may be partially or fully embedded in the quartz grains or occur at the interface between two grains. Before removal the inclusion must be exposed for either acid leach The company, Nordic Mining provided the hydrothermal quartz, from the Nesodden deposit, which is located in the Hardanger fjord (Norway). The promising low trace element content, and the availability of min. 2.7 Electrical fragmentation was done with a Selfrag Lab utility Once the predetermined voltage is reached, the energy of the pulse generator is discharged from the electrode through the solid sample to the bottom of the processing vessel. Electrical fragmentation is the result when a shock wave propagates spherically throughout the material. A sieve is inserted in the bottom of the process vessel to collect the fragmented particles. Standard polished petrographic 30 A JEOL JXA-8500F was used to collect primarily chemical maps of the samples. This instrument is a thermal field electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA) with submicron SEM capability integrated with X-ray analysis. Standard microanalysis reference materials Astimex 53 Minerals Mount MINM25-53 were used for the standardization and calibration of the instrument D8 Advance XRD, BRUKER-EVA qualitative, and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) BRUKER S8 Tiger 4 ICP-MS analyses were carried out to identify the purity of the original and the fragmented quartz. About 20–40 The experiments were designed to perform electrical fragmentation and conventional mechanical jaw crushing followed by sieving and magnetic separation. The experimental flowchart is shown in The two 8 Subsequently, two size ranges were sampled for detailed studies: [0.3–0.5 The sieved fractions were analyzed by quantitative petrographic microscopy. Approximately 1500 mineral fragments were studied in each size fraction. The structure of the fragments, in terms of size, shape, texture, structure, fracture distribution, and the degree of liberation/separation were studied by point counting. The degree of liberation is defined as the fraction of minerals still locked in the quartz fragments, while the degree of separation as the fraction of free minerals separated by sieving and magnetic separation. It was not the purpose of this work to study the fines generated with the two techniques. Polished thin sections of mineral fragments were also studied by SEM and optical microscopy. Fragmented particles in the [0.3–0.5  Two types of foreign trace-mineral inclusions are identified. These are orthoclase KAl The batch of the original quartz was analyzed with solutions ICP-MS. The elements considered were K, Al, Fe, and Mg. Also B and P, which are very difficult to remove from silicon, were analyzed.  The fracture distribution for both mechanically and electrically fragmented quartz is shown in the third row of The most recurrent crack spacing (for the size [0.5–4 The distribution of fractures relative to mineral inclusions is shown in the fourth row of Muscovite grains that remain attached to the surface of the quartz grains are observed after both mechanical crushing and electrical fragmentation. Quantitative analysis describing the mineral behavior after crushing, magnetic separation and sieving is summarized in The highest percentage of liberated quartz particles occurs when HV-pulse and higher energy are applied. The advantage of using electrical fragmentation is more evident for the bigger size range where liberation is 10% better than for the same size range in mechanically crushed material; regardless of the technique used, muscovite is only partially liberated whereas orthoclase is always liberated. In electrically crushed samples using HV-pulses, muscovite is mostly liberated along its grain boundaries rather than along its cleavage plane. In mechanically crushed quartz, there is a much higher percentage of quartz fragments with muscovite. embedded muscovite always occurs in quartz pieces affected by ondulatory extinction. liberated muscovite is completely removed after magnetic separation and sieving whereas it was not possible to separate orthoclase by magnetic separation and sieving.  The mechanical properties of a mineral deposit depend on its tensile strength and typology of defects. It is not possible to define numerically a tensile strength for the quartz investigated. The measured tensile strength is usually 10–20% of the theoretically calculated strength, due to the fact that stress is not applied homogeneously on grain boundaries, and to the presence of small defects in the material i.e. sites of high stress accumulations The electrical properties involved in the process are conductivity and permittivity (which influence the polarization effect of a material in response to an electric field). Experimental electrical values of rock-forming minerals are available in the literature Conventional crushing applies compressive stress, shearing and abrasion forces upon the material Shearing causes polarization of fracture to clusters running parallel to the fragment surfaces and the formation of elongated needle shaped fragments. Some fragments deviate from this general pattern in having fractures with a more random orientation. The fraction [0.3–0.5] showed a higher proportion of such particles. Since the two investigated sieved fractions come from the same mechanical crushing test, we suggest that random fractures originated from quartz lumps which were not in contact with the jaws i.e. they were crushed by other quartz lumps and, therefore, were less affected by shearing. Phase contacts act as a discontinuity where local stress builds up and initiate failure Fine-grained particles are more easily liberated and feature a lower density of fractures. This is a result of a higher energy/surface ratio leading to a higher concentration of stress points and more easy fragmentation. Orthoclase is easily detached from the quartz matrix and no cracks are found in the mineral itself. This is probably due to the fact that the toughness of quartz is lower than orthoclase, hence shear stress will accumulate along the orthoclase/quartz contacts rather than dissipating into the orthoclase crystals. Electrostriction, electrical breakdown and subsequent shock wave interaction contribute to fracture formation and fragmentation. Strictional tension is maximized where the electric field is higher. Local electrical fields accumulate at interfaces with deviating conductive properties The vaporization of extremely small amounts of material during plasma channel formation, causes an instantaneous (10 Muscovite fractures preferentially along its grain boundaries rather than along its cleavage planes. The mechanism of micro-crack formation by electrostriction and plasma channels weakens the mica grain boundaries, such that the muscovite cleavage planes are no longer the weakest point as it was in mechanical crushing. Accordingly, the optimal condition for mineral liberation is obtained: the mechanical strength of the muscovite–quartz interface is lower than the mechanical strength of muscovite and of quartz, and fractures developed through the mineral–matrix interface. Orthoclase is completely liberated. Liberated orthoclase does not show fracture development and maintains its original crystal shape. The degree of liberation is higher for electrical crushing. These results are in agreement with the work performed by During electrical fragmentation the quartz is subjected to high temperatures for a very short time, probably only a few milliseconds. Neither optical microscopy nor EPMA and XRD analyses of our sample material showed any traces of cristobalite or amorphous SiO Having the goal of developing a low cost route to a high purity quartz commodity for SoG-Si, we only applied sieving and magnetic separation to remove the liberated trace-mineral contaminants. Muscovite containing 5.8 A bulk chemical analysis of the fragmented samples confirms our findings. However comparing these results with the original composition of the quartz, indicates that both techniques are intrinsically polluting the quartz. The major concern is B: its value is almost doubled. P is not shown because of uncertainty of the chemical analysis. The major contamination during electrically fragmentation is the electrode in steel. Selfrag is currently developing a laboratory scale equipment with a WC (tungsten-carbide) electrode. We have for the first time investigated the effects of electrical fragmentation on near mono-mineralogical commodity; a hydrothermal quartz deposit, with the goal of removing contaminant trace minerals comprising less than 1% of the commodity and to produce a novel source of SoG-Si raw material. Compared to mechanical crushing, electrical fragmentation is superior in liberating contaminant trace-minerals ( Our results only applies to the investigated parts of the deposit, but since the diversity and total concentration of trace-minerals rarely exceeds 1%, we do not expect hugely different results from other parts of the deposit. However, future studies are required to elucidate this notion. Al and Fe contained in muscovite are detrimental elements for the efficiency of SoG-Si The mechanical stability of quartz is an important issue. Quartz that is disintegrating in the furnace may cloak up the furnace and, therefore, should be avoided. Cracked lump quartz is undesired because quartz is charged in the top of the furnace. For the same reason, mm size particles cannot be charged to the furnace but need to be micronized and agglomerated. The use of milling is therefore a necessary step after electrical fragmentation. Here, the high density of cracks reduces the costs of micronization. In the end, micron fragments of fracture free quartz will be produced and ensure that the final agglomerated quartz is thermally stable during the furnace process. In a scenario to produce SoG-Si raw materials we imagine the following processing steps. At first, electrical fragmentation is applied to fragments of quartz under the liberation of muscovite and orthoclase inclusion and perhaps other trace contaminants polluting the deposit. Secondly, liberated minerals are removed by sieving and magnetic separation, eventually assisted by acid leaching. Finally, liberated quartz particles are grinded mechanically to 10 After jaw crushing, quartz is electrically fragmented to a specific “target size”, followed by sieving and micronization. The “optimal grain size” is defined as the size required for optimal mineral liberation. When the contaminant minerals are situated at grain boundaries, the foreign minerals are easily liberated. However, in cases where the mineral inclusions are embedded in the grain, the “target size” becomes smaller than the quartz grain. Fines formed by mechanical crushing would also need to be recovered since they are required in the agglomeration process. The fine recovery process may be very costly particularly if special separation techniques are called for to remove foreign mineral inclusions. At a certain point of the size reduction process, the cost of mechanical crushing, recovery of fines and rinsing of the fines for contaminant minerals is higher than the costs of electrical fragmentation and, naturally, electrical fragmentation becomes more attractive.  This is the first comparative study of the effects of electrical fragmentation and mechanical crushing, respectively, of a near mono-mineralogical quartz commodity where the goal is to remove minute trace minerals comprising less than 1% of the raw material. Electrical fragmentation technology generates more fractures that are selectively directed towards the mineral inclusions. Mechanical crushing produces fewer fractures, and a strong polarization of the fractures parallel to the grain boundaries. Electrical fragmentation increases the liberation of foreign trace-minerals and reduces the occurrence of embedded particles included in quartz. Muscovite containing 5.8 Muscovite fractures both along its cleavage planes and along the grain boundaries, however, in electrical fragmentation it predominantly fractures along the grain boundary and is more efficiently liberated. Orthoclase always fractures along its grain boundaries. Electrical fragmentation is more advantageous in producing both larger liberated particles and quartz with a dense random network of fractures. This type of quartz is more brittle than mechanically crushed quartz and, therefore, less energy is required to micronize it. A possible route for quartz refining combining electrical fragmentation with conventional micronization was suggested. The authors thank NORDIC MINING (Oslo, Norway) for providing the quartz and are grateful to Dr. A. Weh at SELFRAG AG (Kerzers, Switzerland) for experimental support and scientific discussions. The authors acknowledge also Professor Rolf Arne Kleiv for many interesting discussions. S.B. acknowledges the support of the Leiv Eiriksson mobility program through the