Magnetic nanocomposite has been synthesized successfully using biopolymer route which acts as a source of carbon for carbide formation. The present approach based on thermal decomposition represents a considerable advance over previous reports that often use high-energy procedures or costly and hazardous precursors. X-ray diffraction, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and vibrating sample magnetometer have been used to characterize the composites. Multi phase formation is evident from X-ray diffraction in the as-prepared samples. Phase confirmation was further done from M (magnetization) versus T (temperature) curve indicating presence of different phases of carbide along with iron oxide. TEM study suggests formation of cuboidal shape nanocomposite using two different quenching conditions. Transmission electron microscopy also confirmed the formation of carbon layer in the vicinity of the Fe3O4/Fe3C nanoparticles. The magnetic measurement shows that the composite nanoparticles exhibit a maximum magnetization of 60emug−1 at room temperature. Biocompatibility study with three different cell lines (HeLa, MCF-7 and L929) confirms that these nanocomposites are biocompatible. Temperature versus time measurement in an AC field suggests good heating ability of the samples. These investigations indicate that these nanocomposites may be useful for bioapplications, in particular for hyperthermia.Encapsulated magnetic nanocomposites have wide applications in biomedicine such as magnetically guided transporter for drugs Synthesis of pure phase iron carbide (Fe In this study, we have tried to synthesize carbon encapsulated iron carbide–iron oxide composite via biopolymer route as similar to that reported recently by Schnepp et al. Biopolymer solution was prepared by adding alginic flakes (2 The as-prepared samples were characterized using different techniques to identify the phases and to quantify their size, shape, magnetic and chemical properties. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Philips powder diffractometer PW3040/60 with Cu Kα radiation. The electron micrographs were taken by JEOL JEM 2100 Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) and Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) JSM-7600F. In order to confirm the presence of metal ions as well as their distributions in samples, K The magnetic properties of the samples were measured by vibrating sample magnetometer (LakeShore, VSM–7410). The room temperature field dependent magnetic measurements ( The in-vitro biocompatibility study was done using sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. The study was done on Hela (cervical cancer cells), MCF-7 (breast cancer cells) and L929 (fibroblast cells–normal cells). The results are linear over a 20 fold range of cell numbers and the sensitivity is comparable to those of fluorometric method. The Sulphorhodamine-B (SRB) assay was performed to evaluate cytocompatibility of the iron carbide/iron oxide nanocomposite with HeLa (cervical cancer), MCF-7 (breast cancer) and normal fibroblast (L929) cells The heat generation capability of magnetic nanoparticles was characterized out using Ameritherm Inc. Scottsville, New York magnetic-induction hyperthermia chamber Model no. EZLI 5060 440V RACK operating at 250  High resolution TEM images of as synthesized samples NQ and AQ show that cuboidal nanoparticles have formed with an average size of 92 and 108 TEM, HRTEM and EDS images of sample NQ are shown in The elemental mappings for two samples were done using scanning electron microscope. From Elemental analysis was done using inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy. The data obtained from ICP-AES analysis was calculated to find out the amount of iron and carbon present in samples (shown in The plot of magnetization versus applied magnetic field measured at room temperature for samples NQ, and AQ is shown in  TGA analyses were done for the precursor film and the as-prepared samples at a rate of 5 The TGA analyses of the samples (NQ and AQ) indicate that they are very stable with no mass loss occurring up to 700 The biocompatibility results given in where Further analysis of results showed that the increase in temperature was substantially higher for NQ than AQ in a given time interval, which is in agreement with the X-ray diffraction and magnetic measurement data. In case of sample NQ, a fast heating rate could be due to the presence of relatively higher amount of iron carbide phase in comparison to sample AQ within a given sample quantity. In addition, saturation magnetization value is also higher for NQ in comparison to AQ. Since Fe In the present approach, iron carbide–iron oxide nanocomposites were synthesized via biopolymer route to achieve a mixed phase cuboidal particles with thin carbon coating. Presence of iron oxide in the nanocomposite makes particles biocompatible. On the other hand, iron carbide provides higher conductivity as well as higher magnetization losses. The aim of this study is to design particles with higher losses that can be effectively utilized in hyperthermia application. The authors gratefully acknowledge nanomission of DST and nanotechnology section of