Ultrafine ground calcium carbonate (GCC) produced by carbonate minerals is a widely used inorganic powder material. In order to get a finer GCC powder with narrow distribution span, effects of rotation speed and media density on particle size distribution and structure of GCC were studied. The grinding limit-particle size and distribution of GCC were measured by centrifugal sedimentation granulometer. The specific surface area, average particle size and structure of ground GCC were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and BET. The morphology of particles was observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The result shows that low rotation speed and high-density media are conducive to obtaining a smaller particle with narrower size distribution. The crystal plane (012) and (122) of GCC are more stable than (018) and (202).Ground calcium carbonate (GCC) which is processed by mechanical methods using natural carbonate minerals such as calcite, marble, limestone etc. as raw material is an important inorganic non-metallic mineral. It is widely used in paper, plastics, paint, chemical fiber, rubber, coatings, pharmaceuticals, and fodder industries due to its superior properties in whiteness, thermal stability and rheological behavior. The quality of GCC like fineness, size distribution and purity has a great influence on its applications and product performance. For example, the product for paper coating must meet the requirements that the maximum particle size is not more than 5 It is well known that the superfine grinding process can be divided into two forms: dry and wet. Numerous previous literatures have studied the changes of size distribution, rheological behavior, surface properties, specific surface area and crystal structure of GCC ground in various wet equipment under different feed rate, rotation speed, solid mass concentration, media diameter and surfactant concentration A planetary ball mill is used for ultrafine grinding and can be used in both dry and wet process. Because of greater energy density and higher grinding efficiency Agglomeration is a prevalent phenomenon in superfine grinding In this paper, we investigate the grinding limit-particle size, size distribution, specific surface area, average particle size and phase transition of ground GCC under dry conditions in a planetary mill. The aim of this work is to study the effects of rotation speed and media density on particle size distribution and structure of GCC. The results might be of useful scientific value for practical production and utilization of ultrafine GCC. The initial GCC sample used in this work was provided by the Heng Liang New Material Technology Co., Ltd. The The particle size distribution was measured using a BT-1500 centrifugal sedimentation granulometer (Dandong Bettersize Instruments Ltd) in 0.2–150 The specific surface area of a sample was measured by JW–BK nitrogen adsorption surface tester (Beijing JWGB Sci. & Tech. Co., Ltd.). A representative amount of sample was taken from each sample, and then dried at 250 The mineral composition was analyzed using a D8 ADVANCE X-ray diffractometer (Bruker Co.). Each sample was scanned continuously at 4°/min from 10° to 60° at 35 The morphology of particles was measured using a field emission scanning electron microscope (S-4800, Hitachi, Ltd.). In order to consider the influence of rotation speed, the media density was kept constant. The zirconia beads were used and the speed was increased from 600 Moreover, considering now the whole size distribution and not only the Changes in the width of the particle size distribution ( To investigate the influence of the media density on the grinding results, experiments with different media at a rotation speed of 600 The effect of media density on size distribution is illustrated in The effects of different media density on the width of the PSD are presented in Typical images of GCC ground for 42 Values of the specific surface area and average particle size have been reported in The average increase rate (AIR) of specific surface area during 42 Based on the curve of specific surface area using glass as grinding media, it can be seen that the average increase rate is 0.56 The XRD patterns acquired for GCC ground by glass and zirconia beads at 42 On the basis of the ultrafine grinding study undertaken with GCC in a planetary ball mill, it was verified that increasing the rotation speed from 600 The SEM results illustrate the occurrence of agglomerations during the grinding process. At the stable stage, there are two kinds of agglomerates. Different crystal planes have different stability; (0 We are grateful to