Solvent extraction following pressure acid leaching (PAL) is becoming the technology of choice for treating nickel laterite ores as it allows high recoveries of both the nickel and cobalt from these ores. Early plant experience, however, indicate that impurity control particularly in the solvent extraction stage still hinders full optimisation of this technology.
                  Dissolved chromium, both as chromium(III) and chromium(VI), is one of the major impurities of PAL-generated pregnant leach stream (PLS) and little is known about its solvent extraction behaviour with Cyanex® 272, the predominant extractant for the separation of nickel and cobalt. Only a few studies have been reported and with apparently conflicting results.
                  This study investigated the solvent extraction behaviour of chromium with Cyanex® 272. The effects of various experimental variables such as the metal oxidation state; pH; presence of anions such as nitrate, chloride, sulphate and acetate including the conditions of extraction relevant to the separation of nickel and cobalt directly from the partially neutralised PLS as well as the effect of the extracted species on stripping are discussed. The nature and forms of the extracted species are inferred from slope analysis and UV–VIS spectroscopy data.The exploitation of nickel from laterite ores is currently a major research interest owing to the depletion of sulphidic ores, the traditional source of the western world’s nickel production. Recent estimates indicate that the bulk of known nickel reserves (70–80%) is contained in laterite deposits. Yet, 60% of the world’s nickel production still comes from sulphidic ores. There is therefore a considerable attempt to develop the technology for the extraction of nickel from laterite ores. In contrast to sulphidic ores, which are traditionally processed by pyrometallurgical means, there is an emerging consensus that processing of laterites is best carried out by hydrometallurgical means partly because laterites cannot be easily concentrated and partly because it allows the recovery of cobalt, a relatively expensive metal that is commonly associated with nickel in the ores. The use of pressure acid leaching (PAL) to dissolve the nickel and cobalt is relatively well understood and is becoming the technology of choice as the first step in the extraction process as it allows high recoveries of the metals ( Projects commissioned at Bulong, Cawse and Murrin Murrin in Western Australia, which represent the first generation of these latest attempts to exploit laterites, are all using PAL. However, the downstream processing of the leach liquor, particularly the control of impurities, remains a stumbling block of the process resulting in different approaches being adopted by these projects. Direct solvent extraction (DSX), adopted by Bulong, is the newest and most innovative approach. It involves separation of nickel and cobalt directly from the pregnant leach stream (PLS) and thus avoids tedious and often inefficient intermediate precipitation stages ( The simplicity of DSX, however, is complicated by the complex nature of the leach liquor stream produced by PAL. Early plant experience indicated that impurity control, particularly in the solvent extraction stage, hindered full optimisation of this innovative technology. Chromium, both as chromium(III) and chromium(VI), is an inherent impurity in PAL-generated leach liquors. Chromium(III) is the main form of chromium found in laterite ores and dissolves easily during PAL, remaining in solution until treated. Chromium(VI) is found in chromite, which is present especially in the upper layers of a lateritic resource. Some dissolution of chromite occurs during PAL ( In the absence of effective process control, chromium enters the solvent extraction circuit either as chromium(VI) formed during leaching and not subsequently reduced, or as chromium(III) which has not been fully precipitated during pH adjustment. This has been observed in at least one operating plant. Cyanex The present study investigated the solvent extraction behaviour of chromium with Cyanex The aqueous solutions were prepared from distilled deionised water and if available, analytical grade salts. Chromium(III) solutions were prepared from chromium nitrate nonahydrate (Cr(NO The following conditions were used in solvent extraction tests unless otherwise stated: [Cr] 1×10 Analyses of aqueous solutions for chromium were performed using atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) on a Varian SpectrAA-50. UV–VIS spectroscopy was carried out using a Varian DMS 70 model UV–VIS spectrometer. The samples were placed in 10 mm path length cuvettes and the wavelength scanned from 350 to 800 nm in 10 nm intervals. Independent analyses of the organic phase for chromium were performed by either the Chemistry Centre of Western Australia (CCWA) or Bulong Nickel Operation (BNO). All stripping data was obtained by analysis of the organic phase. The extraction curve obtained for the extraction of chromium(III) from a range of solutions with Cyanex Consistent with the known higher stability of both the hydroxide and aqua complexes of chromium(III) than those of weakly complexing anions (  The only published study ( The similarity of the extraction curve obtained in the present study to that of Other than that of The extraction of chromium(III) with Cyanex A further observation made in all cases when chromium(III) was extracted was the development of a coloured organic phase and the loss of colour from the aqueous phase. Analysis of the organic phase for chromium(III) produced a similar curve to that generated by analysis of the aqueous phase data confirming the transfer of chromium(III) to the organic phase. The effect of chloride ion concentration on the extraction of chromium(III) with Cyanex The concentration of sulphate ion in the aqueous phase affects the extraction behaviour as shown in The presence of acetate in the aqueous phase caused a curious and previously unreported effect on the extraction of chromium(III) (5×10 To simulate the extraction of chromium from a contaminated industrial sample, extraction tests were carried out using a plant solvent extraction feed spiked with chromium(III) (1×10 The effect of Cyanex The change in observed slope of the lines from 1.6 to 2.6 ( The application of Eq. The organic phase takes on the colour of the chromium(III) feed solution when freshly loaded. Observation of the same colour in both the aqueous and freshly loaded organic phase suggested that the inner coordination sphere of the metal is unchanged during extraction. If the organic phase was allowed to stand for approximately 24 h a green organic solution was observed. This colour is characteristic of octahedrally coordinated chromium(III) ( At room temperature a noticeable cloudiness in the loaded organic phase developed as the solution aged. The cloudiness could be removed by passing the organic phase through Whatman Previous investigators on the extraction of chromium(III) with other extractants also observed a change in the UV–VIS spectrum: The direct determination of the extracted species of chromium in the organic phase is difficult for a variety of reasons and thus, indirect methods of analysis were used. In the absence of sulphate and at low chromium(III) concentration the slope of the log An additional consideration in the determination of the extracted species is the unchanged nature of the inner metal coordination sphere indicated by the similar UV–VIS spectra of the aqueous and freshly loaded organic phase ( On the basis of the known behaviour of Cyanex The equations describing metal extraction outlined by The metal species, M Given the range of experimental slope values obtained for chromium (III) and known presence of a range of chromium(III) species in aqueous solutions, it is reasonable to assume that a mixture of species is formed in the organic phase. Additionally changes in experimental conditions, especially the amount of available extractant, may change the complexes formed. The expulsion of water during the formation of the stable organic species suggests that the inner coordination sphere of the chromium(III) metal centre is being exchanged for components of the organic phase. The immediate suggestion is the attachment of the extractant molecules from the outer coordination sphere of the extracted species directly to the chromium(III) centre. A further possibility is the formation of tightly bound CrA Another possible option is the formation of chromium(III) phosphinate polymers as suggested by Chromium is commonly found in the aqueous phase in both the (III) and (VI) oxidation states. The oxidation state of chromium should have a significant impact on the extraction behaviour with Cyanex The extraction curve of chromium(VI) from sulphate or chloride-containing solutions with Cyanex Unlike chromium(III), significant extraction of chromium(VI) did not occur at pH greater than 2 suggesting that the neutral chromic acid, H The extraction of the neutral molecule was consistent with the independence of the extraction behaviour on anion type in the aqueous phase. The extraction of neutral metal species by bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid is not generally accepted. However Cyanex The stripping of chromium(III) from Cyanex The change in the loaded organic species as the organic phase ages, as described earlier, also affected the stripping efficiency. If an organic phase loaded with chromium(III) was allowed to stand until the changes occurred, stripping was low and irreproducible. The use of hydrochloric or sulphuric acid up to 8 mol The difference in stripping behaviour between fresh and aged Cyanex When a freshly loaded organic solution was used the stripping efficiency did not increase with increased contact time in the range 10–120 min. This indicated that the stripping reaction was quite fast. The effect of the acid type and concentration on stripping efficiency is shown in The present work found that chromium(VI) is not extracted by Cyanex The risk of organic oxidation is especially pertinent, as the oxidative power of chromium(VI) is a primary industrial concern. Addition of another strong oxidant that will oxidise chromium(III) to chromium(VI) therefore introduces a further risk to the organic phase and hence the attempt to oxidatively strip chromium(III) was abandoned. In contrast to earlier reports the behaviour of chromium(III) with Cyanex The present work both extends the previously published literature on this subject and simplifies the data available. The hydrometallurgical separation of cobalt and nickel with Cyanex The addition of the present work to the existing literature provides data for chromium(III) extraction under comparable conditions to that published for other first-row transition metals. This allows some confidence in the preparation of comparative extraction curves, which is only reasonable provided the experimental conditions are comparable. The comparison of metal extraction curves under similar conditions is considered a vital starting point for the development of a solvent extraction process yet chromium(III) was never previously included in sulphate systems with Cyanex Chromium(III) could be completely stripped from a loaded organic phase using mineral acids at relatively short contact times but only if stripping is carried out immediately after extraction. If the loaded organic phase is allowed to stand, stripping is difficult and incomplete even with the use of concentrated acids and long contact times. Chromium has been observed in the solvent extraction circuit of at least one operating plant suggesting that the precipitation process is not always complete. If chromium(III) reaches the solvent extraction circuit then it may contribute to decreased phase separation, clarity and crud formation. Any chromium(III) that is extracted by Cyanex To obtain the best comparative data solvent extraction should be undertaken using conditions that closely match the actual conditions that would be encountered during industrial operation.