N,N′-di-8-Quinolyltrimethylenediamine cobalt [Co(dqpr)] and N,N′-di-8-quinolylphenylenediamine cobalt [Co(dqph)] were synthesized and tested as catalysts for electro-reduction of oxygen when immobilized on graphite electrodes. For modification on graphite, the complexes were mixed with graphite powder and heat-treated in Ar atmosphere at 400–800°C, then immobilized on graphite electrode with Nafion solution. The performance was improved significantly by the heat treatment, and it was assumed to be due to the formation of stabilized CoN4 chelate structure still remaining on the graphite surface after pyrolysis. The polarization measurements revealed that the performance of the electrodes modified with the complexes was parallel to that of 5% platinum dispersed on carbon. Durability tests of the heat-treated complex at 80°C in acidic aqueous solutions showed relatively good catalytic performances as oxygen reduction catalysts, as compared with platinum. The potential usage of the complexes was demonstrated as the cathode catalysts in polymer electrolyte fuel cells in combination with fewer amounts of platinum, where a remarkable concerted effect is observed between platinum sites and CoN4 centers dispersed on carbon substrate.In previous studies, the applicability of some organic-metal complexes was reported as potential candidate for oxygen reduction catalysts such as in polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs) In this paper, we report a new series of compounds possessing CoN According to the literature In a similar manner as mentioned above, dqph was prepared from 8-hydroxyquinoline and Under nitrogen atmosphere, dqpr (0.033 g, 10 In a similar manner as mentioned above, claret or reddish purple powder was obtained from acetonitrile. UV ( The melting points were determined with a Mettler FP62 melting point apparatus and were reported uncorrected. The  A disk electrode (diameter, 6 mm; apparent area, 0.28 cm Approximately 10 mg of Co(dqph) was mixed with 40 mg of graphite powder (45 μm, Wako Pure Chemical Industries) in ethanol in a mortar, then dried and put in a furnace (Isuzu Co. model AT-E58) and heat-treated at 400, 600 and 800°C in Ar atmosphere. In a procedure similar to that for modified electrodes based on organic metal catalysts, mixture of Co(dqph) supporting graphite powder and Nafion were put on a graphite disk electrode. The electrode is abbreviated as Co(dqph)/C(Nafion)/BHPG. The amount of graphite powder supporting the catalyst and the dry Nafion was 1.6×10 Mixed catalysts of platinum tetraammine chloride [Pt(NH Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was measured for disk electrodes of 5 mm diameter (apparent area, 0.20 cm Rotating disk electrode (RDE) and ring-disk electrode (RRDE) were used to evaluate the oxygen reduction kinetics on modified electrodes. The disk was modified BHPG, with a diameter of 6.0 mm (apparent area, 0.28 cm The efficiency of oxygen reduction to H Surface analysis of the heat-treated catalysts by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out with a Perkin Elmer model PHI5600ci XPS apparatus with monochromated Al K Surface morphology of the mixed catalysts was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A TOPCON model DS-720 was used for the SEM analysis of the mixed catalysts on graphite powder after the heat treatments at magnifications 25 000× and 100 000×, and at the acceleration voltage of 13 kV.  The current is recorded in the time course for Co(dqph)(Nafion) modified BHPG in quiescent 0.05 mol dm The amount of Nafion in the modified electrode relative to that of Co(dqph) is optimized by varying Nafion impregnation. The limiting current density of modified BHPG is measured for RDE at the rotation speed 300 rpm for various mass ratio of dry Nafion polymer to Co(dqph), in the range up to 4.0. Usage of Nafion polymer to impregnate the catalysts on BHPG appears to protect the compounds from dissolution in acidic solution, and to improve its catalytic ability. Very little amount of Nafion is not effective for such impregnation, but too much of it hinders the oxygen diffusion through Nafion film onto the catalyst site. The best catalytic performance is observed for the ratio of dry Nafion to Co(dqph) at 1:1. This corresponds to the amount of Co(dqph) as 3.3×10 The efficiency %H Co(dqph) was mixed with graphite powder by 20 mass%, heat-treated at various temperatures, then immobilized on BHPG with Nafion impregnation. The amount of complex on the electrode is estimated to be 5.1×10  The results of the stability test conducted for various kinds of heat treated Co(dqph)/C(Nafion) in 0.05 mol dm In CV curves measured for a Pt-Co(dqph)/C(Nafion)/BHPG system starting with 100% Pt(NH The mass transfer corrected Tafel plots and the Koutecky–Levich plots shown in In There have been a lot of reports about the structural features on active centers of macro-cyclic metal complexes In N 1s spectra are shown in The above results indicate that CoN bonding is stable below the temperature 600°C but starts to decompose above this temperature. Considering the results of RRDE and stability tests, which show maximum catalytic performances at 600°C, the chelate unit CoN In order to seek for alternatives of platinum as oxygen reduction catalysts, some organic-metal complexes such as metallo-porphyrins and phthalocyanines have long been studied and found to be good candidates from bio-mimetic implications Co(dqpr) or Co(dqph) studied here exhibit relatively good catalytic performances. Molecular structures of Co(dqpr) and Co(dqph) in The results show that although the initial performance of Co(dqpr) or Co(dqph) reveals good catalytic ability for oxygen reduction, it soon deteriorates due to dissolution in the aqueous phase. Heat treatments of cobalt organic compounds that are mixed with graphite powder significantly resolve this problem ( The stability test shows the similar trend as seen in The organic-metal complexes tested produce mostly H Very interestingly, the catalytic ability of platinum is maintained until the content of platinum becomes as low as 30% (see According to the experimental observations, the oxygen reduction proceeds on platinum via four-electron mechanism, and on Co(dqph) it proceeds mostly via two-electron mechanism. Platinum and Co(dqph) moiety would probably be dispersed on the graphite substrate randomly after the heat treatment. When both platinum and CoN  A new type of organic-metal catalyst, cobalt di-quinolyldiamine complexes for oxygen reduction is proposed and evaluated extensively at the mixed condition with platinum. The following are obtained concerning their performances in acidic medium and in conditions relevant for fuel cell operations. In Nafion impregnated conditions, Co(dqpr) and Co(dqph) on BHPG revealed two-electron reduction process for O The chelate structure CoN Mixture of Pt and Co(dqph) functions as good oxygen reduction catalysts, both in kinetic current and in %H The proposed organic complexes are demonstrated as potential candidates to be applied as a co-catalyst mixed with platinum in PEFCs, thereby reducing the platinum loading by 70%. The authors appreciate Dr Mutsuyuki Kyotani of NIMC, for his help in the SEM measurement.