A Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical (THM) model for Cosserat continua is developed to explore the influence of frictional heating and thermal pore fluid pressurization on the strain localization phenomenon. A general framework is presented to conduct a bifurcation analysis for elasto-plastic Cosserat continua with THM couplings and predict the onset of instability. The presence of internal lengths in Cosserat continua enables to estimate the thickness of the localization zone. This is done by performing a linear stability analysis of the system and looking for the selected wavelength corresponding to the instability mode with fastest finite growth coefficient. These concepts are applied to the study of fault zones under fast shearing. For doing so, we consider a model of a sheared saturated infinite granular layer. The influence of THM couplings on the bifurcation state and the shear band width is investigated. Taking representative parameters for a centroidal fault gouge, the evolution of the thickness of the localized zone under continuous shear is studied. Furthermore, the effect of grain crushing inside the shear band is explored by varying the internal length of the constitutive law.Strain localization is of major importance in fault zones as it affects shear heating and pore pressure build up during seismic slip ( Theoretical and experimental research shows that strain localization is caused and enhanced by weakening mechanisms that can either be of pure mechanical origin (e.g. geometrical and mechanical changes of the solid skeleton (e.g. Models that are able to describe the localization thickness and its evolution have to take into account both the size of the microstructure of a fault gouge as well as the multi-physical couplings that take place during seismic slip. Cosserat theory allows in a natural way to account for the aforementioned characteristics, leading to a shear band of finite thickness even under low strain rates ( Cosserat continuum ( Cosserat continuum has been previously used for studying the behavior of fault gouges and strain localization ( In part I, we focus mainly on point (a) using bifurcation theory and Linear Stability Analysis (LSA). The approach is analytical and it allows to explore qualitatively the influence of the evolution of the hardening parameter and of the grain size on the thickness of the localized zone. In The Cosserat continuum is a special case of first order micromorphic continua, for which the particle is considered rigid ( Compared to a Cauchy continuum formed by a set of particles identified by their coordinates If we consider a point M’, in the particle of center M, defined by its coordinates Einstein summation convention is followed herein. The following kinematic fields are introduced: the deformation tensor The macroscopic strain and rotation tensors (ε Correspondingly the stress tensor The momentum balance equations can be written as follows (assuming no body forces acting on the medium, The energy and mass balance equations as classically derived for a saturated Cauchy continuum are extended here to a fluid-saturated Cosserat continuum. The energy conservation in a quasi-static transformation is expressed as follows: We consider a porous medium consisting of two phases, i.e. the solid skeleton and the fluid contained in the pores. The conservation of the mass of the skeleton and the fluid, when no mass exchange occurs is: By applying the Eulerian continuity conditions and using the expression of the particle derivative ( If we neglect the gradient of the density of the fluid and solid phases, For simplicity, constitutive equations are written in terms of the Terzaghi effective stress for both the elastic and plastic strains. However, the underlying assumption of elastically incompressible grains can be overcome without difficulty by resorting to Biot’s theory of poromechanics ( The general constitutive equations for a linear isotropic elastic Cosserat continuum are defined by six coefficients. The two classical deformation moduli, (.) In the analyses of simple shearing of an infinite layer presented in The generalized elastic stress-strain relationships are written as: Following  Denoting Denoting Q the plastic potential and The classical Drucker–Prager plastic model for cohesionless materials was extended to Cosserat media by The hardening shear modulus is: Let us consider an evolution problem described by We are interested in determining the conditions for which the above homogeneous solutions become unstable in the Lyapunov sense ( The constitutive To obtain The system of For non-trivial solutions, the determinant of the matrix in Note that the classical condition of localization for rate-independent plastic materials with a Cauchy continuum is retrieved ( Field observations of faults show that shear deformation is extremely localized into so-called slip-zones of finite, but small thickness, composed of cataclastic material due to excessive shearing ( Strain localization in narrow bands can be seen as a bifurcation from the homogeneous deformation solution of the underlying mathematical problem. In this section, we determine the conditions for shear band formation by taking into account the THM couplings developed in the previous sections. The results are then compared to field and experimental data. A simple configuration of a fault core is represented in Prior to localization, the state of stress, strain, pore pressure and temperature is assumed to be homogeneous in the layer. As a condition of zero couple stress is applied at the boundaries, the couple stresses are identically zero in the medium. Thus, the medium behaves like a Cauchy continuum. We introduce the following dimensionless quantities: Considering Note that for an infinite layer, as we assume invariance in We consider a fault at 7 km depth to study its stability and the shear band thickness predicted by our model. The values of the different parameters are retrieved from In The value for the critical hardening modulus given in For a given hardening modulus below the critical value The selected wavelength tends to infinity for When a layer of granular material is sheared, experiments show that the shear stress evolves towards a residual value and, thus, the hardening modulus tends to zero after sufficient slip (see The yield surface for a Drucker–Prager model is defined with two parameters: the friction and the dilatancy coefficients. In this section, we look at their influence on the triggering of localization. The critical hardening parameter, under which the homogeneous state of deformation is unstable for some wavelengths of the perturbation, is plotted as a function of In granular materials, inelastic deformations can induce volume changes. In low porosity rocks dilatancy can be the result of rearrangement of close packed particles due to shearing or from uplift sliding over asperity contacts. Yet the opposite effect, compaction, can also be observed as a result of pore collapse or grain crushing ( The mechanical system presents a linear evolution of the critical hardening modulus with For HM couplings, the evolution is bilinear and the two lines intersect at The introduction of thermal pressurization in the THM model has the effect of shifting the line in the contractant regime to even higher values of The initial friction coefficient, The hydraulic parameters of the problem are not well constrained, they depend on the material, the pore pressure, the temperature, the porosity etc.. To have a better insight into the effects of some parameters on the behavior of the system, we plot the evolution of the wavelength selection Several studies were conducted in order to investigate the value of permeability and diffusivity inside the fault core ( Several parameters of the model also depend on the porosity (e.g. the permeability, the thermal pressurization term, the mixture compressibility etc.). In addition, they evolve during the shear process because of deformations and possible thermally activated chemical reactions ( However, the parameter that has the greatest impact on the stability is the ratio Another effect studied here is the change of the normal stress applied to the sheared layer and its effect on the wavelength selection. We have taken values of 100 and 300 MPa corresponding to 3.5 and 10 km depth in the crust respectively. The highest value corresponds to a typical depth of transition between brittle and ductile behavior in the Earth crust. As for the permeability, the bifurcation state is not strongly affected whereas the wavelength selection is. The higher the normal stress is, the smaller the selected wavelength is and thus the thinner the localization becomes. In the previous section, we have studied how the selected wavelength evolves with the hardening modulus for various values of the material parameters. We recall that the above linear stability analysis (LSA) is performed from a reference state which is assumed homogeneous. In the following, we consider a typical stress–strain curve for a fault gouge material under shear and explore the evolution of shear band thickness in due course of the shearing process. This is done by evaluating the selected wavelength from the LSA assuming homogeneous deformation at each state, which, is not strictly speaking the case due to progressive strain localization. However, this approach can give an interesting insight, which will be confirmed in the companion paper (  In From the evolution of the plastic hardening coefficient in At high mean stresses, like for faults at great depth, grain crushing is observed from exhumed samples and also in experiments (  The introduction of a characteristic length in the Cosserat continuum enables us to take into account the microstructure evolution of the medium ( In Seismic slip takes place in a narrow, thin zone (PSZ), whose thickness plays a fundamental role regarding the behavior of ultracataclastic fault cores. In this paper we investigate the effects of the grain size of the fault gouge on the evolution of the thickness of the PSZ. The various Therm-Hydro-Mechanical couplings that are ubiquitous during pre- and co-seismic slip of faults are also considered and their role investigated. Our analysis is based on a three-dimensional Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical model for Cosserat continua. The latter allows to take into account in a direct way the size of the microstructure and its evolution. The model is a generalization of the Bifurcation theory (Linear Stability Analysis) is applied on the coupled, non-linear Cosserat system of equations in order to extract the conditions for the onset of localization. The mathematical treatment of the equations is kept general in order (a) to show the differences with the classical approaches that use the acoustic tensor ( It is shown that the localization zone thickness scales with the grain size. This means that the larger the grains are the larger the shear band becomes. This intrinsic, physical length scale is introduced by the material parameters of the Cosserat continuum, which can be experimentally determined (see The role of porosity is twofold regarding localization. Higher porosity commonly corresponds to higher permeability (e.g. Kozeny–Carman law). It also leads to a lower thermal pressurization coefficient. This latter has a more significant influence on the shear band thickness. Higher permeability and lower thermal pressurization coefficient both result in a broader thickness of the localized zone. On the other hand, higher porosity results in a higher mixture compressibility, which on the contrary leads to thinner localized zone. Of course the dominance of one or another of these competing mechanisms depends on the fault material. However, for the material parameters used here, a more porous material presents a narrower localization zone, because the effect of porosity on mixture compressibility is dominant. Nevertheless, the thermal pressurization is not only affected by the porosity but also by other material parameters and the analysis has shown that this parameter has a very significant influence on the localized zone thickness. The shear band thickness also depends on the confining stress. Although the condition for localization is independent of the confining stress, if we assume a linear yield criterion, it affects the shear band thickness. More specifically, large confining stress (e.g. deeper faults) leads to narrower PSZ. Finally, the evolution of the friction coefficient during shearing has an impact on the shear band thickness development. A typical hardening modulus evolution for gouge material is considered and allows to follow the evolution of the localization zone during shearing. We observe a decrease of the shear band thickness at the beginning of the localization process, followed by a progressive increase towards a steady, residual value. By assuming an exponential grain size reduction under shearing, which was taken into account by modifying the internal length of the model, a qualitative estimation of the effect of grain cataclasis during slip is provided. It is shown that grain communition causes a decrease of the PSZ thickness. It is worth emphasizing that the results of the present paper are of qualitative nature. Our target is to explore the tendency of the overall system and the impact of the several physical quantities. However, this investigation is based on LSA, which has two main drawbacks. The first one is the linearization of the non-linear system of equations, while the second one, is that the linearization is performed to a reference state that does not evolve with deformation. These are strong assumptions for studying the post-bifurcation behavior that have to be explored further numerically. In the companion paper ( Following the mass conservation for the fluid and the solid phase (see As  In In this section, we will follow the method presented in  We express the velocity of the different spheres at the contact point: Thus the relative displacement at the contact point can be written: We calculate its quadratic mean around a sphere of radius where In order to retrieve the classical shear strain rate intensity The expression of the shearing intensity A micro-mechanical model could also be developed by considering that the normal stresses acting on a elementary volume aren’t uniform and, thus, introduce moments. This hypothesis is justified knowing that continuum with micro-structure presents large gradients of stresses and their variation at the level of micro-structure cannot be ignored. By emphasizing the contact tractions over the periphery of grains, it results on different definitions of the invariants (