In this paper, mineralogy, grain size, dissemination, textural consistency and mineral associations were determined for a commercially exploited porphyry copper ore using a Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA). The ore was subjected to high power density microwave treatments in a single mode cavity at 15kW and approximately 2kWh/t. The untreated and microwave-treated samples were subsequently milled to two grind sizes near the nominal plant grind size and a size-by-liberation analysis performed. The analysis revealed that equivalent liberation could be obtained at a grind size approximately 50–60μm coarser than the nominal plant grind due to the microwave treatment. Flotation testing indicated that an increase in copper recovery of approximately 1% could be achieved, or that a grind size increase of approximately 30μm may potentially yield equivalent copper recovery due to the microwave-enhanced liberation observed. However, statistical analyses demonstrated that it is difficult to attain confidence in recovery increases of approximately 1% even when conducting batch flotation tests in triplicate. The ore under investigation had previously been shown to produce only modest average reductions in strength (∼8%) under similar microwave treatment conditions due to a prevalence of many unfavourable textures. However, the preferential association of copper minerals with a hard matrix mineral (quartz) and a hard microwave-absorbent mineral (pyrite) resulted in a significant change in liberation behaviour.The growing demand for many mineral commodities combined with a higher embodied energy in their production from falling grades, finer mineralisation and increased mining activity will place a strain on sustainable mining in the future ( High power density microwave treatment has been proposed as a technique to reduce ore competency prior to beneficiation and as a means of enhancing liberation through the generation of thermally-induced cracks along mineral grain boundaries leading to inter-granular and trans-granular fracture ( Despite the potential for microwave-induced grain boundary weakening and fracture to aid in liberation, most of the published literature on experimental microwave treatments of metalliferous ores has focused on reduced ore competency. This is likely due in part to the limited availability of automated mineralogy facilities (e.g. Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) and QEMSCAN) to researchers prior to the mid-2000s when the bulk of the experimental research was conducted, but also because the value obtained from reduced ore competency is more easily quantified and realised in comminution circuits and has therefore been of primary interest to research sponsors. However, the ability to exploit microwave-induced fracture by improving flotation recovery and grade, and/or increasing the primary grind size to effect liberation has significant potential benefits in terms of increasing plant throughput and metal production while reducing metal specific energy consumption, even without significant reductions in ore competency. The scale of these benefits is evidenced by the incremental movement on earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) for a large copper producer given in Several authors have demonstrated improved liberation on copper sulphide, iron sulphide and native gold-containing ores after microwave treatment and subsequent grinding (  This paper investigates the change in liberation and flotation performance on a commercially exploited porphyry copper ore at the nominal plant grind size and a coarser grind size at the coarse end of the normal flotation range after high power density microwave treatment. The relationship with mineralogical textural features is also elucidated to understand the interaction of microwave treatment with the ore and its effect on selective breakage leading to improved liberation and flotation. The ore sample used in this investigation was a porphyry copper ore from Chile. The ore was supplied as SAG mill feed and subsequently screened into a −53.0+9.5 A different test sample of the same ore was previously tested by Cu-Ore 1 was chosen for further liberation and flotation analysis for several reasons. It is evident from the spread of Point Load results that only the hardest fragments (those typically containing quartz as the dominant matrix mineral) with significant copper and iron sulphide mineralisation (good microwave-heating minerals) experienced any substantial reduction in competency. Many fragments were effectively sulphide barren, had very fine sulphide mineralisation and/or contained a high proportion of soft matrix minerals (typically micas and other phyllosilicates) as illustrated in However, the copper sulphide minerals had a relatively coarse grain size, tended to be concentrated in a small proportion of the ore, were notably associated with hard matrix minerals and were intimately associated with pyrite (another hard and microwave-heating mineral), often tending to rim the pyrite grains. Therefore, the bulk of the copper sulphides were likely included in the group of fragments that experienced significant microwave-induced fracture. As such, despite the textural variability and modest average strength reductions, it was believed that Cu-Ore 1 was a potential candidate for improved liberation due to microwave-induced fracture. Microwaves were provided by 3–15 A single mode cavity is a metallic enclosure in which the superposition of the reflected and incident microwaves gives rise to a standing wave pattern that is very well defined in space and usually localised in a small volume. The automatic E-H tuner was employed to match the impedance of the generator and transmission line to that of the ore load in the cavity in order to maximise the absorbance of microwave energy by the test sample. The short circuit tuner was employed and adjusted to position the maximum electric field strength within the ore load, allowing maximum heating rates to be achieved during treatment. The TE In total, 22 batch treatments were performed with an average of approximately 1.25 A Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) (FEI Quanta 600 platform) was used in these investigations to conduct a textural analysis of the ore as well as to determine the liberation characteristics of milled untreated and microwave-treated material. Polished sections of 84 lump fragments up to 30 Both untreated and microwave-treated samples were stage crushed in a laboratory jaw crusher at the same closed side settings (CSS) to ensure the same conditions for breakage, and starvation fed to minimise fines production and to allow microwave-induced fractures to be preferentially exhausted at the earliest opportunity. The first stage at 9.5 The crusher products were split by rotary sample divider into representative 1 A grinding calibration was conducted at 0, 2.5, 5, 10 and 15 For liberation analysis, the sized fractions were set in resin in 30 Rougher flotation testing was performed on the untreated and microwave-treated material to determine if any changes in liberation resulted in observable changes to the copper grade-recovery curves. The procedure used in this investigation was adapted from the host mine procedure, with some alterations due to availability of reagents and equipment. Substitute reagents were sourced and approved by the project sponsors from previous work on the ore. The reagents, their function and dosage are listed in Laboratory flotation tests were performed in triplicate in a four litre Denver flotation cell; however, the host mine procedure used a three litre cell. A mixture of collectors and frothers were employed, with lime to control the process water to pH10. AP-3758 was substituted for Matcol D-101 (dithiocarbamate) collector and Dertol 90 used as the pine oil frother. The host mine procedure called for an 87.5% D-101 and 12.5% AX-317 collector blend, with a 70% X-133 to 30% pine oil frother blend. Exploratory tests were performed to adjust the reagent dosage for the increased cell volume and reduced pulp density (from 26.5%w/w to 21.4%w/w), yielding the reagent dosages listed in The reagents were added to the mill during grinding, but with only half of the NaHS and the required lime to achieve pH10. The pulp was transferred to the flotation cell and conditioned for a further five minutes with the remaining NaHS and air flowing at 0.5 The average lump fragment and average liberation grind modal mineralogies are presented in The crushing, grinding, combined native copper sulphide and good microwave-heating phase grain size distributions are presented in The native grain sizes derived from the textural analysis show that the crushing product is somewhat finer than the copper sulphide grain size, which seems to indicate that these minerals would begin to liberate even at such a coarse size. However, it must be noted that the copper sulphide grain size appears artificially coarse due to the MLA software defining the grain size as the diameter of an equivalent area circle. Many of the copper sulphide grains occur as fine veins or thin rims around pyrite with touching adjacent grains. Any grains that touch are considered by the MLA software to be a single grain, thereby increasing the grain area and grain size; hence the apparent lack of grains less than ∼500 The grinding calibration on the untreated material predicted grind times of 6.1 Bond Ball Mill Work Index tests were not performed as part of this study due to a limited amount of material. Ideally, to test whether there are residual fractures in the microwave-treated material a synthetic feed should be made that is equivalent in size distribution to the baseline untreated material. However, to estimate any reduction in ore competency at milling sizes, a relative Work Index was calculated from the untreated and microwave-treated batch grinds using the method proposed by Bond’s third theory ( The calculated relative Work Index for the coarse grinds (6.1 The mass distributions and copper sulphide assays by size class from the liberation analysis are presented in The cumulative liberation profiles of the four grinds are given in Furthermore, it is evident that the microwave-treated coarse grind at P  Copper sulphide liberation is of critical importance to flotation and  The apparent reduction in association of the copper sulphides with iron and other sulphides between the untreated and microwave-treated samples (∼4%) may be attributed to their association in lump fragments. As mentioned previously, a large proportion of the copper sulphides appear to rim the pyrite grains or else be intimately associated together. Therefore, the copper sulphides are not only constrained by a hard or soft gangue matrix mineral, but also by a hard microwave-heating mineral providing even greater differential thermal expansion along the grain boundaries. The preferential breakage under load observed between harder and softer minerals ( The association of copper sulphides and other microwave-heating minerals (Fe/Ti oxides and smectite clays) was also very similar between untreated and microwave-treated material. There was little remaining association for both untreated and microwave-treated material and it appeared to be independent of grind size over the range tested. There was little association of other microwave-heating minerals with copper sulphides in the lump fragments, but it also appears that these minerals liberate well from copper sulphides in the untreated ore.  The ore under investigation demonstrated only modest reductions in ore competency after microwave treatment that would contribute directly to reductions in specific crushing and grinding energy requirements. However, by increasing the primary grind size, less grinding would be performed, thereby indirectly reducing the specific grinding energy requirement. Alternatively, if copper recovery can be increased at the same grind size due to a higher degree of liberation, then value would be obtained by increasing copper production. In order to compare a microwave-treated coarse grind with a similar degree of liberation to the untreated coarse grind sample, a target P  In order to test whether the observed average increase in recovery and cumulative copper grades were statistically significant, the method proposed by  The flotation kinetics were modelled after The fitted kinetics model parameters and regression performance are given in The grade-recovery curves, in the form of enrichment ratio-recovery curves, were modelled after Bruey ( The fitted model parameters and regression performance are given in It appeared that one of the microwave-treated fine grind flotation tests yielded lower than expected enrichment ratios for the copper recovery values obtained (the four left-most squares in A bootstrap analysis was conducted with 1000 replicates and the difference between the untreated and microwave-treated parameters compared. Only the difference in the ER50 value for the coarse grinds demonstrated a significant difference (with >99% confidence), which supports the higher grade achieved in the early concentrates following microwave treatment. The other model fitted parameters were within the range of standard error from replicate testing. The full details of the enrichment ratio-recovery modelling difference test are given in Table S.5 in the Supplementary Information. The fitted curves with the 95% confidence limits determined from the bootstrap analysis are given in The previous statistical analysis has focused on determining the confidence in differences over particular ranges of the untreated and microwave-treated curves. To determine if the two curves are different an F-Test may be performed, which compares the residual sum of squares for the separate fits of the two data sets to that obtained by fitting the same model to the combined data set (i.e. the global fit). The F-Test statistic, The results of the F-Test showed that the curves for the fine grinds are statistically the same, achieving only 3–19% confidence, for the triplicate and duplicate analysis respectively, that the two curves are different. However, there is great confidence (>99%) that the two curves for the coarse grinds are indeed different. Full details of the F-Test are given in Table S.7 in the Supplementary Information. The statistical analysis was heavily influenced by the repeatability of the batch flotation tests in these investigations, particularly for the fine grinds. The analysis also suggested that, given the standard deviation of recoveries obtained, at least six repeats would be required to improve the robustness of the averaged flotation results when attempting to prove a recovery difference of 1% at 90% confidence. In addition, the difference in grind sizes between the untreated and microwave-treated samples may have influenced the result as the grind sizes were not directly comparable.  Nevertheless, if the average results are considered to be indicative of actual performance then it can be calculated that at the plant grind of P Plant grind sizes constantly change with differing feeds and operating conditions, typically leading to reduced recovery when the grind size becomes coarser as a result of poorer liberation and/or flotation performance. By adopting microwave treatment prior to milling, it has been demonstrated that higher recoveries may be obtained when the grind size is subject to inherent fluctuations or targeted at a coarser size. A summary of the pertinent statistical confidence levels from the previous analysis are given in The importance of mineralogy and ore texture is further illustrated by comparing the work of The authors omitted the −45 In contrast, the porphyry copper ore tested in this investigation appeared to retain a fairly high degree of copper sulphide association with softer non-heating gangue minerals following grinding (shown in In summary, when considering the potential for microwave-enhanced liberation and flotation recovery, the influence of factors such as grain size, grind size and valuable mineral associations should be well understood, as is the case for conventional processing ( It has been demonstrated that ores which do not exhibit large reductions in average ore competency (<10%) following microwave treatment at economically feasible energy inputs (due to the presence of many barren, fine grained or soft fragments) may still exhibit significant changes in liberation due to favourable valuable-mineral mineralogical characteristics. For the porphyry copper ore tested in these investigations, a coarse copper sulphide grain size coupled with a high association with hard microwave-transparent (i.e. quartz) and hard microwave-heating (i.e. pyrite) minerals resulted in a grind size increase of 50–60 Subsequent laboratory batch flotation testing suggested that copper recovery could be increased by up to approximately 1% at nominal plant grind sizes, or that a grind size increase of approximately 30 The authors would like to thank the sponsors of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 