The chapter presents the state of the art in two areas. The first covers biodegradable 3-D biocomposite materials based on calcium phosphate phases (CPPs) in combination with inorganic and organic components. The focus here is on materials that are designed as hard tissue substitutes. The second area covers the application of the electrochemically assisted deposition (ECAD) process to implant-relevant metallic biomaterials for the preparation of pure CPP and CPP composite coatings. For both areas, this chapter spans all aspects from their preparation conditions, to the results of their biological testing, where possible, to clinical results.
               In the first part of this chapter, the focus lies on different processing routes to prepare CPP-based hard tissue substitute materials. Special attention is given to biomimetic processing routes that allow the incorporation of organic compounds that can improve the osteogenic and chondrogenic response. Additionally, approaches for improving the antibacterial properties of the materials are discussed.
               In the second part of this chapter, the general aspects of the ECAD process as a biomimetic approach for the deposition of coatings of materials showing a pH-dependent solubility are described. This includes the major influencing parameters such as temperature, electrolyte composition, and polarization mode and the deposition of coatings that consist of different CPPs such as brushite and hydroxyapatite. Composite coatings based on CPP that include inorganic and organic components and approaches to realize antibacterial effects are also discussed.Introduction Biocomposites Purely inorganic materials Inorganic organic compound materials CPP Coatings Prepared by ECAD Basic principle of the ECAD process Parameters influencing the coating properties     Composites   In vitro   References In 1926, de Jong et al. identified the chemistry and structure of bone mineral such as that of hydroxyapatite (HAp) [ A variety of methods were developed to deposit CPP (mainly HAp) onto metal surfaces. The available techniques can be divided into high-energy physical methods and low-energy wet-chemical techniques. The physical methods comprise atmospheric plasma spraying (APS), vacuum plasma spraying, suspension plasma spraying, liquid plasma spraying (LPS), high-velocity suspension flame spraying, high-velocity oxygen fuel, gas tunnel-type plasma spraying, pulsed laser deposition (PLD), matrix-assisted pulsed laser evaporation (MAPLE), ion beam-assisted deposition (IBAD), and radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering [ From the previously mentioned mixtures of CPP, especially, ceramics based on HAp with β-TCP additions are used because of their tunable degradation behavior [ This is in line with a recent tendency toward using nanocrystalline CCP for biomedical applications because of their improved degradation behavior and mechanical properties [ Additionally, Zn and carbonate substitution have been used to tune the degradation behavior of nano-HAp [ To improve the mechanical properties, grain growth of nanocrystalline CPP during sintering processes should be avoided. Adding carbon black as a source of carbonate has shown excellent efficiency in this regard [ Pore size and geometry of CPP can also be influenced by specific sintering regimes [ To improve the mechanical properties of highly porous HAp scaffolds for tissue engineering applications, Zhang et al. [ Additionally, there is ongoing work to combine the osteoconductive properties of CPP with antibacterial ones through the incorporation of silver nanoparticles [ To prepare highly porous scaffolds with sufficient mechanical properties, CPPs have been combined with organic components such as chitosan [ Kweon et al. [ Contrary to granular or preshaped ceramics, self-setting CPP cements have the great advantage of being able to fill complex bone cavities. The addition of type I collagen to such cements has been shown to improve the work of fracture more than tenfold in combination with a twofold increase in cell attachment [ The term In the current density range of several milliamperes, which is typically used for the ECAD process, the predominant electrochemical reaction consists in the formation of hydrogen according to Equation For the electrochemical polarization, three different methods can be used [ The formation of a specific CPP and the morphology of the resulting coating generated during the ECAD process are highly determined by a variety of parameters such as electrochemical conditions, electrolyte composition, temperature, and deposition time. The individual influence of each of these parameters strongly depends on the actual settings of the other parameters. Hence, in the following, the general trends of the impact of each parameter will be explained and some typical examples will be given. Based on the principle of the ECAD process and the pH-dependent solubility of different CPPs, the outstanding role of pH is clearly understandable. From For the main components reported in literature as deposited by means of ECAD, the brutto reaction equations are given below. The consumption of OH ions is a measure of the influence of the pH on the formation of the respective CPP. As indicated by the indexes and factors Formation of brushite (BR) Formation of OCP Formation of amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) Formation of HAp For pH values of the electrolyte between 3 and 6 (which is valid for most investigations in the literature), it follows from the pK As stated above, the deposition principle consists in the generation of OH To elucidate the individual contribution of each of the two parameters, a design of experiments would be required keeping the total charge applied constant and varying all important process parameters for at least two different settings to investigate the interaction with other process parameters. Unfortunately, such comprehensive data are not available from published literature. As most authors focusing on the impact of current density investigated several combinations of current density and process time, this section will deal with the combined impact of both parameters. Redepenning and McIsaac [ Using a similar but fluoride-containing electrolyte and working at elevated temperature, Monma et al. [ Rossler et al. [ According to Nancollas [ Irrespective of slight process differences caused by the mode of polarization, the same trends were observed for potentiostatic polarizations and experiments with defined cell voltages when increasing current densities were applied due to increasing potentials. For cell voltages of up to 6 Ban and Maruno [ Another important parameter influencing the formation of CCP coatings is the process temperature. It is of special importance for the deposition of highly crystalline coatings but additionally serves as a limiting factor in the development of coatings containing organic components like proteins in codeposition procedures. From SEM images and XRD studies, it was observed by several authors that in general, higher temperatures lead to the formation of crystalline phases with increasing crystal size [ Additionally, rising temperature also increased the deposited amount of CPP [ The formation of CPP close to the surface depends on the degree of supersaturation, which is mainly affected by the used concentrations of Ca and PO In the different published experiments, calcium concentrations varied over a broad range from 0.5 to 21 Shirkhanzadeh [ If depositions were performed at a neutral pH of 7.2 and comparatively low concentrations varying between 2.4 and 4 A slightly different impact of Ca/PO Apart from variations in deposited amounts or type of CPP, degree of crystallinity, and crystal size, the opportunities to further increase the biological performance were limited. Hence, recent research focused on the incorporation of specific inorganic additives or organic molecules aiming for different physicochemical properties [ Several modifications of the original ECAD method based on calcium- and phosphate-containing solutions were performed with the aim of CPP deposition with ion substitution of anions and cations. Early attempts concentrated on the naturally occurring mineral phases like fluorinated or carbonated apatites. While the first was achieved by the presence of fluoride ions in the solution [ More recently, a series of cations, in particular Mg, Zn, and Si and Sr ions, were included in CPP coatings because of their ability to promote specific osteoblast response and-in the case of Sr-inhibit osteoclasts. Li et al. [ As a potential treatment for osteoporosis [ In another recent study by Huang et al. [ Other elements like silver or copper were incorporated to impart antibacterial properties while maintaining good biocompatibility or even improving it by proangiogenic effects [ By the application of pulsed electrochemical deposition for electrolytes containing Ca, PO Only recently the application of copper came into the focus of research. Apart from its long known bacteriostatic properties [ The successful homogeneous incorporation of copper into HAp layers has been demonstrated in our own investigations studying the impact of pulsed electrochemical deposition on resultant copper phases [ Neumann and Prinz developed a process (24) that assumes a 3-stage biological interaction: (i) burst-like release of Cu to prevent microbial attachment, (ii) osteoconductive effect due to the dissolution of the brushite phase, and (iii) slow dissolution of the remaining phase with the lowest solubility (CuPO Cobalt-another trace element-was incorporated into CPP coatings in earlier studies mainly to achieve a better bonding strength of deposited layers. In a sequential manner, first, a coating consisting of several CPP phases was converted to HAp by heat treatment with 0.1 Calcium phosphates are known for their adsorption of proteins due to their high specific surface area and specific interaction with acidic proteins such as osteocalcin and osteopontin that play dominant roles in biomineralization [ One of the most studied proteins in combination with the ECAD process is type I collagen. The interest in this protein can be attributed to the fact that it is the main organic component of the bone and can thus potentially create implant surfaces with similar composition and morphology to the bone. It is also well known for its ability to improve osteoblast adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation [ In principle, two different approaches were documented: (i) the adsorption of preformed fibrillar collagen onto either metallic [ High-resolution SEM investigations following the mineralization process showed that the characteristic banding pattern of collagen fibrils (63-67 The first studies using the second approach that aims to combine collagen fibrillogenesis with the deposition of CPP were published in a very short technical paper by Okamura et al. [ Fan et al. [ Another application of the ECAD process consists in the codeposition of potential therapeutic agents with CPP for a sustained release (68). The codeposition of the model protein bovine serum albumin (BSA) and HAp was performed by the immersion of preformed HAp coatings into BSA solutions containing calcium and phosphate ions. After a three-step process with increasing current densities from − However, it has to be taken into account that the ECAD process significantly increases the pH values at the interface between substrate and electrolyte. This might have consequences for the conformation and thus biological activity of labile compounds immobilized in this manner. A number of studies dealt with the incorporation of chitosan, a natural cationic polysaccharide, for different reasons such as increasing biocompatibility [ Zhou et al. [ Antimicrobial agents like chlorhexidine (CHD) or antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) were also included in the ECAD process. For the deposition of CHD, its pH-dependent solubility was utilized for coimmobilization with CPP [ In another study, the broad spectrum AMP Tet213 (KRWWKWWRRC) was selected and loaded by adsorption onto a preformed OCP coating [ The scope of The published studies reported well-spread cells and higher proliferation on brushite and HAp-coated samples compared to the respective reference (collagen coating) [ A disadvantage of such cell experiments lies in the lack of more complex reactions that occur when implants are brought in contact with the body, in particular with aspects of the blood system (immune system, complement system, and fibrinolytic system, to name only a few). Furthermore, in mammals, the calcium level in the extracellular space is maintained within a normal range by regulatory mechanisms that coordinate the metabolic activities of the kidneys, intestines, parathyroid glands, and bones [ Other studies focused on the effect of inorganic Sr with or without further organic additives. In the first case, the cells preferred to spread on more flattened CPP structures, which were more dominant in case of Sr doping [  If organic additives were codeposited or adsorbed onto CPP coatings, more specific effects could be demonstrated Wang et al. [ As for the very first ECAD coatings, mainly brushite phases were produced, the first published animal study investigated the impact of brushite and brushite converted to HAp [ Further studies on a later developed commercial brushite coating (BONIT®) were performed with screw-shaped implants in rabbits. A biomechanical removal torque test showed significantly increased values for coated implants only for the later time point of 12 weeks ( Cylindrical implants with HAp coatings produced directly in the ECAD process were implanted into femurs of Japanese white rabbits by Ban et al. [ Composites of CPP layers with organic compounds were investigated by Schliephake et al. [ In summary, it was demonstrated that HAp coatings produced by the ECAD process show a clear tendency to increase bone-implant contact in the early ingrowth period, while the biomechanical fixation for brushite coatings develops over time. The inclusion of collagen may hold some promise when used as a sequential HAp/collagen coating of sufficient thickness. Clinical experience for coatings prepared by the ECAD process is available only for BONIT®-based surfaces and the BoneMaster® (BM) coating manufactured by Biomet. A study by Wedemeyer et al. [ BONIT® coatings used on conical, self-cutting femoral neck prostheses did not show any specific complications within 1 year, and the rehabilitation time showed a tendency to be shorter than after stem arthroplasty [ A short-term study compared pHAp coatings with BM coatings prepared via the ECAD process. The stems had subsided 0.25 (pHAp) and 0.28 (BM) mm with no statistically significant differences between the groups regarding both migration and rotation. The BM group retained significantly more bone than the pHAp group in Gruen zone 1 during the first 2 years [ In summary, the ECAD method combines a variety of advantages: Deposition of thin, nonmonolithic layers with a composition, crystal size, and chemical history as close as possible to that of bone mineral. Composition, mineral phase, and crystallinity of CPP can be accurately tuned by process parameters. Thickness and chemical composition of coatings can be controlled down to the sub-μm level. Generation of coatings with a high specific surface area is possible. Low-energy and low-cost process (with respect to production costs and waste management). Compared to incubation in SBF, a more defined and higher relative supersaturation at the interface, resulting in shorter processing times. Due to the possible use of physiological processing parameters (pH, temperature, and aqueous solution), the deposition of CPP can be combined with the immobilization of organic components like proteins or peptides. Excellent homogeneity of coatings on structured and porous surfaces and on irregularly formed structures as it is no line of sight process. Positive effects of coatings prepared by ECAD Nevertheless, going from the laboratory to the industrial scale, a few points have to be considered: Most discussed is a potentially low adhesive strength of the coatings. However, this is potentially not a problem for rough or structured surfaces that are common for implants in contact with bone and can be overcome by combining them with anodic growth of oxide layers [ Electrically conductive substrates or substrate top layers are necessary. For extreme electrochemical conditions (high current densities and long duration of polarization), there is the possible danger of hydrogen embrittlement of the metallic substrate material due to an uptake of atomic hydrogen as an intermediate product of the cathodic electrode reaction.