Purpose
                  The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical results of arthroscopic treatment of tibial avulsion fracture of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) by suture fixation technique through a single bone tunnel.
               
                  Methods
                  We arthroscopically treated 28 patients (mean age, 35.3 years) with PCL avulsion fractures using 2 posteromedial portals. The bony fragment was sutured by use of a suture hook and was then reduced into the top of the tibial bone tunnel created from the anterior tibial cortex to the bottom of the fracture bed. Slight depression of 1 to 3 mm of the osseous fragment was achieved. We followed up 24 cases for more than 2 years.
               
                  Results
                  The fracture usually healed at 6 to 12 weeks (mean, 2.8 months) after surgery. At the last follow-up, all patients achieved normal range of motion of the knees, except for 2 patients who had 5° and 10° terminal flexion limitations of the involved knees, respectively. KT-1000 examination (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA) showed that the side-to-side difference was 0 to 2 mm in 23 patients and 3 mm in 1 patient, with a mean of 0.7 ± 0.8 mm. The Lysholm score was 92 to 100, with a mean of 95.2 ± 2.3. On the basis of the International Knee Documentation Committee knee examination form, the results were graded as normal in 20 patients and as nearly normal in the other 4. The mean Tegner score was 6.8 ± 0.4 preoperatively and 6.6 ± 0.5 at the last follow-up (P = .23).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The single–tibial tunnel technique seemed not only to simplify the procedure but also to facilitate slight depression of the bony fragment, which might have been useful to restore normal tension of the PCL. Clinically, this technique was reproducible and effective.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic case series.Surgical treatment of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) avulsion fracture is always considered to be a relatively difficult procedure. We know of only 2 clinical reports describing the technique for arthroscopic suture fixation; both of them used double tibial bone tunnels. Some authors have reported that a certain percentage of knees had mild but significant anterior or posterior instability even though the bony fragment had been anatomically reduced and rigidly fixed for the treatment of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) or PCL avulsion fracture. To address the 2 above-mentioned problems, we have designed an arthroscopic procedure through two posteromedial portals. In addition, only a single tibial tunnel has been used not only to facilitate the passage of the sutures but also to seat the PCL bony fragment. The diameter of the tibial tunnel was to some extent enlarged to allow the bony fragment to depress a little distally so as to tighten the PCL, which might have plastic deformation. The purpose of this study was 2-fold. The first purpose was to clinically verify the technical simplicity of this procedure. The second was to evaluate whether this procedure restored clinical PCL function. Our hypothesis was that the new procedure would be simple, reproducible, and effective in the treatment of PCL avulsion fracture. From January 2000 to October 2005, 28 consecutive patients with PCL tibial avulsion fractures were treated. The demographic information of these patients is summarized in The posterior drawer test Under spinal anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position. The affected extremity was flexed to 90° with a thigh tourniquet. Anterolateral and anteromedial portals were routinely created. The 4-mm 30° arthroscope was placed at either the anterolateral or anteromedial portal, through the intercondylar notch, directly into the posteromedial compartment. The posteromedial portals were then established under arthroscopic visualization. Two 18-gauge spinal needles were introduced into the joint to verify the accurate positions and directions of the 2 portals ( The PCL was first identified. The medial margin of the avulsed fragment was elevated, and the tibial bed was subsequently debrided ( After completion of the suturing process, the next step was to create a tibial tunnel. The bony fragment was partially elevated at the medial side by a probe introduced from the anterolateral portal, so the tibial bed was clearly visualized. The PCL tibia guide (Acufex; Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, Andover, MA) was then put into the posterior compartment through the anteromedial portal at an angle of approximately 50° to the tibia, and the tip of the guide was rested at the bottom of the tibial fracture bed, followed by a 2-mm guide pin inserted under arthroscopic control. A 2.5-cm skin incision was made at the anteromedial aspect of the proximal leg. The tibial tunnel was eventually created by use of a 4- to 6-mm cannulated drill bit. The probe was then changed to the anteromedial portal to elevate the bony fragment. A 2.7-mm ACL passing pin (Acufex; Smith & Nephew Endoscopy) loaded with a No. 7 silk suture (used as a retraction suture) was inserted into the posterior compartment through the tibial tunnel. One end of the retraction suture was extracted out the anterolateral portal by a grasper, and the opposite end was left outside the tibial bone tunnel. A second retraction suture was then put into the posterior compartment again, but one end of the suture was extracted out the low posteromedial portal, with the opposite end remaining outside the tibial bone tunnel ( A screw was drilled into the tibia distal to the outer opening of the bone tunnel. The PDS sutures were tensioned under arthroscopic visualization and tied over the screw while an anteriorly directed force was applied to the tibia with the knee flexed at an angle of 70° to 90° ( The operated knee was immobilized in an extension position by use of plaster for 2 weeks after the operation, but 4 weeks' immobilization would be indicated for patients who had concomitant tibial plateau fractures. After removal of plaster, an adjustable knee brace with controllable movement was applied and partial weight bearing was allowed as tolerated. The brace would be retained and full weight bearing would be avoided until the fracture was healed. The screw was removed at about 1 year after the operation. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the knees were taken in all patients immediately after surgery, at 6 weeks and 12 weeks postoperatively, and at the latest follow-up ( The patients were followed up and evaluated according to the International Knee Documentation Committee knee ligament examination form and Lysholm and Tegner rating scales. KT-1000 examination (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA) was performed to evaluate the posterior stability of the knee. The surgery time for each case was 45 to 90 minutes (mean, 67 minutes). All patients were followed up for 26 to 61 months (mean, 40 months), except for 4 patients who were lost to follow-up. Therefore 24 cases (85.7%) were included at their final evaluations. An independent examiner evaluated all patients. No neurovascular injury occurred. At 1 year of follow-up, 20 cases had normal range of motion of the knees when compared with the healthy side, but the other 4 cases had various degrees of arthrofibrosis, with 10°, 15°, 20°, and 25° terminal flexion limitations, respectively. Two of them subsequently underwent arthroscopic release when the tibial screw was simultaneously removed, and at last, the range of motion of their knees returned to normal. The last 2 patients still had 5° and 10° terminal flexion limitations, respectively, at the last follow-up, although they did not feel any discomfort with daily activity. The preoperative data and results at last follow-up are summarized in The fracture was usually shown to have healed on radiographs at 6 to 12 weeks (mean, 2.8 months) postoperatively. No bony nonunion occurred. At last follow-up, the tibial bone tunnels almost became blurred on radiographs. The management of an isolated intrasubstance PCL tear is controversial, The indication for suture fixation technique varied. Kim et al. For suture fixation technique, a tibial tunnel must be made for the passage of sutures. Kim et al. Inoue et al. The time of osseous union of PCL avulsion fractures has ranged from 3 to 8 months in the literature. There is an advantage to tying over a post screw versus using 2 tunnels and a bone bridge because both Zhao and Wang PDS has higher mechanical strength than other nonabsorbable sutures, such as Ethibond and silk sutures. There were several limitations in our study. First, KT-1000 measurements were used to evaluate PCL laxity, but the TELOS machine (telos, Marburg, Germany) The single–tibial tunnel technique seemed not only to simplify the procedure but also to facilitate slight depression of the bony fragment, which might have been useful to restore normal tension of the PCL. Clinically, this technique was reproducible and effective. 