This paper examines a new rock mass classification system (RMCR) for Coal Measures Rocks which is based on extensive laboratory testing results. The new system has been developed using 12 parameters which consist of mineral content index, uniaxial compressive strength, uniaxial tensile strength, Young's modulus of elasticity, shear strength, cohesion of rocks, angle of internal friction, point load index, cone indenter index, Cerchar index, Shore schleroscope hardness and specific energy index. The RMCR value was obtained by a number of laboratory and in situ testing results which were obtained from the coal site. The objective of the RMCR is to estimate the rock mass properties for engineering purposes.A number of rock mass classification systems have been developed over the past five decades ( Previous classification systems generally included in situ testing and very limited laboratory test results. The Rock Mass Classification Rating (RMCR) system of this work has been developed from a number of laboratory and in situ testing results which were obtained from the Coal Measures Rocks. The system is based on a limited number of parameters that are considered to govern the strength of the rock masses. It should be noted here that for anisotropic rocks the aspect of orientation is an overriding factor and the 12 parameters discussed should be considered for each major orientation direction separately. Only the vertical direction has been considered in this analysis. In this study, the strength of the rock mass was determined by the strength of the intact rock. The difference in strength between intact rock and the rock mass was assumed to be three times and was taken into account for classification. Further work is still needed to extend the new classification system to include other factors such as discontinuities and groundwater condition in the field. The properties of Coal Measures Rocks are grouped as geological, physical and mechanical. The laboratory tests employed to define these properties were carried out according to the techniques suggested by Geological properties of the rocks are a very important aspect of construction and design of underground operations. In this work, laminated sandstone, siltstone, mudstone, coal, limestone and slate are studied in detail. Geological properties of rocks such as age, mineral type and matrix composition, grain size, texture and structure, porosity, water content, strength, hardness, weathering and discontinuity presence were determined for mineral content rating. The content and properties of minerals present in the rocks were examined using thin sections under a polarising microscope. Sandstone and siltstone were found to have a similar mineral content consisting of quartz, feldspar, rock fragments and opaque minerals. Rock abrasiveness is usually related to quartz content. Various researchers have found a linear relation between quartz content and UCS in sedimentary rocks. Quartz content alone, however, may not be sufficient to assess rock abrasiveness. It has been suggested that the type and degree of cementation of rock in contact with mineral crystals should also be taken into account because of their effect on the strength and abrasiveness of rocks. The mineral content rating was evaluated in accordance with hardness, the presence of abrasive minerals, the degree of alteration and the type of matrix or cement in rocks ( Sandstone was defined as having a quartz content over 50% (by weight) of quartz grains greater than 4 Siltstone was generally interbedded with mudstone, sandstone, interlaminated siltstone, normally in a complex manner. Siltstone units were defined as having a quartz content of between 50 and 20% (by weight) of quartz grains greater than 4 Mudstones were considered as argillaceous units containing under 20% (by weight) of quartz grains greater than 4 Seatearth was defined as earth textured material that is mainly composed of clay minerals together with fine-grained siltstone or mudstone. Characteristically, it was grey to brownish grey and generally unlaminated or non-bedded. Values of total mineral content rating selected for the different rock types are shown in Firstly, a value rating range of 0–100 is used to cover all variations in Coal Measures rock masses from weak to very strong. The classification is divided into 12 classes with rating values of 8 per parameter rating. Rating values were equally considered for estimating of the rocks strength parameters. All parameters of Coal Measures Rocks values were equally classified in eight different subgroup from very weak to extremely strong rocks in Secondly, the mean values of all parameters obtained from the rocks were calculated and a parameter table was drawn up to show parameter values and rating list of each rock in The new RMCR relates all laboratory parameters. When one of them is tested, other results can be obtained for application to underground design. This system is very flexible and adaptable with respect to the scale and scope of the project. A new method of classification is proposed, based on rock mass properties determined in the laboratory that potentially has a wide practical application. The developed classification system has been used for the estimating mechanical properties of rocks. One of the purposes of this classification is to simplify and examine complex variables affecting underground workings stability. While design workings, extensive testing program takes time and also preparation of the rock specimen is difficult in some rocks such as mudstone, weak siltstone and fractured rocks. The effects of the mineral properties on the rock behaviour were investigated for underground works. These properties of hardness, abrasiveness, alteration and matrix/cement ratio were determined with a polarising microscope and rating list was arranged with respect to the dominant mineral as shown in Determined rocks in this study were assessed according to above mineral content rating list as shown in The uniaxial compression (UCS) and tensile (UTS) strength, and Young's modulus of these rocks were determined by using a conventional testing machine. Shear and cohesion strength, friction angle were indirectly found by using three dimesional testing methods. Cerchar and cone indenter indices, and Shore schleroscope number were carried out in the prepared rock specimen. Point load and specific energy indices of irregular and prepared rock specimen were found in laboratory and in situ conditions. This method of classifying rock masses for underground workings incorporates 12 parameters based on rock material properties. The developed classification system can be used to estimate the mechanical properties of rocks mass, when any laboratory test facility exists. This system can be applicable for both strong and weak rocks. The laboratory test results can be used for computer modelling and estimating cost and rock behaviour prior to engineering workings. When any parameter can be obtained, other parameters can be estimated simply by RMCR without sample preparation. Transportable point load and specific energy, which were measured by hand drilling, can be applicable in situ. These values can indicate reliable and repeatable values, and relates easily and directly to design of mining project. These data should be supported by field testing results such as rock quality designation, weathered properties, discontinuities properties and underground water conditions, once excavation is commenced. According to RMCR system, mudstone and gypsum of very poor strength, limestone of poor strength, sandstone of moderate strength, limestone (2), sandstone (2) and siltstone of good strength and slate of very good strength have been found.