Highly customisable implants with lattice structures can be achieved using selective laser melting (SLM) paving the way for tailored biodegradable Fe-based implants. For the first time, a systematic analysis is presented in terms of laser processing conditions required for scaffolds of pure Fe and a binary Fe-35 Mn alloy. The processability of the two materials were compared in terms of densification behaviour, surface roughness and geometrical error. Both materials were successfully processed into high quality scaffolds with excellent strut morphology and low processing porosity. The differences in the laser processing conditions between the pure metal and the binary alloy were discussed. The lower melting temperature of the Fe-35 Mn alloy required lower energy density for reaching the fully dense condition. Surface roughness and geometrical errors were found to be similar for the two materials. The microstructure of pure Fe was characterized by equiaxed α-ferrite grains, whereas the Fe-35 Mn had a microstructure consisting of columnar γ grains, with each γ-grain comprising of a network of individual cells.Autologous bone grafting has long been the “gold standard” for the treatment of critical bone defects (CBD) [ be biocompatible and ideally promote bone growth [ have adequate mechanical properties to match the host bone and allow for proper load transfer during healing [ have interconnected pores with adequate pore size to allow for diffusion of oxygen and nutrients [ be fully biodegradable leaving behind no residue in the implantation site [ Significant research has been performed on polymer and ceramic scaffolds as they have excellent biocompatibility, can be biodegradable and promote bone growth [ Biodegradable metallic (BDM) implants have shown great potential in overcoming drawbacks of other bone scaffold materials. BDMs corrode gradually in the body, and should induce an adequate host response to implantation and degradation [ Mg is difficult to manufacture due to its poor formability [ In the past the majority of research on pure Fe and Fe-based alloys as a BDM has focused on cardiovascular applications [ Relatively little work has been done on the selective laser melting of biodegradable bone scaffolds. The properties of biodegradable metals can render them difficult for processing. Magnesium is challenging to process due to its high volatility and flammability, especially in powder form. Despite this, magnesium scaffolds have been successfully manufactured using SLM [ While less flammable than Mg, Zn also has a relatively small difference between melting point and vaporization point [ Research on the selective laser melting of pure Fe and Fe-based alloys has mostly focused on maraging steels, tools steels and other steels used in industry [ Through the correct implementation of strategies including process parameter selection, SLM can achieve omplex geometries not achievable by traditional manufacturing methods. A greater understanding of the material processability is required particularly on the effect of process parameters on the geometrical error, roughness, porosity and microstructure. Hence, the aim of this paper is to further study the laser processing conditions of biodegradable pure Fe and Fe-35 Mn alloy to achieve high quality lattice scaffolds manufactured using SLM. Gas atomized powders were used throughout the study. Samples were manufactured using spherical Fe powder with 99.8% purity and a particle size distribution of ≤ 45 μm (TLS Technik, Bitterfeld, Germany). Spherical Fe-35 Mn alloy powder was characterized by a particle size distribution between ≤ 44 μm (CEAIT, San Sebastian, Spain). The powder morphologies and compositions are shown in Samples were produced using an industrial selective laser melting system (Renishaw AM250, Stone, UK) using a 200 W single mode fibre laser with an estimated beam size of 75 μm. The laser is power modulated by fast electronic switching to generate pulsed wave (PW) emission. The machine was fitted with a reduced build volume (RBV) kit, providing a smaller build volume (78 × 78 × 55 mm The SLM system provides control over several laser and scan strategy parameters, which were evaluated differently for bulk and thin geometries. During the PW emission of the laser, the beam is manipulated between different exposure positions with a point distance (d The energy density for a power modulated laser running in pulsed wave regime can be calculated using the following expression. The energy density was varied between 32 and 113 J/mm Lattice scaffolds were designed based on Schwarz Primitive Surface p-unit cells as shown in The surfaces of the as-built samples were observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (EVO-50, Carl Zeiss, Germany). Characterization of the surface quality was performed on the as-built surfaces using focus variation microscopy (InfiniteFocus, Alicona Imaging GmbH, Austria). The surface quality was measured on equivalent cylindrical rods along the build direction employing the linear average surface roughness (R The processed density of the scaffolds was measured using: The processing porosity of the struts were measured on metallographic sections. All samples were cut perpendicular to the scan direction then mounted, ground and mechanically polished following standard metallographic procedures. Optical microscopy (Polyvar Met, Reichert, USA) followed by image processing was used to determine the processing porosity given by: Microhardness testing (Duramin, Struers, Denmark) was performed on bulk pure Fe and Fe35-Mn processed with an energy density of 67 J/mm When selective laser melting bulk samples the processed density should be as high as possible as porosities can reduce the mechanical properties. For load-bearing bone scaffolds the ideal scaffold should resemble the CAD model as closely as possible. This is determined not only by the processing porosity of the struts, but by the strut and pore morphology and processed density. Based on this criteria, the highest quality scaffolds were achieved at an energy density of 72 J/mm Despite the morphological differences, concerning the surface roughness no significant difference was present between different processing conditions and the employed material type The overall mean of the average roughness (Ra) of the pure Fe struts was 14.2 ± 1.3 μm, while for the Fe-35 Mn it was 13.5 ± 3.6 μm. In  From  The microstructure varied considerably between the pure Fe and Fe-35 Mn as can be seen in In contrast, the addition of 35 wt% Mn stabilises the γ-austenite phase and preserves the solidified microstructure produced during SLM (L → γ). In general, each melt pool is comprised of several large columnar γ grains, which grow opposite to the direction of heat flow, and each γ-grain is comprised of a network of individual cells. Due to the alternating scan strategies which changes the directions of heat input and extraction, a complex array of direction changing γ grains result (for example see The cellular structure is apparent in the Fe-35 Mn and not apparent in the pure Fe due to the segregation of Mn solute. At 35 wt% Mn, according to the binary phase diagram [ This study investigated the influence of laser processing parameters on scaffolds of pure Fe and Fe-35 Mn for biodegradable implant applications. Using an experimental design approach, the best laser processing parameters were found to successfully manufacture high quality scaffolds. The results can be summarised as follows: Scaffolds with a processing porosity less than 0.6% were successfully manufactured for both pure Fe and Fe-35 Mn. The lower melting temperature of the Fe-35 Mn was advantageous for scaffolds and was thus easier to process than the pure Fe. Scaffold quality was determined by its resemblance to the original CAD model. This requires the investigation of designed pore size and porosity as a process defect together. Using this key indicator, moderate energy density levels (60–80 J/cm The surface roughness of the scaffolds were comparable to the bulk material in as-built state. The microhardness values of the pure Fe and the Fe-35 Mn were found to be comparable to a mild steel and much greater than the pure Zn and pure Mg counterparts. Distinct microstructures were observed for the pure metal and the binary alloy, reflecting also the differences in the processability. The microstructure of pure Fe was characterized by mostly equiaxed α-ferrite grains with no evidence of the original solidification structure. The addition of 35 wt% Mn stabilises the γ-austenite phase and reveals a solidified microstructure of columnar γ grains, each comprising of a network of individual cells. DC, MJB and MSD acknowledge the support of the