The time dependency of ground deformation and stresses in tunneling is mainly due to the rock rheology and tunnel construction process. This study provides an efficient analytical approach to predict the time-dependent displacement and stress fields around deeply buried circular tunnels. The viscoelasticity of host rock, sequential installation of primary and secondary liners, various interface conditions and non-hydrostatic initial stress field are all taken into account in the analysis.
                  The complex variable method, Laplace transformation technique, and extension of correspondence principle are employed in the analytical derivation. Time-dependent potentials expressed as Laurent series are addressed by satisfying all the governing equations in Cases 
                     (1)–(4), where all possible conditions at rock–liner and liner–liner interfaces are considered. The time-dependent analytical displacement and stress fields of rock and liners are proposed for the entire tunneling process. As a validation step, the analytical solutions in Case 
                     (1) agree well with the results of the FEM numerical simulations.
                  Parametric analyses are then carried out to investigate the influences of installation time of the second liner in Case 
                     (1) and (2), and an analytically-based method for design of the second liner is also presented. The proposed solutions in this paper provide a quick and simple alternative method for preliminary tunnel design, any viscoelastic models and any installation time of the first and the second liners can be considered.The tunnels supported with a system comprising several liners are commonly encountered in hydraulic, traffic and mining engineering. The primary support (the first liner), typically in the form of shotcrete liner or steel set, is installed immediately after tunnel excavation to seal the rock and withstand the loads that may arise during the excavation. Later on, the secondary support (the second liner) is put in place to ensure the long-term stability of the tunnel This problem can be tackled either numerically or analytically. Numerical methods, such as finite element, finite difference, discrete element and boundary element methods, can provide some results useful to many complex underground projects Regarding the rock–liner interactions, some analytical solutions have been developed for tunnels constructed in elastic rock Since it is very difficult to address analytical solutions under complex conditions, most of the solutions considering the rock viscoelasticity/plasticity presented in the current references were derived for circular single-liner tunnels subjected to isotropic initial stresses (axisymmetric problems). Fahimifar et al. For lined tunnels, the interface conditions at rock-liner and liner-liner interfaces, have a significant effect on mechanical fields of the rock and liners In summary, the analytical solution of lined tunnels was mostly concerned with elastic problems, or viscoelastic problem with single liner under axisymmetric conditions. Instead in this study, we attempt to present a new analytical model for circular tunnels with two liners, with consideration of: This paper considers the construction of a deeply buried circular tunnel in rheological rock, sequentially installed with two liners. The following assumptions apply throughout the analyses: The tunnel is of circular section, excavated instantaneously at The tunnel is deeply buried such that no linear variation of the stresses with depth needs to be considered; The rock mass is homogeneous, isotropic, which has small deformation properties. Its rheology properties can be described as linear viscoelasticity, modelled by the Hookean elastic springs and Newtonian viscous dashpots in series or parallel connection. as shown in The tunnel is supported by two elastic liners installed instantaneously at The uniform pressure In the analysis, the effect of the tunnel advancement along the longitudinal direction is not considered. This means that the cross-section considered in this analysis is at a sufficient distance from the tunnel face so that stresses and strains are unaffected by three-dimensional effects. According to the aforementioned assumptions, the equivalent plane–strain problem in the tunnel cross-section plane can be illustrated in The tunneling construction process can be divided into three stages: Full-slip condition is usually assumed for the interfaces involving waterproof layer, while the no-slip condition is set for other interface situations. In this study, analytical solutions are derived for     Correspondence principle gives the relationship between elastic and viscoelastic solutions when the distribution of boundary stresses is independent of time By using the complex potential theory In The stresses can be obtained by utilizing the principle of superposition The potentials of the rock and liners can be expanded as Laurent series as follows By using the complex variable method introduced by Muskhelishvili The tractions, whose values are the same as the initial stresses but the directions are opposite, are exerted on tunnel boundary to address the displacements and stresses occurring after tunnel excavation induced by far-field initial stresses. According to the initial stress state, the expressions of tractions, For the rock (see Note that the displacements and stresses fields of the rock and liners are addressed so long as the coefficients in potentials ( The various interface conditions considered in this study include For no-slip conditions at the rock–liner interface (ρ = For full-slip conditions at the rock–liner interface (ρ = For no-slip conditions at the liner–liner interface (ρ = For full-slip conditions at the liner–liner interface (ρ = During During  During the The total stresses of the rock in the During During Substituting Similarly, other conditions are expressed by potentials as follows: The full-slip compatibility conditions at the rock-liner interface are The compatibility conditions at the liner-liner interface are The boundary condition of the inner boundary of the first liner ( The boundary condition of the inner boundary of the second liner ( Substituting the Owing to the length limit of the paper, the detailed derivations are provided only for In this section, an example under the boundary conditions of The numerical model is consistent with the analytical one, and both of them are calculated under plane-strain conditions with small deformation. Only a quarter of the tunnel structure is analyzed in FEM (see In numerical simulation, the initial pressures were first applied to the boundary of ground without holes for a sufficiently long time (100 days in this study), and then the tunnel (part I in Since the derivation procedure in In this sub-section, the  The viscoelastic solution in reference For the rock with good mechanical properties or subject to low stresses, the exhibited mechanical behavior shows limited viscosity, which can be simulated by generalized Kelvin viscoelastic models (see In order to simplify the analysis, all the variables are expressed in dimensionless forms. The shear moduli, geometry parameters and stresses are normalized by The constitutive parameters of generalized Kelvin model adopted in the analysis are the following: Installation time of the second liner is a crucial parameter in tunnel design. Early installation of the second liner will significantly benefit the rock stability since the large pressure to the rock are induced, however, the second liner is probably yielded if it is installed too early, for it bears excessive stresses due to the rock rheology. On the other hand, later installation of the second liner will induce larger pressure on the first liner and result in a more unstable tunnel, though it is economical to design the second liner. In order to investigate the influence of the installation time of the second liner on the resulting displacements and stresses of the surrounding rock, examples of    In all the cases, the shear modulus and thickness of the second liner are set to commonly used values, The radial and circumferential final displacements of the rock at the rock–liner interface versus the angle θ (the polar angle in coordinate) are plotted in  Displacements and stresses of the rock and liners are time-dependent, mainly because of rheological properties of the rock. The displacements and stresses in Owing to the rock rheology, the final pressure applied to the outer boundary of the second liner is significantly affected by installation time of the second liner. Early installation of the second liner leads to larger final pressure on a support system, probably resulting in failure of the second liner. In this sub-section, the final stress fields of the second liner determined by the proposed analytical model, as well as the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, are employed to predict the initial failure of the second liner for different liner installation time. According to the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, an equivalent stress of the second liner, In the tunnel engineering, in order to ensure the tunnel stability, the second liner is not expected to fail, In the application example, the second liner is made of concrete reinforced by steel. The parameters employed in the example are presented in Time-dependent analytical stress and displacement fields around deeply buried lined circular tunnels were proposed, where the sequential installation of two liners, viscoelastic properties of the host rock and non-hydrostatic initial stress field were all taken into account. Various interface conditions, such as no-slip and full-slip conditions of rock–liner and liner–liner interfaces, represented by Parametric investigation was then carried out, while the generalized Kelvin viscoelastic model for the rock mass was assumed under interface conditions represented by The proposed analytical solutions provide a quick and contingent alternative method for preliminary tunnel design, with consideration of various viscoelastic rock mass and installation times of the first and second liners. Analytical solutions combined with failure criterion can be employed to predict the initial failure zone of the tunnel. However, it should be point out that the solution is under the assumption of small deformation and without the consideration of plasticity, due to the limitation of current theory of mathematics and mechanics if complex conditions are considered. In the future, the formulas will be applied in practical projects, and the research in consideration of rock failure will be further performed to explore other possibilities. This study was financially supported by the In section 4.3, the equations expressed by potentials (see The linear system of algebraic equations with regard to the coefficients in the Laplace domain is then obtained by setting the coefficients of the term  It can be noted that the equations provided in Eqs. The equations expressed by potentials (see Substituting Similar to the process in  