A study of the effect of different variables (inoculation, [Ag], silver addition mode, reactivation of the ore (i.e. delayed silver addition), composition of the pregnant liquid solution, ore particle size, pH and aeration) on the silver-catalyzed bioleaching of two different low-grade copper (>600 μm) has been investigated in column reactors.
                  The two low-grade copper ores tested, lower K-ore and Pinto Valley Dump ore, behaved similarly during the silver catalyzed process. After more than 300 days of leaching, the addition of both silver and bacteria improved the copper extraction from both low-grade chalcopyritic ores. Copper extraction in the presence of silver displays paralinear kinetics with two stages very well defined, with the first stage being much faster than the second one.
                  Copper extraction from the K-ore surpassed 70% after 350 days of bioleaching using low concentrations of silver (1.4 g Ag/kg Cu). The addition of silver was effective even after the bioleaching process was started. Conversely, silver addition mode and aeration were not significant variables in the bioleaching process. The effect of a pregnant liquid solution collected from a first bioleaching experiment demonstrated that the build up of the solution can negatively affect the copper extraction during the silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite process.
                  Copper extraction from PVD ore surpassed 60% after 300 days of bioleaching using 1.24 g Ag/kg Cu. Copper extraction was substantially affected by both [Ag] and ore particle size. For the ranges between 0.25 and 1.00 g Ag/kg Cu and between <5.08×104 and <1.27×104 μm, the dissolution of copper was favoured with the highest amount of silver and the smallest particle size. On the other hand, silver concentration, pH and silver addition mode were not influential variables in the process.
                  Chemical analyses, XRD and SEM/EDX studies were carried out on different residues after 100, 200 and 325 days of experimentation. Chemical analysis showed that copper is selectively bioleached in the presence of silver and bacteria, while silver remains in the solid phase. The SEM study showed that pyrite remains mainly unattacked during the bioleaching of chalcopyrite from the low-grade copper ore. Jarosite, gypsum and elemental sulphur precipitates have been identified on the residues.The decline of mineral resources during the last decades has increased interest in the development of methods that can process low-grade resources using simple, economically efficient processes. Bioleaching is a simple and economical technique that has attracted wide attention from the mining industry. Bioleaching has been applied via concentrate leaching for refractory gold and copper applications and heap leaching for low-grade secondary sulphide copper ores. However, the application of heap bioleaching to low grade chalcopyrite ores has not yet been successfully demonstrated. In response to the slowness of chalcopyrite towards chemical and biological dissolution, several inventions in the literature ( The implementation of this process to the treatment of low-grade copper ores should consider laboratory tests under static conditions. In this sense, The process is sensitive to the degree of chalcopyrite attack in such a way that once the elemental sulfur layer has been formed on the chalcopyrite the catalytic effect of silver is highly reduced. There is an optimum silver concentration for copper extraction from chalcopyrite around 1 The suppression of chalcopyrite dissolution at high silver concentrations has also been interpreted as due to the formation of a silver sulfate film on the sulfide surface ( In fact, as important as it is to form the silver sulfide on the chalcopyrite surface it is also important to dissolve it in order to regenerate silver ions to restart the catalytic process. In spite of the few studies on leaching or bioleaching of silver sulfide ores, the results are not unanimous. Some authors have successfully leached silver from synthetic and natural Ag Literature on mineral sulfide bio-leaching in percolation column reactors is not as extensive as for stirred tanks or shake flasks. Nevertheless, column studies provide useful information on the effect of different variables (particle size, type of ore, bacterial culture, chemical reagent, etc.) on the metal dissolution process for long periods of time and under conditions close to those found in heap leaching practice ( For instance, column bacterial leaching experiments have shown that metal extraction is more efficient from low-grade than from high-grade ores ( However, to our knowledge, only two studies in the literature deal with the silver catalyzed chalcopyrite process in column reactors ( On the one hand, On the other hand, In this work, silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite bioleaching has been investigated with two different low-grade copper ores in column reactors with the aim of establishing the optimum leaching conditions regarding different variables: inoculation, [Ag], silver addition mode, composition of the pregnant liquid solution, ore particle size, pH and aeration. Two different low-grade copper ores from different deposits, lower Kalamazoo (lower K) ore and Pinto Valley Dump (PVD) ore, were tested. Magma Copper Company provided 130 kg of lower K ore crushed to < The content of moisture in the ore, 0.5% for the lower K-ore and 0.2% for the PVD ore, was determined after 3 days of drying in a convection oven at 140 °C. In both materials X-ray diffraction and chemical analyses ( All bioleaching tests were inoculated with active maintenance cultures that were constantly renewed. Bacterial cultures were maintained routinely at 35 °C on 75 mL of the iron-free 0 K nutrient medium (3.0 g (NH Bacterial inocula were grown on 5 g of low-grade copper ore, 95 mL of 0 K nutrient medium at pH 2.0 and 5 mL of a bacterial culture grown in the presence or in the absence of silver. The bacterial cultures used in these experiments were progressively adapted to both ores tested in the absence or in the presence of silver. The bioleaching tests were conducted in small, medium and large columns of polymethyl methacrylate ( In the experimental set-up, each mineral charge was preconditioned individually. A known amount of ore was loaded into each column. The experimental procedure consisted of several steps: Firstly, the ore was subjected to a This procedure was not followed in all cases since the addition of silver to the top of the column was also employed. In that case, the dried ore was loaded into the column and after an acid leaching pre-treatment for ∼ Losses of solution due to evaporation were calculated by estimation of weight (specific gravity) and compensated with distilled water to a total recirculating volume of 15 L per column. Periodically, pH was readjusted to 1.2, 1.4 or 1.8 with 12 M H The leach solution (15 L) was passed through the ore sample by gravity, collected in a reservoir and recycled at a rate of 20 L/m The redox potential was measured using a Pt combination redox electrode with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. However, all the results are presented as Eh here. pH was monitored using a gel-filled combination pH probe with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Solution pH and redox potential were measured twice a week and bacterial population was determined on a monthly base using a counting chamber and an optical microscope. Weekly, 25 or 50 mL of sample were removed from the leach solutions and analyzed for dissolved metals (copper, iron and silver) by atomic absorption spectrometry. The sample removed was replaced with equivalent aliquots of the diluted nutrient medium of the same pH. Each column was dismantled after progressively longer leach periods. The residues were recovered by washing the column load repeatedly with a mild sulfuric acid solution. Then, the ore was dried, weighed and chemically analyzed. A summary of the experimental conditions in the different experiments in column leaching is shown in As mentioned in our previous work (  The variation of pH, acid consumption and Eh during the column tests was very similar for all experiments. The drop in Eh and the increase in pH when columns were shut down were associated to several washing cycles. Copper and iron extraction indicate a clear influence of the silver concentration in the range studied. This is in accordance with the stirred tank experiments carried out formerly (  A comparison of the copper dissolution rate of both ores in column tests catalyzed with silver demonstrates that they behave similarly following a two-stage leaching process as shown in Total iron extraction also confirmed that point since the existence of a high ferric ion concentration favored the precipitation of iron as jarosite ( The initial pH was set at low values (< For both ores, the redox potential increased from 600 to 900 mV immediately after inoculation of these tests ( Acid consumption for the lower K-ore in the experiments run at pH 1.8 showed an identical behaviour to that observed in shake flask and stirred tank leaching ( The principal variables tested in this study were: bacterial activity, silver concentration, reactivation of the ore (i.e. delayed silver addition), composition of the pregnant liquid solution, ore particle size, pH and aeration. The effect of these variables on the copper dissolution rate was uneven. On the one hand, bacterial activity ( As in the shake flask and stirred tank experiments ( The effect of a delayed silver addition is demonstrably shown in the copper extraction plots of Unlike The influence of the composition of the irrigation solution was studied using the pregnant liquid solution (PLS) from column 10A as the irrigation solution of column 10B, loaded with a similar fresh ore but using a concentration of silver 10 times lower than in the former test, run at room temperature, instead of at 35 °C, and without forced aeration ( The influence of ore particle size was investigated in medium columns using the PVD ore in the range between < Finally, The columns were dismantled after progressively longer periods of time. For instance, for the lower K-ore, columns 1, 2 and 10 were shut down after 100 days of leaching, column 8 after 200 days and columns 7 and 9 after 325 days. Mass balances of Cu, Fe, Ag, S Residues from inoculated columns with or without the addition of silver showed a higher degree of attack than those from non-inoculated experiments. For the same column, the level of precipitation increased from top to bottom, with higher copper and iron extraction in the upper zone in the case of inoculated experiments chemically activated. Chemical analyses have corroborated this point what would be an indication of a higher bacterial activity on top of the column. The residues of three of the columns working under similar experimental conditions (inoculated experiments with 14.3 g Ag/kg Cu mixed up with the ore), except for pH, were considered for this study. Compared to the as-received lower K-ore and to the initial amount of catalyst added, the residues showed substantially lower amounts of Cu, Fe, Ag and sulfide, sulfate and elemental sulfur content ( A SEM/EDX study of two residues was performed on two samples from columns stopped at different times: C10, shut down after 100 days ( Chalcopyrite particles after 100 days of leaching show a high degree of attack ( High variations in composition of different chalcopyrite surfaces were detected during this study. For instance, Finally, besides S°, jarosite precipitates have been identified by XRD and EDX as the main reaction products ( In contrast with the strong attack of the chalcopyrite grains exposed to the leaching solution, chalcopyrite grains inside the host matrix present an intact aspect (  The efficiency of the silver catalyzed bioleaching process has been demonstrated in column experiments for both the lower K-ore and the PVD ore. Additions of silver higher than 1.4 g Ag/kg Cu slightly improved the copper extraction of the lower K-ore. However, the addition of silver to an experiment started in the absence of silver considerably improved the kinetics of copper dissolution but not for iron. Conversely, the addition of silver during the course of experiments started with silver did not improve the copper dissolution rate. pH did not have a significant influence on copper extraction, considering the high acid consumption at lower pH. For both ores, kinetics of the silver-catalyzed bioleaching process is characterized by two stages: one of rapid copper extraction followed by another of slow dissolution. The change of dissolution rate can be related to a depletion of chalcopyrite surfaces available for leaching and to the formation of passivating films on chalcopyrite particles. The economic significance of this work is potentially large. At current metal prices ($11/oz Ag and $3.40/lb Cu), the cost of silver addition per unit of copper in the ore at a dosage of 1 g Ag/kg Cu equates to (1 g Ag) The authors wish to express their gratitude to Eugene Long for his support in the control of the column leaching experiments. Thanks are also extended to Raj Patel for supplying the ore samples.