The effects of silicon carbide (SiC) particles on the as-cast microstructure and properties of Al–Si–Fe alloy composites produced by double stir-casting method have been studied. A total of 5–25wt% silicon carbide particles were added. The microstructure of the alloy particulate composites produced was examined, the physical and mechanical properties measured include: densities, porosity, ultimate tensile strength, yield strength, hardness values and impact energy. The results revealed that, addition of silicon carbide reinforcement, increased the hardness values and apparent porosity by 75 and 39%, respectively, and decreased the density and impact energy by 1.08 and 15%, respectively, as the weight percent of silicon carbide increases in the alloy. The yield strength and ultimate tensile strength increased by 26.25 and 25% up to a maximum of 20% silicon carbide addition, respectively. These increases in strength and hardness values are attributed to the distribution of hard and brittle ceramic phases in the ductile metal matrix. The microstructure obtained reveals a dark ceramic and white metal phases, which resulted into increase in the dislocation density at the particles–matrix interfaces. These results show that better properties is achievable by addition of silicon carbide to Al–Si–Fe alloy.In the last two decades most research and development efforts have aimed at reinforcing monolithic metals and alloys with a ceramic phase with the primary purpose of enhancing their properties, spanning the domains of physical, mechanical and fracture behaviour Potential uses of these materials are numerous in industries and they include such areas of application as aerospace (satellite struts), defense (electronic instrument racks), automotive (drive shafts and brake discs), sports goods (golf clubs and mountain bicycle frames), and marine (yacht fittings) The early work on MMCs focused mainly on continuous fiber reinforcement. However, high cost of fibers, complex fabrication techniques, and limited fabricability restricted their use to those applications where the end could justify the means silicon carbide particles have become one of the popular reinforcing phases for many aluminum alloy-based metal matrix composites. They are hard and brittle ceramic particles with high strength, high modulus of elasticity, and high thermal and electrical resistance. The size of the particles depends on both the manufacturer and the type of alloy. However, the mean particle dimension normally lies in the range 2–20 Particle-reinforced MMCs are produced via various routes. They have additional advantages over the continuous fiber-reinforced MMCs especially since they are low-priced and have both high heat treatment ability and processing flexibility. Particle-reinforced MMCs are now being produced commercially One of the factors limiting the use of MMCs for engineering components is a lack of property characterization in relation to the unreinforced alloys. The lack of data extends from processing parameters to final mechanical properties. Understanding the factors that influence the physical and mechanical properties of these materials is very important in the sense that these properties are sensitive to the type of reinforcement, the mode of production and the details of post-production processing The objectives of the present work are therefore to investigate microstructure and properties of as-cast Al–Si–Fe alloy and its composites reinforced with silicon carbide particles. The synthesis of the metal matrix composite that was use in this study was produced using double stir-casting method at the Foundry Shop of the National Metallurgical Development Center, Jos, Nigeria. The specimens were produced by keeping the percentage of iron and silicon constant and varying the reinforcing material (silicon carbide) particles in the range 5–25% SiC. High purity aluminium electrical wires obtained from Northern Cable Company NOCACO (Kaduna), free from dust and contamination was charged in a graphite crucible kept in an electric resistance furnace and 0.01% NaCl–KCl powder was used as a cover for melting the alloy. NaCl–KCl powder aids in minimizing oxidation of aluminium by excluding oxygen and creating a protective atmosphere inside the furnace. Upon initiation of melting of pure aluminium the temperature of the furnace was raised to 720 The basic method of determining the density of a specimen by measuring the mass and volume of the specimen was used. The density of the specimen was then estimated from the formula given below: The specimens were kept in the oven at 110 Hardness was determined using the Rockwell hardness test machine. The indenter used was a 1.56 Impact tests were conducted using a fully instrumented Avery Denison test machine. The machine can provide a range of impact energies from 0 to 300 The tensile properties were conducted on Tinus–Olsen test machine, standard tensile test specimen with the original diameter of 12.5 Metallographic specimens were cut from the unreinforced and reinforced specimens of the Al–Si–Fe/SiC particulate composite. The cut specimens were then mounted in bakelite, and mechanically ground progressively on grades of SiC impregnated emery paper (80–600 The various microstructures developed for different SiC additions are shown in Macrostructural studies revealed a reasonably uniform distribution of SiC particles and a slight macro-segregation of particles in some places. The distribution of SiC particles is influenced by good wettability of the silicon carbide by the molten metal and good interfacial bonding between SiC particles and matrix material ( The microstructure of the unreinforced alloy is shown in The results of density measurements on the base alloy and reinforced materials are shown in The apparent porosity values of the reinforced MMCS with SiC particles slightly increased with percentage SiC addition (see The yield strength and ultimate tensile strength increased with increasing percentage SiC addition up to maximum values of 79.98 and 106.12 The impact energy, percentage elongation and percentage reduction in cross-sectional area (see The increase in strength with percent SiC addition may be due to the formation of nearly uniform distribution of SiC particles of the soft alloy (see The hardness values increases as the percentage SiC addition increases in the alloy (see Considerable success was recorded in the synthesis of Al–Si–Fe alloy with silicon carbide addition using double stirring casting method. From the results obtained in this research, it can be concluded that addition of silicon carbide particles using this method to Al–Si–Fe alloy increases both the yield strength, ultimate tensile strength and hardness values up to a maximum values of 79.98, 106.12 For optimum service performances of this alloy, silicon carbide addition should be between 15 and 20% and not exceed 20% in order to develop better necessary properties. The authors acknowledge with thanks the management of the National Metallurgical Development Centre, Jos, Nigeria for allowing us used their equipments. We also like to acknowledge the support and encouragement given by Dr. S.A. Yaro during the production of the research materials.