A critical overview on the petrogeochemistry of Hormuz Island highlights that the Ediacaran Hormuz Complex includes synchronous felsic submarine volcanism associated with diamictite and dropstone-bearing banded iron salt (anhydrite, halite, sylvite) formation (BISF) that formed 558–541Ma in the Late Neoproterozoic. Our field observations disagree with Faramarzi et al. (2015) on the geological map of the Hormuz Island, in particular on the occurrence of the ferruginous agglomerates in the Hormuz Island, thus the geological data do not provide a robust geological mapping. The agglomerates are commonly related to the strombolian peralkaline basaltic eruptions rather than the submarine felsic volcanism. Based on the tectonogeochemical diagrams extracted from the geochemical data of the authors, the Hormuz rhyolites show an affinity to the A-type or A2-type submarine riftogenic and or intra-plate rhyolites of Eby (1992). However, the authors admitted two sides of the debate and proposed an extensional back arc or rift-related magmatic activity as well as continental arc margin setting. The rhyolites are also similar to the Ediacaran Arabian–Nubian A-type alkaline rhyolites that formed by intra-plate rifting during the Pan-African orogen in the proto-Tethys shallow grabens of the Gondwana supercontinent. The most exceptional feature of the Hormuz rhyolites is related to their co-occurrence with the Ediacaran salt rocks, glaciogenic diamictites and jaspillitic banded iron formations, which have never ever been reported previously.It is gratifying to read the results of A very critical inspection on the geological map (Fig. 1) and lithostratigrapical column (Fig. 9) shows that the lack of detailed geological mapping has caused several conflicting geological and petrological points. These include: (1) Presence of a brecciated ring of ferruginous autoclastic breccias or volcanoclastic units, which has been interpreted in the text (page 204, lines 5–6) to be the ferruginous agglomerates and Fe-Mn bearing clays. Unfortunately, these units are not included in Fig. 9. This conclusion is highly unlikely, as our field observations do not indicate any ferruginous agglomerates on Hormuz Island. In contrast to the incorrect definition of the agglomerates, there is a continuous ring of ferruginous or hematite-rich glaciogenic diamictite ( The authors mention (page 204, lines 12–13) that the Hormuz rhyolites are highly altered (sensu-stricto), but they do not present any petrogeochemical signatures, regarding the type or the cause of the alteration. The photomicrograph (Fig. 2) and low LOI values (0.69–2.9 The authors could not explore the correct tectonomagmatic nature of the Hormuz rhyolites. In the abstract of the paper (page 203, line 15), the authors considered an extensional back arc volcanism for the Hormuz rhyolites without presenting any tectonogeochemical diagrams for this tectonic setting. This idea is incompatible with the active continental arc margin or volcanic arc setting presented in Fig. 3 and page 205 (lines 40–42). The diagrams of Fig. 3 have several limitations. Fig. 3a is only suggested for island arc zones ( In order to overcome the inconsistency of the tectonomagmatic settings, we discuss new data in the area. In a Zr-10,000  The age data obtained by the concordant U–Pb method is about 558 In the title of the paper and page 210, the authors mentioned that the magmatic activity at Hormuz Island is similar to those of the volcano-plutonic rocks of Cadomian arc, but the geochemical data of The A-type felsic volcanism - plutonism includes within plate or intra-plate rifting subalkalic-peralkalic quartz syenites, granites, and rhyolites formed by fractional crystallization of mantle derived mafic magmas, with or without crustal assimilation and or partial melting of the pre-existing crustal sources ( Conclusively, the main pitfalls of the paper developed by The authors kindly appreciate the cooperation of individuals at Hormuz Island for a very difficult time of field geology and sampling. We gratefully appreciate the professional editorial suggestions made by Prof. N. G. Eby, Prof. M. Roden, and R. Shivaram and insightful comments from the anonymous reviewers for revision and online submission. We kindly acknowledge the use of the supplementary data of