Cytosolic calcium-binding proteins termed calbindins are widely regarded as a key component of the machinery used to transport calcium safely across cells. Acting as mobile buffers, calbindins are thought to ferry calcium in bulk and simultaneously protect against its potentially cytotoxic effects. Here, we contradict this dogma by showing that teeth and bones were produced normally in null mutant mice lacking calbindin28kDa. Structural analysis of dental enamel, the development of which depends critically on active calcium transport, showed that mineralization was unaffected in calbindin28kDa-null mutants. An unchanged rate of calcium transport was verified by measurements of 45Ca incorporation into developing teeth in vivo. In enamel-forming cells, the absence of calbindin28kDa was not compensated by other cytosolic calcium-binding proteins as detectable by 45Ca overlay, two-dimensional gel, and equilibrium binding analyses. Despite a 33% decrease in cytosolic buffer capacity, cytotoxicity was not evident in either the null mutant enamel or its formative cells. This is the first definitive evidence that calbindins are not required for active calcium transport, either as ferries or as facilitative buffers. Moreover, in challenging the broader notion of a cytosolic route for calcium, the findings support an alternative paradigm involving passage via calcium-tolerant organelles.The active transport of calcium across cells holds widespread importance in medicine and biology, yet the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Operating in many places ( The 30-year-old paradigm that calcium is ferried through cytosol by mobile calcium-binding proteins (calbindins) remains widely accepted ( Active calcium transport is crucial for normal production of tooth enamel, and it appeared that the calbindin ferry model would apply here too. Enamel, the most highly calcified of all tissues, is formed in two stages (secretion, maturation) involving low and high rates of calcium transport, respectively. Calbindin This study addressed the hypothesis that, should calbindin      To address these possibilities, we initially compared enamel formation in calbindin Like enamel, dentine and bone were indistinguishable when compared in null mutants and wild types using macroscopy, x-ray analysis, scanning electron microscopy, and histology (   According to widely accepted models, the removal of calbindins from calcium-transporting tissues should either curtail active transport or be compensated by functionally similar “calcium ferries.” Contradicting this dogma, we found that active calcium transport proceeded normally during enamel formation in null mutant mice lacking calbindin Our results showed that calbindin Despite the predominance of calbindin An alternative paradigm whereby calcium is routed through organelles instead of the cytosol does fit our observations that bulk calcium can be transported safely in the absence of calbindins. Calcium transcytosis via an ER/Ca Do these findings hold broader significance beyond teeth? In general terms, calcium handling processes appear to be largely conserved across different animal tissues, albeit each system is adapted to its particular physiological circumstances. Enamel cells conform in this regard, having been found to express conventional calcium machinery in similarly high abundance as brain, a particularly calcium-centric tissue ( In conclusion, this study brings to the fore a fundamentally important question with broad biomedical significance: is bulk calcium transported across cells via the cytosol or organelles? Answers are needed if active calcium transport is to be targeted accurately with a view to developing new therapeutics in key areas such as nutrition, biomineralization, and fertility. Until now, calbindins have stood as prime targets in the transit step of active calcium transport. This no longer seems appropriate, however, at least in the tooth, where this study has rendered the calbindin ferry concept untenable. We thank Nicky McHugh for skilled technical assistance throughout this study. From elsewhere at Otago University, Ken Turner (Histology Unit), Diane Campbell (Dental Radiography Department), Liz Girvan (Electron Microscopy Unit), and Prof. Tom Kardos (Oral Pathology) are gratefully acknowledged for their help.