A wide range of enzymes (fungal amylase, esterase, hemicellulase, glucose oxidase and transglutaminase) were added to gluten-free flours (buckwheat, corn and rice) at different concentrations (0, 1, 3, 5, 10 g/100 kg flour) to investigate the effects on pasting properties of flour and texture profiles of the flour gels. Concerning the pasting properties, fungal amylase enzyme consistently affected the flour properties. Breakdown of complex starch molecules into simpler sugars due to the enzyme activity decreased the overall viscosity parameters (at least trough viscosity by 50%, breakdown viscosity by 80%, final viscosity by 60% and setback viscosity by 67%) during the application of heating, shearing and cooling cycle. Increasing enzyme concentration decreased these values further due to increase in the rate of hydrolysis. Texture profiles of the flour gels showed good relation with pasting properties. Decreasing viscosity of gluten-free gels by enzymes caused reduction in the firmness of the gels. The hardest gel was found as corn flour at the highest amylase enzyme concentration (10 g/100 kg flour). However, the highest springiness, resilience, cohesiveness and adhesiveness value was observed for buckwheat starch gel.Gluten is the key ingredient found in the grains such as wheat, barley and rye. As a structure-building protein, it directly affects the bread quality by giving elasticity to dough, helping it rise and gives the final product a chewy texture. However, people with celiac disease must adhere to what is commonly referred to as a gluten-free diet which generally involves the products made by buckwheat, corn and rice flour. Baking without gluten causes many problems including a crumbling bread texture, poor color, a weak or poorly developed dough structure and other quality defects making its replacement a major technological challenge for the food industry. To improve the baking performance of gluten-free flours, starches ( Starch is one of the most important ingredients and functions as pillars of dough structure. It acts as a thickener, water binder, emulsion stabilizer and gelling agent. Use of enzymes in the formulation of gluten-free products has many advantages since (i) they are considered as clean label compounds, (ii) they can be used as best and safest alternative to chemical compounds, (iii) they do not remain active after bread making process due to their protein structure being denatured during baking, and (iv) they can add various improvements in dough handling properties, fresh product quality and shelf life. The enzymes most frequently used in bread making are the Based on the disadvantageous position of gluten-free flours and positive effects of starches and enzymes on dough formation, the aim of this study was to investigate the effect of different enzyme addition (fungal amylase, esterase, hemicellulase, glucose oxidase and transglutaminase) on pasting and textural properties of gluten-free flours (buckwheat, corn and rice flours). In the production of gluten-free products, the interaction of enzymes with starch molecules has been scarcely explored. Moreover, although benefit of using enzymes has been observed in the overall dough structure, how these benefits occur has not been understood thoroughly due to the involvement of many molecules and their various interactions with each other in bread making process. Texture is one of the major criteria that consumers use to judge the quality of foods and the most abundant molecule is starch in flours; therefore, studying the effect of enzymes on the pasting properties of flours and textural properties of their gels will be beneficial to reveal the importance of starch–enzyme interaction in bread making process. Buckwheat flour (891 g dry matter/kg, 198 g protein/kg, 26.5 g fat/kg and 16.6 g ash/kg) was procured from Fitmek, Hadef Glutensiz Ekmek Industry and trade limited company, Izmir, Turkey; corn (890 g dry matter/kg, 71.2 g protein/kg, 38 g fat/kg and 6.6 g ash/kg) and rice (950 g dry matter/kg, 93.5 g protein/kg, 16.5 g fat/kg and 4.5 g ash/kg) flours were from Aro-Tech Industry and trade limited company, Izmir, Turkey. The enzymes (brand Mühlenchemie) were obtained from SternIngredients, İzmir, Turkey. The specifications of the enzymes used and their selling aim in the bakery industry are summarized in The influence of different enzymes addition at different concentrations on the pasting properties of buckwheat, corn and rice flours was determined using a Rapid Visco Analyser (Perten RVA 4500, Australia). For this aim, amount of flour was adjusted to 14 g flour/100 g mixture depending on its moisture content. For each flour type, 28 g flour and water mixture was put into RVA canisters. Enzyme was added to this mixture at different concentrations (1, 3, 5, 10 g enzyme/100 kg flour) with respect to flour amount. After being heated of the dispersions to 50 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min and stirring at that temperature at 160 rpm for 10 s, they were held at 50 °C for 1 min. Then they were heated to 95 °C at a rate of 13.16 °C/min and maintained at 95 °C for 5 min. Then the gel was cooled to 50 °C for 6.18 min. Thermocline windows software (Perten RVA 4500, Australia) was used to calculate pasting parameters, namely, peak viscosity, trough viscosity, breakdown viscosity, final viscosity, setback viscosity, peak time and pasting temperature. The prepared gels kept in the canisters covered with parafilm were stored at 25 °C for 3 h prior to measurement of textural properties. Texture profile analyses (TPA) of the gels prepared with different flour and enzyme combinations were performed using a texture analyzer (TAXT2i, Stable Micro Systems Ltd., Surrey, England) equipped with 49 N load cell and SMSP/25P probe. Strain, test speed and trigger force was selected respectively as 25%, 1 mm/s and 0.049 N. Hardness, adhesiveness, springiness, cohesiveness, gumminess, chewiness and resilience parameters were calculated using Texture Exponent Software. All of the analyses mentioned were repeated three times with two replications. The results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Two way ANOVA was conducted using JMP 5.0.1 (Version 5.0.1a, SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, USA) to determine if the effect of enzyme type and concentration on pasting and texture properties of the samples was significant (α = 0.05). The pasting properties of buckwheat, corn and rice flour treated with different enzymes and enzyme concentrations are depicted in As can be seen from Regarding the trough viscosity, native buckwheat and corn flour had high trough viscosity (1.24, 1.21 Pa.s) which were close to their peak viscosities (1.35, 1.38 Pa.s). Trough viscosity represents the cooking or hot paste stability of the already broken starch at the cooking temperature and breakdown viscosity is the difference between the peak viscosity and through viscosity. Therefore, high trough viscosity and low breakdown viscosity of corn and buckwheat flour indicated the high stability of them under heat and shear. Whereas, rice flour had high breakdown viscosity which implied its fragile structure to heat and shear. However, increasing fungal amylase concentration considerably decreased breakdown viscosity of all the studied gluten-free flours. Breakdown viscosity of the flours ranged between 0.016 and 0.194 Pa.s after the addition of 10 g fungal amylase/100 kg flour. This showed that the flours not treated with amylase would have more tendency to resist shear forces during processing under high temperature ( Another important pasting property is the setback viscosity which is the difference between final viscosity and trough viscosity. It is a useful indicator of bread staling. During the cooling stage, retrogradation which occurs due to the association of linear amylose molecules gives rise to setback viscosity ( The other pasting property which is one of the concerns of food processors is pasting temperature. It is the temperature at which the rise in viscosity can be observed and can be regarded as the minimum temperature required to cook a given sample. Therefore, energy costs can be calculated by this property. Although only fungal amylase enzyme addition was detected to affect the pasting temperature by the software of RVA, the temperature when the initial increase in viscosity was observed did not change by enzyme additions, as seen in It is worth considering here why other enzymes did not generally change the pasting properties of the studied flours heavily. With the addition of protein crosslinking enzymes (glucose oxidase and transglutaminase), high molecular weight complex protein molecules are formed and entanglement of protein with starch molecules is expected ( The textural properties of gels from buckwheat, corn and rice flours determined using the texture analyzer are shown in As can be seen in Despite the decrease in hardness value, cohesiveness increased with the addition of amylase enzyme for all gels. Interestingly, the reverse order with respect to hardness value was observed from the lowest to the highest value of cohesiveness; namely, corn gel had the lowest cohesiveness value and buckwheat gel had the highest value. The negative correlation observed between the hardness and cohesiveness values agreed with the works conducted by Generally increasing trend was observed for adhesiveness value of the gels with the addition of amylase enzyme except for corn starch gel with 10 g amylase enzyme per 100 kg flour. In this concentration, buckwheat starch had the stickiest structure. Positive correlation between fungal amylase concentration and adhesiveness value of the gels implied that dough making process would be hard by the addition of this enzyme due to increase in stickiness value of the gel. Moreover, it could be inferred that buckwheat flour would be less desirable regarding the sensory properties as adhesiveness shows how strongly the product adheres to palate or teeth after compression occurred between tongue and palate or teeth. Positive correlation was observed between amylase enzyme addition and springiness value of the gels except for corn starch gel. Corn and rice gel had nearly the same springiness value after the addition of 10 g fungal amylase enzyme/100 kg flour (0.957 and 0.952 mm). However, buckwheat starch gel showed the highest springiness value at this enzyme concentration. Furthermore, only buckwheat gel showed increase in resilience value by the addition of amylase enzyme. Springiness shows the extent to which the sample transitions back to its original shape after the force during the first compression has been taken away and resilience value indicates how well a product fights to regain its original position. Therefore, buckwheat flour could be chosen in gluten-free bread making formulations if less brittle and more elastic dough was desired. In this study interaction of enzymes with starch molecules in gluten-free flours was investigated as there is a lack of understanding about benefit of using enzymes in the overall dough structure due to existence of many molecules and their various interactions with each other in dough formation. Consumers generally accept texture as one of the major criteria in the preference of foods. As being the most abundant molecule in flours; starch also forms the structure of dough. Therefore, this study aims to shed a light on the importance of starch–enzyme interaction in bread making process by investigating the effect of enzymes on the pasting properties of flours and textural properties of their gels. Investigation of the effect of various enzymes on the pasting and textural properties of gluten-free gels importantly revealed that only enzyme whose substrate was starch clearly affected these properties. The other enzymes whose substrates were fiber and protein molecules could not affect the pasting and textural properties in a consistent manner. The results of the present study highlighted that studied gluten-free flours with fungal amylase enzyme could be used in many different food products to alter its pasting and textural properties. Amount of enzyme could be selected based on the production processes and quality characteristics of the product.