The solvent extraction of lanthanum(III) from nitrate solution using DEHPA and PC88A as extractants diluted with petrofin was investigated. The findings indicated that lanthanum extraction process follows a cation-exchange mechanism. The effect of experimental parameters like shaking time, extractant molarity, aqueous medium pH, presence of salt, phase volume ratio, and diluents on the extraction process has been studied. Extraction of 99.8% and 85% has been noticed with 0.5mol/L DEHPA and 0.6mol/L PC88A, respectively. Stripping of lanthanum from the loaded organic phase with mineral acids and separation of lanthanum(III) from Ce, Pr, Nd and Sm have also been reported.Rare earth elements are of enormous applications in the field of metallurgy, nuclear energy, chemical engineering, high temperature super conductors, secondary batteries, etc. ( The present study aims at investigating the extraction behavior of La(III) using DEHPA and PC88A in petrofin by varying the above stated parameters. The use of kerosene may have limited industrial application because of its low boiling point and low flash point. Efforts are continuing to replace kerosene with a diluent having properties similar to kerosene but with higher boiling point and flash point. Petrofin (n-tridecane) fits into this requirement and here an attempt has been made to study the solvent extraction of La(III) with DEHPA and PC88A using petrofin as diluent. Binary separation of La(III) and Ce/Pr/Nd/Sm from nitrate solution using these extractants in petrofin has also been studied and possibilities of feasible separation have been suggested. Solutions of the metals used in this study were prepared by dissolving reagent-grade metal nitrates in distilled water. Petrofin (Sri Ashok Petro Products, Fine Par Oil) was used as an organic phase diluent except for diluent variation experiment. The commercial extractants ,DEHPA (Merck) and PC88A (Daihachi Chem. Ind. Japan) were used as obtained without further purification. All other reagents used were of analytical reagent grade. The extraction of metal species was performed by shaking equal aliquots (20 The effect of equilibration time (2–30 The acidic organophosphorous extractants, i.e. DEHPA and PC88A considered in this study, are cation exchangers which produce H The extraction behavior of La(III) was investigated by varying concentration of DEHPA from 0.1–0.5 Both extractants used in the present work are liquid cation exchangers those extract the metal by the exchange of hydrogen ion. These extractants form dimers through hydrogen bonding generally represented by (HX) As examined by varying the aqueous pH and extractant concentration the extraction of trivalent lanthanum mostly proceeds through cation exchange mechanism. On the basis of slope analysis results the following equilibrium expression may be proposed for the studied extraction: With DEHPA (HA): With PC88A (HX); Water activity in the aqueous phase is largely affected by the salts present in it. This in turn influences the metal extraction to the organic phase. The aqueous phase should be saturated enough to produce the salting-out effect with the added salt. With increasing capacity of the extractant higher salt concentrations in the aqueous phase may increase the extraction percentage ( When 0.1 The extraction of La (III) using DEHPA and PC88A at different O/A ratios was studied. The extraction percentage increased with increasing organic phase concentration by volume. In the case of DEHPA the extraction was 8.8% at the initial O/A ratio of 1:5 which increased up to 99.6% at 4:1 O/A ratio. Similarly for PC88A the extraction percentage was 3.2 at 1:5 O/A ratio that increased to 81.0% when the O/A ratio increased to 4:1. A decrease in aqueous pH from 4.1 to 1.7 in the case of DEHPA and 4.2 to 2.0 for PC88A was noticed in both cases which may be due to the release of hydrogen ions in the aqueous phase during the extraction process. The increase in the percentage of extraction with varying O/A ratio was shown in The organic phase in the solvent extraction system mostly consists of relatively small amount of extractant in a large volume of diluent. Hence the physical and chemical characteristics of the diluent are quite significant in explaining the extraction ability of a particular extractant. The binding mode of the metal complexes changes with the polarity of diluents ( Besides petrofin five different diluents i.e. chloroform, benzene, toluene, carbon tetrachloride and kerosene were taken with 0.1 The loaded organic phase obtained in cases of maximum extraction of La(III) (96.6% The nature of complexation of metal ions affects their relative affinity for the ligands (extractant in this case) and results in a marked difference in extractability to allow separation of the metals ( Lanthanides have very similar chemical properties and quite difficult to separate from one another. In the present investigation the separation studies were carried out by taking 1.33 An increase in aqueous pH and extractant concentration has a positive influence on the extraction of trivalent lanthanum with DEHPA and PC88A in diluent petrofin. The extraction process accompanies with the release of three hydrogen ions. In the extraction of La(III), DEHPA is proven to be a better extractant than PC88A under all experimental conditions. PC88A shows better efficiency in petrofin as compared to kerosene whereas carbon tetrachloride is the best with DEHPA as extractant. It has been observed that 5 The authors (S. Acharya and S. Mishra) are thankful to the authorities of Siksha ‛O’ Anusandhan University for the encouragement to carry out this research work. The authors are grateful to Indian Rare Earths Ltd., OSCOM, Odisha for experimental facilities.