Can the pharmaceutical industry learn anything from other powder processing industries? Although essential regulatory processes have ensured that the pharmaceutical industry is a leader in quality assurance, they have also led to a conservative approach to process technology. Conservatism is advantageous when the dosage form and profit margins are stable; however, for most other industries, form, price and quality of product are all subject to fickle customer requirements. Other powder industries have used a sequential questioning approach to elicit new technical responses to change. Perhaps the time is ripe for this to be introduced to the pharmaceutical industry?The market for powder-based products is large and is growing. Products such as foodstuffs, cosmetics, ceramics, detergents, powdered metals, plastics and abrasives share many of the processing challenges faced by the pharmaceutical industry and can frequently provide alternative process outcomes. Over recent decades, all these other industries have undergone a rapid transition from a processing art to a processing science. The art of manufacturing requires the acquisition of manufacturing skills based on experience generated over a long period of time and requires a stable, consistent market for its products. Intense competition in these industries has led to the manufacturing process becoming customer-led rather than technology-led and has instigated the requirement that the process should be flexible to meet changing customer demands. This requires a fundamental and quantitative understanding of the processing and packaging of the product. Powder mixing is a central operation associated with all these industries, and has had to be customer sensitive. Customer demands focus in varying proportions on the mixture quality and the market appeal of the final product form. A ceramic component of a titan rocket is judged almost exclusively on its quality, in that the intimacy and texture of the mixed powder before fusion will determine the reliability of the product; the appearance of the part has little significance. By contrast, an eyeliner cosmetic faces a different customer demand, which is much more orientated towards the presentational form or visual attraction of the final product. A package of detergent lies somewhere between these two extremes: it is a relatively complex mixture that requires quantifiable quality standards but at the same time tries to meet a fickle public requirement for product forms, which could include flakes, loose granules, dense granules, tablets and, the ultimate horror from a powder technologist’s point of view, the liquid form. But where does the pharmaceutical industry position itself in this spectrum of demands? Quality is typically considered to be of paramount importance and because the customer is considered to be incapable of judging the efficacy and quality of a prescribed drug, a complex regulatory system is enforced. Seemingly, drugs are categorized with ceramics as quality dominated, with the product form being either irrelevant or at least of little significance. However, this scenario appears to be changing. Patients are no longer passive; increasingly, manufacturers are required to present the product in forms that are well accepted by patients. The customer-led development of powder inhalants and skin penetrants suggests that the slow succession of dosage forms from ‘shake the bottle’ prescriptions through to rolled pills, capsules and the all- dominating tablet might not yet be finished and might even gather further momentum in the future. But is there a general technological logic that can be applied across all the powder process industries, which will allow a flexible response to a changing customer requirement of quality, form or both? Following a sequential questioning procedure, a generic mixer selection can be made based on an information input of the mixture formulation, the product quality requirements and the process limitations imposed by the nature of the product ( This review will not detail a sequential questioning procedure but will explore the nature of the three information inputs and will reach conclusions relevant to the pharmaceutical industry on generic mixer selection. Although the weight proportions of a formulation are usually fixed, there is considerable freedom at the formulation stage to vary the morphology of the ingredients and hence their flow characteristics. For mixing to occur, individual particles must be given the opportunity to relocate themselves repeatedly within the bulk of the mixture. To generate such movement the particles can be tumbled, kneaded, fluidized, sheared, scooped or impacted within a mixer with a variable level and type of energy input. Whatever the imposed mixing mechanism, the ability of individual particles to move independently within the bulk powder is evidently an important characteristic and leads to a broad division of powder-mixing processes into ‘free-flowing’ and ‘cohesive’ (non-free-flowing) mixtures. A division between the two regimes is not easily defined. The bulk effect can be seen by rolling the mixture in a bottle. The free-flowing powder moves smoothly with well-defined planes of movements whereas the cohesive powder exhibits ‘stick-slip’ motion with irregular surface characteristics. Particle size is probably the dominant influence on the type of flow regime. The gravitational force associated with a large particle is much larger than any restraining interparticulate force with the result that individual particles retain their freedom of movement. As the particle size decreases, various interparticulate forces can potentially dominate and the particles attempt to retain a structured arrangement. The actual transition size will be a function of the nature of the interparticulate forces and other particle characteristics, but in general terms it can be stated that particles of nominal diameter greater than 50 μm tend to be free-flowing whereas particles of nominal diameter less than 50 μm tend to be cohesive. But what effect has the flow property of a powder on the mixing process? From both a marketing and a processing perspective, free-flowing powders have many desirable features, but the disadvantage of these mixtures is that they can be subject to segregation or ‘unmixing’ on a severe scale For the free-flowing mixture, the art of the process engineer is often to restrict the freedom of movement of individual particles; however, for the cohesive mixture the problem is reversed. The cohesive system has a natural structure that must be repeatedly broken down in order to give individual particles within that structure an opportunity to relocate themselves. Problems of mixture quality can arise in processes that demand a finely textured product. It is commonly found that although the scale of segregation of cohesive mixtures is small, the intensity of segregation can be high. This is caused by small agglomerates of individual mixture ingredients retaining their structure throughout the mixing process. The strength of these agglomerates and the ability of different mixers to break them down to the scale of the individual particle is a central study of cohesive mixtures. A subject of considerable industrial interest is the achievement of an ordered structural arrangement of particles, which could improve the typically limiting random particle arrangement. If the shape and surface characteristics of the constituent particles can be manipulated so that the particles prefer to adhere to a dissimilar particle, an orderliness is introduced into the mixture that gives a better mixture quality than that for random mixing. Particularly attractive is the so-called ‘coating process’ wherein fine minor component mixture constituents adhere preferentially onto a relatively coarse carrier particle. Such a mixture carries the double advantage of having free-flow characteristics for handling whereas still retaining a high mixture quality. Essential reading for anyone wishing to have a better qualitative understanding of mixture quality is the article written in 1953 by Danckwerts Although these two definitions are helpful in describing the role of the mixer, they give no indication of the ‘end point’ in the mixing process. To what extent should the scale and intensity of segregation be reduced within the mixer? What is the end point of the mixing operation for a particular process? Danckwerts established the concept of a ‘scale of scrutiny’ for a process; this enables us to answer these questions. As the scale and intensity of segregation are reduced, the mixture passes through a critical mixing state during which it changes from an ‘unsatisfactory’ to a ‘satisfactory’ mixture for a particular process. The identification of this critical quality or scale of scrutiny is perhaps the most important step in the performance analysis of a mixture. Any mixture will be unsatisfactory if scrutinized closely enough because the scale of scrutiny will then approach the scale of individual elements. Thus, in the case of the dispersion of a pigment in plastic, the scale of scrutiny on the plastic surface will normally be a small area incapable of resolution by the human eye. Microscopic examination of the plastic places higher demands on the mixture because the area examined, and hence the scale of scrutiny, is reduced. The smaller the scale of scrutiny demanded by a product application, the greater the difficulty the mixer will have in achieving a satisfactory mixture. For meaningful results a mixture should be sampled at a size equal to or less than the scale of scrutiny required by the mixture application. The control of the mixture quality is then based on a statistical assessment of a selection of such samples The variance of a component in several samples is a measure of the consistency or quality of the product. The smaller the variance, the better the mixture. Such a measure gives a graded assessment of mixture quality, which enables process trends to be followed and problems to be predicted and avoided. The sample variance value alone gives no absolute assessment of mixture quality; this value has to be related to the limiting mixture variance values of complete segregation and of randomized mixing. The variance of the randomized mixture is the more helpful datum of comparison because it usually represents the attainable mixture quality in an industrial process and represents a random positioning of the components within the mixture with no segregation or preferential positioning. The limiting random variance can be calculated for most industrial mixtures. The simplest case is that for a two-component mixture of equi-sized particles  σ Similar but more complex relationships are available for multisized, two-component systems The mixing process attempts to minimize the variance value between samples. Ideally, this value should be kept as small as possible. Inspection of The inspection of the expressions for the random variance of more complex systems confirms the importance of comminution and especially the control of particle size if a consistent and high quality is to be maintained. Although a random arrangement of particles is normally the attainable ideal for powder mixing, it is possible, in certain circumstances, to have an ordered or ideal arrangement of particles and thus approach a mixture variance of zero. Such mixtures are of great interest to those industries requiring very high mixture standards Of the three information inputs needed to logically select a mixer, the process and product requirements are usually the easiest to specify. A logic-based assessment of the mixer requirements would flag up questions under the following headings. If a batch process is envisaged, does the mixer have the flexibility to cope with a variable batch size? Is the mixer loaded with all the mixture ingredients or is there a sequential addition of ingredients at staged mixing times? For a high material throughput and/or for a strongly segregating system, serious consideration should be given to specifying a continuous rather than a batch mixer. Traceability is rapidly becoming a requirement for all the process industries. For the pharmaceutical industry it is an essential requirement and usually precludes the ‘open-ended’ continuous mixing route. If batch integrity is to be maintained from the loading of the mixture ingredients through mixing to the final packaging of the product then intermediate storage and handling should be minimized and all process equipment should be capable of easy flushing and cleaning. A mixing vessel that can be transported between the loading, mixing and packaging operations would have many advantages. Further, easy access for sampling is desirable. Product containment can be a two-way problem with risks of either contamination of the product from an external source or contamination of the surroundings by the product. How well can the mixer isolate the process materials? Product contamination is not only caused by other powders but can also be sourced from bearings or from moisture in the atmosphere. Mixers handle products in different ways depending on whether the product is fragile, abrasive, explosive, contaminated by metallic surfaces, heat sensitive, agglomerative or dusty. All these factors can influence a final mixture choice. Does the mixer require frequent cleaning and to what standard? Cleaning between batches of different products or cleaning to ensure the flushing out of batch residues can be a time- consuming operation that cuts into profitable product-production time. Do the mixing surfaces require highly polished surfaces or to be constructed with exotic materials? These are all factors that will contribute to the final mixer selection. There are a very large number of mixers and mixer manufacturers and the temptation to choose ‘the same as last time’ can be strong. The selection problem can be simplified considerably by grouping most mixers under the broad descriptive headings of convective, tumbler, impaction and high shear. These categories will be reviewed giving generic descriptions and their relative merits under the three information input headings. Convective mixers relocate groups of related particles within a static shell by means of a rotating impeller. The shell can be a trough, a double trough, a vertical cone or a cylindrical hopper; the impeller can be a blade, a ribbon, an Archimedian screw, a Z-blade or a paddle. Rotational speeds are typically five to 30 revolutions per minute. They are probably the most frequently used group of industrial powder mixers ( The greatest advantage of convective mixers is their ability to handle a wide range of process materials from free-flowing powders to pastes and doughs. In the powder sector, the mixing mechanism of pushing and relocating groups of particles minimizes the opportunity for segregation and optimizes the mixture quality. Cohesive powders mix well but risk searching out unswept corners of the mixer to lodge as dead spots. Because of the static shell, the mixers are accessible for sequential ingredient additions, for heat transfer and for the addition of liquid sprays. The disadvantages of this generic group of mixers are that they risk contamination with their moving parts, are difficult to access for cleaning and sampling, and have to be carefully integrated with the overall process. Simple mixer shell shapes are rotated horizontally on bearings and mixing occurs by the powder within the mixer tumbling and cascading on the free surface. A variety of simple shapes such as cubes, double cones and V-shapes are used with rotational speeds of typically five to 30 revolutions per minute ( Tumbler mixers can handle free-flowing and cohesive powders but not pastes or doughs, and quality is a problem. Free-flowing powders can segregate relatively dramatically on the tumbling surface and the emptying process frequently reinforces this segregation. Weakly structured powders will be broken down within the mixer but small agglomerates or aggregates of an ingredient might remain intact. The degree of fill of the mixer can also affect mixture quality leading to an inflexibility in batch size. Although quality will always remain a problem, the tumbler mixer has significant process advantages. The simple shape enables the mixer to be manufactured in a wide variety of non-contaminating materials, gives good access for both cleaning and sampling, and has no internal bearings contacting the product. Interaction with the mixing process for heat transfer, liquid addition or the stage-wise addition of ingredients is difficult. Impaction mixers ( For dry mixtures, the hold-up of fine material on the unswept walls of the vessel creates dead spots, and for a free-flowing powder the emptying of the mixer is vulnerable to physical or chemical segregation. There is good evidence that impactor blades are effective at breaking up aggregates of powder only down to a limiting size, and below that it is possible to have a small scale of segregation but with a high intensity of segregation. In some cases, though, this will limit the application of the impactor mixer. High-shear mixers ( What lessons does a logical mixer-selection procedure hold for the pharmaceutical industry? Similar to other process industries, selection is constrained by the joint requirements of the mixture meeting the quality requirements, and the mixing equipment meeting the specific process requirements of the product. The pharmaceutical industry is perhaps less flexible than other industries in its approach to process design because of the necessary constraints of quality regulation and process approval that are imposed on it. Achieving and maintaining a high product quality is never easy; typically, the problem is exacerbated in the pharmaceutical industry by having to ultimately blend a small amount of active drug with a large amount of excipient in order to produce a product with a scale of scrutiny of a single tablet or less. The statistics of powder mixing therefore require the active drug to be finely milled in order to achieve a finely textured product. The onset of high-speed tabletting posed a difficult problem in that the cohesive blend was required to flow consistently and at speed into the die of the tabletting plate. This contradiction in flow requirements was satisfied by granulating the cohesive mixture in a high-speed impaction mixer and/or granulator and then feeding a dried and free-flowing granular mixture to the tabletting machine. The pre-mix followed by the granulation is optimal because the chemical uniformity of the product is achieved at the pre-mix stage, and at the tabletting stage any segregation associated with the free-flowing granules is physical rather than chemical. The pre-mix stage is usually carried out in a tumbler mixer possibly with the aid of an impactor or intensifier bar. With a cohesive powder charge a tumbler mixer will not segregate the mixture and is capable of breaking up and mixing loosely structured systems. The use of an impactor along the axis of rotation will break up stronger structures but experience in the ceramic and cosmetic industries suggests that impaction will not be as effective as high shear in breaking down the microstructure of a mixture. Nonetheless, an effective and high-throughput process can be built about a combination of tumbler and high-impaction mixers. However, the sequencing of a tumbler mixer with a high-speed mixer granulator has lost the effective shearing action of the mortar and pestle, and if strongly structured aggregates are to be broken down in order to optimize the microstructure of the powder then a high-shear mixer needs to be introduced into the sequence. The familiarity and availability of tumbler and high-impaction mixers within the industry can lead to quality-control problems when their clear roles in the high-speed tabletting process are forgotten. If the direct compression route to tabletting is attempted by omitting the granulation step then the flow characteristic of the bulk mixture has to be intermediate between cohesion and free flow in order to suppress segregation within the tumbler mixer whilst maintaining flow on the tabletting plate. The risk of segregation within the tumbler mixer is ever present in this delicate flow balance. If the alternative of using the high-speed impactor as a dry mixer is used, there are the combined risks of hold-up of powder on the unswept walls and segregation occurring on discharging the mixer. A new quality-assurance danger arises as process segregation is possible. The tacit assumption that if a mixture is ‘well mixed’ within the mixer then the mixture quality can only be improved by subsequent handling is incorrect and the equilibrium nature of a mixture of a segregating powder can cause quality degradation downstream of the mixer. The possible use of a convective mixer and the careful sequencing and design of the downstream process are now essential.