Non-sulphide zinc deposits are important potential resources of zinc and other metals, which require accurate characterisation of the mineralogy, texture and grade for successful processing. The mineralogy of these deposits has traditionally been examined using optical microscopy, cathodoluminescence, XRD, SEM and EPMA. This study develops QEMSCAN® technology to rapidly acquire spatially resolved mineralogical data from non-sulphide zinc ores from Accha (Peru) and Skorpion (Namibia). The resulting modal and textural data provides significant additional information on the distribution of the ore minerals including detail on the trace minerals, grain size distributions, and mineral associations. The data were verified by XRD to assess clays and compositionally similar mineral polymorphs and EPMA to accurately establish mineral compositions. The detailed mineralogical knowledge from this study improves the lithotyping of the deposits and will benefit the ore processing strategies for these complex deposit types. The particular processing implications include assessments of the acid consumption, the abundance and distribution of penalty elements, and potentially low zinc recoveries relating to iron oxyhydroxides and sauconite.This study explores the advantages and limitations of scanning electron microscopy based automated mineralogy by QEMSCAN® for the characterisation of non-sulphide zinc deposits. Mineralogical characterisation was tested on two different types of deposits, the Accha deposit in Peru and the Skorpion deposit in Namibia. The development included the generation of a mineralogical database and species identification protocol (SIP) with the minerals that are specific to these deposits. QEMSCAN® is an automated technique for the rapid characterisation of mineral species and relationships in polished samples by scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (SEM–EDS) ( Non-sulphide zinc deposits are mineralogically very complex and variable, which is one of the major issues for the development of successful ore processing strategies. The aim of this study is to characterise the mineralogical variation within non-sulphide zinc deposits using QEMSCAN®. This includes the development of a robust SIP database. Non-sulphide zinc deposits are usually inferred to have formed from sulphide precursors and are commonly hosted in carbonate rocks (e.g., In any extraction scenario, the response of the ore feed to different processing methods is a direct function of the mineralogical components and particle size distributions in the ore material. In order to fully understand the operating requirements for processing, such as the acid consumption, the likely recovery, the presence of detrimental substances, or the energy consumption, it is important to develop an understanding of the mineralogical variability of the ore feed. This study develops the background for achieving mineralogical characterisation of non-sulphide zinc deposits using QEMSCAN®, on sample specimens from Accha in Peru. Significant mineralogical work has already been carried out by The recovery of zinc relates to how well these minerals can be processed. Traditional hydrometallurgical processing using sulphuric acid is strongly affected by the carbonate gangue, because it increases acid consumption. This issue can rarely, if ever, be completely overcome by selective mining, and there have been attempts at applying some method of mineral separation (heavy liquid separation, flotation) before the leaching of the ore (e.g., 54 samples were collected from the Accha prospect in Peru and 10 samples from the Skorpion deposit in Namibia. The Accha deposit is located 70 Previous studies have subdivided the Accha prospect into a series of mineralogically distinct lithotypes ( The Skorpion deposit is located approximately 25 Analysis was carried out at Camborne School of Mines, University of Exeter, UK, using a QEMSCAN® 4300, a Siemens D5000 XRD and a JEOL JXA-8200 EPMA. The QEMSCAN® 4300 is built on a Zeiss Evo 50 SEM platform with four light element Bruker Xflash® Silicon Drift energy dispersive X-ray detectors. The basic QEMSCAN® methodology and analytical modes were published by The SIP database was modified by the use of detailed compositional analysis obtained by the EPMA. This included the corroboration of minerals already present as well as the identification of new mineral species. Further corroboration of data was carried out using powder XRD and scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JEOL JSM-5400LV). The EPMA analyses were carried out using a 15 One of the most significant aims of this study was to develop a QEMSCAN® species identification protocol (SIP) that can differentiate the minerals in non-sulphide zinc deposits ( Issues relating to similar X-ray spectra include minerals that differ primarily by the concentration of light elements that are not directly detected (H), or have limited detection in the X-ray signals (C, O). The minerals that are influenced by this include smithsonite, zincite and hydrozincite; hemimorphite and willemite; and scholzite and skorpionite. These minerals can only be differentiated by their different concentrations of hydroxide (OH) and carbonate (CO Spectral interferences relate particularly S-Kα, Pb Mα and Tl Mα; and to Cd-Lα and Ag-Lβ. The S–Pb interference is already resolved in the LCU5 SIP by differentiation on the electron backscattering coefficient. However, minerals with Tl were systematically misidentified as compounds with Pb. The Tl was very difficult to resolve from the Pb because of the closely similar spectra and was identified by the EPMA. Also, Cd was significant in calcite, which was initially identified by the QEMSCAN® software as calcite with silver. The low X-ray count rate restricts the lower limit of detection of minor constituents within the minerals and limits the differentiation of minerals with closely matching spectra. For this study, this has implications for the identification of hemimorphite and smithsonite, where the Si–Zn ratio should be distinctive but in some cases was found not to be. The only way to resolve this is to increase the precision on the spectra, by increasing the X-ray counts to 5000 or more per spectrum. The beam excitation volume has implications for the identification of the fine mineral particles, in particular the clays. Consequently, the SIP has to allow for substantial compositional variation within these minerals, which limits the compositional constraints for the characterisation. At Accha, the Fe (hydr) oxides/CO On average, 6.5 million X-ray spectra were collected on polished thin sections for each of the Accha and 4 million for each of the Skorpion samples. Samples were not disaggregated for this study, which enables observation of macroscopic textural observations but reduces the representativeness of modal abundances. The main minerals found during the study of the Accha samples are listed in The host rock at Accha is characterised by 50–90 The samples from Skorpion contain smithsonite, hemimorphite, sauconite and hetaerolite. In contrast to Accha, the Zn-phosphates tarbuttite and scholzite are locally abundant, and the ore contains significant minerals from the protolith. This includes apatite (locally Cd- and Zn-rich), zircon, calcite and a variety of silicates. The Fe (hydr) oxides locally include Pb and Zn, and the Mn (hydr) oxide can have Ba. Two lithotypes were identified based on mineralogy, separated by the abundances of tarbuttite, Mn (hydr) oxides, hemimorphite and apatite ( A QEMSCAN® SIP database was produced that characterises the phases associated with non-sulphide zinc deposits, including both the primary and secondary minerals. Specific issues that occurred during this process are discussed below. In this project, it was not possible to distinguish between smithsonite and hydrozincite; hemimorphite and willemite; and scholzite and skorpionite at 1000 X-ray counts per spectrum. Verification by XRD appeared to be the best way of determining these, although this method does not provide information on the spatial distribution, liberation, and in situ mineral association data that would benefit a mineral processing operation. The only method to obtain this type of data would be to increase the X-ray counts per spectrum, which would improve the accuracy of the electron backscattering coefficient, but increase the running time and consequently decrease the productivity. In both deposits, the mineralogy appeared to be strongly dominated by one of each of the mineral pairs, and it was acceptable to assume that the other minerals were absent. X-ray interferences are a function of the average resolution of the EDS detectors, which in this case was 133 The typical QEMSCAN® 1000 X-ray counts per spectrum facilitates rapid spatial analysis but limits the precision of measurement of elemental concentrations. Furthermore, increasing the X-ray counts on the spectra would require a complete readjustment of all minerals in the SIP. This is particularly significant for the characterisation of elements that are distributed as trace constituents within minerals. For this study, the balance (or deportment) of Mn, Zn, Pb, Tl, and Ba would be significantly influenced by the ability to recognise their inclusion as minor components in the major minerals. However, at 1000 counts per spectrum, significant concentrations of these elements were detected. The resolution of the spot size/excitation volume was particularly significant for the characterisation of sauconite and other clay and fine grained minerals. Mineral grains of similar size as the electron beam diameter will consequently result in abundant mixed X-ray spectra. As a result, a wide compositional variability is required for the classification, which limits the precision of the Zn-deportment where these minerals are abundant. The Accha mineralogy was previously quantified by XRD with the Rietveld method by Mineralogical and textural data is commonly collected by optical microscopy. However, the method is subjective, operator dependent, and quantification can only be carried out with significant time investment (image analysis or point counting). The very small size of the minerals makes identification and quantification virtually impossible, and trace minerals are difficult to locate. Some significant differences were observed between the QEMSCAN® and quantitative XRD analyses. Differences in mineral abundances were significant and can be explained by the type of materials analysed by the two techniques. The XRD spectra were collected on powdered bulk materials while the QEMSCAN® analysis was carried out on thin sections. The very different volume and particle sizes between the two techniques result in significant differences in the modal results. These differences could be minimised by using disaggregated sample material (crushed and screened) for the QEMSCAN® analysis, but the drawback would be significantly less information on the primary textures and mineral associations. The QEMSCAN® data demonstrated that hetaerolite is a major constituent in the Accha ore, but, this mineral was not identified by XRD, probably due to the closely matching XRD spectra between hetaerolite and calcite. Furthermore, the minor and trace minerals found by QEMSCAN® would be significantly below the detection limit of XRD. Ten samples from the Skorpion deposit were successfully analysed using the SIP developed for Accha. The samples include two mineralogically distinct lithotypes defined by their contents of tarbuttite, Mn (hydr) oxides, hemimorphite and apatite ( The additional data provided by QEMSCAN® analysis will benefit the design of a successful mineral processing strategy. The improved characterisation of lithotypes will allow better targeting of the ore extraction. The strategy for mineral processing will be particularly affected by the presence of carbonate in the ore and the Zn deportment – particularly the local abundance of sauconite and Zn in goethite. While Mn could be considered as significant by-products, the close association with Tl would be prohibitive. Penalty elements include Cd and Tl, which could have significant negative impact on the extraction ( This study highlights that the Accha ore is mineralogically very variable, and that each of the lithotypes is likely to present different processing problems. The mineralogical distribution of the Zn is highly variable and will require carefully designed processing. The current suggested extraction method includes a combination of selective mining, dense media separation and acid leaching. Alkali leaching or leaching with organic solvents may offer alternatives but have yet to be properly tested and developed. While the carbonate gangue will consume significant acid, dense media separation is unlikely to be able to separate sauconite from calcite, and this process will consequently lead to significant Zn loss. If these processes are applied, further developments are required to separate the sauconite from calcite. As sauconite belongs to the smectite group of clays, it may be possible to separate these by suspension in water in a sedimentation tank; calcite and other gangue minerals should settle while sauconite should remain in suspension for significant time allowing for the solution to be recovered for acid leaching. Thallium and cadmium are the most significant penalty element at Accha, and could have significant negative effect on the ore extraction. The close association of Tl with Mn (hydr) oxides may allow for a successful management and containment strategy to be developed. Cadmium is predominantly associated with calcite, and will require a successful separation of calcite prior to acid leaching. Further studies are required to fully examine the distribution of these elements and explore how they can best be managed during the extraction process.  The complex mineralogy of non-sulphide zinc deposits ( The QEMSCAN® data allows for improved detail in the lithotyping and adds significant information on the major and trace mineral distribution that will benefit the design of a processing strategy and predictions of the Zn recovery. At Accha, the distinct mineralogies and Zn-deportment in the different lithotypes are likely to require different processing strategies. Penalty elements in the Accha deposit include Pb, Tl and Cd. While Pb is distributed among a series of minerals, Tl is predominantly included in Mn (hydr) oxides and minute grains of avicennite. Cadmium is primarily included in calcite. Silver could be targeted as a potential by-product subject to further investigation. The authors would like to thank Zincore Metals for access to the samples and permission to publish. Further thanks are extended to Steve Pendray, Fiona Downey and Sharon Uren for support during the project at the Camborne School of Mines Laboratories, University of Exeter, UK. The authors are grateful for the thorough comments provided by Dr. Duncan Pirrie which helped to improve the manuscript. RJS thanks NERC for funding his MSc which is gratefully acknowledged.