The present work provides an investigation of the recovery of manganese from a relatively low-grade ore (37.5% Mn) located in Um-Bogma, Sinai area, Egypt. Several leaching experiments have been performed in HNO3 acid medium to which molasses as an additive was used to benefit from the reduction action of glucose and fructose. Leaching parameters were optimized as 2.7 M HNO3 in the presence of molasses (20% of the input weight) in a solid–liquid ratio of 1:12 at 95 °C for 2 h. Under these conditions, the recovery efficiency of manganese attained about 98%, whilst iron dissolution did not exceed 12.9%. The recovery efficiencies of the interesting associated metal values (Cu, Co, Zn, Ni and Cr) have also been investigated. Manganese oxide was recovered from leach liquor in basic media after removal of major gangue impurities by precipitation technique. High purity manganese oxide products namely; (Bixbyite Mn2O3) and activated manganese oxide (hausmannite Mn3O4) were prepared. The latter was obtained via precipitation in basic media followed by activation using HNO3 as oxidant and ignition. The obtained products were suitable for several industrial applications besides, ammonium nitrate as added by-product.Manganese is a key role in the development of various industrial activities such as steel production, dry batteries, preparation of dietary additives, fertilizers, fine chemicals and some medicines ( Exhaustion of relatively rich manganese ores has focused attention on the possible exploitation of its low grade ores. Besides, the low grade manganese ores have also generated a lot of interest as a potential source of associated metal values such as cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, chromium, vanadium and molybdenum. Therefore, several hydrometallurgical processes have been developed for these ores involving, dissolving manganese as soluble chloride, sulphate or nitrate and subsequently purifying the obtained liquor each by different technologies such as precipitation (as hydroxides, sulphides or basic salts), solvent extraction, electro-winning and adsorption onto activated matrices. Um-Bogma Mn–Fe deposit is located in the marine intercalation within the clastic Paleozoic section at the south west Sinai, Egypt. The ore bodies are generally irregular in shape and tend to be lenticular. In some parts, the ore body is present as different vien fillings cutting through the surrounding dolomite ( Adopting a zero-waste approach, carbohydrates from agriculture wastes are low-cost, renewable and non hazardous reducing agent that can be used for manganese leaching under mild acidic conditions ( The aim of this work is to investigate a new leaching process of the relatively low grade manganese ore from Um-Bogma locality by nitric acid in the presence of molasses as reductant. This method would provide low iron dissolution during the leaching process as well as it would decrease the leaching efficiency of the associated metal values. Molasses, as obtained from conventional sugar extraction procedures, are essentially composed of glucose and fructose together with some residual sucrose in varying proportions depending upon the source. In case of sugar cane, the produced molasses may contain glucose, fructose and sucrose. While both glucose and fructose are reducing agents, sucrose is not because both anomeric carbons are involved in acetal formation; it can be inverted to glucose and fructose according to the following reaction: Glucose and fructose would indeed reduce MnO In particular, molasses used as a reducing agent undergoes a series of degradation reaction giving different organic compounds able to complex ions in solutions and then increasing their solubility. The working manganese ore sample was collected from Um-Bogma area which is located in west central Sinai, Egypt. The ore sample was first crushed to + The ore was analysed for its major, minor and trace elements using the proper analytical methods ( The performed leaching tests were carried out to which varying amounts of molasses were added using 10 g sample portions of ore and 120 ml of HNO The effect of HNO It is interesting in this regard to mention that calculation of the acid requirement (stoichiometric) for manganese dissolution according to reaction ‘2’ in which all Mn is assumed to be present as MnO The chosen 2.7 M HNO In order to evaluate the effect of molasses addition upon the manganese reduction, a series of leaching experiments were carried out using 2.7 M HNO In a trial to improve the leaching conditions, another experimental leaching series was performed using < In order to reduce the heat energy and in turn of the leaching costs, four leaching experiments were carried out at room, 50, 75, 85 and 95 °C under the same conditions previously used at 100 °C. The resultant recovery efficiencies as shown in Working with the fixed concentration of 2.7 M HNO To eliminate the concomitant elements released in the leach liquor, precipitation technique was employed. Complete iron precipitation as Fe In this work, high-purity manganese oxides were obtained from acid reductive leaching of a relatively low grade Sinai manganese ore using a proper molarity of nitric acid in the presence of molasses as the reducing agent. In this proposed method, the other associated metal values have also been leached in varying efficiencies; namely Zn, Cu, Co, Ni and Cr. The studied relevant leaching factors were optimized as 2.7 M HNO