In developmental toxicity studies, skeleton abnormalities found in fetuses at term are classified as variations or malformations. The relevance of skeleton variations for human risk assessment, however, is a controversial issue. This paper is a contribution to the discussion on the interpretation of fetal skeleton variations in the context of risk assessment. Dose–response relationships of skeleton variations and malformations induced by three antineoplastic drugs (FUDR: 5-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine, HU: hydroxyurea and 6-MPr: 6-mercaptopurine-riboside) were evaluated. FUDR (0, 3, 14, 25, 35, 45, 55 and 65mg/kg body wt sc) and HU (0, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500 and 550mg/kg body wt ip) were administered to rats on gestation day 11 (GD 11) while 6-MPr (0, 3, 7, 10 and 14mg/kg body wt sc) was given on GD 11, or on GD 12. Caesarean sections were performed on GD 21 and all fetuses were cleared and stained with alizarin red S for skeleton examination. Drugs given on GD 11 increased the incidence of thoracic and lumbar vertebra (dumbbell-shaped and bipartite ossification center (o.c.) and sternum (misaligned sternebrae) variations in a dose-dependent manner. Occurrence of zygomatic bone fused with maxilla (a variation in our rats) was also increased by HU and 6-MPr (GD 11) but it was not altered by FUDR. Spontaneous occurrence of wavy ribs was reduced by all treatments. Malformations such as cleft palate, tympanic bone absent and tibia absent were also increased in a dose-dependent manner by the three compounds. No observed effect levels (NOEL) for variations, irrespective of the compound administered, were generally lower than NOELs for malformations. In the discussion, we supported the view that any dose-related increase in the incidence of variations should be taken into account for determination of NOELs in routine studies. Increased occurrences of skeleton variations in term fetuses are also to be considered in risk assessment, unless experimental evidence exists that a particular change has no detrimental effect on the animal survival or health after birth or that it does not occur in humans.In developmental toxicity studies, skeleton observations in fetuses at term are classified as variations or malformations. The distinction between variation and malformation is based mainly on the transience/permanence and also on the potential adversity of the anatomical change for survival or health. According to current definitions, variations are structural changes that occur within the normal population and are unlikely to affect survival or health, whereas malformations are permanent changes that are likely to adversely affect survival, development or function ( Whether or not a substance-induced increase in the incidence of fetal skeleton variations should be taken into account for human risk assessment is a long-standing controversial issue. It has been argued that chemical-produced increases in variations are not to be considered for risk assessment because they are “unlikely to adversely affect survival or health”. The counter argument is that even not being overtly adverse and conveying no apparent selective disadvantage, a treatment-induced increase in the occurrence of variations means that the chemical agent has the potential to perturb skeleton development. According to this view, under a different condition of exposure, or in another species, this perturbation of normal bone formation may give rise to a different and more severe outcome. Another problematic area that contributes to this controversy is the interpretation whether a given fetal skeleton observation is a variation or a malformation. The difficulty in classifying skeletal anomalies in fetuses at term arises from the fact that little is generally known about their persistence into postnatal life and their consequences for survival, growth or health. Twenty-six years ago, Recently, the interpretation of fetal skeleton variations in the context of human risk assessment has been brought again into discussion by a series of review articles focusing on different aspects of this topic ( In this article we evaluated dose–response relationships for some skeleton variations and malformations induced by developmental toxicants, and in so doing we provided a set of data for discussing their relevance for quantitative risk assessment. We treated rats at mid-gestation (gestation day 11 or 12) with five to eight doses of an antineoplastic drug (hydroxyurea, 5-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine and 6-mercatopurine-riboside) and examined the incidence of fetal skeleton abnormalities at term. It is of note that no more than 4 dose levels are usually tested in regulatory required developmental toxicity studies, a number of doses that may be at times insufficient to reveal a clear dose–response relationship. Restricting treatment to a single administration at mid-gestation, on the other hand, was an attempt to attenuating maternal toxicity and to avoiding marked embryo lethality. Nulliparous Wistar female rats (Bor:Wisw/spf, TNO), weighing 190–220 For mating, three females were placed into the cage of one male rat for 2 Hydroxyurea (HU: 0, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500 and 550 Caesarean sections were performed on GD 21. Rats were killed by decapitation and gravid uteri were removed, weighed with their contents and opened. The uterine position and numbers of viable fetuses and resorptions were recorded. Implantation sites were determined as described by The exposure of dams to FUDR, HU or 6-MPr on GD 11 produced a variety of axial skeleton abnormalities in the exposed offspring. As shown in Similarly to FUDR, HU also caused a dose-dependent increase in the incidences of dumbbell-shaped and bipartite o.c. in thoracic and lumbar vertebra ( 6-MPr administered on GD 11 also enhanced the occurrence of dumbbell-shaped and bipartite o.c. in thoracic and lumbar vertebrae in a dose-dependent manner ( Taken together results from this study showed that FUDR, HU and 6-MPr enhanced in a dose-dependent manner the occurrence of some skeleton anomalies, which are commonly categorized as variations or malformations. As shown in All three substances used in this study, 5-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine (FUDR), hydroxyurea (HU) and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MPr), are antineoplastic and immunosupressive agents currently used to treat a variety of leukemias, lymphomas and solid tumors as well as sickle cell disease, psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease and other conditions ( Administration of FUDR, HU or 6-MPr to dams on GD 11 produced a variety of skeleton variations and malformations in the exposed offspring. Dumbbell-shaped and bipartite o.c. in thoracic and lumbar vertebrae are believed to be variations rather than malformations ( The incidence of zygomatic bone fused with maxilla ( Tympanic bone and tibia bone absent as well as cleft palate are obviously detrimental to the animal and thus these observations were considered as typical malformations. Misaligned sternebrae ( Dose–response relationships as those found in this study for some fetal observations are perhaps the best indication that these anatomical changes were caused by exposure to the chemical agent. In most cases, for skeleton observations listed in The background incidence of wavy ribs in our rats is 6.1%, a frequency that is within the range of spontaneous occurrences (2–22%) usually reported for Wistar rat populations ( The fact that FUDR did not affect the occurrence of zygomatic bone fused indicates that the mode of action of these universal teratogens on rat skeleton development is not uniform. Although both variations and malformations were increased in a dose-related manner by the three teratogens, for a given compound, NOELs for variations were generally lower than those for malformations ( The rationale for not taking into account skeleton variations in the context of risk assessment stands mainly on two assumptions: (1) the skeleton variation is mechanistically unrelated to the induction of malformations, i.e. dose-related increases in the occurrence of a given variation would not be an indication or warning that a more severe structural change would appear under a different condition of exposure or in another species. (2) Sufficient evidence is available showing that a given variation by no means affects survival of health. Results from this study indicated that, as far as these three developmental toxicants are concerned, increases in some variations anticipated an enhanced occurrence of malformations at higher doses. This does not necessarily mean that they are mechanistically related. Theoretically a compound may interfere with two or more different processes regarding skeleton development. In this study, however, skeleton abnormalities resulted from a short exposure early during bone anlagen formation (GD 11) and the incidence of some variations increased at doses with minimal or non-maternal toxicity. Moreover, both variations and malformations exhibited a similar stage-specificity and their incidences were decreased when exposure to 6-MPr took place one day later (GD 12). Under those circumstances, it cannot be ruled out that variations and malformations were produced through similar mechanisms. At any rate, if we are going to stay on the safe side in risk assessment, a pre-requisite for not taking into account a given variation is to have good experimental evidence that it is mechanistically unrelated to malformations. Another crucial problem is the lack of a comprehensive knowledge on the consequences of a fetal skeleton observation at term for survival or health after birth. This may result in misclassification and uncertainties regarding categorization of fetal findings (i.e., “grey-zone anomalies”). Additionally, in practical terms, transient changes tend to be considered as variations instead of malformations (i.e., “permanent structural changes”). Nonetheless, even if a given change is eventually repaired it may adversely affect animal health as long as it persists into postnatal life. Very few experimental studies have addressed these questions so far. A variation, therefore, should be taken into account in risk assessment, unless evidence exists that it does not have a detrimental effect on survival or health after birth. All three antineoplastic drugs (FUDR, HU and 6-MPr) evaluated in this study induced dose-related increases in the occurrence of fetal skeleton variations and malformations in rats. Along the dose range tested, incidences of variations started to increase at doses lower than those that elevated the occurrence of malformations. Owing to this fact, for a given compound, NOELs for variations were generally lower than those for malformations. In order to stay on the safe side in risk assessment, dose-related increases in fetal skeleton variations must be taken into account unless evidence exists that they are not mechanistically related to malformations and do not have detrimental effects on survival health after birth, or if it is already well known that they do not occur in humans.