The 3D flower-like NH4NiPO4 was successfully fabricated on nickel foam via one-step hydrothermal route without nickel salts added. In our design, nickel ions were originated from the acid corrosion of nickel foam, which decreased the concentration of nickel ion in the solution and effectively control the environmental pollution. The 3D flowers-like NH4NiPO4 was arranged on the Ni foam, and the 3D flower-like structures were assembled by sheet-like crystals with an average thickness of 380 nm. Furthermore, the sheet-like crystals are also stacked by many layers of nanoflakes. The 3D flower-like NH4NiPO4 modified Ni foam can be used as a binder-free electrode for non-enzymatic glucose detection. And the electrode exhibits excellent electrochemical properties with high sensitivity (6135 μA mM−1 Cm-2 and 2205 μA mM−1 Cm−2), wide linear range (covered from 0.001–1 mM and 2–5 mM) and a low detection limit of 0.015 (3S/N) at an applied bias of 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl.Ni-based materials (NiO, NiS and Ni (OH) Recently, NH Moreover, 2D micro/nanostructure, especially sheet-like crystal stacked by many layers of nanoflakes [ Herein, we proposed a facile one-step low-temperature hydrothermal route to synthesize NH In a typical procedure, the nickel foam (1 × 1 cm) was firstly cleaned using dilute hydrochloric acid, acetone, absolute ethanol and deionized water, respectively. Then, 0.1 mL concentrated nitric acid, 0.004 mol diammonium hydrogen phosphate and 3 g urea were mixed with 50 mL deionized water. After that, the Ni foam was put into a Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave filled with the mixed solution above mentioned. The autoclave was sealed and maintained at 120℃ for 12 h and subsequently cooled to room temperature naturally. Finally, the product was rinsed with deionized water and dried at 60 ℃ in air. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the 3D flowerlike ammonium nickel phosphate/Nickel foam electrodes were examined by a DX-2700 diffractometer with a Cu K The electrochemical performance of the 3D flowerlike ammonium nickel phosphate/Nickel foam electrodes were evaluated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), cyclic voltammetry (CV) and chronoamperometry (CA) on a Gamry Reference 600 electrochemical work station. A conventional three electrode configuration was used with as-synthesized 3D flowerlike ammonium nickel phosphate/Nickel foam electrode (1 × 1 cm) as the working electrode, a Pt foil electrode as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl (in saturated KCl) as the reference electrode. All the electrochemical measurements were carried out in 0.3 M NaOH aqueous solution. The XRD pattern (Fig. S1) shows the diffraction peaks of Ni foam (JCPDS no. 04-0850) and ammonium nickel phosphate (JCPDS no. 86-0585), respectively. No other diffraction peak is observed in the XRD pattern, confirming the purity of the product. As shown in A part of single sheet-like crystal was observed in the TEM image ( In this work, the 3D flower-like NH Fig. S2 shows cyclic voltammograms of the NH The applied potential of 0.5 V was selected due to an obvious current response and acceptable signal noise (Fig. S3). In this report, the effects of eight interfering compounds on the electrochemical response towards glucose were investigated. The content of glucose in human blood serum is about 3–8 mM while the other interfering species such as uric acid (UA) and ascorbic acid (AA) exist at a concentration of 0.1 mM, which the glucose concentration is about 30-50 times of interfering species in human serum [ The stability of the NH To verify the applicability of the sensor, a series of blood serum samples were analyzed using the NH In summary, the 3D flower-like NH This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: