The effects of the industrial processing steps (chopping–blanching-citric acid solution addition, pressing, pasteurization, depectinization, rotary vacuum filtration, bag filter and concentration) on the total and individual phenolic compounds, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and antioxidant capacity of black carrot concentrate were investigated. Then, an anthocyanin-rich black carrot concentrate (5%) was encapsulated with the emulsion method to make thermally induced whey protein-based microcapsules; the microencapsulated back carrot concentrate was used as a natural colorant in yogurt. The degradation rates of phenolics, flavonoids, anthocyanins and antioxidant capacity (1/EC50) of black carrots from raw material to concentrate were 25, 20, 19, and 33.5%, respectively, while the browning index, which is a commercial index, increased 23% between raw materials to concentrate. Bioactive compounds were moderately affected by the processing steps with the largest changes occurring early in the process. Pasteurization at 85°C/2.5min and concentration to 63.5°Bx caused a higher rate of total phenolic and flavonoid degradation compared to anthocyanins. Encapsulated concentrate in whey hydrogels showed homogenous distribution of the pink color in yogurts when added at 5, 10, 15 and 20% capsule concentrations. In whey hydrogels, 2.0g/kgdb phenolics, 1.43g/kgdb for flavonoids, 0.86g/kgdb anthocyanin was found.Anthocyanins are natural pigments responsible for the red, blue, and purple colors of some plant materials. They are used as a substitute for synthetic food colorants due to the health-conscious consumers’ demand for natural additives. Artificial dyes have also received a lot of attention due to their effect on the attention deficit hyperactivity disorder of children ( The black or purple carrot ( Fruit and vegetable concentrate production has several steps which can influence foods’ major and minor components. Therefore, monitoring the processing steps and taking preventive measures during the production is important. There is only limited information in the literature reporting if processing techniques affect the black carrot antioxidant compounds during its production on an industrial scale ( Black carrot anthocyanins are available in the market in both liquid and powder forms. Here we have examined, in greater detail, the changes in total and individual phenolic compounds, anthocyanin, and antioxidant capacity caused by each individual processing step of the concentrate production of black carrots in industrial production. We have also microencapsulated the black carrot anthocyanin by the emulsion method to make water insoluble whey protein based hydrogels, to obtain a more stable natural colorant in dairy products. Black carrot ( The Folin–Ciocalteu reagent and gallic acid were obtained from the Merck Co. (Darmstadt, Germany). Cyanidin-3-glucoside, neochlorogenic acid, chlorogenic acid, catechin, and caffeic acid were purchased from the Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, Mo, USA). The DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) was purchased from Fluka (Chemie AG, Bucks) and whey protein was obtained from Davisco Foods International Inc. (North America). All other reagents used were of analytical grade. The black carrot juice samples were collected at different steps during production from the black carrot processing line of an industrial Turkish fruit juice concentrate producer “Akdem Fruit Juice Co. (Ereğli, Konya)”. Sampling was accomplished twice from different bulks and batches just after following steps: raw material (1), chopping–blanching-citric acid solution addition (2), pressing (3), pasteurization (4), depectinization (5), rotary vacuum filter (6), bag filter (7) and concentration (8). The dry matter content of samples was measured using a vacuum oven (Nuve EV 018, Turkey) according to The browning index (BI) was determined according to Extraction was carried out with a shaker incubator operated at 50 Whey protein microcapsules were produced, as described previously ( An 84 Generated capsules were mixed with an acetone-water (70:30; 1% acetic acid) solution and crushed using an Ultra-Turrax homogenizer (IKA-WERKE, T25) at 4000 The total phenolic (TP) content was determined using the Folin–Ciocalteu assay with the gallic acid standard as described previously ( The total flavonoid (TF) content was determined by the colorimetric method ( The total anthocyanin (TA) content of the samples were determined by the pH differential method described by The antioxidant capacity (AC) of the samples were estimated by DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) assay with minor modifications as described by The extracts obtained from the extraction procedures were first filtered through 0.45 The morphology of the microcapsules was visually examined by an inverted microscope (Olympus LC40). The aqueous capsule suspension was photographed at 100× magnification. Turkish plain yogurt was colored by the addition of encapsulated black carrot anthocyanins. Four different concentrations (5, 10, 15, and 20% w/w) of whey protein capsules were added to the yogurt to mimic the fruity yogurt products by mixing with a homogenizer (Ultra-Turrax T25 basic IKA-WERKE) for 30 The experimental data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) using SPSS version 15.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) and the The changes in the total soluble solid (TSS) and the pH value of the black carrot juices during processing are depicted in The pH value of the raw black carrot was 6.05 and sharply decreased to 3.04 after the addition of citric acid solution. As it is known, the pH has an impact on the anthocyanin stability. Depending on the pH, the colored flavylium cation co-exists with other forms of anthocyanins, causing the color to fade quickly. Along with proton transfer reactions, leading to the quinonoidal bases, hydration of flavylium ions gives hemiacetals in equilibrium with chalcones ( The final product quality is directly related to the robustness of the bioactive components to the industrial processing steps. When the processing steps are well organized, the final quality of the black carrot concentrate can be more highly conserved in terms of phenolic compounds and anthocyanins. Therefore, in the first part of this study, the effect of industrial processing steps on the phenolic compounds of black carrot was investigated. The changes in TPC, TF, TA, and AC of the black carrot during processing are shown in When looking at the effect of the processing steps individually, the blanching step was found to cause a rapid degradation of the bioactive compounds significantly ( The TPC, TF, and TA contents of the product decreased slightly after pasteurization. Similarly, The largest amounts of bioactive compounds were degraded during the concentration step. They were significantly affected by the concentration step due to the temperature and °Bx change ( Literature data shows that the antioxidant capacity of plant materials is highly correlated with the anthocyanins and phenolic compounds in the plants ( In all obtained extracts, individual anthocyanins and phenolic acids were determined using an HPLC equipped with a UV/vis PDA detector. The typical HPLC chromatogram of the black carrot extract at 520 Acidic WPI-solutions at a pH 1.5 with a protein content of 20% (w/v) were produced for the entrapment of black carrot extract in stable gels, as suggested by The total anthocyanin content of the microcapsules was 0.86 This study shows that the emulsion/heat gelation method can be used to generate water insoluble whey protein-based beads for the microencapsulation of an anthocyanin-rich black carrot extract. However, further studies should be performed to enhance encapsulation efficiency Colors additives are commonly used to improve sensory characteristics of commercial yogurts. The pH value and acidity of yogurt may contribute to instability of natural colors ( Industrial black carrot concentrate production features several steps, including heat treatment. The phenolic, flavonoid and anthocyanin content of samples as well as their antioxidant capacity declined with successive processing steps. Blanching and concentration resulted in higher degradation of bioactive compounds. The rate of change of browning index, which is considered to be a commercially relevant index, showed similar trend to that of the bioactive compounds. It has been demonstrated that in addition to using black carrot concentrate as a coloring agent in foods, it is possible to encapsulate it in the form of a whey protein isolate hydrogel emulsion which can be readily incorporated into dairy products such as yogurt to obtain different shades of pink. In addition, the composite gel microcapsules were able to protect the color by increasing its stability. This study was supported with a fund from