An automated reconstruction of the pre-transformation microstructure from the microtexture data of the post-transformation product phase is proposed. The method involves identifying triplets of neighboring product grains with a common variant and linking such neighboring triplets via a generalized misorientation criterion. The approach is non-iterative and extremely efficient computationally. The method was tested successfully for different post-transformation microstructures in zirconium. The biggest limitation of any research on microstructural developments through phase transformation arises from the experimental difficulties of viewing both pre- and post-transformation structures Recently, serious efforts have been made to convert post-transformation microtexture data to the pre-transformation microstructure The first step is to process the electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) data of the product (e.g. hcp α) phase. The following are the necessary steps: Raw data needs to be free from wrongly indexed points. If such points exist, appropriate clean-up(s) needs to be conducted. The orientation data representation is reduced to the minimum Euler space required by the symmetry of the product phase to avoid redundancy in orientation description A data set is created from the refined EBSD data, containing unique grain IDs The rest of the proposed algorithm (also shown in 1. Consider a product grain 2. For grains in a given triplet find all possible parent orientations 3. The common solution to all the three grains in a triplet is selected as a potential solution. If there is no such common solution, it is inferred that the grains of the triplet are not from a common parent. 4. These steps are repeated for all triplets of Reject any As can be seen, the weighting factor ( For experimental measurements of the post-transformed microstructures a FEI Quanta-3d field emission gun scanning electron microscope with a TSL-EDX EBSD system was used. Representations of microstructures, both post-transformed and calculated pre-transformed, were made through the same EBSD graphics. For automated reconstruction, the algorithm described above was implemented in MATLAB. The program uses post-transformation EBSD data and appropriate ORs along with The present algorithm was tested for different β Significant improvements in quality, and in scope, of parent structure predictions, over the previous methods, are achieved. These improvements can be summarized as: (a) weighting each potential solution by its misorientation effectively neutralizes the deviations caused by transformation strains; (b) the existence of an internal consistency check of the predicted parent solutions by comparing different potential solutions; (c) higher tolerance to experimental errors as potential solutions are linked together by the respective weighting factors; and (d) less sensitivity to user-defined maximum misorientation tolerance ( Another main advantage of the present algorithm is its computational efficiency. One needs to evaluate the possible parent variants for each product grain only once. Then the common solution is selected for each triplet. Using 1000 Zr α grains as input, the present method of reconstruction of the β microstructure took 10 The earlier models The fact that a solution is obtained by solving multiple neighboring product grains in conjunction virtually eliminates the possibility of artificial reunification of grains belonging to different parents. The estimated The present method thus combines the merits of the previous algorithms: simplicity of neighbor-to-neighbor correlation 