The availability of oxidized PGM ore deposits, at or near the earth's surface, present lucrative prospects for future PGM production owing to the large resource estimates, the relatively high PGM grades and they can be mined through relatively lower-cost open-pit mining processes. However, these oxidized PGM ores are currently not mined or treated due to insufficient recoveries using established metallurgical techniques. The complex mineralogy and polymodal distribution of PGM in the oxidized ores pose a number of challenges to the metallurgist from a mineral liberation and extraction perspective.
                  A conceptual route to the integrated processing of a Ni-Cu-PGM bearing chromite ore in oxidized mineralization for the recovery of base and precious metals is presented based upon earlier work of the authors and recent research on metal recovery from solution. This paper presents laboratory batch-scale results of simultaneous adsorption of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) onto commercially available weak-base anion exchange resin, diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) cellulose, from hydrochloric acid solutions. Effects of various variables such as equilibration time, thiocyanate and tin chloride concentrations were studied.
                  Without any prior scrubbing step to remove co-extracted impurities, the uptake of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) was successfully accomplished with recoveries approximating 100% within 15 min. The presence of Fe(III) and other non-ferrous metal accompanying ions didn't show any marked tendency to adsorb. Among the adsorption parameters, thiocyanate concentration had the most significant effect on the process. The dual role of Sn(II) i.e. labilizing agent and PGM collector at a time, was simply overridden, overshadowed by the DEAE high selectivity for PGMs. Thiourea proved to be a better stripping reagent for bulk elution of combined Pd(II) and Pt(IV). A conceptual flowsheet is disclosed for hydrometallurgical pilot scale testing, economic evaluation and assessment of potential environmental impacts.Langmuir constant that relates to the affinity of binding sites, L/mg Initial concentration of ions in the solution, mg/L Equilibrium concentration of ions in the solution, mg/L Freundlich constant related to adsorption capacity of adsorbent, (mg/g)/(mg/L) Freundlich exponent, it measures the deviation from linearity Loading of a metal on the resin at equilibrium, mg/g Theoretical saturation adsorption capacity of the monolayer, mg/g Adsorption capacity of the resin at time t, mg/g Dimensionless separation constant The availability of oxidized platinum group metal (PGM) ore deposits, at or near the earth's surface, present lucrative prospects for future PGM production owing to the large resource estimates, the relatively high PGM grades and they can be mined through relatively lower-cost open-pit mining processes ( However, these oxidized PGM ores are currently not mined or treated due to insufficient recoveries using established metallurgical techniques ( A process approach has been developed and evaluated for treating PGM-bearing chromite ores in oxidized mineralization (with platinum content predominantly mineralized as sperrylite, and palladium as palladium antimonides) at atmospheric pressure in order to recover metal values contained therein ( Using cheap and readily available reagents — CaCl The charged and covered crucible was placed in an unvented electric or static air roast muffle furnace equipped with a programmable temperature controller, and was gradually heated under normal atmospheric pressure and oxygen partial pressure conditions at 650 °C for 6 h residence time. Afterwards the roast calcine was leached in 6 M HCl, that mimickes typical industrial concentration, at 90 °C for 24 h. Excellent leach beneficiation averaging 99.71% Pt and 100% Pd was recorded, with relatively low co-extraction of deleterious chromium (0.31%). Therefore, high Cr content can be allowed in the flotation concentrate without adversely affecting PGM recovery. Although PGM solubilisation was an important measure of the overall success of the processing method, the degree to which these are recovered from pregnant solutions was equally important. PGM chloro-complexes are generally recovered from pregnant solutions by using the classical process, which basically involves successive series of salts precipitation and redissolution steps, and a final thermal reduction to metal ( The classical method is also not satisfactory for recovering desired element(s) from diluted media containing precious metals in trace amounts ( The objective of the present work was to examine under laboratory batch-scale conditions, the technical feasibility of using commercially available anion exchanger diethylaminoethyl cellulose (DEAE) for the separation and preconcentration of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) in aqueous HCl. The process could be accomplished by two different routes: (1) selective extraction of each metal or, (2) group extraction followed by selective stripping. The latter option was adopted for this study, but with a single bulk strip of PGMs. This paper presents and discusses the recovery test results. Until the 1970s, PGM recovery and separation in precious metal refineries had been achieved by a series of precipitation processes exploiting differences in the chemistry of their anionic chloro-complexes ( The complexity of this classical technology, sometimes referred to as a 1 PGM chloro-complexes have an extremely high affinity for strong-base resins. This affinity is so high that quantitative elution is difficult and their recovery from the loaded resins is completed by combustion ( Despite the abovementioned high affinity, strong-base resins have not found significant commercial application in PGM circuits, other than being metal scavengers from dilute streams ( As far as could be determined, the earlier work reporting on selective adsorption of PGM ions from mixed thiocyanato-chloride media is a series of papers by  Furthermore, noble metal ions adsorbed were easily stripped from DEAE using either only one eluant — isocratic elution which simplifies the process — or a mixture of reagents as shown in  In chloride media containing low concentrations of thiocyanate ions, Generally typical liquid/solid adsorption involves film diffusion, intraparticle diffusion and mass action. Two trends are usually used to evaluate adsorption kinetics. These are (1) adsorption reaction models, e.g. pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order kinetic equations and the Elovich model and, (2) adsorption diffusion models, including intraparticle diffusion model and liquid film diffusion model. To this end,  The empirical Freundlich and Langmuir models are among isotherms generally used to describe single solute adsorption equilibrium onto either activated carbon or ion exchange resins and to investigate its mechanism ( The Freundlich isotherm (Eq. The Langmuir isotherm in Eq. Solving the Langmuir Eq. Therefore, a plot of 1/q The dimensionless separation constant or equilibrium parameter R Owing to insufficient quantity of material to produce enough leach liquor, ion exchange tests have been conducted on synthetic solutions that almost mimicked expected typical industrial leach liquors. The leachate generated in Synthetic stock solutions of major species were prepared by dissolving appropriate amount of chloride salts of analytical grade in 2.5 M HCl, which was the average residual acid concentration in the process pregnant leachates. For abovementioned reasons, it seemed more reasonable to suggest synthetic solutions ( The anion exchange resin diethylaminoethyl (C Batchwise adsorption tests were performed in open-ended rolling bottles to allow free circulation of oxygen. These were rotated at 105 rpm as this was the maximum speed of the device used. Although Simulating multi-stage countercurrent loading operations, 5 g of resin was contacted with 500 mL of solution and allowed to equilibrate at room temperature for 24 h. After filtration, the partially loaded resin was then placed into another 500 mL of fresh pregnant solution for the same length of time, after which the separation process was again conducted. The procedure, also called “repeating contact technique”, was continued for a couple of cycles to produce isotherms covering the full range of metal ion concentrations in solution and on the resin that would be found in typical counter-current applications ( Samples were collected before and after each contact. The initial and final solution concentrations of metal ions present in the solution were analyzed using ICP-MS. Equilibrium points for each anion in solution were then plotted together to generate equilibrium isotherms as illustrated in The desorption of adsorbed metal ions was studied under dynamic conditions in a fixed-bed glass column with ~9 mm interior diameter and ~45 cm height. The exchange column previously filled with distilled water was then filled with the loaded resin until it settles. This procedure was imperative as it prevents air spaces (bubbles) in the resin bed which would lead to channelling. Acting as a calming zone, glass beads were added to improve the flow distribution avoiding physical disturbance of the resin bed. The loaded resin was eluted for PGMs using various fresh bed volumes of 0.05 M thiourea ( It should be noted that a bed volume relates to the volume (25 mL in this investigation) of the empty column ( As it is an important variable in validating the adsorbent choice, time progression was examined to ensure optimal and quantitative real-time uptake of targeted metal ions. The adsorption percentage vs. time plotted in Attempts have been made to address base metal co-adsorption, i.e. by shortening the adsorption time ( However, these co-adsorbed metals can be displaced with appropriate wash solutions. In this context, prior to elution, The experimental layout and results of the 15 min adsorption trials are listed in In addition, the results indicate that the presoaking of the resin (converting its sites with desired SCN The effect of Sn Adsorption tests in the presence and/or absence of Sn(II) at a time as a collector and a labilizing agent — but in presence of SCN(I) — gave approximately similar PGM recoveries of 100% (Tests 1, 2 and 3). It can be inferred that its dual role was simply overridden, overshadowed by the high selectivity of DEAE for PGMs. Hence SCN(I) initial concentration was the most important variable for the overall adsorption of the two adsorbates. The adsorption data were fitted with both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models. Based on the Fisher z-transform (See During the loading sequences, partially loaded resins were separated from solutions for 2 h per cycle. From the interruption test results given in It is clear that Pt(IV) and Pd(II) were extracted into the resin up to 7 Elution curves for bulk stripping of combined Pd(II) and Pt(IV) are shown in PGMs are then recovered from thiourea strip liquors by reduction-precipitation using alkali metal borohydride e.g. NaBH Based on above experimental results and observations, and earlier research relating to the salt-baking and leaching of the PGM-bearing chromitite ore in oxidized mineralization, a conceptual flowsheet for recovering principal pay metals i.e., Cu, Ni, Pd and Pt, is proposed for hydrometallurgical pilot scale testing, economic evaluation and assessment of potential environmental impacts. Its recovery unit operations include, among others, the molten salt chlorination roast and the standard ion exchange resin technology, which plays pivotal roles in the schematic flow diagram displayed in This is a radical redesign of the process developed for the Panton deposit in Western Australia ( The original “Panton process” was developed for the high-chromite Panton Sill ore in oxidized mineralization which was problematic as the deposit size and remoteness could not justify the erection of a smelter, and the high chromite content of the flotation concentrates made it difficult to secure an offtake agreement with existing smelters at the time (2003–2007). Additional information on flowsheet complexity and shortcomings of the “Panton process” is found in The solubilisation of PGMs was the prime driving force behind the flowsheet ( In another laboratory evaluation, the hybrid pyro-hydrometallurgical and low-temperature single-stage molten salt (CaCl Using weak-base anion exchange resin DEAE cellulose, a successful quantitative batch-scale separation of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) from a large excess of various interfering cations and anions in chloride solutions is reported in this paper. DEAE adsorption decreased PGMs content to less than ICP-MS detection limit of 0.001 mg/L within 15 min with Pd(II) and Pt(IV) recoveries approximating 100% each. The results showed that the maximum loading capacity of the resin for Pt(IV) and Pd(II) can reach 32.57 and 36.86 mg/g, which represents 96 and 98% adsorption of Pt and Pd respectively, and 90.69% of the overall loading capacity. The results also indicated that with only few bed volumes (2 to 4), using 0.05 M thiourea as eluant, >99% of the adsorbed solutes could be successfully eluted; resulting in a small volume of highly concentrated PGMs eluate which is suitable for downstream processing. PGMs are then recovered from thiourea strip liquors by reduction-precipitation using alkali metal borohydride e.g. NaBH The authors would like to thank  Difference between z-transforms of the models for Pt = Difference between z-transforms of the models for Pd = With 10 samples per correlation coefficient, we can calculate the standard error of each difference: This means that the 95% confidence limit around the difference between the z-transforms of the metals would be: Pt (IV) models Lower limit Pt (95%): −1.206-1.96 ∗ 0.53 = −2.25 Upper limit Pt (95%): −1.206 + 1.96 ∗ 0.53 = −0.158 Since the sign of the upper and lower limits are the same, the difference between the two z-transforms is not zero and hence the difference between the corresponding correlation coefficients is also not zero, in other words one model is significantly better (95% confidence) than the other. Pd (II) models Lower limit Pd (95%): −1.206 − 1.96 ∗ 0.82 = −1.52 Upper limit Pd (95%): −1.206 + 1.96 ∗ 0.82 = 0.579 For Pd, the difference between the two models does not seem to be significant at a 95% confidence level and hence it is not possible to differentiate between the fits of the two models at a 95% confidence level.