Cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) were obtained from three types of oil palm wastes, mesocarp, empty fruit bunch (EFB), and palm kernel shell (PKS), as well as the trunk of the oil palm tree, to compare their morphological, thermal, and mechanical properties. Despite large differences in the chemical components of cell walls in the raw materials, the production of CNFs from all parts of the oil palm were achieved in this work. The morphology and mechanical properties of the CNF sheets obtained from the trunk had advantages over the CNF sheets from wastes, while the thermal degradation properties showed no advantage. Cellulose crystallinity of the CNF sheet from the mesocarp and PKS had lower crystallinity (69.1 and 71.1%), and the highest crystallinity of 77.0% was exhibited by the sheet from the trunk. The value of specific tensile strength and specific Young’s modulus were highest in the CNF sheet of the trunk, and lowest mechanical properties shown in the CNF sheet from the mesocarp. These results strongly suggested that the CNF could be obtained from all parts of the plants, but their properties may vary.The oil palm tree ( Recently, the production of cellulose nanofibers (CNF) and their applications in composite materials has gained significant interest due to their high Young’s modulus, high strength, low coefficient of thermal expansion, low weight, biodegradability, and renewability ( Cellulose is the major constituent of plant cell walls. Many researchers have studied the extraction of cellulose nanofibers from biomass materials ( These studies mainly focused on the method for the isolation of CNF or nanocrystals from oil palm samples, and succeeded obtaining them by using different techniques. However, no research has been reported on CNF isolated from the mesocarp and PKS, nor on a direct comparison of the CNF properties obtained from different parts of oil palm tree. The degree of polymerization, structure, morphology, and surface properties of the resulting CNF can be very different depending on the raw materials ( Oil palm mesocarp, EFB, PKS, and trunk were obtained from Suksomboon Palm Oil Co., Ltd (Chonburi, Thailand) ( The reagents used in this study were supplied by WAKO Pure Chemical Industries Ltd (Osaka, Japan). Sample extracts were prepared with a 1:2 (v/v) methanol/toluene solution using a Soxhlet apparatus over 12 h. Samples were cyclically treated in an acidified sodium chlorite (NaClO A slurry of 1 wt.% of purified cellulose was passed once through a grinder (MKCA6-3, Masuko Sangyo Co., Saitama, Japan) at 1500 rpm with the grinding stones (NKGC6-120, Masuko) pressed closely together. CNF sheets, 90 mm in diameter, were obtained from 120 g of fibrillated slurry with a fiber content of 0.5 wt.% by filtration. Raw materials and purified cellulose were analyzed using attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy (Spectrum One, PerkinElmer, Inc., USA) to examine the changes in functional groups induced by purification of cellulose and to compare them among samples. Spectra was collected in the range of 4000 – 650 cm The surfaces of the CNF sheets were imaged by AFM (AFM5100 N, Hitachi High-Tech Science Co., Tokyo Japan). The specimens were scanned under dynamic force mode probes with a tip radius of 7 nm. The length of the cantilever was 200 μm, the spring constant was 9 N/m, and the resonant frequency was 150 kHz. Real-time scanning was performed with scan rates of 0.5–1.0 Hz and scan angle 0°. Images were obtained in the phase mode. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the CNF sheets were recorded. Cu Kα radiation was generated by a RINT-2500 (Rigaku Co., Tokyo Japan) diffractometer, operated at 40 kV and 20 mA, with a scan speed of 0.5°/min, sampling step angle of 0.02°, and scan range 2 Crystallinity (CrI) was calculated using Segal’s method via Eq. ( In this equation, The crystallite size D was calculated using Scherrer’s Eq. ( Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the CNF sheets was conducted using a thermogravimetric analyzer (STA7200 RV, Hitachi High-Tech Science Co., Tokyo, Japan) with a rate of 10 °C/min from ambient temperature to 600 °C after heating at 110 °C for 20 min to dehydrate the samples. The analyses were performed in a nitrogen atmosphere with a 60 ml/min flow rate. A rectangular-shaped specimen (5 × 40 mm) of each CNF sheet was formed using a cutter, and the specimen was completely dried in vacuo at 40 °C for over 12 h before use. Tensile moduli of fibrillated-fiber sheets were evaluated using a universal materials testing machine (EZ-SX, Shimadzu Co., Kyoto, Japan) for samples 20 mm long and 3 mm wide at a crosshead speed of 1 mm/min. The average values ± standard deviations of Young’s modulus, tensile strength and strain at break were evaluated using five independent specimens. The FTIR spectra of raw materials and purified cellulose are shown in After the purification, the absorption peaks corresponding to lignin, hemicelluloses, protein, and silica were diminished in their intensity in all samples, confirming the removal of these components ( The CNF sheets were prepared using the same concentrations of CNF dispersion. The thicknesses of the CNF sheets from the mesocarp, EFB, PKS, and trunk were 158, 155, 147, and 152 μm, respectively. The CNF sheets from the EFB, PKS, and trunk appeared translucent, and only the mesocarp sheet was not transparent. (  The XRD patterns were obtained to determine the crystalline index of the CNF sheets (  On the other hand, these results suggest that cellulose from the mesocarp and PKS has an advantage in the production of fermentable sugars to make biofuels. Reduction of cellulose crystallinity in pretreatment processes can significantly improve the hydrolysis by cellulose enzymes ( TG curves showed the weight loss of the CNF sheets upon heating ( A tensile test was performed for each CNF sheet, and stress-strain curves are plotted in The chemical composition of the mesocarp, EFB, PKS, and trunk of oil palm trees varied; the hemicellulose content of the mesocarp was much lower than others while the lignin content of the PKS was much higher than others. However, the production of the CNF from all parts of the oil palm was achieved in this work. The morphology and mechanical properties of the CNF sheets obtained from the trunk had many advantages over the CNF sheets from other parts, but showed deteriorated thermal degradation properties. The crystallinity and mechanical properties of the CNF sheets from the mesocarp and PKS were much lower than those of the EFB and trunk. The degree of polymerization, structure, morphology, and surface properties of the resulting CNF can be very different depending on the raw materials. Mesocarp, EFB, PKS and trunk have different cell wall structures and chemical components from each other. It could lead to the differences of susceptibility to the treatment. For example, the mesocarp and PKS were obtained from the fruit tissues of the oil palm. These might have higher sensitivity to chemical and mechanical treatment than cellulose obtained from the trunk and EFB, so mild pretreatment might be required for the mesocarp and PKS. It is an expectation of the authors that these results will open up many possibilities for the new application of oil palm wastes. The authors thank Suksomboon Palm Oil Co., Ltd for kindly providing oil palm trees. Funding from the