Microcrystalline GaN was synthesized in supercritical ammonia with acidic, neutral, and basic mineralizers. For both acidic and neutral mineralizers, a mixture of wurtzite GaN and zinc-blende GaN was obtained, whereas wurtzite GaN was preferentially synthesized with basic mineralizers. Gibbs free energy for wurtzite GaN and zinc-blende GaN was calculated to investigate phase stability of GaN. The free energy of formation for wurtzite GaN was smaller than that for zinc-blende GaN by 720 J/mol (8meV) at 600K and 1310 J/mol (14meV) at 800K. Given this small energy difference, the selection of phase in ammonothermal synthesis turned to depend more on kinetics than on thermodynamics. Water-dissolving powder which was occasionally synthesized in basic conditions suggested that the reaction path in basic conditions is different from that in acidic and neutral conditions. The difference in the reaction path is thought to affect the phase selection.Despite the lack of homoepitaxial substrates, various devices such as blue, green, white light emitting diodes, blue laser diodes, high electron mobility transistors, and bipolar transistors have been realized with GaN and its related alloys. Heteroepitaxially grown devices are already in the market and device performance has continuously improved. However, fundamental problems arising from heteroepitaxy (e.g., on sapphire) still need to be solved to realize high-efficiency, highly reliable, and low-cost devices. Using GaN substrates sliced from bulk GaN crystals would be a direct and ultimate solution for these problems. Several growth techniques based on a Ga melt have been investigated to grow bulk GaN crystals Our research on ammonothermal growth of GaN is strongly motivated by successful mass production of α-quartz and ZnO by hydrothermal growth In ammonothermal growth of GaN, the choice of a mineralizer, which is an ionic additive to increase solubility of GaN or to enhance synthesis of GaN, is a key to achieve successful crystal growth. The type of mineralizers is categorized into three groups, acidic, basic, and neutral. Since ammonia dissociates into NH In this paper, we report on the synthesis of microcrystalline GaN in supercritical ammonia with various mineralizers including neutral alkali halides as well as conventional basic and acidic mineralizers. Microcrystalline GaN powders were synthesized from metallic Ga without any crystalline template to reduce any kinetic influences in the crystal growth. The powder yield and the volumetric ratio of zb to wz phases were investigated for each mineralizer to present a comparison of the mineralizers as well as phase preference in GaN formation. Thermodynamic calculations were also performed to help understand the phase selection phenomena in ammonothermal growth of GaN. Commercially available reactors made of Ni–Cr based alloy (Parr Instrument Co., model 4652) were used for the powder synthesis. The internal volume was about 500 After each growth run, the ammonia was released through the gas-inlet port, and the reactor was pumped down and purged with N The crystal structure of the powder was characterized with powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). An X-ray tube with a Cu anode was operated at 2 Since mineralizers are the key to controlling the ammonothermal synthesis of GaN, we studied various kinds of mineralizers. The alkali halides (KCl, KBr, KI, NaCl, NaBr, NaI, LiCl) were used as neutral mineralizers, ammonium halides (NH   The major impact of choosing mineralizers in ammonothermal synthesis of GaN is its selection of phase. Since thermodynamic consideration is a basic of assessing phase selection phenomena, Gibbs free energy of formation was estimated for wz-GaN and zb-GaN. The detailed calculation procedure is explained in However, the result shown in In the case of basic conditions the ratio of zb-GaN to wz-GaN was about one order of magnitude lower at 525 GaN powder was synthesized in supercritical ammonia with acidic, neutral, and basic mineralizers. Among neutral mineralizers, LiCl resulted in exceptional high powder yield. Powder yield with acidic mineralizers was higher than that with K and Na-based neutral mineralizers and basic mineralizers yielded even higher GaN than acidic mineralizers. For both acidic and neutral mineralizers, a mixture of wz-GaN and zb-GaN was obtained, whereas w-GaN was preferentially synthesized with basic mineralizers. The zb/wz ratio of GaN synthesized with neutral and acidic mineralizers had a positive correlation with the powder formation rate, indicating the kinetic influence on the phase selection. Gibbs free energy for wurtzite GaN and zinc-blende GaN was calculated to investigate phase stability of GaN. The free energy of formation for wurtzite GaN was smaller than that for zinc-blende GaN by 720 For a powder sample of volume The ratio is calculated using the following values: The Gibbs free energy at standard pressure, In this study, calculations were carried out for standard pressure (i.e. 1 Here, Another key point is