Composites containing spinel (MgAl2O4) and calcium hexaluminate (CaAl12O19) can excellently combine the properties of these two phases. However, their fabrication in dense composites for structural applications is limited on account of the poor sinterability. Considering this aspect, the effect of MnO addition on the sintering, microstructure and mechanical properties of MgAl2O4-CaAl4O7-CaAl12O19 composite was investigated by solid state reaction sintering at 1500–1600°C. The results showed that the grain growth of MA was significantly promoted due to the formation of Mg(Mn)Al2O4 by introducing MnO. The addition of MnO can also weaken the barrier effect of the elongated CA6 grains, indirectly promoting the development of MA and CA2 grains. Accordingly, highly uniform and dense microstructures were formed, with the apparent porosity decreased from 18.3% to 3.4% when adding 6wt% MnO at 1600°C. Significant improvements in the mechanical properties were also achieved for the MnO added composites sintered at this temperature. The optimum flexural strength was obtained by adding 6wt% MnO, achieving an increase from 186 to 308MPa, while the optimum fracture toughness was obtained by adding 4wt% MnO, with the value increased from 2.3 to 3.5MPam1/2.Within the past half century, magnesium aluminate spinel (MgAl Calcium hexaluminate (CaAl MA is thermodynamically compatible with CA The starting materials used in this work were Al The crystalline phases of the sintered samples were identiﬁed by X-ray diffraction (XRD; X′pert PRO, PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu Kα1 radiation (λ=1.5406 Physical and mechanical properties such as bulk density, apparent porosity, flexural strength and fracture toughness were measured. The bulk density and apparent porosity were evaluated using Archimedes principle in kerosene medium. The flexural strength was measured by the three point bending test method using a universal testing machine with a span of 30   As reported in the literature  When 2 As already mentioned, it is difficult to make dense sintered spinel by a single step sintering due to the large volume expansion For all the MnO added samples, Mn  A noticeable enhancement of the fracture toughness was also observed for the MnO added composites as shown in The effect of MnO addition on the densification, microstructure and mechanical properties of MgAl It was found that the uniform solid solution of Mg(Mn)Al2O4 was formed by replacing Mg2+ with Mn2+ in the MA grains at high temperatures. This substitution greatly improved the sintering activity as well as the grain growth of MA. Considerable decreases in the amount and aspect ratios of CA6 were achieved in the MnO added composites, which weakened the barrier effect of the elongated grains and thus further promoted the development of MA and CA2 grains, leading to a dramatical decrease in the apparent porosity from 18.3% to 3.4% when adding 6 The MnO added composites also showed higher flexural strength and fracture toughness. The basic parameters leading to the improvement of the mechanical properties were determined as follows: (i) the significant decrease of the porosity and the strengthening of the grain bonding; (ii) the improved uniformity in the microstructure. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant numbers 51374057, 51374062, 51574065, 51574066, and 51174049].