A series of Colossal Magneto Resistance materials, with compositional formula (1−
                     x) La0.67Ca0.33MnO3
                     +
                     xZrO2 (where x
                     =0%, 10%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%) were prepared by sol–gel technique. When characterized structurally by X-ray diffraction they are found to have cubic structure. After measuring their bulk densities, the ultra sonic longitudinal (V
                     l) and shear velocities (V
                     s) were measured at room temperature using the pulse transmission technique. Using the ultrasonic data, the values of Young's and rigidity moduli along with Poisson's ratio and Debye temperatures have been calculated. As the materials are porous, zero porous elastic moduli have also been arrived at using a well-known model. The observed variation of elastic moduli with varying ZrO2 concentration has been explained qualitatively.The most interesting and essential feature of the Colossal Magneto Resistance (CMR) manganites is the coexistence of metallic conductivity along with ferromagnetism at low temperatures (below CMR composites form an interesting field of study. Intrinsic CMR materials, governed by the inter grain transport of conduction electrons through double exchange, are having limited applications owing to high field requirement and low transition temperatures. However, extrinsic CMR materials (a function of the inter grain transport between ferromagnetic particles) play a crucial role in exhibiting a low field magneto resistance (LFMR) A study of the elastic behavior is of particular significance in the theory of solids in understanding the nature of the interatomic and interionic forces in them. Moreover, the ultrasonic velocity measuring technique is a non-destructive one and is a very sensitive tool not only for studying the defects of microscopic process in solids but also successful in monitoring systems under going magnetic and structural phase transitions A series of Colossal Magneto Resistance composites with compositional formula (1 The experimental values of longitudinal ( The elastic moduli of ceramics depend on their density. As the CMR materials under study are found to be porous, the measured elastic moduli will be less than those of non-porous ones and as such these values do not have any significance unless they are corrected to zero porosity. Therefore, the elastic moduli of all the materials have been corrected to zero porosity using Ledbetter and Datta's model In this method, it was considered that the ceramic material contains spherical voids. If we assume that the void density is ( Assuming that the void density of an ideal material is zero, the macroscopic density expression reduces to Ledbetter and Datta assumed that the randomly distributed spherical voids offer zero resistance to both dilation and shear. Incorporating these assumptions, the authors modified the equations to, Acoustic Debye temperature provides useful information about the physical properties of solids. As such, the Debye temperatures of all the materials have been calculated using Anderson's relation The values of It is clear from Eq. In general, the elastic behavior of oxide materials can be interpreted in terms of binding forces between various ions. According to Wooster On the basis of elastic behavior of CMR composites of the present investigation, it has been concluded that samples from 10–40% ZrO