A novel method combining with continuous wavelet transform and ratio spectra derivative is proposed for simultaneous determination of copper, cobalt and nickel in industrial wastewater by UV–vis spectrometry, without separation step. The derivative calculation by continuous wavelet transform (CWT) using Haar wavelet function is found suitable for noisy signals. The ratio derivative value is measured at zero-crossing wavelength. The linear ranges of calibration graphs are up to 3 mg /L for copper, cobalt and nickel. The root mean squared error of prediction (RMSEP) for copper, cobalt and nickel is 0.073, 0.064 and 0.131, respectively. The mean relative deviations of copper, cobalt and nickel are all less than 5%. The results indicate that the proposed method is rapid, inexpensive, and more accurate than partial least square method. Therefore, it is suitable for analyzing overlapping spectra in their mixtures.Hydrometallurgy is a major smelting technology of zinc. The industrial wastewater of hydrometallurgy usually contains many trace metal ions being overproof, and the concentrations of the ions have to be determined in real time and strictly controlled [ The absorption spectra of copper (2.4 mg/L), cobalt (1.2 mg/L), nickel (1.8 mg/L) and their mixture in the wavelength range of 350–800 nm are shown in The proposed method combining with continuous wavelet transform and ratio spectra derivative is given in brief in following. If a ternary mixture (M, N and P) is considered, and the Beer-Lambert law is obeyed for three components, then the absorption spectra of three components at wavelength Due to the small change of Using a standard spectra of M (whose concentration is The ratio of The derivative calculation of Eq. In Eq. In a 25-ml calibrated flask, a series of mixed standard solutions containing 0–3 mg/L copper, 0–3 mg/L cobalt, 0–3 mg/L nickel, 7.5 mL of acetic acid-sodium acetate buffer solution (pH = 5.5) and 5.00 mL of Nitroso R salt solution were placed and diluted to the mark with the appropriate volume of distilled water. A blank solution was prepared in the same manner. Absorption spectra were measured in the wavelength range of 350–800 nm, with respect to a reagent blank. All the spectra measured were the means of 5 replicates, and they were used for subsequent analysis. A Purkinje T9 optic spectrometer (Beijing Purkinje General Instrument Ltd., China) equipped with 1-cm quartz cuvette was used to measure absorbance spectra. The T9 spectrometer used a hybrid C-T dual monochromator and dual beam, equipped with a special grating and a high-performance PMT receiver, it was a highly sensitive scientific-grade UV–vis spectrophotometer instrument with a high dynamic range and good SNR. A Lenovo personal computer was used to control the spectrometer and collect data via Uvwin software. A simulated signal and its first derivative by different methods are shown in  The simultaneous determination of copper (Cu), cobalt (Co) and nickel (Ni) in ternary mixtures by ratio spectra derivative are described as following. The calibration graphs are shown in In order to evaluate the model of PLS (partial least square) and CWT–RSD (continuous wavelet transform and ratio spectra derivative), we prepared 10 sets of metal mixture solution containing copper, cobalt and nickel in different proportions, the comparison results of the two models were shown in In conclusion, because of overlapping absorption spectra, the simultaneous determination of copper, cobalt, nickel mixture is extremely difficult without any separation process. The derivative calculation by continuous wavelet transform (CWT) using Haar wavelet function is found suitable for noisy signals. A method combining with continuous wavelet transform and ratio spectra derivative is successfully used to determine copper, cobalt and nickel in ternary mixtures without separation step. The linear ranges of calibration graphs are up to 3 mg/L for copper, cobalt and nickel. The root mean squared error of prediction (RMSEP) for copper, cobalt and nickel is 0.073, 0.064 and 0.131, respectively. The mean relative deviations of copper, cobalt and nickel are all less than 5%. The results indicate that the proposed method is rapid, inexpensive, and more accurate than partial least square method. Therefore, it is suitable for analyzing overlapping spectra in their mixtures. The work reported in this paper was financed by the