The uncontrolled distortion of steel parts has been a long-standing and serious problem for heat treatment processes, especially quenching. To get a better understanding of distortion, the relationship between transformation kinetics and associated distortion has been investigated using a low-alloy chromium steel. Because martensite is a major phase transformed during the quenching of steel parts and is influential in the distortion, a new martensite start (M
                     s) temperature and a martensite kinetics equation are proposed. Oil quenching experiments with an asymmetrically cut cylinder were conducted to confirm the effect of phase transformations on distortion. ABAQUS and its user-defined subroutines UMAT and UMATHT were used for finite element method (FEM) analysis. The predictions of the FEM simulation compare well with the measured data. The simulation results allow for a clear understanding of the relationship between the transformation kinetics and distortion.Heat-treating processes have traditionally been used to greatly enhance the mechanical properties of steel parts such as bearings, gears, shafts, etc. Unfortunately, heat treatments such as carburizing, quenching and tempering often cause excessive and uncontrolled distortion. This type of distortion is still a major issue in the production of quality parts. Many research groups have examined the causes of distortion and found that the phase transformations as well as thermal stresses that occur during the heat treatment play an important role. Denis et al. Because martensite is the major phase produced during the quenching of the steel parts, a reliable prediction of the martensitic transformation kinetics is indispensable for the computational simulators of the distortion such as HEARTS Koistinen and Marburger’s equation Although many researchers In the present work the Dilatometric specimens of AISI 5120 steel were machined into small plates of 10 A common differential formula to characterize the diffusive transformation was used in this study. Kirkaldy et al. The dimensional change of the dilatometric specimen due to the transformation during heat-up results from the crystal structural change from body-centered cubic (bcc) ferrite and pearlite to face-centered cubic (fcc) austenite. This dimensional change, which is a transformation strain, can induce stresses within the specimen that could affect subsequent transformations during the heating and cooling processes. Thus, the kinetic model of the transformation during heating has to be considered in the heat treatment simulation for the accurate prediction of the final distortion. The austenite volume fraction is obtained by applying a lever rule to the change in dilatometric curves assuming an isotropic transformation and insignificant cementite effect. According to the lever rule, the volume fraction of transformed phase at a given temperature is calculated by the ratio of the measured transformation strain to the total transformation strain, which is the gap between the extrapolated linear thermal expansion lines of parent phase and fully transformed phase at that temperature. Based on Eq. The phases formed by diffusive transformation during cooling are classified as ferrite, pearlite and bainite, while martensite forms via a diffusionless transformation. Thus, it is impossible to apply a lever rule to obtain the product phase fractions in a cooling process. The volume fractions of the product phases were obtained using a routine  A number of empirical formulae have been proposed to predict the Some experimental results regarding the relationship between the AGS and the martensitic transformation have been reported in Fe–Ni and Fe–Ni–C alloys In order to obtain the experimental data regarding The K–M equation The The thermal conductivity calculated by Miettinem’s formulae The values (J austenite The enthalpy change due to a phase transformation, i.e. latent heat, causes heat absorption or heat generation of the system. In this study, the latent heat of the diffusive transformations is calculated based on the thermodynamics of the transformation. The latent heat for ferrite formation is calculated at the temperature at which the austenite decomposition is thermodynamically complete, while the latent heat of the pearlite formation is calculated by the rule of mixtures between the latent heats of the cementite and ferrite formation. Although bainite is composed of ferrite and cementite-like pearlite, the latent heat of the bainite formation contains an additional shear energy value of 600 Only a few studies have reported the latent heat of martensite formation. Recently, Cho et al. The published stress–strain curves of AISI 5120 steel with different microstructures are used for the stress analysis  The FEM simulation was performed using ABAQUS   Distortion of the asymmetrically cut cylinder before and after oil quenching was quantitatively measured at nine different points along the longitudinal direction at the center of the outside surface of the cylinder using a coordinate measuring machine with a minimum resolution of 100     The relationship between transformation kinetics and distortion during oil quenching of AISI 5120 steel has been investigated. Experimental results were compared with computational simulations using ABAQUS with its user-defined subroutines UMAT and UMATHT. To predict accurate martensite volume fraction during quenching, a new The effects of transformations on the distortion of the cut cylinder (i.e. the transformation strain, phase-dependent thermal expansion coefficients and flow stresses) are clearly verified by comparing the simulated results with/without phase transformations. The phase transformations as well as the thermal contraction of the asymmetrically cut cylinder upon cooling cause high stress values. The importance of an accurate martensite kinetics for better prediction of quenching distortion was verified by using two different martensite kinetic equations: the K–M equation and the new kinetic equation proposed in this study. The final distortion of the quenched asymmetrically cut cylinder shows excellent correlation with the new martensite kinetics equation. This research was supported by the National Core Research Center (NCRC) program from MOST and KOSEF (No. R15-2006-022-01002-0). The authors are grateful to Professor C.J. Van Tyne at the Colorado School of Mines for helpful discussions.