The sliding friction and wear behavior of aluminum matrix composites (AA7075–TiC) have been investigated under dry sliding wear conditions. The aluminum metal matrix composites (AMMCs) are produced as AA7075 matrix metal and TiC particulates of an average size of 2μm as reinforced particles through stir casting. AMMCs studied are contained 2–10wt.% of TiC particles in both as cast and heat treated (T6) conditions. All the composites exhibited better mechanical properties (hardness, tensile strength and percentage of elongation) than the matrix metal in both the conditions. The wear tests were carried out at a sliding velocity of 2m/s, sliding distance 2km and at normal load of 20N. The wear resistance of the composites increased with increasing weight percentage of TiC particles, and also the wear rate was notably less for the composite material compared to the matrix material. A detailed analysis in as-cast condition and T6 condition of the AMMCs was carried out using SEM in order to find out the influence of TiC particles in the AMMCs formed. It has been observed that under T6 heat treatment condition, matrix as well as composite shown significant improvement in mechanical and tribological properties when compared in as cast condition.The evaluation of metal matrix composites (MMCs) has been one of the major revolutions in materials from the last 3 decades. Metal matrix composites are obtaining wide importance in several areas due to its improved mechanical and tribological properties when compared with basic alloys, especially in applications where strength to weight and stiffness to weight ratios are of most importance in automobile, aerospace and defense AA7075 is a matrix metal alloy, with zinc as the major alloying element. It is strong, with strength comparable to many steels and has good fatigue strength and average machinability, but has less resistance to corrosion than many other aluminum alloys. Its relatively high cost limits its use to applications where cheaper alloys are not suitable. The superior stress corrosion resistance of the T173 and T7351 tempers makes AA7075 a logical replacement for 2024, 2014 and 2017 in many of the most critical applications. The T Mainly two common methods are there to fabricate AMMCs in large scales, powder metallurgy method (solid state) and casting (liquid state). There are different methods of liquid state processing to produce metal matrix composites The mechanical alloying followed by hot pressing temperature and pressure shown an effect on hardness and distribution of Ti particles in Al7075–TiC nanocomposite In present work effect of TiC particle on mechanical and wear behavior of AMMCs are studied in as cast and heat treated condition. AMMCs were produced with 2–10 In the present investigation AA7075 as matrix material and TiC particulates of an average particle size of 2 The composite, matrix material as AA7075 and reinforced material as titanium carbide (TiC) with 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 Matrix material and its composites were heat treated and aged at T The hardness tests were carried out according to test procedure IS 1501:2002 ASTM standards using Vickers hardness testing machine with a 10 As per the ASTM B 557:2006 standard, the tensile strength was evaluated on the cylindrical rod of as-cast and heat treated condition (T A wear and friction monitor shown in The wear mechanisms of the composites were established by scanning electron microscopic (SEM) analysis of the surface morphology of the test samples. The scanning electron microscopy (model: SEM – Quanta 400, FEI, Netherlands) with EDAX energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used in order to evaluate the morphological changes and the elemental analysis of composites. The Vickers hardness test results of AA7075 matrix material and their composites containing TiC particles (0–10 The effect of TiC on the tensile strength and the percentage of elongation of the composite obtained from tensile test are shown in The wear rate of the AA7075 matrix material and its composites with adding TiC particles at heat treated and as cast condition is shown in   The interactions between dislocations and TiC particles resist the propagation of cracks during sliding wear. Strain fields are created around TiC particles due to the thermal mismatch between the aluminum alloy and TiC particle during solidification. Those strain fields offer resistance to the propagation of the cracks and subsequent material removal. The homogeneous distribution of TiC particles provides Orowan strengthening As shown in  In the present work, AA7075/TiC AMMCs were prepared by the stir casting process and the effect of TiC particulate content on mechanical and tribological properties of the prepared AMMCs were investigated both as cast and heat treated conditions. The results can be summarized as follows: The composites at cast condition exhibits less hardness, tensile strength and wear resistance than heat treated (T The mechanical (hardness, tensile strength and percentage of elongation) properties for the TiC reinforced composite specimens are better than AA7075 matrix material in both conditions. The high content of TiC particles in AMMCs lead to high wear resistance up to 8 The wear rate of AA7075/8 Wear rate and coefficient of friction decreases with increase of wt.% of TiC reinforced particle. The author declares no conflicts of interest.