Sorption processes, especially sorption from pulps, are of considerable interest in nickel hydrometallurgy. The use of polymeric resins in pulp process allows elimination of expensive and extensive operations of filtration or countercurrent decantation from the flowsheet. The preliminary comparison of capital and operating costs indicates that resin in pulp process can compete successfully with liquid–liquid extraction and precipitation processes and may be considered as a feasible alternative when designing nickel hydrometallurgical plants. Based on this approach, resin in pulp batch tests were carried out to evaluate the nickel adsorption characteristics. An iminodiacetic acid polymeric resin was selected for nickel adsorption from sulfate acidic solutions. The results showed that the resin was able to provide nickel and cobalt extractions from solution greater than 99% after five counter-current stages. It was also observed that nickel and cobalt could be extracted from solids in the pulp due to “sorption leach” phenomena. The resin process continuously removed nickel and cobalt from the solution allowing the potential for further solids leaching. A maximum load resin capacity of 100g Ni/kg was obtained in these tests.All nickel laterite processing plants include multi-stage counter-current decantation (CCD) circuits to wash nickel and cobalt values out of the leach pulp, followed by precipitation and/or solvent extraction for metal recovery. When a low-grade ore is treated in a hydrometallurgical process and a solid–liquid separation is required, the level of production relative to the volumes of pulp being leached and filtered is high and therefore, the operating cost of this step is probably significant. One solution to this economic problem is to recover the dissolved metal from the pulp after leaching by using a solid reagent that makes the solid–liquid separation step unnecessary. Loss of valuable product occurs during a solid–liquid separation step of a conventional process because of the unfeasibility to wash the solids and recover dissolved species. An alternative to recovery nickel and cobalt values from the leach pulp is to use a resin-in-pulp (RIP) system. According to If resin in pulp process is used in the recovery of nickel from an acid leach the following benefits are expected: The acid leach might produce a pulp which is difficult to clarify or solids that, when separated, are difficult to wash. RIP could cope with this situation. Neutralization of acid introduced by the resin during adsorption is conveniently done in the contactors. Cheap reagents such as lime or limestone could be used and the relatively insoluble reagent and gypsum formed during neutralization merely become part of the pulp. The use of resin that is non-selective over iron will require the prior removal of iron by oxidation and precipitation before nickel is recovered. The insoluble ferric hydroxide precipitate also becomes part of the pulp. Based on this new approach, The Center for Mineral Development from Vale do Rio Doce Mining Co. (Brazil) started evaluating the application of resin in pulp to nickel laterite ores. The pressure acid leach process discharges a hot acidic pulp, which contains dissolved metals, including high levels of iron, aluminum, manganese, magnesium, besides nickel, cobalt and copper. The resin in pulp process option presents the advantage of sorption–leach phenomena ( The resin selected for the adsorption of nickel/cobalt from high pressure acid leach (HPAL) pulp of a Brazilian laterite was Amberlite IRC 748® from Rohm & Haas (USA), a chelate-based resin with iminodiacetic acid group. The resin has been chosen based on its high selectivity for nickel and cobalt in the presence of competing ions. Pulps were contacted with resin in a beaker agitated by an impeller, at different speed, time, temperature and resin/pulp ratio. The ion exchange experiments used polymeric resins under sodium and hydrogen-forms. The resins were conditioned by washing with acid or basic solutions and rinsed with distilled water. The conditioning followed the recommendations provided by the manufacturers and it was carried out to remove all the impurities from the resin and to obtain a free base form. In the first stage, resin in pulp batch tests were carried out to evaluate the adsorption characteristics. The use of RIP technique involved a previous oxidation of iron (II) to iron (III) after leaching, followed by addition of limestone to precipitate iron. After pulp pre-treatment for iron removal, some parameters were studied in bench sorption tests and had their values varied in order to identify their influence on percent of nickel recovery. After defining the best conditions for maximizing nickel sorption, additional RIP experiments were carried out. The actual selectivity and loading capacity values observed for chelating resins depend on pH solution, time, stirring speed, temperature and resin to pulp ratio. Fixing the pH, these parameters were varied in order to determine their effect on the loading of nickel in the resin. Samples of the effluents were collected to determine their metal ion concentration in solution after their sorption on resin. The best conditions for nickel recovery from HPAL pulp were adopted in further experimental RIP evaluation.      Fixing solution pH, batch tests were carried out in order to study the influence of time, speed, temperature and resin to pulp ratio on resin loading. Besides nickel extraction from solution, nickel extraction from solids was evaluated as well, observing the advantage of sorption–leach phenomena. This means that nickel and cobalt are continuously removed from the liquid phase allowing the potential for further nickel leaching from solids and consecutively recover from solution. Maximum nickel loading was obtained with pH 4. At pH A typical process scheme for the adsorption of nickel and cobalt from HPAL pulp involves the three process steps according to HPAL pulp was discharged from the autoclave at pH At pH 0.3, the concentration of ferrous/ferric ions in solution is high and has large influence on loading capacity of the resin. A reasonable option to deal with this interference was to adjust the pH of the pulp to pH 4, forming a precipitate of iron hydroxide. This procedure was able to eliminate large part of soluble iron in HPAL pulp. The present testwork was carried out in 5-stage counter current RIP using a HPAL pulp with ferric hydroxide precipitate at pH The results indicated the ability of the resin Amberlite IRC 748® to capture the soluble metal values in the pulp and additionally extract nickel and cobalt from the solid fraction of the pulp through leach–sorption phenomena. The same neutralized HPAL pulp was adopted in resin sorption tests—part 2. The concept was contrary to the previous one (part 1), because this procedure involved a fresh pulp for each stage that was contacted with the same resin in eight stages. Fresh resin Amberlite IRC 748® in sodium form was added to a fresh pulp, stirred and reacted for appropriate time while pH was monitored and adjusted if necessary. The resin (100 The results again clearly indicated the rapid extraction of nickel from the liquid phase in the first stages of adsorption on the resin Amberlite IRC 748® when there were available sites on the resin for nickel adsorption. Nickel extraction was higher than 98% in the first two stages. As long as the resin has become loaded, the nickel recovery has decreased as well. In stage number 8, the saturated resin was not able to adsorb nickel anymore and was verified some nickel desorption which returned to the aqueous solution. A similar behavior was verified for nickel extraction from solid phase with a maximum nickel adsorption of 13.5% in just one stage. After the sixth stage no more nickel was extracted from solids phase.  The loaded resin obtained in resin sorption tests—part 2 was washed with distilled water and desorbed with one liter of acid solution (sulfuric acid 7% v/v) to provide a pregnant solution. The pregnant solution obtained from this step was analyzed for determination of metal concentration and the results are shown in The concentration of nickel and cobalt in the pregnant solution is dependent on the initial concentrations of nickel and cobalt in the feed solution. Nickel concentration of 10 Stripping of the resin produced liquor with the different constituents. Utilization of resin loading capacity was high for nickel, due to its high affinity to resin and for that reason, nickel was upgraded in purity. The recovery of non-valuable metals (sodium, magnesium and iron) was low, for example, a low level of iron, 0.14 A study of the mechanical resistance of the resins to the abrasion was also made. The life of the resin or the number of cycles that can be satisfactorily operated before renewing the resin bed is an important criterion of choice between various types of resins. The method to determine the mechanical resistance of the polymeric resin is based on a particle size study made before and after the contact between the resin and pulp with 30% solids, in agitation of 500 The resin coarse fraction must not be too large because of its brittleness; osmotic shock breaks the coarse fraction first. Moreover, if it happens, the exchange capacity may be slightly lower. The smaller fraction has a good capacity but causes the pressure drop inside the resin bed to increase. In addition, fine resin particles are difficult to backwash without resin loss. During successive cycles, around 10% of the resin particles are damaged and the granular distribution changes. After the mechanical tests, the degrading resin was added to a HPAL pulp, stirred and reacted for 45  Amberlite IRC 748® appeared to be more selective for nickel over other metals. The increase in pH value is able to provide a better nickel recovery from pulp. Other parameters such as temperature, stirring speed, time and resin to pulp ratio have some influence on nickel adsorption and the best values for maximizing nickel recovery could be defined. The resin has a strong affinity for iron and copper, which should be removed from the solution by the addition of lime or limestone prior to RIP process. Five stages were enough to obtain 99.8% nickel recovery. After three stages, nickel extraction was higher than 99%, showing that Amberlite IRC 748® is efficient and selective in nickel recovery from HPAL pulps. The resin saturation was reached after eight stages with a maximum loading capacity of 97.6 Mechanical resistance study showed that the working capacity is not impaired by the presence of a large number of fines in the resin bed, even if we have more than 10% broken beads. The resin in pulp technology allows increased nickel recovery and elimination of expensive and low-effective equipment from the implementation of the process (thickeners and filters). Since pH functionality for nickel and cobalt was similar, these metals would probably co-extract and cobalt could then be separated from nickel in the eluate by known solvent extraction technology.