Manganese ores differ extensively in their mineralogical and bulk chemical composition. Consequently these ores follow different mineralogical morphology development paths as the reduction reaction proceeds in the production furnace. Mineralogical factors such as composition and distribution of initial liquid silicate formed at specific temperatures, as well as iron and manganese metallisation patterns, are significant determining factors in the relative importance of different parallel reduction reaction mechanisms in each ore type. Applied mineralogy techniques were used to identify and analyse matrix liquid silicate phase formation in manganese ore reacted at 1300 °C with Carbon Black reductant. The study includes three South African ores from the Kalahari Manganese Field, the ores represent both the Wessels-type and Mamatwan-type mineralogy. FactSage computational thermodynamic calculations were made to explain liquid silicate phase formation and its evolution with increased reaction time. Matrix silicate phase liquidus temperatures and pseudo-ternary phase diagrams in the MnO-FeO-SiO2-CaO-MgO-Al2O3 composition system were calculated. Matrix liquid silicate formed at the relatively low reaction temperature of 1300 °C within all three ores, although different quantities of liquid silicate formed along differing composition paths set by ore mineralogy.Manganese ores vary widely in their mineralogical and chemical composition. The main South African manganese ores fall into two groups, carbonate containing ore (Mamatwan-type) such as Mamatwan or Gloria ore (different mines from the same ore body) or high manganese and iron-containing ores (Wessels-type) such as Wessels or Nchwaning ore, ( The heterogeneous mineralogy of manganese ores and the consequential heterogeneous reduction reaction extent in each ore have created difficulties for process metallurgists in describing manganese ore reduction to the same level of mathematical detail attained for iron ore reduction. Despite mineralogy variation amongst and in different ores, there are two to three distinct reduction stages which were identified in various laboratory studies, ( In the third stage, final reduction of MnO by carbon occurs. This stage has the lowest reduction rate ( Initial metallic iron nucleation in reduced ore particles favours manganese oxide reduction by lowering the manganese activity in the initial iron-manganese alloy, ( Liquid silicate phase formation and its composition were identified in previous studies on the reduction of individual South African manganese ores ( Therefore, the two mineralogical aspects, which take place in the initial stages of manganese ore reduction, seem to have large influences in the overall reduction mechanisms and resultant kinetics of manganese ore reduction: the distribution of initial metallic iron prills and beads formed in the reduced ore particles, and initial liquid silicate (glass phase) formation in the second stage of reduction. Applied mineralogy is required to investigate these two aspects because bulk chemistry and thermodynamic phase chemistry calculations are not able to accurately predict phase morphology development in manganese ore reduction. The objective of this study is to investigate reduced ore phase chemistry and phase distribution and use this information to to better explain differences in reduction rate variation among South African ores of the carbonate type (Mamatwan) and the high manganese and iron content type (Nchwaning and Wessels). FactSage 6.4 thermochemical software is used to interpret liquid silicate phase chemistry evolution as a function of increased reaction time, and to calculate silicate phase liquidus temperatures because experimentally determined four and five component phase diagrams in the CaO-MnO-SiO Three manganese ores were individually reacted in reduction experiments: Mamatwan, Nchwaning and Wessels ore of −2.8 mm + 1.4 mm. Ore bulk chemical analyses ( Ore mineral composition was determined by XRD (X-ray diffraction) using a PANalytical Aeris diffractometer with PIXcel detector and fixed slits with Fe filtered Co-Kα radiation with a special PHD setting for fluorescent material. Mineral phases were identified using X’Pert Highscore plus software. The relative phase amounts (mass%) were estimated by using the Rietveld method. The Rietveld quantification goodness of fit parameter was 1.05–1.69 across raw ore and reacted ore samples. XRD analyses detection limit was 0.5–3 mass%, therefore XRD analyses numbers were rounded up to whole numbers. Sample preparation included addition of 20 mass% silicon metal as internal crystalline standard to the sample, and micronizing in a McCrone micronizing mill. Since only the crystalline phases are quantified in the Rietveld method, the mass% crystalline phases is over-estimated in the XRD analysis due to the presence of amorphous phase in the sample (which is invisible in the XRD analysis). The 20 mass% silicon metal added as internal standard will also be proportionally over-estimated due to the presence of the amorphous phase and this over-estimation proportion allows for back-calculation of the mass% amorphous phase present in the sample. Amorphous phase mass% quantification error from calculation and weighing errors was estimated to be ±10–15 mass%. Substantial amounts of amorphous phase were identified in all the reacted samples, which also included the amorphous Carbon Black reductant (confirmed from a separate Carbon Black sample XRD scan). The main mineral phases identified within each ore ( Reductant addition requirement for each ore was calculated by mass balance for total metallisation of manganese and iron assuming all elements are contained as oxides. For manganese, iron, magnesium and calcium, the following mineral expressions were used to calculate the carbon requirement for each ore: in Mamatwan ore: Braunite I (Mn The level of carbon requirement is expressed as the mol ratio of carbon to reducible oxygen (C/O) to meaningfully present the importance of carbon addition, as compared to a mass% carbon addition number. In the (C/O) value, reducible oxygen (O) is the sum of the moles of oxygen associated with Mn and Fe oxides and C is the mole carbon added to the mixture, based on the ultimate analysis in Mixtures of manganese ore and graphite reductant were reacted in carbon steel crucibles under Argon gas in a muffle furnace at 1300 °C for 10, 20 and 30 min. Upon completion of the reaction time the crucible was removed from the furnace and cooled under Argon gas. Each starting sample mixture contained 40 g of ore and 10 g of carbon black. Polished sections were prepared from the reacted mixtures to study reduced ore particle phase morphology and chemistry by methods of light optical microscopy at x50 magnification (Olympus BX51M) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) using a JEOL-IT300 SEM-EDS with Oxford X-max 50 detector. Element analyses from individual sample phase areas were made at 15 kV and 60 s count time. The maximum element analyses one sigma error was 0.44 mass%. The presence of oxygen in the phase SEM-EDS element analysis served as identifier for oxide phases. The metal cation element analyses were expressed as MnO, FeO, SiO The Equilib module in FactSage 6.4 (with the FTOxid database) was used to calculate liquidus temperatures of the silicate glass phase compositions measured by SEM analyses. Reacted sample mixture XRD patterns at increased reaction time are illustrated in Photomicrographs in  In the reacted Nchwaning ore, the glass phase chemistry as summarised in The glass compositions in Nchwaning ore are displayed in the phase diagrams in Initially formed silicate glass phase consists of Olivine-type silicate with co-ordination of 2(Mn,Ca,Mg,Fe)O.SiO   The CaO-MnO-SiO Glass phase basicity in Wessels reacted ore samples remained within a narrow range (0.6 < B3 < 0.9) as displayed in  In the glass matrix compositions for Wessels ore (not containing sodium) the low quantities (<1%) of MgO or FeO affect the glass phase liquidus temperatures by less than 5 °C, therefore these glass phase compositions are projected onto the CaO-MnO-SiO From the mineralogy data generated in the above analyses it is clear that low liquidus temperature matrix glass phases formed in all three South African manganese ore reacted samples: Nchwaning, Mamatwan and Wessels ore. This phenomenon is important in manganese ore smelting because the matrix glass phase formed at low temperatures will hinder CO gas access to the ore particle interior to reduce iron oxides to metallic iron, which is required to start reduction of manganese oxides positioned in contact with the metallic iron phases. Therefore, even though a particular ore contains high levels of iron oxide and associated manganese oxide in its mineral phases, if initial iron metallisation is hindered by glass matrix formation at low temperatures, then the ore will display a low reduction rate. The lowest matrix glass phase liquidus temperatures were calculated for Wessels ore. Qualitatively, both Wessels and Nchwaning ore formed more low temperature melting glass phase areas compared to Mamatwan ore.  The crystal structures of the initial ore minerals in Nchwaning, Wessels and Mamatwan ores were almost completely absent from reduced ore XRD analyses following reaction for 10 min at 1300 °C. Reduced ore particles consisted of three main phases: manganosite (Mn-Mg-monoxide), iron metal (containing up to 28 %Mn) and matrix silicate glass phase, even at short reaction times of 10 min at 1300 °C. In all three manganese ores investigated (Nchwaning, Wessels and Mamatwan), silicate glass phase formed already at a relatively low reduction temperature of 1300 °C. Initially formed silicate glass phase basicity levels were much lower than bulk ore basicity levels. The relative quantities of glass phase formation were higher in the acidic ores, Nchwaning ore and Wessels ore, compared to the extent of glass phase formation high basicity Mamatwan ore. Low liquidus temperature matrix glass phase formation lower manganese ore reduction rates by hindering CO gas access to the reduced ore particle interior where most of the iron oxides are reduced to metallic iron. The latter is required to start metallisation of manganese oxide phases in contact with iron metal prills. The author appreciates contributions of Dr. Sabine Verryn (xrd Analytical & Consulting) for the XRD analyses and Mr. Dirk Odendaal ( (See