A numerical study of the motion particulates follow along a circularly vibrating screen deck was done using the three dimensional Discrete Element Method (DEM). The motion of the particles was analyzed. The effects of vibration amplitude, throwing index, and screen deck inclination angle on the screening process are discussed. The results show that the average velocity of the particles increases along the longitudinal direction of the deck. The screening efficiency is highest when the vibration amplitude, throwing index, and screen deck inclination angle are 3–3.5mm, 2.7 and 15°, respectively. This work is helpful for developing a deep understanding of particle motion and for optimizing screen separator designs.Screening is an important means of size classification used on granular or particulate materials The Discrete Element Method (DEM), which has been developed since the 1970s, is a numerical method suitable for calculating the mechanical behavior of a granular medium. Successful applications of DEM in granular media engineering fields include work in geotechnical engineering, mining engineering, mineral processing, and material separation There have been few reports in the literature to date concerning DEM simulation of the screening process: and the existing reports are limited to simple processes An improved DEM dry contact soft-sphere model was used in our studies The contact model considers the force of gravity and the normal and tangential forces acting on a particle during the screening process. In addition, two torques that are produced by a tangential force and a rolling friction force also are considered to act on the particles. The equation of motion for the The circularly vibrating screen classification processes was simulated for coal particles using the physical parameters shown in Simulation results using these parameters are shown in The velocity distribution of the particles on the deck is illustrated in The numerical computations predict the time dependent particle behavior shown in  In this work, the screen-deck was divided into six equal sections along the longitudinal axis. The average velocity of the particles on each of these sections can be calculated independently. The distribution of the average particle velocity along the longitudinal axis of the screen deck is shown in  The effect of vibration parameters on a circularly vibrating classifier is shown in The analysis shows that particle velocity increases linearly with an increase in vibration amplitude. The time that particles stay on the screen deck is shorter when the velocity is larger than the critical value of 0.373–0.389 The effect of throwing index on the screening efficiency is shown in Particles develop a sharp throwing angle from the rotary acceleration of the screen deck during the vibrating screen separation process. This motion acts against transport and segregation of the particles. Consequently the screen deck should have a larger inclination angle.  The particles on a circularly vibrating screen deck have a complicated motion. The average velocity of the particles on the screen deck increases along the longitudinal direction of the deck. Vibration parameters have significant effects on the circularly vibrating screening process. Too small a vibration amplitude, a throwing index, or a screen-deck inclination angle will cause the accumulation of particles on the deck. But too large values of these parameters will also reduce screening efficiency. A vibration amplitude, throwing index, and screen-deck inclination angle of 3–3.5 The DEM simulations have a great advantage in modeling particle motion by the adoption of real-world parameters. The authors are grateful for financial support from the