Sulphidisation xanthate flotation is a common process in dealing with zinc oxide minerals and sulphidisation is the key procedure in the zinc mineral recovery. In this study, the effect of Ca2+ on the sulphidisation flotation of smithsonite was investigated by flotation tests. The results show that the presence of Ca2+ impairs the sulphidisation flotation of smithsonite. Adsorption studies and scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) analysis illustrate that at pH 9.5, where the sulphidisation process is routinely performed, the positively charged Ca(OH)2(s), Ca(OH)2(s), and CaOH+ produced due to hydrolysis and precipitation of Ca2+ will preferentially adsorb onto smithsonite surface, preventing the adsorption of sulfur ions. Thus, the insufficient sulphidisation on smithsonite surface cannot promote the mineral flotation performance. Interestingly, sodium carbonate can eliminate adverse effect of Ca2+ by charge reversal. For its reactivity with Ca2+, the formation of negatively charged calcium carbonate ceases the adsorption of calcium onto smithsonite surface as a consequence of electrostatic repulsion. As thus, the sulphidisation flotation of smithsonite is regained.As an important base metal, zinc is widely used in galvanizing, alloy and many other industrial processes ( Zinc oxide minerals possess a naturally hydrophilic surface which does not respond well to traditional collectors for sulfide minerals flotation, such as xanthate ( As for sulphidisation xanthate flotation, Na Smithsonite, as a typically zinc oxide mineral, is usually used as the investigated object. However, smithsonite is always intergrown with carbonate gangue minerals (calcite and dolomite) which are considered as soluble calcium-bearing minerals ( Sodium carbonate is commonly used as a pH regulator and dispersant. What is more, carbonate ions can react with dissolved Ca In this paper, the effect of Ca Smithsonite samples were obtained from Changsha, Hunan Province. The samples were hammered into small pieces and then ground using a ceramic ball mill. The products were then dry screened to obtain −74 μm fraction samples for the flotation tests. The chemical composition analyses are shown in Potassium butyl xanthate (PBX) with purity of 98% used as the collector in this study was bought from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co. Ltd. Na Micro-flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine. 2 g pure mineral samples were mixed with 35 mL deionized water in the plexiglass cell. To test the effect of Ca For the adsorption studies, smithsonite samples (2 g) were introduced into three different solutions (40 mL) respectively, they are: 2 mol/L Na To determine the elements components of smithsonite surface after treated in different conditions, scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) were employed in this study. For SEM-EDS analysis, smithsonite samples were conditioned in the same process as in the flotation tests.   To further confirm the effect of Ca Surface sulphidisation plays an important role in smithsonite sulphidisation flotation. At pH 9.5, where sulphidisation process is routinely performed ( As for Ca To regain the adsorption of sulfur ions and the flotation recovery of smithsonite, sodium carbonate was introduced. Carbonate ions can react with Ca Based on the aforementioned results, the following conclusions can be drawn: The sulphidisation flotation of smithsonite can be achieved in the presence of Na The presence of Ca Sodium carbonate can react with Ca This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: