The solvent extraction of gold(I) from aurocyanide solutions by means of various reagents: amines (Primene JMT, Amberlite LA2, Alamine 336), solvation extractants (TBP, Cyanex 921, DMPL) and mixtures of both is reported. Different variables that could affect the systems were evaluated; on the basis of the numerical treatment of experimental data, the stoichiometries of the extracted species (generally represented by HAu(CN)2·R·L
                        q
                     , R being the amine, L the solvation extractant and q depending either of the amine and/or the solvation reagent) are proposed. The permeation of Au(I) through a supported liquid membrane impregnated with various of the extractants has been investigated. High selectivity in the separation, through supported liquid membrane, of Au(I) against different metal–cyano complexes (Ag(CN)2
                     −, Cu(CN)4
                     3−, Zn(CN)4
                     2−, Fe(CN)6
                     3−) is achieved.Gold is being recovered from primary and secondary resources using hydrometallurgical processing. From the pregnant solutions (either in cyanide or chloride media) various separation/concentration operations are used: cementation, ion exchange and carbon adsorption, solvent extraction being less used, especially in cyanide media. Recently there has been renewed interest in the application of this technique to gold processing and various extractants have been proposed On the other hand, liquid membranes containing a carrier have been emerging as a potential alternative to conventional solvent extraction and have different applications in the field of separation science Two configurations of liquid membranes are now being investigated: supported liquid membranes (SLM) and liquid surfactant membranes (LSM) In the present paper, the solvent extraction of the gold(I)–cyanide complex using various extractant systems is described and the transport of Au(I) from these solutions through a supported liquid membrane impregnated with various extractants is studied and a general permeation model describing the transport mechanism is proposed. Various basic and neutral reagents were used as extractants, their main characteristics are given in All other chemicals used were of AR grade, except the cyano-complexes of silver(I), copper(I) and zinc(II) which were prepared by dissolution of the cyanide salts in the respective KCN equimolar concentration solution to form the complex. Metal extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by mechanical shaking in separatory funnels of the appropriate organic and aqueous solutions. In all cases, experiments were performed at 20°C and using an organic:aqueous (O:A) phase ratio of 1. The metal distribution coefficient was calculated according to The pH Single stage supported liquid membrane measurements were carried out with a two compartment permeation cell which consisted of a source phase (200 ml) separated from a receiving phase chamber (200 ml) by a liquid membrane having an effective membrane area of 15.9 cm The permeation coefficient The organic membrane phase was prepared by dissolving the corresponding volume or weight of the extractant in cumene (aromatic diluent) to obtain a carrier solution. The polymeric support was impregnated with the carrier solutions by immersion for 24 h, then leaving it to drip for a few seconds before being placed in the cell. Gold was normally analysed by AAS (the standard deviation obtained was 2% on 8–10 replicates). In extraction-stripping experiments, the gold concentration in the equilibrated organic phases was thus calculated by mass balance, the accuracy of the procedure was previously checked by experiments in which complete metal stripping of the loaded organic phases was achieved using a suitable stripping solution. In supported liquid membrane separation of gold from various metals, the aqueous metallic mixture was analysed by ICP. The extraction of gold from cyanide media using amines has been described elsewhere The study was carried out using organic solutions of the amines Primene JMT, Amberlite LA2 or Alamine 336 (2% v/v in cumene) and aqueous solutions of 60 μM gold and 1 mol/l NaCl. The organic and aqueous solutions were contacted for 30 min (previous experiments had shown that this time was sufficient to achieve equilibrium). An apparent extraction order in the form primary (pH Experiments to study the effect of equilibration time using Cyanex 921, DMPL or TBP on gold extraction were carried out with aqueous solutions of 60 μM Au(I) and 1 mol/l NaCl and organic solutions of 10% w/v (Cyanex 921), 10% v/v (DMPL) and 50% v/v (TBP) in cumene. Results obtained are shown in The effect of the aqueous pH on gold extraction was studied using the same aqueous and organic solutions as described above ( The presence of NaCl in the aqueous solution and its influence on gold extraction was also investigated using an organic phase of 10% w/v Cyanex 921 in cumene and an aqueous phase of 60 μM Au(I). The presence of an inorganic salt in the aqueous feed shifts the pH The variation of equilibration time and its effect on gold extraction using extractant mixtures was studied with an organic solution of Primene JMT 5% v/v–Cyanex 921 5% w/v in cumene and aqueous phases of 60 μM gold and 1 mol/l NaCl. The results obtained showed that equilibrium was reached within 10 min (60% gold extraction at equilibrium pH of 9.9), although the difference between 5 and 10 min was only 1.7%. The influence of the aqueous ionic strength on gold extraction was studied with an organic phase of Primene JMT 2% v/v–Cyanex 921 2% w/v in cumene and aqueous phases of 60 μM gold which contain various NaCl concentrations. The results obtained, presented as pH The extraction of gold using mixtures of different amines and Cyanex 921 in cumene was also studied. The aqueous phases were 60 μM gold and 1 mol/l NaCl, whereas the organic solutions were composed of Primene JMT 2% v/v, Amberlite LA2 2% v/v or Alamine 336 2% v/v and Cyanex 921 2% w/v. The results obtained are shown in On the other hand, The effect of varying the extractant mixture concentration on gold extraction was investigated using mixtures of Cyanex 921 with the three amines in cumene. In all cases, the aqueous phase was composed of 60 μM Au(I) and 1 mol/l NaCl. The results obtained are shown in The extraction of gold using mixtures of various solvation reagents with the amine Primene JMT was also studied. Using mixtures of Primene JMT 10% v/v with the neutral reagents (Cyanex 921 10% w/v, DMPL 10% v/v or TBP 10% v/v), the results were generated with organic phase in cumene and aqueous solutions of 60 μM gold(I) and 1 mol/l NaCl. The corresponding pH Further experiments were carried out using mixtures of the amines Amberlite LA2 and Alamine 336 with DMPL in order to gain knowledge of these less well-known systems. In this case, the aqueous phases contained 60 μM Au(I) and 1 mol/l NaCl and the organic solutions were composed of various concentrations of the extractants dissolved in cumene. The results obtained are shown in The extraction of gold using these extractant mixtures (amines–solvation reagents) can be represented by the general equilibrium The results of the numerical calculation are given in The stripping of gold from loaded organic phases was studied using NaOH (0.1 to 1 mol/l) solutions. In this study, the organic phase was composed of a mixture of the amines (5% v/v) with Cyanex 921 (5% w/v) in cumene loaded with 60 μM gold. Contact time was 30 min. Results of these experiments show that the increase of the NaOH concentration has a negligible effect in the percentage of gold stripped; however, this percentage is greater in the order: Primene JMT–Cyanex 921 (average 94% gold stripping)>Amberlite LA2–Cyanex 921 (average 87% gold stripping)>Alamine 336–Cyanex 921 (average 80% gold stripped), when a single contact is carried out. The results concerning transport of gold(I) from the source phase containing 50 μM gold and 1 mol/l NaCl at pH 9.2 and a receiving phase of 1 mol/l NaOH were obtained using organic solutions of the amines (0.25 mol/l) and the solvation extractants (0.1 mol/l) in cumene. Gold(I) permeability increases in the order Primene JMT–DMPL (1.2×10 The behaviour of these systems was also compared with that obtained using other extraction systems suitable for gold–cyanide extraction such as: LIX 79 (0.25 mol/l) and LIX 79 (0.25 mol/l)–Cyanex 921 (0.1 mol/l) or LIX 79 (0.25 mol/l)–DMPL (0.1 mol/l) mixtures in cumene immobilised on a Durapore microporous support. The aqueous feed and receiving solutions were as described above. LIX 79 presents a gold permeation coefficient value (8.9·10 Further studies deal with the effect of varying the Cyanex 921 concentration in the LIX 79–Cyanex 921 mixture and the results obtained from these series of experiments are shown in The separation of gold(I) from other metal–cyano complexes using a supported liquid membrane was also studied by the use of the LIX 79–Cyanex 921 mixture (LIX 79 0.25 mol/l and Cyanex 921 0.1 mol/l in cumene) and an aqueous feed containing 254 μM each of Au(I), Fe(III), Cu(I), Zn(II), Ag(I) and 1 mol/l NaCl at pH 9.5. The receiving phase was 1 mol/l NaOH. In the extraction process using a supported liquid membrane, the metal diffuses through the aqueous feed boundary layer and reacts at the interface with the carrier, which impregnates the pores of the polymer support, resulting in the formation of the metal complex. Then, the complex species diffuses through the membrane to the receiving phase because its concentration gradient is negative. Finally, metal carrier complexes release metal ions into the receiving phase at the interface. Therefore, to model the mass transfer of Au(I) it is necessary to consider diffusion of the metal-complex through the aqueous feed boundary layer, reversible chemical reaction at the feed interface, diffusion of the metal complex species in the membrane and chemical reaction at the receiving interface. However, the interfacial flux due to the chemical reaction can be neglected, as the chemical reactions (at the feed-membrane and the membrane-receiving interfaces) occur instantaneously relative to the diffusion processes The solvent extraction of Au(CN) The gold(I) transport rate is determined by the rate of diffusion of gold-containing species through the feed diffusion layer and the rate of diffusion of HAu(CN) Assuming that the transport of gold(I) occurs at steady state and that concentration gradients are linear, the equations describing the aqueous diffusion flux, In As the distribution coefficient of gold(I) between the membrane phase and the receiving phase is much lower than that between the feed phase and the membrane, the concentration of the gold-extracted complexes in the membrane phase on the receiving solution side may be considered negligible compared with that on the feed solution side. Then, If the chemical reactions expressed by Thus, the permeability coefficient From experimental data obtained in the present investigation, The extractant mixtures formed by amines and neutral extractants dissolved in cumene extracted gold(I) from cyanide media; however, only mixtures of the primary amine Primene JMT and the solvation reagents Cyanex 921 or DMPL seem to be suitable for extraction at high alkaline pH values (e.g., greater than 10). The addition of the solvation reagents to the amines normally increases gold(I) extractability in the order Cyanex 921>DMPL>TBP, whereas using various amines the order found is Primene JMT>Amberlite LA2>Alamine 336 (e.g., primary>secondary>tertiary). The extraction of gold by these extractant mixtures seems to be the sum of various equilibria with formation of species with different stoichiometries: HAu(CN) In supported liquid membrane transport of gold using mixtures of amines and solvation reagents as carriers the order followed changes with respect to that obtained in conventional solvent extraction. From the permeation model of gold(I) presented, the permeation of gold seems to be governed by the diffusion of metal species at the feed-membrane interface. LIX 79 and especially mixtures of LIX 79 and solvation reagents increases gold(I) permeation across supported liquid membrane. On the other hand, SLM containing LIX 79–Cyanex 921 mixture have been proved to selectively transport Au(I) over Fe(III), Zn(II), Ag(I) and Cu(I) (all metals as their corresponding metal–cyano complexes). This work was supported by CICYT (QUI 96-1025) and Comissionat per Universitats i Recerca (SGR98-00082). Authors gratefully acknowledge to Rohm and Haas (Primene JMT, Amberlite LA2), Henkel (Alamine 336, LIX 79), CYTEC (Cyanex 921) and Bayer Leverkusen (DMPL) for gift samples of their reagents. Also to the CSIC for support.