Background
                  Posteromedial and greater trochanteric fragments are a major cause of telescoping and medialization of the femoral shaft in an unstable intertrochanteric fracture. This leads to significant limb shortening, fracture collapse in varus position and implant failure, which can be prevented by trochanteric wiring in addition to dynamic hip screw (DHS) fixation. The purpose of our study is to assess the outcomes of DHS augmented with trochanteric wiring in unstable type A2 intertrochanteric fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  One hundred and two retrospective cases of unstable intertrochanteric fractures treated with DHS between January 2010 and December 2015 with a minimum follow-up period of 12 months were reviewed. Out of 102 cases, 28 were treated with DHS and derotation screw alone (Group A), while in rest 74 cases trochanteric wiring was used as an augmentation to DHS and derotation screw (Group B). Patients were evaluated clinically for range of motion, Harris hip score and Oxford hip score. Radiologically, fracture reduction, change in neck shaft angle and neck length ratio in comparison to opposite hip and union status of greater trochanter were assessed.
               
                  Results
                  The mean age of the patients at the time of surgery was 72 years (range 23–94 years) with 48 males and 54 females. The mean follow-up period was 20 months (range 12–48 months). The Harris hip score, Oxford hip score, shortening, attainment of weight bearing and change in neck shaft angle was not significantly different between the two groups (all p values >0.05). Incidence of greater trochanter nonunion was greater in group A (17.85%) as compared to group B (6.75%). We found significant association between occurrence of limp with varus change in neck shaft angle, decrease in neck length ratio and greater trochanteric non-union (all p values <0.05). We had 7 complications, one superficial infection, one deep vein thrombosis, 4 screw cut out and one deep infection treated with implant removal.
               
                  Conclusion
                  DHS augmented with trochanteric wiring in unstable intertrochanteric fractures gives similar result to group without no wiring, although greater trochanter non-union rate was more in the latter group. Limp can be prevented by anatomical or valgus fixation, augmentation of DHS to support posteromedial and greater trochanteric fragments and delayed weight bearing.Intertrochanteric fractures constitute almost one-half of proximal femoral fractures, and one-third of these intertrochanteric fractures are unstable with high morbidity Between January 2010 to December 2015, 102 retrospective cases with prospective follow-up of unstable intertrochanteric fractures treated with dynamic hip screw were reviewed. There were 48 males and 54 females with a mean age of 72 years (range 23–94 years). Trivial falls were the most common mode of trauma accounting for 86 cases (84.3%), while road traffic accidents accounted for the remaining 16 cases (15.7%). The inclusion criteria included: unstable intertrochanteric femur fractures, patients with age above eighteen years and fractures which were classified into AO type A2. A total of 15 patients with reverse oblique pattern of fractures involving the lateral cortex (8 cases), pathological fractures (2 cases), polytraumatized patients (3 cases) and patients with other ipsilateral or contralateral upper and lower limb fractures and dislocations (2 cases) were excluded from the study. Preoperative and postoperative X-rays and records of all patients were available for evaluation. DHS and derotation screw were used in all cases. Cases were divided into two groups; 28 cases were treated with DHS and derotation screw alone (Group A), while figure of eight trochanteric wiring was used as an augmentation to DHS in the other 74 cases (Group B). After spinal anaesthesia, the patients were placed in the lateral decubitus position with the affected hip facing upwards. The decision to use augmentation was taken intraoperatively depending on the posteromedial and posterolateral comminution. The surgical technique employed a direct lateral approach to the hip. A Lateral incision was made 5 After the fixation with DHS, the fracture was assessed for posteromedial and posterolateral fracture fragments. In 28 patients, there was an isolated small posteromedial fragment involving the lesser trochanter. In these cases, DHS with derotation screw was used alone without augmentation (Group A). Whilst in 74 patients of Group B, there was a large posteromedial fragment involving the posteroinferior cortical bone beak, and lesser trochanter with or without fracture of the greater trochanter. In these cases, a bone hook was used to anatomically reduce and hold the posteromedial fragment and was augmented with bone wire passed around the lesser and greater trochanter in the figure of eight fashion (Group B) All patients were called for follow-up and consent was obtained. Each patient was evaluated with range of motion, Harris hip score and Oxford hip score. Harris hip score considered function of the hip as well as the symptoms (Pain, limp, mobility of the patient, deformity, shortening and range of motion). Oxford hip score considered the quality of life of the patient based on the questionnaire. Pre-op and post-op radiographs were assessed for reduction of the fracture, change in neck shaft angle and neck length ratio in comparison to the opposite hip and union status of greater trochanter. The mean follow-up period was 20±6.32 months (range 12–48 months). All patients in both groups except one case of deep infection achieved union at the end of 6 months at the intertrochanteric fracture site ( We found a significant association between the occurrence of limp and greater trochanteric non-union, neck length ratio and change in neck shaft angle ( One patient (0.98%) developed superficial wound infection which was treated successfully with appropriate antibiotics as per the culture report. One patient developed deep vein thrombosis (0.98%) of the affected limb which was treated successfully with anticoagulants. Four patients (3.92%) had screw cut out, out of which 2 patients ended with uneventful union, and two patients with excessive varus collapse had persistent hip pain with shortening of affected limb. One patient developed deep infection (0.98%) around the implant which was removed and the patient had malunion with shortening of the limb ( Proximal femoral fractures with or without instability of fragments remain a topic of vivid discussion amongst orthopaedic trauma surgeons Posteromedial and greater trochanteric fracture fragments, respectively contribute to unstable types of intertrochanteric fracture. The posteromedial bone fragment including the lesser trochanter has been reported to be implicated in the instability of the these fractures fixed with DHS, and might be the cause of subsequent varus deformation if not stabilized sufficiently We preferred cerclage wiring over screws for fixation of the fractured posteromedial bone fragment. Cerclage wiring works with the principle of tension band wiring, which is passed in a figure of eight fashion around the insertion of hip abductors over the greater trochanter and around the posteromedial fragment, with the lesser trochanter ending over the lateral aspect of the greater trochanter and tension being achieved with the tensioner. This is an effective method of additional fixation which provides support to the posteromedial and posterolateral fragments and achieves compression which helps in better union Wang et al. noted that the recognition of the posterior wall fragment of the greater trochanteric area was an important predictive factor in the treatment of unstable intertrochanteric fractures In our study, we found no significant difference between outcomes of the two groups based on Harris Hip Score and Oxford Hip Score. The mean shortening in Group A was higher than in Group B, but it was statistically not significant. There was no significance between attainment of full weight bearing in the two groups. Cases of greater trochanteric non-union were five in each group accounting for 17.85% and 6.75% of fractures respectively. This suggests additional fixation with figure of eight wiring prevents non-union at greater trochanteric fragments, however more likely this is associated with primary injury and displacement of greater trochanter. Cho et al. studied 30 cases of unstable intertrochanteric fractures treated with dynamic hip screw and additional fixation methods, of which 1 patient (3.33%) had excessive sliding of 16 However, there were certain limitations to this study. First, it was a non-randomised control study. Second, the sample size in the subgroups was small. However, there are very few papers on greater trochanter wiring and hence the results of the study are clinically relevant. In conclusion figure of eight trochanteric wiring as an augmentation to DHS gives anatomical reduction and support to posteromedial and greater trochanteric comminution. Although there was no difference in outcomes as compared to DHS with derotation screw alone the incidence of greater trochanter nonunion was less in group with trochanteric wiring. Thus trochanteric wiring can be reserved for cases that have gross displacement of the greater trochanteric fragments and doing it in routine cases does not have any additional advantage. Incidence of limp can be reduced by anatomical or valgus fixation of the fractures, additional fixation to support the posteromedial and posterolateral fragments and allowing weight bearing after radiological healing to prevent collapse. None declared.