In this article, 5-heptyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole-2-thione (HpODT) surfactant was synthesized and originally recommended as a collector for flotation recovery of chalcopyrite, bornite and pyrite. The micro-flotation findings indicated that compared with traditional collectors such as sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) and sodium hexyl xanthate (SHX), HpODT possessed superior flotation affinity to chalcopyrite and bornite, and selectivity against pyrite under alkaline circumstances. After HpODT treatment, the contact angle of chalcopyrite increased, suggesting an improved hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite surfaces. Adsorption thermodynamic and kinetic analyses suggested that chalcopyrite adsorption of HpODT was a spontaneous-endothermic chemisorption process, and the ΔH (change of enthalpy), ΔS (change of entropy), ΔG (change of free energy) and Ea
                      (activation energy) were 21.06kJmol−1, 173.63Jmol−1
                     K−1, −30.77kJmol−1 (298K) and 20.19kJmol−1, respectively. The results of zeta potential hinted that HpODT chemisorbed on chalcopyrite surfaces. UV–vis spectra clearly observed that HpODT selectively reacted with Cu+ or Cu2+, not with Fe2+ or Fe3+ ions. FTIR spectra inferred that HpODT–Cu surface complexes were formed on chalcopyrite by reaction of HpODT’s CNNHC(S)O group with surface copper atoms to build CuS and CuN bonds.Froth flotation is one of the primarily selected techniques for selective upgrading and separation of precious minerals from the ores containing them Sulfhydryl surfactants including xanthates, dithiocarbamates, dithiophosphates, thionocarbamates and thioureas are common flotation collectors for copper sulfide minerals such as chalcopyrite, bornite and chalcocite. These collectors generally chemisorb on copper sulfide mineral surfaces by formation of copper surface complexes Sulfhydryl aryl surfactants including 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT), 2-mercaptobenzoxazole (MBO) 2-mercaptobenzimidazole (MBI) and amino thiophenole (ATP) contain S, N or O donor atoms and are known as chelating flotation collectors for recovery of copper, lead and copper-activated zinc sulfide or oxide minerals Recently, a novel N- and S-containing heterocyclic surfactant, 2-hexyl-4-amino-1,2,4-triazole-5-thione (HATT) has been introduced as a flotation collector and exhibited excellent flotation performance for recovery of chalcopyrite and malachite Similar to triazole–thione surfactants, oxadiazole–thione compounds contain S, N-donor atoms which possess strong affinity to soft metal atoms such as platinum In this paper, 5-heptyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole-2-thione (HpODT) surfactant was synthesized and first recommended as flotation collector for chalcopyrite, bornite and pyrite. The hydrophobic mechanism of HpODT to chalcopyrite flotation was studied via micro-flotation, adsorption, contact angle, zeta potential and FTIR spectra. Through evaluating HpODT’s flotation behavior and adsorption mechanism, it will help us to cognize the interaction between oxadiazole–thione surfactants and copper sulfide minerals, and to develop novel chelating flotation collectors. HpODT was prepared in our laboratory. Its The mineral samples were successively treated by crushing in the jaw breaker and roll crusher, handpicking and grinding in an agate mortar with a pestle. Their chemical compositions were characterized through XRD (X-ray diffraction) and XRF (X-ray fluorescence) as shown in An improved Hallimond tube with 220 The contact angle of chalcopyrite surfaces was measured according to the methods reported in literature The zeta-potential values of chalcopyrite were determined in 1 0.3 To evaluate the selective interaction of HpODT with Fe The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of HpODT, chalcopyrite before and after HpODT treatment, and precipitates of Cu 100 The synthetic route of HpODT was displayed in  The function of initial collector concentration with the flotation recovery of chalcopyrite, bornite or pyrite at pH 11.0 or 9.5 was shown in  The results in The contact angle of chalcopyrite surfaces as a function of pH value (under 0.5 The relationship between pH value and zeta potential of chalcopyrite with or without 1 The influence of pH on the HpODT equilibrium adsorption quantity on chalcopyrite surfaces under 1   The pseudo-first-order Generally, a physisorption process do not require an activation energy. As shown in Δ The UV–vis spectra of 5 The FTIR spectra of HpODT, HpODT–Cu The FTIR results in The FTIR results in The micro-flotation results elucidated HpODT presented good flotation affinity to copper sulfide minerals against pyrite under pH 8.0–11.0. After HpODT treatment, the contact angle of chalcopyrite increased, displaying an enhanced hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite surfaces. Adsorption thermodynamic and kinetic analyses suggested that chalcopyrite adsorption of HpODT was a spontaneous-endothermic chemisorption process. The pK The FTIR spectra presented in After HpODT treatment, the C In this paper, an original flotation collector 5-heptyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole-2-thione (HpODT) was prepared and characterized by FTIR, UV–vis spectra, The micro-flotation results indicated that compared with SIBX and SHX, HpODT possessed superior collecting affinity to chalcopyrite and bornite, and selectivity against pyrite under alkaline medium. After HpODT treatment, the contact angle of chalcopyrite increased, suggesting an improved hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite surfaces. The results of zeta potential hinted that HpODT chemisorbed on chalcopyrite surfaces. Adsorption thermodynamic and kinetic analyses suggested that chalcopyrite adsorption of HpODT was a spontaneous-endothermic chemisorption process, and the Δ The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: Details on the NMR characterization of HpODT and description of data treatment for adsorption kinetics and thermodynamics.