Wet milling of ibuprofen in a Micros Type 0 ring mill resulted in particle sizes which passed through a minimum of about 10 μm during milling independent of rotation speed. The apparent size enlargement may be due to plastic deformation and compression of fine particles. According to literature, the critical diameter characterising the brittle/ductile transition of ibuprofen is about 850 μm. Compression of single polycrystals revealed, however, that the particle size of ibuprofen had to be reduced to 125–355 μm in order to see plastic deformation. Thus, the study demonstrates that the ring mill is capable of comminuting particles to sizes well below the brittle/ductile transition.Simple fracture is the separation of the body into two pieces in response to an imposed static stress (i.e., constant or slowly changing with time) and at low temperatures relative to the melting temperature of the material. The applied stress may be tensile, compressive, shear or torsional. Two fracture modes are possible: ductile and brittle. The classification is based on the ability of a material to experience plastic deformation. Ductile materials typically exhibit substantial plastic deformation with high energy absorption before fracture. Normally it is observed that there is little or no plastic deformation with low energy absorption accompanying a brittle fracture It is difficult to comminute powders below certain sizes owing to flow supervening fracture in small sizes. Kendall Below When the particle size is below Another fundamental problem arises from determination of It might be more convenient to make a direct assessment of the brittle/ductile transition by compression of single polycrystals. This has been done in the present study in order to assess the size range below which the particles are ductile. Ibuprofen was chosen as model substance because of its high The brittle/ductile transition of a solid is supposed to affect the milling result of solid. Ibuprofen was wet-milled in a Micros Ring Mill in order to compare the resulting particle size with Ibuprofen, Ph.Eur. quality, sucrose, Ph.Eur. quality, ethanol (96%), polysorbate 80. Size fractions of ibuprofen were prepared by sieving in the following fractions: Above 800 μm, between 710 and 800 μm, between 500 and 710 μm, between 355 and 500 μm, and between 125 and 355 μm. Compression of single polycrystals was made in a rheometer (Rheometrics, Solid Analyser RSA 2). The strain rate was 0.01 s The wet-milling took place in a super fine mill (Micros-0, Nara Maschinery) which consists of the following parts ( A main shaft rotating in a vessel. Six sub-shafts which are attached by metal plates to the main shafts. Six sub-collars attached loosely around the sub-shafts. 19 small rings loosely fixed on each of the sub-collars. The mill has three grinding zones: between the rings and the vessel wall, between the sub-collars and the rings and between sub-shafts and sub-collars. In all three grinding zones, shear and compression forces are present. Since the largest surface is the outer wall where most of grinding takes place, the energy consumption will be biggest in this zone and the other two zones are of minor importance and therefore neglected. The compression force The suspension of micronised ibuprofen in water and sucrose in ethanol was obtained by wet-milling. Samples for particle size determination were taken out after 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128 and 256 min. The product temperature during the milling was between 20°C and 28°C. Sucrose was only milled at 1200 rpm, whereas ibuprofen was milled at 600, 1200 and 1800 rpm. The measurement of the particle size was made by laser diffraction (Mastersizer S, Malvern Instruments). Before measuring 0.5% polysorbate 80 was added to ensure dispersion of the particles. Each result is an average of 4 independent measurements. Because the Mastersizer uses Mie theory, the refractive indices of the sample and the medium where it is dispersed, are required. The refractive indices for the sample consist of a real- and an imaginary part. Refractive indices used for ibuprofen are (1.4346, 0.1000) and for sucrose (1.5380, 0.0100). For water and ethanol, they are 1.3300 and 1.3600, respectively. The average diameter  It is expected that milling of sucrose results in smaller particles, because of the smaller  Generally, materials in the brittle state fracture in a non-reproducible manner which also is shown in the above figures. These compression experiments are only a qualitative way to decide if the crystals fracture. A smooth force–time curve means that no fracture occurs, while it gives rise to “notches” on the curve when the crystal breaks under the load. It is clear from the compression experiments that a brittle/ductile transition is reached for the sizes between 125 and 355 μm. This size range is much lower than the Wet milling results into particles that are much smaller than It is shown that direct compression of single polycrystals can be used to assess the brittle/ductile transition of ibuprofen. The particles become ductile in a size range much lower than the critical diameter derived from data from the mechanical properties. Wet milling of ibuprofen by Micros-0 mill results in particles being much smaller than the critical diameter obtained from the compression due to the ductile fracture caused by shear stresses in the mill. The changes in particle size during wet milling show that ibuprofen passes through a minimum in contrast to the brittle sucrose particles. It is supposed that size enlargement of the ductile particles proceeds because of effects of impacts. The authors would like to thank Mike Newton and co-workers at School of Pharmacy, University of London, for introduction to the experimental work with mechanical properties.