The present work represents a significant new approach in the field of thermal spraying to deposit nanostructured phase-pure α-Al2O3 coatings in a single step. In order to understand the mechanism of coating formation, a detailed investigation of in flight formed particles and splat morphologies has been carried out. A plausible deposition mechanism has been proposed based on the understanding derived from the above studies that can form the basis for developing novel ceramic coatings employing the solution precursor plasma spray technique.Thermally sprayed alumina coatings find wide-ranging applications by virtue of their inherent wear and corrosion resistance and attractive dielectric and diffusion barrier properties. Conventionally, spray pyrolysis based techniques have been used for synthesis of various nanostructured ceramic powders. The absence of any significant effort devoted to generation of Al It is reasonable to anticipate that formation of α-Al The aluminum acetate, used as the precursor for Al Thermo-gravimetric analysis of the precursor and in flight formed particulates was carried out using a thermal analyzer (Model: STA 449F3, NETZSCH, Germany) under oxygen atmosphere up to 1400 The sequence of events leading to eventual Al It is well-known that acetic acid gives off substantial amount of heat energy during combustion, reportedly 1.83 During SPPS coating deposition, the in flight formation of particles and their subsequent heat-up and acceleration to ensure good splat formation upon impact with the substrate are key factors determining the microstructure of the coating as well as its characteristics. Subsequent to the injection of precursor droplets just downstream of the plasma gun nozzle, energy transfer between the plasma and droplets takes place and several events involving solvent vaporization, fragmentation, pyrolysis, particle formation and melting could occur before the droplets/particles (depending upon the process conditions) impact the substrate to form a coating. In conventional plasma spraying, in-flight particle diagnostic tools can provide intrinsic details of the particle status at the time of impact, in terms of its velocity, diameter and surface temperature. The BET surface area of the in flight formed particles was found to be high (around 75 In a vast majority of cases, the in flight formed particles were found to be hollow as evident from the SEM micrograph in The in flight formed Al XRD analysis of the in flight formed particles revealed the presence of various transition alumina phases as shown in It is pertinent to note that monitoring phase changes that occur during the TG/DTA analysis can also be extremely informative, as already demonstrated by the authors elsewhere. The above results clearly suggest the promise of the SPPS route to provide an exciting pathway for deposition of at least predominantly α-Al Consistent with the main objective of this study of highlighting the possibility of achieving phase pure α-Al The deposition of a phase pure, nanostructured and thick α-Al A proposed mechanism depicted in From the morphological observations discussed previously, it is clear that the Al The heat flux from the plasma torch during subsequent passes and the impact of the incoming particles assist in coalescence of the molten splats and fragmented particles to achieve improved consolidation of the prior deposited layer. However, complete densification and sintering is challenging because of the voids within the microstructure. It is plausible that utilization of a significant portion of the available energy to transform the deposits to α-Al The above cycle repeats itself during successive passes leading to formation of phase-pure α-Al In summary, the present study is devoted to generation of nanostructured and phase-pure Al The use of modified organic precursors is promising to augment the available plasma energy and, thereby, facilitate in flight Al A comprehensive study of in flight formed Al More crystalline powders compared to spray pyrolysis, with presence of higher transition phases (θ-Al Fully molten Al Continued exposure of the in flight formed particles to the high enthalpy plasma plume, which is akin to an heat-treatment (with a similar effect as conventional post-treatment), results in formation of phase-pure α-Al The plausible mechanism of coating formation is described based on the study of in flight formed particles, splats and coating microstructure. The authors would like to thank Director, ARCI for his kind permission to publish this work. The support extended by Dr. Y. Srinivasa Rao, Dr. Joydip Joardar, Mr. M. Ramakrishna, Mr. A. Sathyanarayana, Mr. GVR. Reddy, Mr. L. Venkatesh and Mr. K. Ramesh Reddy during experimental studies and characterization is gratefully acknowledged.