To reduce cost of Monte Carlo (MC) simulations for time-consuming processes, Bayesian Monte Carlo (BMC) is introduced in this paper. The BMC method reduces number of realizations in MC according to the desired accuracy level. BMC also provides a possibility of considering more priors. In other words, different priors can be integrated into one model by using BMC to further reduce cost of simulations. This study suggests speeding up the simulation process by considering the logical dependence of neighboring points as prior information. This information is used in the BMC method to produce a predictive tool through the simulation process. The general methodology and algorithm of BMC method are presented in this paper. The BMC method is applied to the simplified break water model as well as the finite element model of 17th Street Canal in New Orleans, and the results are compared with the MC and Dynamic Bounds methods.In the framework of determining reliability of complex systems, we will focus our attention in this paper on the Monte Carlo methods. This is necessary because Monte Carlo methods are flexible and more suited for dealing with complicated problems. The Monte Carlo family of methods includes the so-called variance optimization schemes for improving the computational efficiency. Among these the most widely used are the importance sampling (IS), explained in In general, which Monte Carlo simulation is widely considered to be among the most robust and most generally applicable method for the reliability analysis of engineering structures. The Monte Carlo technique considers each simulation independent of the previous simulations. The absence of systematic errors and the fact that its error analysis is well-understood are properties that many competing methods lack. A drawback, however, is the often large number of runs needed, particularly in complex models, where each run may entail a finite element analysis or other time consuming procedure. Variance reduction methods may be applied to reduce simulation cost as was reviewed above. In this paper, we describe a method to reduce the simulation cost, while retaining the accuracy of Monte Carlo. Here, we present a method to speed up the simulation process by producing a predictive and judgmental tool. Having this tool, we will be able to predict the response of model or conclude with certainty that if the sample is to be accepted or rejected. We achieve this by implementing some logical dependence among neighboring pixels (points). This is obtained considering the fact that each randomly generated point may be estimated by its neighboring pixels (points). This implementation is done by using the Bayesian technique which is, in fact, based on the Bayesian interpolation in This study requires a background of Bayesian techniques as well as Monte Carlo methods. The Bayesian approach is well described in The layout of this paper as follows. To start modeling the problem, we assume that there is a signal The univariate probability density function (PDF) for an arbitrary pixel, given the data There are some logical dependence among neighboring pixels and this expectation is translated in the following model, Therefore, It is important to attend to the difference between We substitute Eqs. The boundary pixels are treated separately. In fact, these two pixels are assigned to the first and last position and presented as If  Apart from the model and prior, we also have The posterior can be obtained by using the product rule, The model error regarding the prior information was described with a parameter As a result of Eq. Given the fact that most of the times neither value of We would like to integrate out the parameter Based on the aforementioned mathematical formulation, description of the BMC method is the following. Given is a limit state equation Here the algorithm is described for the BMC method. To begin, we consider the ideas of BMC algorithm by looking at a one-dimensional example. We consider a one-dimensional limit state equation Reverting to dimension Summarizing, the algorithm is as follows: Having a Our prior information that comes from previous simulations and the target pixel are sorted in each dimension of the LSE space in order to generate the interaction matrices. The JPDF of output variable corresponding to the target pixel ( Having the JPDF of output variable and according to the accepted tolerance criterion ( Repeat until the Monte Carlo requirements are obtained.  Here, we apply the BMC method to a one-dimensional and two-dimensional versions of the break water model presented in One-dimensional LSE of break water model is presented by Eq. To examine change of accuracy during the BMC simulations, we monitor a certain pixel ( A two-dimensional break water model is presented in Eq. We apply the BMC method to the 17th Street Flood Wall in New Orleans as a case study to demonstrate its applicability to a real world problem. The 17th Street Flood Wall is an I-wall located on the east side of the 17th Street Canal in New Orleans. It was breached during Hurricane Katrina when the surge level reached about 8.0 feet. This was a typical failure of the flood walls that occurred in New Orleans. The flood walls were constructed on a concrete cap, and sheet piles that penetrated into the dike as is depicted in The materials of the levee in the 17 Street Flood Wall from top down were two layers of clay, a thick layer of marsh (peat), followed by two layers of mixed clay and Gray clay laid over a thick sand layer. Additionally, there was a thin layer of sensitive clay located between the marsh and intermix zone. The normal water level on the left hand side is +1 foot (0.3 Different failure scenarios for this structure were investigated and sliding was found to be the main mechanism of the failure for the 17th Street Flood Wall The water pressure on the flood wall at the water level +6 ft is the driving force. The Gaussian variation of variables soil models for the 17th Street Flood Wall is considered according to In this application, we also consider the implementation of BMC method with three influential variables to investigate the behavior of 17th Street Flood Wall and estimate its probability of failure. These first three influential variables were determined based on the product moment correlation ( In the finite element Plaxis model, we can investigate the stability or collapse of a model on the basis of maximum deformation. We define safety factor as a ratio between resistance and driving forces. To calculate the safety factor for a stable condition, the resistant parameters, mainly are incrementally reduced until the model fails. The ratio for the reduction is considered as a safety factor. When the model is not stable, the ratio of loading is considered as the equivalent safety factor. This is accomplished by gradually increasing the load until the model collapses. The percentage of loading that leads to a collapse is the safety factor. On the base of calculated safety factors, we apply the BMC method to the 17th Street Flood Wall model in order to reduce the number of finite element realizations required for the safety assessment of the flood wall. In this paper, the Bayesian Monte Carlo (BMC) method is thoroughly described. It is shown the approach to integrate previous simulations as a prior information to the current simulation using the Bayesian method. The BMC method maintains the interesting properties of MC and increases the efficiency by considering the prior information that becomes gradually available by progression of simulations. The prior is based on the logical dependence among neighboring pixels. This means that if for instance two random points are very close to each other and the response of LSE in other neighbor points confirm that it is highly probable for this point to have a close response, we proceed in BMC without the realization of LSE. The results of applying BMC method are shown with numerical examples and compared with other techniques. These show that the BMC method is a robust technique that can be applied to complex structures. The novel BMC method proposed in this paper can be integrated with finite elements model or the other highly complicated and time consuming processes. The proposed BMC method also provides basis for implementing the informative priors of models. The suggested method is not limited to the number of variables or presence of correlation between variables. However, further studies on integrable priors as well as correlation between variables will supply a higher efficiency. For failure assessment of simple problems, the BMC method will require more computations than the classical Monte Carlo. Further study is recommended to increase the efficiency of BMC method and reduce the computational burden. The authors of this paper are grateful for the reviewers constructive comments and remarks and appreciate their time and effort.