Alunite was considered as a potential alternative resource for potassium and alumina production. The disintegration of alunite was a principal step to extract valuable components and therefore was highly relevant to great and efficient utilization. In this research, the phase transformation and kinetics of alunite during thermal decomposition were examined. The results showed that increasing the calcination temperature was beneficial to the decomposition of alunite. The soluble potassium salt K2SO4 was recovered by water leaching after calcination. The recovery ratio of K reached 83.9% after calcined at 900 °C for 2 h, and the purity of K2SO4 was 83.77%. A crystal structure disintegration mechanism of KAl3(SO4)2(OH)6 was proposed on the basis of the phase transformation sequences characterized by XRD and FTIR. Dehydroxylation was attributed to the breakage of the AlOH and (Al)OH bonds. [AlO4] tetrahedrons in alunite were transformed into [AlO6] octahedrons. The S-O linkages between [SO4] tetrahedron and [AlO6] octahedron were broken during desulphation. Then the staged kinetics of alunite decomposition was studied by thermo-gravimetric analysis using the Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose method. The apparent activation energies of dehydroxylation and desulphation were determined.The potash fertilizer was essential and largely consumed for agricultural use Natural potassium alunite mainly consisted of K, Al, and S, which can be recovered in the form of K For hydrometallurgy methods, alunite was calcined and transformed into the soluble potassium and aluminum salts, which were subsequently separated and recovered by leaching and filtration Therefore, dehydroxylation and desulfurization by calcination are usually the principal steps for the beneficiation of alunite. The key problem of alunite decomposition is to promote the disintegration of the S-O-Al framework structure in KAl The aim of this study was to investigate the thermal behavior of alunite. The disintegration mechanisms of alunite were clarified by characterization of the phase and structure transformation of sulphoaluminate. Then the staged reaction kinetics of alunite decomposition was studied using a non-isothermal method, and the activation energy was determined as a function of the conversion degree. Natual alunite ore used in the experiments was provided by Zijin Mining Group in the Fujian province of China. The alunite samples were crushed and milled in a rod mill. Ore powders with an average particle size <74 μm were prepared by sieving. The mineral phase and composition of alunite are listed in  Thermal decomposition experiment The thermal decomposition experiment was conducted in a tube furnace at temperatures ranging from 400 to 1000 °C in N Water leaching and crystallization In order to evaluate the contents of the soluble K, the calcined samples were leached by deionized water at 30 °C for 1 h in a Jacketed PMMA reactor. The solid-liquid ratio and the stirring speed were 1:10 (g/ml) and 300 rpm, respectively. Then the leaching solution containing the soluble K salt was separated by filtration. The concentration of K in the filtrate was determined by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Perkine-Elmer OPTIMA 3000, USA). Finally, the recovery ratio of K ( After filtration, the leaching residual was separated and dried at 110 °C for 24 h. The filtrate was concentrated and crystallized by evaporation at 80 °C, and the crystallized product was collected. The chemical and phase compositions of the crystallized product and the leaching residual were analyzed by ICP-AES, XRD and X-ray fluorescence (XRF, AXIOS-MAX, The Netherlands). Thermal decomposition kinetics The thermal decomposition kinetics of alunite was investigated by thermo-gravimetric analysis based on a non-isothermal method. Simultaneous thermo-gravimetric (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were performed using a thermo-gravimetric analyzer (STA-409C NETZSCH, Germany), where the mass loss of the sample was measured. For a typical test, about 20 mg of the alunite sample (<74 μm) was heated in a corundum crucible from ambient temperature to 1000 °C at the heating rates of 5, 10, 15, and 20 °C/min under N The effect of the calcination temperature on the recovery ratio of K was investigated at temperatures ranging from 400 to 1000 °C. All samples were calcined for 2 h. When the temperature was <500 °C, the recovery ratio of K slightly increased with a value below 5%, indicating that little soluble K was recovered ( To further investigate the existing state of K salt, the calcined products at 900 °C were leached by deionized water (solid-liquid ratio 1:10, g/mL) at 30 °C. After filtration, the filtrate was concentrated and crystallized, and the crystallized product was collected. The XRD patterns of the calcined products and the leaching residual are shown in To investigate the decomposition mechanisms of alunite, the calcined samples were analyzed to identify the phase transformation at each temperature stage of the reaction. The XRD patterns of the alunite samples calcined at 500, 600, 700 800, 900 °C for 2 h are shown in When the calcination temperature was >700 °C, the peak intensity of K FTIR experiments were carried out to investigate the structures of S-O-Al and –OH in KAl The peaks at 796 cm The peaks at 1080-1120 cm The thermo-gravimetric analysis was used to evaluate the kinetics of alunite thermal decomposition. The TG and DTA curves of alunite ore at the heating rates of 5, 10, 15, and 20 °C/min are shown in For the Stage II, the second mass loss and endothermic peak appeared at about 700–850 °C. It was due to the emission of SO The total mass loss ratios of the two stages were about 11.23% and 28.73%, which were in agreement with the theoretical values of 13.04% for dehydroxylation and 29.01% for desulphation, respectively. In order to determine the kinetics parameters based on the TG data, the degree of conversion ( Kinetics analysis of thermally stimulated reactions is traditionally expected to produce an adequate kinetics description of the process in terms of the reaction model and of the Arrhenius parameters using a solid-solid kinetics equation In the TG process at a constant heating rate, the reaction temperature is a function of time, thus: The expression of Many methods were carried out to derive the approximation of the temperature integral. To derive the approximation suited for an isoconversion method, the function of This approximation led to the Kissinger–Akahira–Sunose (KAS) method Substitute Eq. At a constant degree of conversion, the relationship of According to Eq. In the present study, four heating rates (5, 10, 15, and 20 °C/min) were used to evaluate the relationship between the activation energy ( The degrees of conversion ranging from 0.1 to 0.9 were selected for the kinetic analysis in Stage I and Stage II. Substituting the data of TG into Eq. The relationship of the apparent activation energy and the degree of conversion was shown in In this paper, the process of recovering the soluble K salt from alunite by thermal decomposition was investigated. The decomposition mechanisms and kinetics were analyzed. The following conclusions can be drawn: Increasing the calcination temperature was beneficial to the decomposition of alunite. The soluble potassium salt K A disintegration mechanism of crystal structure in KAl In the dehydroxylation stage, the activation energy decreased from 549.4 to 237 kJ/mol when the degree of conversion increased from 0.1 to 0.9. In the desulphation stage, the activation energy was 153.9–242.8 kJ/mol and reached a maximum value at the degrees of conversion between 0.4 and 0.7. This work was financially supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Details about the data of kinetics and linear regression analysis are given in Table 1S and 2S in Supporting Materials. Supplementary data related to this article can be found at