Osteoblasts are a main target for the steroid 1α,25(OH)2-Vitamin D3 (1,25D3), where a major outcome is the modulation of the bone remodeling process. 1,25D3 deficiency leads to clinical disorders such as osteomalacia and osteoporosis, characterized by a state of insufficiently calcified tissue and bone loss, respectively. In the osteoblast nucleus, 1,25D3 modulates gene transcription for the synthesis of bone matrix proteins via the Vitamin D receptor (VDR). At the plasma membrane level, 1,25D3 potentiates ion channel functions, activates signal transduction pathways, and increases cytoplasmic calcium concentrations. So far, no clear physiological significance has been attributed to membrane-initiated 1,25D3 actions in single cells. To investigate if (a) 1,25D3 is a modulatory agent of secretion in osteoblasts and (b) the classical VDR is involved in rapid electrical events in the cell membrane, we studied hormone effects on ion channel activities in relation to exocytosis in osteoblasts isolated from VDR knockout (KO) and wild-type (WT) mice. This paper is a retrospect of the electrophysiological studies done in our laboratory to date. We found that 1,25D3-promoted ion channel responses are coupled to secretion in calvarial osteoblasts, and develop only in the presence of a functional nuclear steroid VDR. This 1,25D3-regulated exocytosis in osteoblasts, which takes place within minutes of hormone application, seems to be the natural complement of genomic actions that evolve at a longer time scale. The absence of both 1,25D3 membrane and nuclear effects in VDR KO osteoblasts may explain bone abnormalities typically found in VDR KO mice.Osteoblasts, the bone-forming cells, are secretory cells. They constitutively secrete collagenous and noncollagenous matrix proteins at different stages during cell differentiation, and are in charge of the mineralization of the bone Bone is one of the main targets for the steroid hormone 1α,25(OH) We have shown that physiological nanomolar concentrations of 1,25D The main purpose of this paper is to summarize the current state of understanding on the molecular mechanisms underlying nongenomic actions of 1,25D 1,25D Mice carrying a wild-type (WT) and a functionally KO VDR gene were a kind gift from S. Kato, University of Tokyo, Japan All animal study protocols were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of California, Riverside. Osteoblast primary cultures were established from VDR WT and KO mice basically as described before ROS 17/2.8 cells (kindly provided by M.C. Farach-Carson) were cultured under the same conditions described for primary calvarial osteoblasts. For patch-clamp experiments, cells were plated at low density in 35-mm tissue culture dishes. Prior to recordings, the cells were washed at least three times with the external recording solution to remove the medium completely. Cells were used for patch-clamp recordings within the first 4 days after each passage. Whole-cell patch-clamp experiments Patch-clamp recordings were performed with a Heka EPC-9 amplifier (ALA Scientific Instruments, Inc., Westbury, NY). Patch pipettes of about 2 Changes in whole-cell capacitance, a measure of exocytosis  Our most recent efforts aimed at further elucidating these multiple molecular pathways for 1,25D To investigate if there is a common molecular pathway underlying the multiple mechanisms of ion channel modulation by 1,25D The addition of 5 We described for the first time that physiological nanomolar concentrations of 1,25D  Cells that express a functional VDR ( On the other hand, cells lacking a functional VDR ( Although the exact molecular mechanisms of a cross-talk between 1,25D We wish to thank Dr S. Kato for the VDR WT and KO mouse couples to initiate our mouse colony; Dr James C. Fleet (Purdue University) for helpful advice on the mouse genotyping; and Dr D. Carter for the use of the confocal microscopy facilities. This work was supported by USPHS grant (AWN) DK-09012-038.