Bioleaching is an economical method for the recovery of metals that requires low investment and operation costs. Furthermore, it is generally more environmentally friendly than many physicochemical metal extraction processes. The bioleaching of chalcopyrite in shake flasks was investigated with pure and mixed cultures of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans, Acidithiobacillus caldus, and Leptospirillum ferriphilum. The mixed cultures containing both iron- and sulfur-oxidizing bacteria were more efficient than the pure culture alone. The presence of sulfur-oxidizing bacteria positively increased the dissolution rate and the percentage recovery of copper from chalcopyrite. Mixed cultures consisting of moderately thermophilic L. ferriphilum and A. caldus leached chalcopyrite more effectively than mesophilic A. ferrooxidans pure and mixed cultures. The decrease of the chalcopyrite dissolution rate in leaching systems containing A. ferrooxidans after 12–16 days coincided with the formation of jarosite precipitation as a passivation layer on the mineral surface during bioleaching. Low pH significantly reduces jarosite formation in pure and mixed cultures of L. ferriphilum and A. caldus.The solubilization of metals by the application of microorganisms from the mineral ores and the subsequent recovery of metals from solution are referred to as bioleaching ( Microorganisms are important in metal recovery from sulfide ores, particularly in large-scale heap or tank aeration processes for commercial application. In processes that operate from ambient temperatures to about 35–45 Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The objectives of the current study were: (1) to compare the rates of chalcopyrite dissolution in shake flasks by pure and mixed cultures of   The mineral sample used in the experiments contained about 95% chalcopyrite and 5% galena. Chemical analyses showed the ore contained 23.20%Fe, 31.91% Cu, and 27.14% S. The mineral was crushed, and then passed through a sieve with a pore size of 75 Bioleaching tests were carried out in 250 Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed twice in distilled water adjusted to pH 2.0 with sulfuric acid. The cells were then suspended in basal salts medium without energy sources. Bioleaching experiments at 30 For the experiments with abiotic controls at 40 Aliquots of leachate were sampled and copper concentration was determined by atomic absorption spectrometry within 32 days of incubation. The ferrous iron concentration was determined by titration with potassium dichromate (K Comparison of chalcopyrite leaching at 30 Comparison of chalcopyrite leaching at 40 For the pure culture of Scanning electron micrographs of the chalcopyrite surface prior to leaching are shown in The surface morphology resulting from the exposure to bacteria was different from that resulting from the abiotic control. As illustrated in In order to examine the role of jarosite in the passivation of chalcopyrite during bioleaching, jarosite formation was confirmed via analysis of XRD patterns ( When the same quantity of chalcopyrite was oxidized, the mixed culture Chalcopyrite as acid-soluble metal sulfides is probably dissolved by the ferric ions and proton attack ( The ferrous ions formed in the leaching reaction are oxidized by the following reaction: The elemental sulfur formed in the above reaction can be oxidized to sulfate by bacteria in the following reaction: In addition to the bioleaching process, there was another possible mechanism of increasing the leaching rate of chalcopyrite directly by acid in the following reaction ( Ferric ions readily precipitate as basic sulfates such as jarosite during the leaching process. The acid dissolution (Eq. The presence of the sulfur-oxidizing bacteria The main parameter affecting jarosite formation was pH ( Furthermore, moderately thermophilic bacteria, in comparison to mesophilic bacteria, improved the bioleaching of chalcopyrite. Iron-oxidizing This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 50621063), the China National Basic Research Program (No. 2004CB619204).