High-pressure comminution is regarded as an important technology in grinding circuits primarily because it offers considerable energy savings. HPGRs can only be operated energy efficient under choke feeding condition in which a material bed is formed between the rollers that improve the interparticle breakage. The slow load application to the particles causes the structural collapse of the grains which minimize energy losses such as heat and noise. To increase the amount of fines in the product (cake) of HPGR, the recycling load can be used up to some extent and a higher pressure gradient along the roller width is obtained. This application may result in compact flakes containing more fines. An extensive testwork was performed with an industrial HPGR unit in a cement plant in Turkey to elucidate the effects of recycling load together with the operational parameters on HPGR's performance. For this purpose the recycling load of the circuit was changed as in different ratios to the fresh feed flow rate during the testwork. Six different tests were performed and for each test, samples were collected from HPGR total feed and discharge in the steady state condition. After sampling campaigns, the particle size distributions of all samples were determined and mass balancing around the circuit was performed. Capacity, pressure and gap relationships were investigated. According to the data acquired, it was shown that the reduction ratio of the HPGR is getting higher with the recycling load for the same specific motor output power. The flake thickness indicates the same situation, as well. More compacted flakes were produced for higher recycling load ratios.The development of high pressure grinding rolls has been offered as a promising new comminution technology with claims of improved performance relative to conventional grinding technology especially rod and ball mill circuits. The various circuit configurations were derived to achieve a reduction in overall specific energy consumption, by transferring more of the grinding required for the HPGR. An HPGR unit can well be applied as a stand-alone unit, in open circuit to replace conventional 3rd and 4th crusher stages or rod milling, or as a pre-grinding stage ahead of, for instance, ball milling ( An extensive testwork was performed with an industrial HPGR unit in a cement plant in Turkey. HPGR total feed composed of clinker, limestone and pozzolana. Simplified flowsheet of the HPGR circuit is given in During the testwork, a specific amount of whole HPGR product was recycled as recycling load. The amount of the recycling load was changed as in different ratios to the fresh feed flow rate in order to identify the effect of the recycling load ratio on the HPGR performance. Six different tests were conducted on the circuit. For each test, samples were collected from HPGR total feed and discharge in the steady state condition. After sampling campaigns, the particle size distributions of all samples were determined and mass balancing around the circuit was performed. Determination of particle size distributions of samples was carried out in two steps. First of all, the samples were screened down to 150 The relationship between the operating parameters such as capacity, operating pressure, roll gap, flake thickness and their effects on HPGR performance is discussed in this section. Particle size distributions of the products of all tests are given in  Energy-size reduction relationships are useful for comparing the comminution efficiencies of various comminution systems. For material size distributions, the median size is a valid and meaningful measure of the product fineness and it is inversely proportional to a specific surface area; and, therefore, the reduction ratio, which is defined as the ratio of the feed median size, d To investigate the effect of the recycling load ratio on the grinding performance, Tests 2, 3, and 4 were performed with the possible closest throughput tonnage while the recycling loads were different. It was seen that, total HPGR feed became finer with the increasing recycling load. The size distributions of the HPGR total feed and product for Tests 2 to 4 are given in The relationship between recycling load ratio and cake thickness for Tests 2, 3, and 4 is shown in An analysis of the comminution of coarse-fine admixtures of feeds in confined particle beds ( In selecting a profitable flow sheet for HPGR and efficient operation in a plant, the feed size distribution is needed to be controlled by the recycle ratio or the quantity of fines. In other words, the utilization of energy depends greatly on the uniformity of the particle bed. In many cases the HPGR performance can be increased by optimizing the recycle ratio. In this study, operating parameters and their relationship were defined for an open circuit HPGR. It was found that the operating parameters were related to each other either directly or indirectly. It is clear that this relationship affects the performance of HPGR. Industrial data results showed that the amount of recycling load has an effect on the performance of the HPGR in terms of the size reduction, increased with the recycling load ratio.