In an earlier study [Hydrometallurgy 58 (2000) 193], detailed kinetic work on dissolution of Co3O4 in an ammoniacal system using SO2 as the reductant was carried out. It was observed that under certain experimental conditions, Co(II) becomes unstable and precipitates as Co(NH3)4S2O6·2H2O. With a view to study the precipitation behavior of Co in the Co3O4–NH3–SO2 system, the present systematic work was done. A 23 factorial design was used to study the effects of three leaching parameters, i.e., NH3, SO2 and temperature on the dissolution and the precipitation of Co(II). The conditions for maximum Co precipitation were then chosen to study the effect of various parameters such as time and temperature of storage and initial cobalt concentration on extent of precipitation. It was observed that an increase in storage time and initial cobalt concentration increased the precipitation of Co(II). With a decrease in storage temperature, an increase in Co(II) precipitation was observed. In order to minimize the Co precipitation, the effect of addition of ammonium sulphate was studied. The increase in ammonium sulphate concentration from nil to 280 g L−1 resulted in a decrease of cobalt precipitation from 58% to 5%.Cobalt is known to form a soluble hexammine complex in ammonia. During an earlier work The Co It has been reported Depending on the reaction conditions cobalt will be present in the leach solution as soluble hexammine or as a dithionate complex which tends to precipitate on cooling of the leach solutions. Various parameters which influence the Co(II) precipitation would be ammonia, ammonium sulphite and initial cobalt concentration, time and temperature of storing the leach liquors. To study the effect of storage time, the dissolution of cobalt was carried out under the following conditions: pulp density, 5%; temperature 391 K, ammonia and SO In an earlier study The effect of storage temperature on the precipitation of cobalt (II) during cooling of the leach liquor obtained under standard conditions is shown in To study the effect of initial cobalt concentration, the dissolution experiments were carried out by varying the amount of Co  The experimental results of the behavior of Co(II) in leach solutions obtained after a reductive aqueous dissolution of Co (a) The precipitation of Co(II) increases with an increase in storage time up to 72 h after which the storage time has no effect. (b) The study on effect of various parameters for maximum extraction and precipitation of Co through 2 (c) With the increase in initial Co concentration from 3.66 to 8.1 g L (d) The precipitation of Co(II) decreases with an increase in ammonium sulphate concentration. (e) The conditions for minimum cobalt precipitation (∼5%) are: leaching temperature, 391 K; (NH The authors are thankful to the Department of Ocean Development (DOD) for their financial support to this project and for providing Ms. Mamata Mohapatra with a Junior Research Fellowship. The authors wish to thank the Director of The Regional Research Laboratory for his kind permission to publish this paper.