The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of adding a jarosite–alunite chemical precipitate, a waste product of a new hydrometallurgical process developed to treat economically low-grade nickel oxides ores, in the raw meal for the production of sulfoaluminate cement clinker. For that reason, two samples of raw meals were prepared, one contained 20% gypsum, as a reference sample ((SAC)Ref) and another with 11.31% jarosite–alunite precipitate ((SAC)J/A). Both raw meals were sintered at 1300°C. The results of chemical and mineralogical analyses as well as the microscopic examination showed that the use of the jarosite–alunite precipitate did not affect the mineralogical characteristics of the so produced sulfoaluminate cement clinker and there was confirmed the formation of the sulfoaluminate phase (C4A3
                     
                        
                           
                              S
                              ¯
                           
                        
                     ), the most typical phase of this cement type. Furthermore, both clinkers were tested by determining the grindability, setting time, compressive strength and expansibility. The hydration products were examined by XRD analysis at 2, 7, 28 and 90 days. The results of the physico-mechanical tests showed that the addition of jarosite–alunite precipitate did not negatively affect the quality of the produced cement.The general trend of today for the industrial wastes or by-products, which are produced in industrial countries, is to examine alternative ways for their exploitation in order to eliminate cost of disposal and avoid soil and water contamination. Many of these undesirable industrial materials contain significant amounts of inorganic ingredients, such as oxides of silicon, aluminum, calcium and iron, which, at suitable combinations, can be used in the production of either Portland cement clinker or other special cement types. Such a material is a crystalline chemical precipitate, consisting of basic sulfate salts of iron, aluminum and chromium of the jarosite–alunite types. The jarosite–alunite group of isostructural minerals is described by the general formula M(Fe The precipitate is produced at some stage of a new hydrometallurgical process It is well known that various industrial wastes, such as metallurgical slags, fly ash, glass, ceramics from the electronic industry, spent catalysts from refineries, sludge from waste water treatment and others, have been successfully used in clinker production On the other hand, the manufacture of Portland cement consumes not only a vast amount of energy but generates also undesirable CO The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of using the jarosite–alunite precipitate as a raw material for the production of sulfoaluminate cement clinker. For that reason, two samples of raw meals were prepared, one contained 20% gypsum, as a reference sample ((SAC) Six runs were conducted to produce the jarosite–alunite precipitate, according to the method developed by the Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens, in order to remove the aluminum and chromium from laterite leach solutions, in a crystalline and filterable form The sintering process applied was common for the production of both types of cement clinkers. The raw meals were shaped in small spheres, with a diameter of 2 The chemical analysis of the feed solution used for the production of the jarosite–alunite precipitate was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Perkin-Elmer Model 4100) and it is shown in The clinkers microstructure was examined by optical microscopy. The microscopic observation of the polished impregnated samples was achieved using a Jenapol optical microscope in reflected light. Their mineralogical phases were determined by XRD analysis, using a Siemens D5000 diffractometer with nickel-filtered Cu Kα The clinkers were continuously crushed and ground in a Bond ball mill to a specific surface area of about 3950 Compressive strength measurements were conducted at the ages of 2, 7, 28 and 90 days on mortar prisms (dimensions 40 For the study of the hydration products, the cement pastes were prepared by mixing 300 The results of particle size distributions by a laser scattering analyzer are given in The chemical analysis and the Bogues potential mineralogical composition of the sulfoaluminate cement produced are given in The XRD analyses of the produced sulfoaluminate cement clinkers are given in The microstructure of the sulfoaluminate cement clinkers was examined by optical microscopy in polished sections. The addition of the jarosite–alunite precipitate by 11.31% did not seem to affect its microstructure and the formation of its characteristic mineralogical phases ( The water requirement and setting time, determined by Vicat probe and Vicat needle apparatus, as well as the results of expansion are reported in The mortars of the samples under investigation were tested for compressive strengths after 2, 7, 28 and 90 days of curing. The obtained results are shown in The XRD patterns of the (SAC) The addition of jarosite–alunite precipitate by 11.31% in the raw meal did not affect either the sintering or the hydration process during sulfoaluminate cement production. More specifically, the sample with jarosite–alunite presented the following characteristics: C C The higher proportion of C The values for setting times, water content for standard consistency and expansion were similar to those obtained with the reference sulfoaluminate cement sample. The compressive strengths were at least as high as those of the reference sample during hydration. The authors are grateful to the General Secretariat for Research and Technology of Greece for financial support in the framework of the Program “Industrial Exploitation of the Solid Wastes Produced from Hydrometallurgical Treatment of Greek Laterites – PENED 99”. They also express their warmest thanks to Mr. J. Marinos, Director in Quality Assurance and R&D Manager of Hercules Cement Company of Greece, for his constant advice.