Calcaneal fractures result, in many cases, in, subtalar joint stiffness and severe disability. Diagnosis is usually made by X-ray, but more accurately by a computed tomography (CT) scan. In the last years, much has been known regarding its physiopathology and osteosynthesis. Although new developments in osteosynthesis materials have been made, calcaneus fractures still remains in dispute of those advocating non-operative treatment and those defending open reduction and internal fixation. Less invasive surgery, arthroscopy and three-dimensional (3D) fluoroscopy are very important for reduction accuracy and soft-tissue damage avoidance. In this article, the physiopathology, diagnosis, classification and treatment of calcaneus fractures are updated. Nevertheless, systematic reviews have shown no evidence about what treatment is better.Much has been known about the physiopathology of calcaneus fractures in the last years, thanks to the important contribution of digital X-rays and, particularly, computed tomography (CT) scan. However, although new developments in osteosynthesis materials have been made, calcaneus fractures still remain in dispute in terms of those advocating non-operative treatment and those defending open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Although new knowledge and implant developments have made ORIF, together with less invasive surgery, achieve better results than before, subtalar joint stiffness still will result in the majority of the cases. The anatomy of the calcaneus is very complex, as it has many different joint axes in three-dimensional orientations ( The posterior joint facet is convex, sloping posteromedially in its support of the talar body. The anterior and middle facets support the talar head and neck, and are flattened. The medial facet is supported by the sustentaculum tali, a hard bone process very interesting to be considered for screw purchase in case of osteosynthesis ( A groove divides the posterior and the complex anterior–middle facets. This groove has the insertion of the interosseous ligament. The lateral part of the groove is the floor of the sinus tarsi ( As the posterior subtalar joints is responsible for most of the eversion-inversion movement, and during inversion the midfoot joints are locked for gait, three-dimensional reconstruction of the whole calcaneus becomes of overwhelming importance. Swelling and deformity are the main diagnostic symptoms and signs. Soft-tissue situation must be examined thoroughly to avoid skin complications if surgical treatment is expected to be applied, as skin necrosis has been published to occur in up to 43% of patients.   Böhler's angle assesses calcaneal height and joint depression and Gissane's angle is indicative of anterior, middle and posterior facets’ relationship alteration.  The CT scan is, up to now, the most important diagnosis tool for the study of calcaneus fractures Precise fracture pattern analysis is one of the last pieces of knowledge obtained in calcaneus fractures. Intra-articular calcaneal fractures are generally provoked by a suddenly applied load to the heel. The fracture pattern depends on the position of the foot and the subtalar joint by the moment of the traumatism, its force and the bone quality. The inferior midcoronal portion and the lateral process of the talus hammer into Gissane's angle (   Some authors have also hypothesised that there are two primary fracture lines. One runs from Gissane's angle to the medial cortex, and another one to the anterior facet of the joint. More than a few classifications have been developed during the years, but essentially calcaneal fractures can be intra- or extra-articular. Extra-articular fractures affect either the anterior process – very rarely – or, most commonly, the tuberosity. The original easy classification by Essex-Lopresti into tongue-type and joint depression has persisted over the years. Sanders’ CT coronal slice-based prognostic classification is limited to the posterior face. According to this classification, the more comminution in the posterior facet, the worse the prognosis is. Sander's classification only considers CT coronal slices, missing some other projections for complexity. It does not consider displacement, osteocondral fractures and soft-tissue or tendon entrapment. Nonetheless, Sanders’ classification and Regazzoni's  Therefore, the most important concept we have learnt during the last years, concerning the management of calcaneus fractures, is that the three-dimensional calcaneus anatomy must be fully restored during the treatment, rather than only addressing the reduction to the posterior facet joint or height, length or axis restoration, although, as in any joint, more than 1–2 Valgus inclination stabilises the foot during gait, but varus deformity after fracture facilitates distal talar subluxation, lateralisation of the heel fat pad, overload of the tibialis posterior tendon and diminution of push-off efficiency during gait. Widening of the heel impedes the lateral malleolus and shoe wearing, making heel-width restitution very important; also, heel-height decrease (equinus deformity) greatly affects talar inclination with ankle impingement. Corrective osteotomies for varus malunion in extra-articular cases may do well, whereas in intra-articular fractures they remain unknown. A very important issue in the treatment of calcaneus fracture is soft tissue. Current surgical approaches and osteosynthesis materials are addressed to deal with soft tissue. Less-invasive surgery (LIS), arthroscopy and plastic-surgery procedures deal with this problem, and it looks advisable to address treatment by means of these, whenever risk for skin damage exists.   ORIF is the gold standard, and has its main indication in complex displaced intra-articular fractures that cannot be reduced by less invasive methods. By all means, ORIF is the best method of achieving anatomic joint reduction and calcaneus morphology restoration; however, soft-tissue complications are proportionally directed to the aggression magnitude of soft tissue and the reason why ORIF is not always accepted for every case, being usually performed when soft tissue has recovered from fracture trauma. Three different approaches have been in use for ORIF: lateral approach, medial approach and combined lateral and medial approach. The lateral approach either short or extended ( The medial approach has been also broadly described. Combined lateral and medial approaches are indicated whenever lateral and medial fragments need accurate reduction. Combined approaches are favoured by many authors. Osteosynthesis in ORIF is accomplished once the subtalar joint and the three-dimensional anatomy of the whole calcaneus have been neatly reconstructed. Osteosynthesis takes advantage of K wires, lag screws and plates, including the new locking plate technology. K wires work very well, but only for provisional stabilisation during surgery ( What is capital in calcaneus fracture osteosynthesis is the knowledge by the surgeon of the internal anatomy of the calcaneus to fix the screws into the bone safely and with good purchase In relation with soft-tissue problems, the compartmental syndrome although very rare, affecting only the 10% of calcaneus fractures, may be a devastating complication LISs try to avoid wound complications provoked by ORIF. They combine traction by a K wire together with percutaneous pin manipulation of fragments and osteosynthesis by K wires, cannulated screws or external fixation. In relation to fracture patterns, LIS may be a good option for extra-articular fractures Since with non-operative treatment subtalar joint reduction and calcaneus morphology reconstruction is not possible, and surgical treatment is associated with a high rate of complications, LIS appears to be an option for accurate reduction and minimisation of soft tissue complications in less severe fracture patterns. Hence, LISs are indicated in patients who otherwise would have only indication for non-operative treatment. Arthroscopy is one of the new tools in the current calcaneus fracture treatment armamentarium aimed at achieving better reductions with reliable stabilisation, but without interfering with soft-tissues physiology. Another indication of arthroscopy after a calcaneus fracture is the calcaneo-fibular impingement syndrome when the space between the tip of the fibula and the lateral wall of the calcaneus is decreased. The abnormal bony and soft tissue can be removed by a 2-portal endoscopic technique. Subtalar release or fusion can be added at the same time. In some patients, a 3-portal (anterolaterally, centrally and posterolaterally) approach may be needed, to gain access to the sinus tarsi, the lateral gutter and the posterior talocalcaneal facet. Persistent pain with mild, degenerative changes of the subtalar joint should also be considered an indication of arthroscopical debridement. The short-term results of arthroscopical treatment of calcaneus fractures are excellent, while long-term results with greater patient cohorts are unknown. As the main feature of calcaneus fracture is subtalar joint depression with underlying bone crush, reconstruction by lifting bone fragments to joint restoration leaves an important cavity ( Subtalar arthrodesis can lead to degenerative changes in the ankle joint; however, this is the most effective method for the treatment of residual pain, resulting in a high rate of patient satisfaction. Primary subtalar arthrodesis may be the choice for the treatment of markedly comminuted intra-articular Sanders type IV calcaneal fractures. Nevertheless, whereas some authors believe that there is no need for a previous ORIF to restore the normal Bohler and Gissane angles, some others claim that better functional outcomes and fewer wound complications are associated when ORIF of a displaced intra-articular calcaneal fracture is first performed; apparently, initial ORIF restores calcaneal shape, alignment and height, which facilitates the fusion procedure and establishes an opportunity to create a better, long-term, functional result. As, usually, in any arthrodesis, the subtalar arthrodesis technique must combine a hardware system for bone fixation together with a biological substance to enhance bone formation. A wide range of techniques has been described to achieve subtalar fusion. Minimally invasive surgery trying to minimise the risk of malpositioning the screws has a lower rate of complications Either as a primary operation or after reduction, subtalar distraction bone-block arthrodesis for malunited calcaneal fractures is usually necessary after 1–2 Operative versus non-operative treatment has been a long-lasting discussion in the orthopaedic community. Many studies support either treatment. However, when these papers have been studied in depth, methodology represent a burden for trusting definite conclusions; also, stratification of variables makes patient groups representation very difficult. The current trend point for surgical management is LIS. As problems of surgery are very much related to soft tissue, the percutaneous technique would minimise surgical complications. Although the tipping point for discussion is when to apply NO or OT, as there are so many variables to be studied in relation to patient characteristics, fracture patterns and techniques, comparison between NO and OT is very difficult. We have searched for the keywords ‘Calcaneus’ WITH ‘Systematic Review’, ‘Clinical Trials’, ‘Cochrane’ and ‘Evidence Based Medicine’. Databases used were MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, Google Scholar, the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register and the Cochrane Musculoskeletal Injuries Group Trials Register. There are a few evidence-based medicine or systematic review papers on calcaneus fractures. We found four recent papers dealing with systematic reviews Consequently, it is unclear if general health outcome measures, injury specific scores and radiographic parameters improve after operative management, and whether the benefits of surgery outweigh the risks. Large databases, although they do not fit within ‘evidence based medicine’ give very useful information. The Canadian In a study, out of systematic review criteria, including 1656 patients from 34 papers of the literature with the aim of knowing if calcaneus fractures should be operated only in specialised centres, it has been shown that the infection rate increases exponentially with a decreasing fracture frequency, also that there is a significant inverse correlation between the fracture volume and the subtalar arthrodesis rate, indicating a need for specialised institutional trauma care to improve outcomes associated with the operative treatment of calcaneal fractures. As there are a few well-designed published papers with not so many cases, stratification becomes impossible, and important patient variables such as age, gender, mental capacity, smoking, co-morbidities, fracture pattern, worker's compensation and many others, are out of evidences. At least we have learnt over the years very much about fracture patterns physiopathology, and general principles of treatment. The authors state that they have no conflict of interest.