Infection stones (ammonium magnesium phosphate) and catheter encrustations have a common cause—urease producing microorganisms. With their rapid growth and frequent recurrences, infection stones are among the most troublesome of urinary system stones. For many patients with a long-term indwelling catheter, encrustations can be a severe problem. Urine composition is important, because, urine calcium enhances the crystallization process and urine citrate inhibits it. The role of non-urease producing microorganisms in stone forming processes is not well understood. Stones can now be successfully treated with a low morbidity index by percutaneous stone surgery or extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) and recurrence of stone formation is then avoided by prolonged antibiotic treatment and oral citrate. Catheter encrustations and damage caused by ammonia released during urease activity can, however, be a serious problem in patients with indwelling catheters and our remedies are unsatisfactory.Concretion formation in urine constitutes a problem both when the result is a renal stone or a deposit on indwelling catheters. This includes infection stones that have been described as ‘stone cancer’ due to their especially high risk of recurrence. Such recurrence required repeated surgery or prolonged irrigation with stone dissolving solutions, both methods being associated with considerable morbidity Encrustation on indwelling catheters is still a problem with many patients and methods to reduce the deposits are urgently required. Concretion formation in urine is a complicated process and involves a series of consecutive interrelated steps. Microorganisms can influence the process in many ways, the best known being the formation of infection stones by urease producing bacteria. The ability of Stones containing ammonium magnesium phosphate and calcium phosphate are secondary to an infection with urease containing microorganisms and consequently termed infection stones. The occurrence of infection stones in different accounts varies widely, between 3 and 34%. Calcium oxalate stones are frequently passed spontaneously Urinary tract stones are not frequent enough to justify prophylactic measures in the population except possibly for high-risk patients. Measures to reduce the risk of recurrence may be justified. Oral intake of citrate is the best documented method  Urease splits urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide, thus increasing the pH. In the alkaline urine, phosphate is precipitated either in the form of calcium phosphate or as magnesium ammonium phosphate. This precipitation is pH-related. The precipitation starts at a pH of 6.7–6.8, peaks at around pH 7.5 and then declines markedly at higher pHs. The substrate for urease, urea, is present in abundance and is not a limiting factor. Native urine-pH and urine-phosphate are also of importance. Phosphate is the major urine buffer and a high phosphate concentration reduces the risk of alkaline urine, as does a low native urine pH Several urine components, but most significantly citrate, have been shown to influence the urease-induced precipitation A virulence factor for Biofilms are also of importance for the rapid spread of The urothelial cells lining the urinary tract are covered by a layer of glycosaminoglycan which acts as a defence against bacterial adherence and infection Damage of this protective layer in the rat bladder by chemical means or by an infection, increases the adhesion of struvite crystals by five to six times compared with an intact bladder Non-urease producing microorganisms could be involved in the formation of infection stones by facilitating crystallization. It could be speculated that they also play a role in the formation of calcium-containing stones (calcium phosphate and calcium oxalate). There are several ways the bacteria could facilitate urine crystallization. They could act as a nucleus for epitactic crystallization, they could damage the protective anti-adhesive GAG-layer and cause crystal retention or they could alter urine composition in a way that favours stone formation How often renal stones are infected with non-urease producing microorganisms varies with the make up of stones analyzed. If only larger stones are included then up to 20% are infected Today, nearly all stones are treated by ESWL. Because it cannot be foreseen that culture of the fragments passed will reflect the situation in the stone, it is difficult to get a picture of how often stones are infected. Urine cultures are of limited value since they often fail to predict a stone infection The incentive to conduct studies to evaluate stone formation further, including the role of microorganisms, has decreased during recent years. One reason is the difficulty in obtaining cultures from stones after ESWL, which is used in the vast majority of all patients requiring treatment. The incentive has also been reduced by the use of modern methods with a low morbidity rate for stone removal. This is also reflected in a decreasing number of publications about the subject. There are, however, many unanswered questions. Risk factors like outflow obstruction are common among infection stone-formers, but in most patients no risk factor can be detected and why they form infection stones is unclear. Is it a combination of an unsatisfactory urine composition with low citrate and high calcium and an infection that has happened to reach the upper urinary tract? The mineralization process that transforms crystals into hard stones is also an enigma. Crystals formed in vitro by urease-forming bacteria are not transformed into a stone. When they are first inoculated into the urinary tract, stones are formed. Why the mineralization process occurs only within the urinary tract is completely unknown. Bacteria colonize the lower urinary tract in patients with indwelling bladder catheters. The bacteria produce a biofilm on the catheter and within this protective film, urease precipitates ammonium magnesium phosphate and calcium phosphate crystals Consequently long term indwelling catheters should be avoided as far as possible. Clean intermittent catheterization is a better alternative and should be used whenever possible.