Mechanical properties of rocks are known to be correlated by their engineering index properties. However, the interactions between these properties are quite complex. In this article, the associations between mechanical and hardness properties and also between mechanical and abrasion properties of samples collected from an andesite quarry are studied by using canonical ridge technique. Mechanical properties included uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength and modulus of elasticity, while index properties consist of Shore scleroscope hardness, Schmidt hammer hardness, cone indenter hardness, Bohme surface abrasion, Los Angeles abrasion with 100 and 500 revolutions. It was found that in a multivariate setting the relationship between mechanical and abrasion properties is stronger than the relationship between mechanical and hardness properties.Mechanical properties of rocks are of great importance in designing the engineering structures to be formed inside rock units. At the same time, these properties are closely related to engineering index properties. Using these relations many attempts have recently been made in the literature to predict rock strength from engineering index properties due to the practicality and simplicity of index tests compared to standard sample preparation All these studies are based on regression of one variable for mechanical properties from one or more variables of engineering index properties under isolation of other dependent variables. However, the multivariate relationships between these two sets of variables are too complex to identify simple or multiple regression analysis. For example when two sets of mechanical and engineering index properties are simultaneously treated, to what degree these two sets are related at a multivariate level and which variables are the most dominant in this relation cannot be answered by regression analysis. This calls for techniques that allow to simultaneously analyse two sets. The purpose of this study is to identify the association between a set of mechanical properties and a set of engineering index properties measured in an andesite quarry using canonical ridge technique. For this purpose 108 samples are collected from the quarry and these are tested for numerous variables of both mechanical and engineering index properties. The variables for index properties are further divided into two groups: hardness and abrasion. The associations between a set of mechanical variables and a set of hardness variables and also between a set of mechanical variables and a set of abrasion variables are studied. Canonical correlation analysis, originally developed by Hotelling Various similarities exist between canonical correlation and other multivariate methods. For example, canonical correlation analysis is a generalization of multiple regression in which there is only one dependent variable and multiple independent variables and the linear combination of the independent variables is formed such that the combination is maximally correlated with the dependent variable. In canonical correlation the number of dependent variable is more than one and as explained earlier the linear combinations (canonical variates) are constructed from both the dependent variables and independent variables with maximum correlation between them. Therefore, canonical correlation analysis produces richer information than multiple regression analysis. Another link can be established with principal component analysis. Both are a data reduction technique that uses uncorrelated linear combinations. In the principal component analysis the first few linear combinations account for most of the total variance in the original set of variables while in canonical correlation the first few pairs of linear combinations generally account for most of the association between two sets of variables. The following provide a brief mathematical treatment of canonical correlation analysis. Complete representation has been given by Anderson Canonical correlation analysis identifies the vectors This maximization problem leads to the following generalized eigenvalue problem: The largest eigenvalue The canonical variates then have the following properties: a canonical variate is uncorrelated with all previously determined canonical variates [ Canonical correlation and variates can be derived from both the covariance and correlation matrices. Although both analyses produce the same canonical correlations the canonical weights will differ. In this study we will prefer the correlation matrix because it yields the weights easy to interpret compared to the covariance matrix. The canonical weights obtained using the correlation matrices are known as standardized weights. Standardized weights can be quite unstable in the presence of collinearity in the data and unstable weights lead to unreliable interpretations. Collinearity is a result of highly dependent variables in the data matrix and should be treated appropriately before analysis. Vinod Typically, only those canonical variates are interpreted whose canonical correlations are statistically significant. However for large sample sizes, even small values of canonical correlations are statistically significant. Therefore, the practical significance of the canonical correlations also needs to be assessed. As a rule of thumb, the researchers treat pairs with canonical correlations of 0.30 or less trivial, even if it was found to be significant. There are two devices used in the literature to assess the information contained in the canonical correlations and canonical variates: (1) standardized weights, (2) correlation between each original variable and the canonical variate, also known as loading or structure coefficient. Some authors (e.g., Harris The data used in this study are from an andesite quarry located 60 To reveal the multivariate relationships between a set of mechanical properties and a set of engineering index properties, one level of the andesite quarry is sampled on a 9×12 regular grid with 20 The 108 rock samples were tested for a number of mechanical and engineering index properties based on the guidelines of ISRM  Contrary to mechanical properties, correlations among hardness variables are very low ( Bohme abrasion has a low correlation with both tests of Los Angeles abrasion ( Considering the algorithm given in the Tests of hypotheses concerning the significance of canonical correlations under multivariate normality assumption proved that the first canonical correlation was worthy of consideration [ The first correlation is 0.58, representing 34% overlapping variance for the first pair of canonical variables. The magnitude and sign of the weights indicate the importance and direction of respective variables in the relationship. As indicated by the magnitude of the weights the greatest contribution to the first correlation is made by compressive strength among mechanical properties and Shore hardness among hardness properties (shown in bold letters in the table). The first pair of canonical variables, therefore, refers predominantly to the relationship between compressive strength and Shore hardness. The signs indicate that strength is directly related to hardness in the multivariate level.  Tests of hypotheses indicate that the first and second correlations are significant From the equations ( This section explains how the researchers could use the canonical ridge technique for their own situation and rocks. First of all, determine the variables which will be included in the sets for mechanical and engineering index properties. Make sure that the number of samples is greater than the total number of variables contained in both sets. Otherwise the results would be meaningless. Compute correlation matrices for both sets of mechanical and engineering index properties and also a cross-correlation matrix between them. Determine the canonical ridge parameters The assessment of mechanical and engineering index tests made on the andesite samples by canonical ridge technique brings out the existence of important associations between sets of mechanical and hardness variables and also between sets of mechanical and abrasion variables. In particular the degree of association between strength and abrasion is much stronger than that of the degree of association between strength and hardness. In the presence of all variables the most contributing variables are compressive strength and Shore hardness for association between strength and hardness whereas they are tensile strength and LA There exist close relationships between mechanical and engineering index properties. However, the interactions between these properties are quite complex. Canonical correlation analysis seems to be a promising tool to identify the predominant relations between these properties. This work was supported by the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) under Grant 104Y007.