The current study examines the enzymatic decomposition of urea into carbon dioxide and ammonia as a means to increase the pH during biomimetic deposition of calcium phospate (CaP) onto implant surfaces. The kinetics of the enzymatically induced pH increase were studied by monitoring pH, calcium concentration and conductivity of the aqueous solutions as a function of time, urease concentration and initial concentrations of calcium and phosphate ions. Cryogenic transmission electron microscopy was used to study the process of homogeneous CaP precipitation in solution, whereas CaP deposition on conventional acid-etched titanium and micropatterned polystyrene (PS) surfaces was studied using scanning electron microscopy. The data presented in this study confirm that the substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease offers strong control over the rate of pH increase by varying the concentrations of precursor salts and urease. Formation of biomimetic CaP coatings was shown to proceed via formation of ionic polymeric assemblies of prenucleation complexes. The process of deposition and corresponding coating morphology was strongly dependent on the concentration of calcium, phosphate and urease. Finally, it was shown that the substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease allowed for spatial distribution of CaP crystals along the grooves of micropatterned PS surfaces at low concentrations of calcium, phosphate and urease, stressing the sensitivity of the presented method.Bone tissue owes its exceptional functional properties to its unique hierarchical and spatially organized nanostructure. This nanostructure is formed by means of a highly controlled mineralization process that results in the embedding and ordered alignment of nanosized calcium phosphate (CaP) platelets within the interstices of collagen fibrils In view of their high specificity, enzymes may offer improved control over the pH for the biomimetic coating process Therefore, we have systematically studied the characteristics of enzymatic pH control for deposition of CaP onto implant surfaces using a threefold approach. First, the kinetics of the enzymatically induced pH increase were studied by monitoring pH, calcium concentration and electrical conductivity of the aqueous solutions as a function of time, urease concentration and initial concentrations of calcium and phosphate ions. Second, cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (cryoTEM) was used to study the process of CaP precipitation in solution by applying plunge-freeze vitrification to ensure the close-to-native preservation of the molecular structures. Finally, deposition of CaP was studied on conventional acid-etched titanium (Ti) implant surfaces using scanning electron microscopy (SEM); micropatterned polystyrene (PS) surfaces were also used as substrate for CaP deposition, in order to study the effect of micropatterning on CaP deposition. Urease (type III from Jackbeans, U1500-20kU, Sigma-Aldrich), Na All reactions were performed at a temperature of 37 CryoTEM analysis was employed to investigate if pre-nucleation complexes could be observed in our system with variable pH similar to the previously reported presence of these complexes in metastable solutions of constant pH In order to study the feasibility of using the substrate–enzyme combination urease–urea for the deposition of CaP, Ti substrates and PS substrates were incubated in the solutions in a vertical position. The Ti substrates were incubated in 2 All CaP precursor solutions (  SEM of CaP depositions onto Ti revealed that high concentrations of urease (1.0 and 0.2 Deposition of CaP onto microgrooved PS did not occur within 3 The current study has focused on enzymatic decomposition of urea into carbon dioxide and ammonia as a means to increase the pH during biomimetic deposition of CaP onto implant surfaces. It was shown that the substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease offers strong control over the rate of pH increase in solutions which are metastable with respect to CaP. It was shown that formation of biomimetic CaP coatings proceeds via the formation and gradual densification of branched polymeric assemblies of pre-nucleation complexes, which at the point of nucleation collapsed, leading to the homogeneous precipitation of micron-sized CaP aggregates throughout the solution and deposition of CaP coatings onto implant surfaces. The number density of the deposits and the corresponding coating morphology was strongly dependent on the concentration of calcium, phosphate and urease, resulting in the deposition of either micron-sized flake-like CaP crystals at high concentrations of calcium and phosphate and rate of pH increase vs. nano-sized crystals at low concentrations of calcium and phosphate and rate of pH increase. The substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease allowed for the spatial distribution of CaP crystals along the grooves of micropatterned PS surfaces at low concentrations of calcium, phosphate and urease, stressing the sensitivity of the method presented herein. Generally, the initial rate of pH increase was proportional to the urease concentration, stressing the robustness and versatility of enzymatic control of pH for biomimetic deposition of CaP. Rates of pH increase decreased with increasing precursor salt concentration, which can be attributed to the reduced buffering capacity of the solutions at lower phosphate concentrations. After the initial linear increase in pH, a drop in pH was observed—accompanied by a drop in electrical conductivity and calcium concentration—reflecting the onset of homogeneous precipitation of CaP, as evidenced by the sudden increase in the opacity of the solutions. Typically, this pH drop was biphasic, which might be caused by formation of amorphous precursor phases prior to the formation of crystalline precipitates XRD analysis confirmed that the final crystalline deposits were mainly apatitic, while FTIR analysis showed that these apatites contained carbonate, hydroxyl and (protonated) phosphate ions, characteristic of calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite phosphate. The drop in pH can be attributed to the formation of hydroxyapatite according to the following reaction that accounts for the observed decrease in electrical conductivity by consumption of protons and calcium ions: Increased concentration of calcium and phosphate precursor salts resulted into homogeneous precipitation at lower pH since supersaturation is reached earlier Interestingly, the concentration of free calcium revealed an initial steep decrease immediately after addition of urease, followed by a more gradual decrease at later time points and a second steep decrease after 4 Recent findings have revealed that the formation of apatite is preceded by the formation and aggregation of solution-based pre-nucleation species consisting of branched ionic polymers of CaP complexes which are in equilibrium with free ions in solution prior to nucleation of solid CaP crystals in solution The feasibility of enzymatic control of pH for biomimetic deposition of CaP coatings was confirmed by the successful application of crystalline CaP layers, with characteristics of OCP as well as hydroxyapatite, onto Ti substrates using the substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease. SEM analysis revealed that CaP crystals nucleated preferentially at the irregularities along the groove edges in concentrated 3CaP solutions, which grew in size by perpendicular growth away from the substrate surface. In contrast, deposition tended to start from the groove tops for the 1CaP solution followed by lateral growth of smaller crystals along the substrate surface. Since crystal growth rates generally increase with increasing supersaturation, we speculate that the crystal growth rates were higher in 3CaP solutions, thereby resulting into homogeneous crystal growth of CaP away from the Ti substrate. Lower crystal growth rates as observed in 1CaP solutions, on the contrary, induced lateral growth of a higher number of smaller crystals. The observed spatial differences between the nucleation of CaP crystals stimulated us to investigate if the process could be optimized for spatially organized deposition of CaP along the edges of micropatterned PS films. Therefore, several experiments were performed at low precursor salt and urease concentrations (ranging from 0.1 0.2 In general, the relationship between nano/microroughness and (spatial) deposition characteristics is expected to have a strong impact on coating adhesion as well, since it was observed that coatings could only be deposited onto chemically etched Ti substrates, whereas CaP coatings detached from as-received Ti substrates. In order to be able to prepare strongly adhering coatings in a reproducible manner, future research (performed with standardized experimental conditions and urease activities) on the mechanism of CaP nucleation onto micro- and nanopatterned implant surfaces is therefore necessary. In summary, the results of the current study indicate that the method presented herein for enzymatic control over pH allows for precise control over supersaturation and corresponding nucleation of CaP, and emphasizes the sensitivity and potential of the substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease for biomimetic deposition of CaP coatings. We anticipate that this system can be optimized for preparation of chemically patterned surfaces as well as for simple testing of the calcification ability of a broad range of materials. The current study has focused on enzymatic decomposition of urea into carbon dioxide and ammonia as a means to increase the pH during biomimetic deposition of CaP onto implant surfaces. The data confirm that the substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease offers tight control over the rate of pH increase in solutions which are metastable with respect to CaP by varying the concentrations of precursor salts and urease. Formation of biomimetic CaP coatings was shown to proceed via formation of ionic polymeric assemblies of prenucleation complexes. The process of nucleation and corresponding coating morphology was strongly dependent on the concentration of calcium, phosphate and urease, resulting in deposition of either micron-sized flake-like CaP crystals vs. nano-sized crystals at low precursor salt concentrations and rate of pH increase. Finally, it was shown that the substrate–enzyme combination urea–urease allowed for spatial distribution of CaP crystals along the grooves of micropatterned PS surfaces at low concentrations of calcium, phosphate and urease, emphasizing the sensitivity of the method described herein. We are grateful for the financial support from the SmartMix program of the Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Netherlands Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (MRN), the Biomedical Materials Bone-IP programme of the Netherlands Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation (ZTB) as well as from The Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW, China–Netherlands Programme Strategic Alliances (PSA) (No. 2008DFB50120)) (A.W.G.N.). J.t.R. is supported by a personal VENI grant (680-47-421) of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO). Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 2, 3, 7 and 10, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at